
EPISTEMOLOGY
Epistemology: Contemporary Readings is a comprehensive anthology that draws
together classic and contemporary readings from leading philosophers writing on the
major themes in epistemology. The book begins with an extended introduction by
Robert Audi, one of the leading experts in the ﬁeld of epistemology, in which he sets
the stage for the themes of the reader. Chapters appear under the headings:
• Perception
• Inductive inference
• Memory
• The architecture of knowledge
• Reason and the a priori
• The analysis of knowledge
• Testimony
• Skepticism
• Inference in general
Each section is prefaced by an introductory essay by the editor which guides students
gently into each topic. Study questions follow every article and a bibliography is
provided at the end of each chapter.
Articles by the following leading philosophers are included:
Alston
J.L. Austin
Ayer
Berkeley
BonJour
Carnap
Carroll
Chisholm
Coady
DeRose
Descartes
Dretske
Edwards
Foster
Fumerton
Gettier
Goldman
Haack
Hume
Kant
Klein
Lehrer
Locke
Malcolm
G.E. Moore
Nozick
Plato
Pollock
Putman
Quine
Reid
Russell
Stove
Ideal for any philosophy student, this book will prove essential reading for epistemology
courses. The anthology is designed to complement Robert Audi’s textbook Epistemol-
ogy: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge (Routledge, 1998).
Michael Huemer is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the University of Colorado,
Boulder. He is the author of Skepticism and the Veil of Perception (2001). 
Robert Audi is Charles J. Mach Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the Uni-
versity of Nebraska, Lincoln. He is regarded as one of the top experts in epistemology
and has published widely in the ﬁeld. His previous publications include Epistemo-
logy: A Contemporary Introduction (1998), Practical Reasoning (1996), Moral
Knowledge and Moral Character (1997). He is also the editor of the Cambridge
Dictionary of Philosophy (1999).

Routledge Contemporary Readings in Philosophy
Series Editor: Paul K. Moser
Loyola University of Chicago
Routledge Contemporary Readings in Philosophy is a major new series of
philosophy anthologies aimed at undergraduate students taking core philosophy
disciplines. It is also a companion series to the highly successful Routledge
Contemporary Introductions to Philosophy. Each book of readings provides an
overview of a core general subject in philosophy, offering students an accessible
transition from introductory to higher-level undergraduate work in that subject.
Each chapter of readings will be carefully selected, edited, and introduced. They
will provide a broad overview of each topic and will include both classic and
contemporary readings.
Philosophy of Science
Yuri Balashov and Alex Rosenberg
Metaphysics
Michael J. Loux
Epistemology
Michael Huemer with an introduction by Robert Audi

EPISTEMOLOGY
Contemporary Readings
Edited by
Michael Huemer
With an introduction by
Robert Audi
London and New York

For my students
First published 2002
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 2002 Selection and editorial matter, Michael Huemer; Introduction, Robert Audi
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 0–415–25920–7 (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–25921–5 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”

CONTENTS
Preface
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
Introduction: A Narrative Survey of Classical and Contemporary
Positions in Epistemology
1
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
1
PERCEPTION
27
John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding
32
George Berkeley, Of The Principles of Human Knowledge
37
David Hume, “Of the Academical or Sceptical Philosophy”
46
Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man
51
Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy
64
J.L. Austin, Sense and Sensibilia
74
2
MEMORY
85
Bertrand Russell, “Memory”
88
Norman Malcolm, “A Deﬁnition of Factual Memory”
91
John Pollock and Joseph Cruz, “Reasoning and Memory”
104
Michael Huemer, “The Problem of Memory Knowledge”
113
3
REASON AND THE A PRIORI
125
Plato, Meno
131
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason
142
Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy
152
A.J. Ayer, “The Elimination of Metaphysics”
166
W.V. Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism”
176
Rudolf Carnap, Philosophical Foundations of Physics
194
Laurence BonJour, “Appendix: Non-Euclidean Geometry and
Relativity”
208
4
TESTIMONY
217
John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding
219
David Hume, “Of Miracles”
221
Thomas Reid, Inquiry into the Human Mind
234
C.A.J. Coady, “Testimony and Observation”
239
v

PART II: THE STRUCTURE AND GROWTH OF
JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
5
INFERENCE IN GENERAL
253
Lewis Carroll, “What the Tortoise said to Achilles”
256
Richard Fumerton, “Inferential Justiﬁcation and Empiricism”
259
David Hume, “Of Scepticism with Regard to Reason”
270
Hilary Kornblith, “Distrusting Reason”
275
6
INDUCTIVE INFERENCE
293
David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
298
Paul Edwards, “Russell’s Doubts about Induction”
311
Nelson Goodman, “The New Riddle of Induction”
320
John Foster, “Induction, Explanation and Natural Necessity”
333
Colin Howson and Peter Urbach, Scientiﬁc Reasoning: The
Bayesian Approach
344
David Stove, “Another Attempt to Prove that Induction is
Justiﬁed: The Law of Large Numbers”
352
7
THE ARCHITECTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
369
Sextus Empiricus, “The Five Modes”
372
I.T. Oakley, “An Argument for Scepticism Concerning Justiﬁed Beliefs”
375
Laurence BonJour, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge
387
William Alston, “Has Foundationalism Been Refuted?”
402
Susan Haack, “A Foundherentist Theory of Empirical Justiﬁcation”
417
PART III: THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF JUSTIFICATION
AND KNOWLEDGE
8
THE ANALYSIS OF “KNOWLEDGE”
435
A.J. Ayer, “Knowing as Having the Right to be Sure”
440
Edmund Gettier, “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?”
444
Michael Clark, “Knowledge and Grounds: A Comment on Mr.
Gettier’s Paper”
447
Alvin Goldman, “A Causal Theory of Knowing”
450
Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson, “Knowledge: Undefeated
Justiﬁed True Belief”
464
Robert Nozick, “Knowledge”
475
Keith DeRose, “Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions”
491
9
SKEPTICISM
507
René Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy
513
Hilary Putnam, “Brains in a Vat”
524
Fred Dretske, “The Pragmatic Dimension of Knowledge”
539
Peter Klein, “Skepticism and Closure: Why the Evil Genius
Argument Fails”
552
Michael Huemer, “Direct Realism and the Brain-in-a-Vat Argument”
575
Roderick Chisholm, “The Problem of the Criterion”
590
G.E. Moore, “Proof of an External World”
602
G.E. Moore, “Hume’s Theory Examined”
606
Index
613
CONTENTS
vi

PREFACE
This anthology is designed primarily for use in undergraduate courses in epis-
temology, although it may also provide a useful reference for graduate students
studying the subject. The topics have been chosen to enable it to serve as a useful
companion to Robert Audi’s comprehensive and widely-used Epistemology: A
Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge. Professor Audi’s
introduction indicates many of the points of contact between this book and his.
Alternatively, this collection may be used as a standalone text.
I will use this preface to say a few words about the usefulness of this collection.
The choice of readings is the most important factor. My guideline in choosing the
readings for this volume has been to select, for each chapter, readings that in my
view are paradigms of several important, competing approaches to the topic of
that chapter. Thus, for instance, the chapter on perception includes paradigmatic
examples of representationalism, direct realism, and idealism. Within that con-
straint, I have sought to choose well-known or inﬂuential philosophers. I have
included a mixture of both classic and contemporary readings, ranging from
Plato to Quine. This reﬂects the fact that many of the debates in epistemology are
perennial. And it reﬂects my beliefs, both that the terms of these debates were set
by the great philosophers of the past, and that recent analytic philosophers have
made important advancements in these debates. Beyond that, I will let the table
of contents speak for itself.
In addition, for each selection, I have included a few simple “study questions.”
These are short-answer, objective questions about the contents of the readings,
which can be used by the student to remind himself or herself of what the reading
was about, or by the instructor to test students’ familiarity with the readings.
Although it cannot in general be assumed that a student who is able to answer
these questions has an adequate grasp of the readings, it can be assumed that a
student who is unable to answer the questions does not.
I was prompted to edit this anthology in part by a dissatisfaction with the
existing alternatives. Most existing anthologies, I discovered, included only
examples of recent work, while at least one included only classic writings. Many
of them were narrowly focused on only a few topics of recent interest, neglecting
some of the classic, perennial issues of epistemology—such as the problem of
induction, or the debate between rationalism and empiricism. Some books even
omitted the topic of perception. I have sought in this book, as Audi has in his, to
remedy such omissions, without, I hope, introducing any equally serious omis-
sions of my own. It is my opinion that a student who follows all the readings in
vii

this book will have a solid education in epistemology. For a single, introductory
course, however, most instructors will want to select perhaps four or ﬁve chapters
to focus on.
Lastly, I would like to thank a number of people without whom this anthology
would not have existed, or would not have been nearly as good as it is: Robert
Audi, for his advice and assistance at various stages; Peter Klein and the other
(anonymous) reviewers for Routledge; my students, whose feedback on my
classes has helped me to learn what works and what doesn’t; and the staff at
Routledge, including Tony Bruce and Siobhan Pattinson, for all their work in
bringing this project to fruition.
Michael Huemer
University of Colorado
PREFACE
viii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editors and publishers would like to thank the following copyright holders
for permission to reprint material:
Locke, John, from Essay Concerning Human Understanding, edited by Peter H.
Nidditch. © Oxford University Press, 1975. Reprinted by permission of the
publisher.
Berkeley, George, from Principles of Human Knowledge. Reprinted by kind
permission of Open Court Publishing, a division of Carus Publishing
Company.
Hume, David, from Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concern-
ing the Principles of Morals, ed. by L.A. Selby-Bigge (2nd edition, 1902).
Reprinted by permission of Oxford University.
Reid, Thomas, from Inquiry and Essays, ed. Ronald Beanblossom and Keith
Lehrer. Reprinted by permission of Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. © 1983
by Hackett Publishing Co. All rights reserved.
Russell, Bertrand, from The Problems of Philosophy (1912), pp. 7–26 &
82–110. Reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.
Austin, J.L., from Sense and Sensibilia, edited by G.J. Warnock. © Oxford
University Press 1962. Reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press.
Russell, Bertrand, “Memory” from Analysis of Mind. Reprinted by permission of
Routledge and the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation.
Malcolm, Norman, from Knowledge and Certainty. © 1963 Cornell University
Press. Used by permission of Cornell University Press.
Huemer, Michael, “The Problem of Memory Knowledge”, reprinted from Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 80 (1999): 346–57 by permission of Blackwell
Publishers. © 1999 Blackwell.
Pollock, John and Joseph Cruz, “Reasoning and Memory” from Contemporary
Theories of Knowledge, 2nd edition (Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1999).
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Kant, Immanuel, from Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith
(1965). Copyright © Macmillan & Co. Reprinted by permission of
Palgrave.
Plato, from Plato’s Meno in Focus, trans. and ed. Jane M. Day (London:
Routledge, 1994). Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Ayer, A.J., “The Elimination of Metaphysics.” Reprinted with permission of
Dover Publications from Language, Truth, and Logic.
ix

Quine, W.V. “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” Philosophical Review 60 (1951).
© 1951 Cornell University. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Carnap, Rudolph, “Philosophical Foundations of Physics.” Reprinted from
Philosophical Foundations of Physics (Basic Books, 1966).
BonJour, Laurence, reprinted from In Defense of Pure Reason, with the permis-
sion of Cambridge University Press. © Laurence BonJour 1998.
Coady, C.A.J., “Testimony and Observation” from American Philosophical
Quarterly 10 (1973): 149–55. Reprinted by permission of the journal.
Carroll, Lewis, “What the Tortoise said to Achilles.” Reprinted from Mind 4
(1895): 278–80 with permission of Oxford University Press.
Fumerton, Richard, “Inferential Justiﬁcation and Empiricism.” Reprinted from
the Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976): 557–69 by permission of the author and
the journal.
Kornblith, Hilary, “Distrusting Reason.” Reprinted from Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 23 (1999): 181–96 by permission of Blackwell Publishers. © 1999
Blackwell.
Edwards, Paul, “Russell’s Doubts about Induction.” Reprinted from Mind 58
(1949) with permission of Oxford University Press.
Goodman, Nelson, “The New Riddle of Induction.” Reprinted by permission of
the publisher from Fact, Fiction and Forecast by Nelson Goodman, pp. 59–83,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, © 1979, 1983 Nelson Goodman.
Foster, John, “Induction, Explanation, and Natural Necessity.” Reprinted from
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 83 (1982/83): 87–102 by courtesy of
the editor of the Aristotelian Society. © 1983.
Howson, Colin and Peter Urbach, from Scientiﬁc Reasoning. Reprinted by
permission of Open Court Publishing Company, a division of Carus Publishing
Company, Peru, Ill. © 1989 Open Court Publishing Company.
Stove, David, from The Rationality of Induction. © D.C. Stove 1986. Reprinted
by permission of Oxford University Press.
Sextus Empiricus, reprinted from Scepticism, Man and God: Selections from the
Major Writings of Sextus Empiricus, ed. Philip Hallie, trans. Sanford Etheridge
(Wesleyan University Press, 1964), by permission of the publisher.
Oakley, I.T., “An argument for Skepticism Concerning Justiﬁed Beliefs.”
Reprinted from American Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976): 221–8 by
permission of the journal.
BonJour, Laurence, from The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Reprinted by
permission of the publisher (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press)
© 1985 President and Fellows of Harvard College.
Alston, William, “Has Foundationalism been Refuted?” Reprinted from
Philosophical Studies 29 (1976): 287–305 with kind permission from Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Haack, Susan, “A Foundherentist Theory of Empirical Justiﬁcation.” © 1997
Susan Haack. This paper ﬁrst appeared in The Theory of Knowledge, ed. Louis
Pojman, 2nd edition (Belman, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1998), pp. 283–93, and was
reprinted in Epistemology: An Anthology, eds Ernest Sosa and Jaegwon Kim
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1999), pp. 226–36. It also appeared in Spanish in Agora
18, 1 (1999): 35–53 (Santiago de Compostela, Spain), and will appear in
French in Carrefour (Ottawa, Canada). Reprinted by permission of the author.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
x

Ayer, A.J., “Knowing as Having the Right to be Sure.” © A.J. Ayer, 1956.
Reprinted from The Problem of Knowledge by A.J. Ayer, with permission of
Penguin Books.
Gettier, Edmund, “Is Justiﬁed, True Belief Knowledge?” Reprinted from Analysis
23 (1963): 121–3 by permission of the author.
Clark, Michael, “Knowledge and Grounds: A Comment on Mr Gettier’s Paper.”
Reprinted from Analysis 24 (1963): 46–8 by permission of the author.
Goldman, Alvin, “A Causal Theory of Knowing.” Reprinted from the Journal of
Philosophy 64 (1967): 357–72 by permission of the author and the journal.
Lehrer, Keith and Thomas Paxson, “Knowledge: Undefeated Justiﬁed True
Belief.” Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969): 225–37 by
permission of the author and the journal.
Nozick, Robert, “Knowledge.” Reprinted by permission of the publisher from
Philosophical Explanations by Robert Nozick, pp. 172–8, 198–211
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press). © 1981 Robert Nozick.
Descartes, René, Meditations on First Philosophy. Trans. John Cottingham.
© Cambridge University Press 1996. Reprinted with the permission of
Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, Hilary, “Brains in a Vat.” © Cambridge University Press 1981.
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, Fred, “The Pragmatic Dimension of Knowledge.” Reprinted from
Philosophical Studies 40 (1981): 363–78 with kind permission of Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Klein, Peter, “Skepticism and Closure.” Reprinted from Philosophical Topics 23
(1995) by permission of the journal and the author.
Chisholm, Roderick, “The Problem of the Criterion.” Reprinted from The Prob-
lem of the Criterion (Aquinas Lecture, 1973) by Roderick Chisholm, with
permission from Marquette University Press.
While reasonable effort has been put into obtaining permissions prior to publica-
tion, there are some cases where it has been impossible to trace the copyright
holder or to secure a reply. The author and the publishers apologize for any
errors and omissions and, if notiﬁed, the publisher will endeavor to rectify these
at the earliest possible opportunity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xi


INTRODUCTION:
A Narrative Survey of Classical and
Contemporary Positions in Epistemology
Robert Audi
This book presents a quite comprehensive set of readings that are excellent for
courses in epistemology at several levels and can be used even without an
accompanying textbook. They are organized by topic in a way that invites
sequential study; the readings in each major area are presented in an order that
both indicates historical development and facilities comprehension; and the vol-
ume as a whole has a good balance: it contains classical contributions by great
philosophers, inﬂuential recent essays, and contemporary papers that illustrate
cutting-edge work in the ﬁeld.
The book is also specially designed to be a good companion to my Epistemol-
ogy: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge, and at
appropriate points I will indicate connections between a particular reading and
my book. A glance at the contents of the two books will make it obvious that
their overall content and organization are parallel. There are, however, far more
connections than I can bring out here: nearly every main point in the readings is
addressed in one or another part of Epistemology—which has a detailed index
meant to facilitate research and comparisons.
Both Huemer and I have presented epistemology not only as the theory of
knowledge but also as the theory of justiﬁcation. We have also presented it in the
light of its history, but have given primary emphasis to bringing out its distinctive
questions, positions, and methods. The aim is to help readers achieve an under-
standing of the ﬁeld that is both broad and—given serious study of the
materials—signiﬁcantly deep. A mastery of these readings, particularly in com-
bination with Epistemology, should provide a good sense of the ﬁeld and a
capacity for critical reading of the contemporary literature.
There are at least two further aims shared by this book and my Epistemology.
First, both books aim at making connections between epistemology and other
branches of philosophy, above all general metaphysics and philosophy of mind
and language. Second, both are sensitive to the importance of approaching epis-
temology with an eye on the psychological aspects of the subject. This is in part
because knowledge is constituted by belief (of a certain kind), which is a central
psychological concept, and because knowledge and justiﬁcation are both closely
connected with perception, inference, memory, and other elements in human life
that are crucial in psychology as well as in philosophy. But it is also because
1

epistemology should be studied in a way that enables us both to get a psycho-
logically realistic picture of human knowers and to accommodate the ﬁndings of
psychological and neurobiological research.
The rest of this introduction will discuss the readings with a view to helping
instructors and other readers decide what to select and in what order. This should
be useful whether or not an accompanying textbook is used; but the connection
between the readings and my Epistemology will be obvious from the part titles
and section titles in this volume (which closely parallel mine), and I will indicate
some further connections.
Suggested course outlines
The comprehensive study
One natural approach for a course in epistemology, particularly an undergradu-
ate course, is simply to select readings from each part of this book and, depending
on the number to be covered, add parts of a supporting book, such as Epistemol-
ogy. But regardless of the level of the course, instructors and readers may have
special interests. Let me indicate how some of these might yield a selection.
The basic texts approach
For those interested in the historically most inﬂuential “basics,” it might be pos-
sible to select readings most heavily from Parts I and III, with, say, Hume and
Edwards on induction in Part II. In Part III, for this kind of emphasis just two or
three items on the nature of knowledge might serve. Descartes’s version of skepti-
cism is of course historically crucial, and the responses by Chisholm, Putnam,
and Moore would provide variety and can give students a sense of some major
approaches to dealing with skeptical problems.
The contemporary problems approach
If, on the other hand, the aim of a course is above all to help students get “up to
speed” in dealing with contemporary problems, then much less time can be
devoted to Part I, and the emphasis throughout can be on recent literature. In
Part I an instructor might select just a few readings on perception and memory
and concentrate on the a priori, with Quine an obvious choice for emphasis. Here
my own chapter on reason (in Epistemology) gives a broad but also quite ﬁne-
grained picture of options other than the Quinean view. Part II is designed to be
useful with or without the readings on inference in general. The works on induct-
ive inference are independently intelligible, as are those on the architecture of
knowledge, which treat the structure of a body of justiﬁed beliefs or knowledge.
For Part II, then, one might use only the classical short treatment of the problem
of induction by Hume, introduce the “grue problem” with the selection from
Goodman’s Fact, Fiction, and Forecast, and choose at least one of the con-
temporary responses to skepticism about induction. The chapter on inference in
Epistemology is meant to go with either kind of selection, but is particularly
suited to those interested in the philosophy-of-mind aspects of inference and how
INTRODUCTION
2

its epistemological role is connected with meeting skepticism. As to Part III, for
students who—whether as advanced undergraduates or graduates—are good
candidates to get “up to speed,” the “Gettier Problem” can be quickly introduced
and a selection made from the works by Goldman, Lehrer and Paxon, Nozick,
and DeRose. The same students would be capable of dealing with skepticism
mainly in connection with the contemporary readings.
Special topics approaches
Beyond the common kinds of aims for a course in epistemology so far discussed,
one might have a special interest that determines the main readings. Suppose it is
perception, or skepticism, or the a priori, or the nature of knowledge. On each of
these, there are not only the readings so labeled but related ones—and of course
there are chapters on these topics in Epistemology, which also deals with percep-
tion in comparison with memory and with consciousness (inner perception, in a
sense). Let me brieﬂy suggest some the possible combinations.
Perception
The readings on perception are a substantial set, and the perception chapter in
Epistemology ranges over many of the recurring issues. Moreover, the selections
on perception are nicely supplemented by, for instance, Coady on testimony,
Alston on foundationalism, Dretske on knowledge, and Putnam and Huemer on
brains in a vat.
Skepticism
The selections on skepticism are supplemented by Russell on memory, Hume on
induction and Edward’s critique of Russell’s Humean treatment of induction,
Sextus on the ﬁve modes, Oakley on justiﬁcation, and DeRose on contextualism.
The ﬁnal chapter of Epistemology deals with most of these approaches and
constructs a defense of a common-sense epistemology.
The a priori
In the case of the a priori, again there are many readings to choose from and the
chapter on reason in Epistemology provides basic deﬁnitions and a perspective
of its own. Chisholm’s paper on the problem of the criterion and Kornblith’s on
distrusting reason are among the useful supplemental readings one might choose.
The analysis of knowledge
As to the nature of knowledge, in addition to the selections speciﬁcally on that,
there are connected readings on all of the other topics. These can present data
crucial for a good analysis as well as a perspective to be accommodated, as with,
say, Quine, or BonJour.
INTRODUCTION
3

The psychology of cognition
This can be a theme in any epistemology course or the main focus in specially
designed ones. Particularly relevant among the readings would be Goldman’s
“Causal Theory of Knowing” taken together with the readings on perception by
Locke and Hume, those by Pollock and Huemer on memory, the paper by Korn-
blith on “Distrusting Reason,” and Putnam’s paper on “Brains in a Vat” (which
also makes connections between epistemology and philosophy of language). In
Epistemology, Chapter 1 has much on the psychological and causal elements in
perception (dovetailing with some of Goldman’s theory); Chapter 5 explores the
psychology of testimony; and Chapters 6 and 7, on the nature of inference and
the structure of knowledge and belief, present a psychologically detailed account
of the epistemology of those topics.
It should help in orienting readers if I address the contents of the parts of the
book in some detail. In doing this, I will try to say enough to help instructors with
selection and to aid readers—including students—in acquiring a sense of the
issues and of connections among them.
The readings: content and further connections
What follows will be an indication of both some of the drift of the readings and
how they are interconnected. I will also pose some of the larger questions they
raise and identify some points of contact with the corresponding parts of Epis-
temology. In various places study questions will be suggested, although there is
no explicit listing of them.
Perception
Locke
The short selection from John Locke’s Essay presents the idea, so inﬂuential in
empiricism, that the mind is a tabula rasa (blank tablet) at our birth, and that its
initial and basic content is inscribed by the hand of experience. We also hear of
“ideas” produced in the mind by experience—speciﬁcally, through the senses—
and these ideas “bear witness” to truth. Here we have one classical picture of
how perceptual knowledge arises. It is a version of representationalism.
Berkeley
In the selection from George Berkeley’s Principles, we ﬁnd experience producing
ideas in us, but this time without causation by external objects. Rather, Berkeley
defends the phenomenalist view that physical objects themselves are constituted
by stable groupings of ideas. Perception is still, however, seen as a source of
knowledge of the physical world.
Hume
In the short selection from Hume’s Treatise, we again see “ideas,” but with an
apparent acknowledgment of the mind-independent existence of external objects
that cause them: “[t]he existences, which we consider, when we say this house
INTRODUCTION
4

and that tree, are nothing but perceptions or representations in the mind, and
ﬂeeting copies or representations of other existences, which remain uniform and
independent” (p. 48).
Reid
The views of the three great British empiricists, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, are
criticized by the Scottish philosopher Thomas Reid, whose Essays represent what
many today continue to regard as the enduring common sense of humanity. Reid
astutely attacks Berkeley’s phenomenalism and resolutely defends a common-
sense view of perception as caused by objects and capable of giving us genuine
knowledge of them. Perception involves “First, Some conception or notion of the
object perceived; Secondly, A strong and irresistible conviction and belief of its
presence; and Thirdly, That this conviction and belief are immediate, and not the
effect of reasoning” (p. 51). A noteworthy element here is the apparent assump-
tion that perception is conceptual (involving a conception of what is perceived)
and even doxastic (belief-entailing regarding the object perceived). These are
both views that are critically assessed at some length in the chapter on perception
in Epistemology.
Russell
In Bertrand Russell, we ﬁnd a more scientiﬁcally oriented version of the kind of
representationalist theory articulated by Locke. But for Russell as for Locke,
“sense-data,” as opposed to physical objects, are taken to be what we are
immediately acquainted with in perception and what represent the external
world to the mind. We also ﬁnd in Russell an afﬁrmation of the “irresistibility” of
which Reid spoke; and there are other common-sensical elements in Russell that
are fruitfully compared with some found in the selection from Reid.
Austin
The sense-datum theory is criticized at length by J.L. Austin in the selections from
Sense and Sensibilia, as well as (more comprehensively) in Chapter 1 of Epis-
temology. Austin is famous for his astute sense of the distinctions reﬂected in
ordinary English. He brings this sense to bear on the idea that in illusions and
hallucinations our experience can be “intrinsically indistinguishable” from what
it normally is. It is an interesting question to what extent a sense-datum theorist
can meet the objections Austin raises and whether an adverbial theory of percep-
tion (such as the one outlined in Epistemology) can provide an adequate account
of perception. In any case, the readings on perception are an excellent source of
theories and problems concerning what perception is, what its immediate objects
are, whether it involves some kind of inference, and indeed whether it must
produce beliefs at all.
Memory
Memory is perhaps best understood in comparison with perception. Perception is
standardly taken to be the chief or only source of our knowledge of things in the
present—at least if we include consciousness of what is in our own minds as
a kind of (inner) perception. (In Chapter 3 of Epistemology consciousness is
INTRODUCTION
5

examined in the light of the idea that it may be conceived as “inner” perception.)
Memory might similarly be taken to be the chief or only source of our knowledge
of things in the past and to yield only knowledge of the past. This conception
would, however, be a mistake on two counts: ﬁrst, we remember such timeless
things as propositions of mathematics; second, we seem to have inferential know-
ledge of the past from its footprints in the present—smouldering embers, dried-
up stream beds, fossils of living creatures.
Russell
In Russell’s treatment of memory in The Analysis of Mind, he says that its
“images are recognized as ‘copies’ of past sensible experience” (p. 88). This
discussion is the source of his famous statement that it is logically possible that
“the world sprang into being ﬁve minutes ago, exactly as it then was” (p. 88). A
copy, after all, can be a forgery. More positively, he introduces the notions of
feelings of pastness and of familiarity and suggests how these feelings ﬁgure in
generating trust in memory. A question he leaves us with here is what role these
phenomenological aspects of memory play in justifying memory beliefs. That role
is discussed in Chapter 2 of Epistemology. A central question to think about here
is how recalling, which clearly involves the capacity of memory, is related to
remembering.
Malcolm
By contrast, Norman Malcolm is concerned much less with the phenomenology
of memory and far more with what constitutes knowledge from memory. His
view is that we remember that p (some proposition) if and only if we know it
because we knew it (p. 91). Malcolm does not here contrast the way memory
ﬁgures in relation to knowledge—by preserving it, in his view—and the way it
ﬁgures in relation to justiﬁcation (a contrast that is developed in some detail in
Chapter 2 of Epistemology), but he does consider the question of how one can
know one has dreamt, given that (for him) one cannot know one is dreaming
when one is. Here Russell’s view would perhaps allow what Malcolm’s does not:
that the sense of pastness is enough for justiﬁcation, whatever we say about the
status of memorial knowledge.
Pollock
The contemporary essay by John Pollock covers territory left uncharted by Rus-
sell and Malcolm. Pollock is concerned to show how reasoning can justify belief
when not all of the premises of the reasoning are actually held in active memory
as a basis for the conclusion. He takes only one’s “dynamic argument”—the kind
one has through reasoning that is in consciousness at the time one draws the
conclusion—to be “directly relevant to the assessment of the [conclusion] belief
as justiﬁed or unjustiﬁed” (p. 112).
Huemer
Michael Huemer, in contrast to Pollock, considers justiﬁed belief in general,
whether it rests on reasoning or not, and gives a direct role to both memorial and
other aspects of its basis. He contends that justiﬁcation for believing a prop-
osition on the basis of memory requires both justiﬁcation for adopting the belief
INTRODUCTION
6

and justiﬁcation for retaining it (p. 117). These views differ from mine in Epis-
temology. I take memory to be preservative with respect to knowledge (and here
share part of Malcolm’s view), but generative with respect to justiﬁcation (per-
haps differing with Huemer on this). On that last point I stress something only
implicit in the other treatments. I leave open, however, just how memory can
preserve justiﬁcation. A central question here is whether, if one has a belief justi-
ﬁed on the basis of memory, one at least can remember the justiﬁcatory elements,
even if only with effort or cues.
Reason and the a priori
In what might be called the epistemological tradition, perception (including such
“inner perception” as consciousness) and memory are considered experiential
sources of knowledge and justiﬁcation, whereas reason is viewed as a distinct
kind of source. It might be called intuitive, ratiocinative, or simply rational. The
contrast is misleading insofar as it suggests that the thinking that is crucial for a
priori justiﬁcation is not part of one’s experience or that people do not normally
need experience to supply raw materials for knowledge of any kind; but if the
basis of a priori justiﬁcation is something like understanding concepts or proposi-
tions or their relations, the contrast has a point. This is apparently not the basis
of justiﬁcation in the other, “experiential” cases. In any event, the readings in this
section all concern the kind of justiﬁcation yielded by the use of reason in
application to what would generally be agreed to be something abstract.
Plato
The opening reading from Plato is a splendid expression of a nativist conception
of mathematical knowledge (and by implication, all a priori knowledge and pre-
sumably other knowledge as well). Socrates, Plato’s spokesperson here, claims
simply to bring to articulation what the slave boy already knows. Socrates takes
the boy’s answers to his questions to reveal not inference or discovery, but previ-
ously unarticulated knowledge. If, however, we distinguish—as I do throughout
Epistemology, and especially in Chapter 1—between dispositions to form beliefs
and, on the other hand, beliefs one already holds in dispositional form (roughly,
in memory rather than in mind), then it is not at all clear that nativism gains
signiﬁcant support in the dialogue. For it is easy to produce belief by asking
questions, as where, in asking you whether you are less than ten and ﬁve-
hundredths feet tall, I cause you to believe this when previously you believed
only that your height was some smaller measure and immediately saw that it
was less than this. You were of course disposed to believe this, but did not
already believe it. This is not to suggest that it is easy to tell what we already
believe and what we quickly come to believe (and perhaps to know) upon con-
sidering some matter; but the question is important. It is crucial both for the
psychology of cognition and for understanding what we know and how we
acquire knowledge.
Kant
The selections from Immanuel Kant’s monumental Critique of Pure Reason serve
to introduce both the notion of a priori knowledge as “knowledge absolutely
INTRODUCTION
7

independent of all experience” (p. 143) and the distinction between analytic and
synthetic propositions. He also lays out a famous case for the existence of some
propositions that are synthetic yet a priori. Among these Kant counts some quite
substantive mathematical (and other) propositions. Here he sets the stage for
Quine’s critique of the analytic–synthetic distinction and Laurence BonJour’s
discussion of the synthetic a priori in relation to geometry.
Russell
In the selection from Russell, Kant’s view is critically examined, and although
Russell accepts the basic distinction between the a priori and the empirical, he
quite plausibly questions Kant’s idea that the constitution of our nature underlies
certain a priori truths (pp. 154–5). Russell goes on to characterize universals
(here exhibiting connections with Plato, Berkeley, and Hume). His account of a
priori knowledge construes it as dealing wholly with relations of universals
(p. 161). In the same chapter he introduces the notion of intuitive knowledge,
which is always direct (non-inferential) and is the basis for derivative knowledge
(here conceived as knowledge deductively based on intuitive knowledge). He
articulates both a notion of self-evidence and a foundationalist conception of
knowledge. The selection is outstanding for its combination of brevity, read-
ability, and scope. It nicely connects the epistemology of the a priori with the
metaphysical question of the status of universals.
Ayer
A.J. Ayer’s “The Elimination of Metaphysics” is also concerned with the a priori:
but whereas Russell embraced a metaphysical view of universals to account for
the a priori, Ayer argued that metaphysical sentences lack cognitive meaning. He
defended the position (earlier expressed by David Hume) that “tautologies and
empirical hypotheses form the entire class of signiﬁcant propositions” (p. 171),
where by “tautologies” Ayer meant to include all and only truths of logic and
analytic propositions (these are described in detail in Chapter 4 of Epistemo-
logy). Like Carnap and other logical positivists, Ayer sought to account for the a
priori through a philosophy of language. He conceived tautologies as true in
virtue of the meanings of the crucial (linguistic) terms in which they are
expressed; as to the empirical (factual), “a sentence is factually signiﬁcant if, and
only if he [its user] knows how to verify the proposition which it purports to
express” (p. 167), that is, knows what “observations” would conﬁrm or dis-
conﬁrm it. By contrast, “no statement which refers to a ‘reality’ transcending the
limits of all possible experience [by which he meant a metaphysical statement]
can possibly have any literal signiﬁcance” (p. 167). In this linguistic, empirically
oriented strategy for determining what kinds of discourse are intellectually
admissible, he foreshadows much contemporary philosophy.
Quine
The position Ayer arrived at left the heart of empiricism intact: like Hume, he
countenanced the analytic–synthetic distinction, put logic and (presumably) pure
mathematics on the analytic side, and took all knowledge of other kinds to be
empirical: grounded in experience. If philosophical inquiry could ﬁt into this
framework, he could account for it; if not, as with traditional metaphysics, he
INTRODUCTION
8

had no place for it as a cognitive (roughly, truth-seeking) enterprise. It was
against both the analytic–synthetic distinction and the associated conception of
the cognitive enterprise that W.V. Quine so inﬂuentially argued in “Two Dogmas
of Empiricism.” In “Two Dogmas,” Quine examines a number of criteria for
analyticity and ﬁnds them wanting. For instance, he attacks the appeal to def-
initions as a way to secure the analytic–synthetic distinction. A correct deﬁnition
would have to capture synonymy (sameness of linguistic meaning), and Quine
ﬁnds that notion obscure. This is not because we do not understand the concept
of sameness; it is because the notion of meaning is obscure. The veriﬁcation
theory of meaning (whose core I quoted in Ayer’s formulation) does not help
(pp. 187–8). Veriﬁcationism is committed to the second dogma Quine attacks:
reductionism, which “survives in the supposition that each statement, taken in
isolation from its fellows, can admit of conﬁrmation or inﬁrmation [disconﬁrm-
ation] at all” (p. 188). Rather, using a now well-known metaphor, Quine
contends that “statements about the external world face the tribunal of sense
experience not individually but only as a corporate body” (p. 188). This view
supports rejection of the other dogma; there can be no analytic statements: “no
statement is immune to revision” (p. 190). Non-Euclidean geometry furnishes
examples of propositions, such as Euclid’s parallel postulate, that apparently
illustrate the universal fallibility that Quine here afﬁrms.
Carnap
If Quine is right, it is no surprise that there should be non-Euclidean geometries,
and these are described brieﬂy in the readings from Carnap on the nature and
scientiﬁc rationale for development of such geometries. Here a crucial focus is the
status of Euclid’s famous parallel postulate, according to which, for any line and
any point not on that line, there is exactly one line parallel to the ﬁrst and passing
through the point.
BonJour
Laurence BonJour critically explores the signiﬁcance of such geometries for the
rationalist view that, contrary to empiricism, there are synthetic a priori proposi-
tions, and hence, in principle, there can be substantive knowledge accessible to
reason without dependence on sensory experience. He concludes that we cannot
rule out the possibility that there is “an a priori insight or apparent insight that
. . . a non-physical and also not merely formal geometry provides a correct
account of the necessary features of space” (p. 213).
Readers of the section on the a priori may notice that there is little analysis of
the way in which a priori knowledge is supposed to be “independent” of experi-
ence. This notion merits careful exploration, and in various parts of Epistemol-
ogy I do one thing needed here by distinguishing between negative and positive
dependence on experience (and independence of it). This distinction also bears
on the sense in which a single proposition may or may not individually admit of
“conﬁrmation or inﬁrmation.”
Readers may also notice that, particularly in the contemporary readings, there
are references not only to propositions as the focus of concern but also to sen-
tences and statements. What difference might this make, and how is it related to
the question of the bearing on the analytic–synthetic distinction of the possibility
INTRODUCTION
9

of deﬁnitions? If what is a priori is the proposition that if A is taller than B, then B
is shorter than A, and if that proposition can be expressed in indeﬁnitely many
languages, why is the possibility of a deﬁnition of terms—which are peculiar to a
single language—crucial for the issue?
Testimony
The classical sources of knowledge and justiﬁcation, as we might call them—
perception (including consciousness conceived as “inner perception”), memory,
and reason—might all be called intrapersonal. They yield knowledge for a single
person without essential dependence on another person. Testimony is different. It
is interpersonal. We get it from one or more other people (apart from the meta-
phorical case of the testimony of the senses). What, then, is its status as a basis of
knowledge or justiﬁcation?
Locke
In the short selection from Locke’s Essay, we ﬁnd little credit given to testimony
as a source of knowledge. He goes so far as to say, “So much as we our selves
consider and comprehend of Truth and Reason, so much we possess of real and
true Knowledge” (p. 219).
Hume
In the selection on the subject from David Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature, he
is only a little more concessive than Locke: “It is experience only, which gives
authority to human testimony” (p. 230). Hume’s positive view is apparently that
our experience of natural patterns outweighs even the testimony of a great many
people claiming to have witnessed miracles (which, for Hume, must be violations
of natural law—p. 223). Even if a miracle were to occur, then, he thinks that we
could not be justiﬁed in believing it did.
Reid
Here, as on other matters, Reid opposes the Humean view. In the selection on
testimony drawn from his Inquiry, Reid articulates two important, intercon-
nected principles. That “Truth is always uppermost, and is the natural issue
of the mind” he called “the principle of veracity.” That we have “a disposi-
tion to conﬁde in the veracity of others” he called “the principle of credulity”
(pp. 236–7). I do not ﬁnd him treating testimony as exactly the same kind of
source of knowledge as perception; but it is clear that he takes it to be a major
source, and he sees our accepting it where there is no special reason not to as
reasonable.
Coady
C.A.J. Coady is even more at odds with Hume’s position than is Reid. Coady
attacks what he calls “the reductionist thesis,” which he quotes from the same
passages in Hume’s Enquiry just referred to: “The reason why we place any credit
in witnesses and historians, is not derived from any connexion, which we per-
ceive a priori, between testimony and reality, but because we are accustomed to
ﬁnd conformity between them” (p. 223). Coady argues that we are in no position
INTRODUCTION
10

to live up to ﬁnding such conformity; our experience is far too limited. His
positive conclusion is an anticipation of the idea that a condition for meaningful
language is a certain degree of accuracy regarding the world. Coady says, “I do
not understand the idea that testimony could exist in a community and yet it be
possible to discover empirically that it had no ‘connection with reality.’” Indeed,
it “constitutes a fundamental category of evidence” (p. 247). It is an interesting
question how much support this last, epistemological claim receives from the
previous, impossibility claim.
In the chapter on testimony in Epistemology, I have raised the question of
whether testimony is a basic source of knowledge or justiﬁcation. This is not the
same as the question of whether testimony is a “basic category of evidence.” The
type of evidence is one thing, its source another. Even if we cannot receive testi-
mony without relying on perception, the evidence we get may not be
perceptual—or indeed of any other speciﬁc kind. Suppose, however, that the
person giving testimony did not have perceptual (or memorial or a priori)
grounds for the proposition attested to (nor did anyone in a testimonial chain
ending with that person, if the person is the last in such a chain of attesters to the
proposition in question). Could we then come to know, through the testimony,
what is attested to? And if we could not, how does this bear on the sense in which
testimonial evidence is a basic category? Moreover, since we can become justiﬁed
through testimony even if the attester is lying and asserts a falsehood, might our
grounds for testimony-based justiﬁcation be different from our grounds for
testimony-based knowledge? These and other questions raised by the readings on
testimony are addressed in detail in Epistemology, and the topic is currently a
lively source of discussion in the ﬁeld.
Inference
Even if testimony is not a basic source of knowledge or justiﬁcation, it is like
those sources in one important way: it can yield non-inferential beliefs. Ordinar-
ily, I just believe what you attest to without drawing any inferences; I presuppose
your veracity, as Reid would say, rather than infer from a premise that you are
veracious that I should accept what you say. Much of what we know, however,
we do know by inference. What is inference, and under what conditions do we
come to know something through it?
Carroll
The charming piece from Lewis Carroll brings out that we cannot take the (or a)
principle governing an inference to be a premise in it. If we do, we simply have
another inference with an additional premise; then the principle governing that
inference must be added as a premise, and so on to inﬁnity. A related issue is
whether, in order to know one’s conclusion on the basis of one’s premises, one
must believe the (or a) principle governing the inference. In this case, one would
not get a regress provided the principle need not itself be known inferentially.
Fumerton
An intermediate view here is that one need only be capable of knowing or justi-
ﬁedly believing a governing principle in order to know or have justiﬁed belief of
INTRODUCTION
11

the conclusion of the inference. Richard Fumerton’s “Inferential Justiﬁcation and
Empiricism” defends something closer to the second of these. One reason it is
difﬁcult to tell whether he does is that he is not distinguishing between disposi-
tions to believe and dispositional beliefs (p. 264). In any event, he is concerned
to defend an empiricist version of the foundationalist view that we can have
knowledge inferentially based on non-inferential knowledge.
Hume
Nothing I have said so far distinguishes between deductive and inductive infer-
ence. The kinds of questions we have considered and the main points made by
Carroll and by Fumerton can be applied to both kinds. But Hume, in his section
on “Skepticism with Regard to Reason,” is especially concerned with inductive
inference and defends the speciﬁc thesis that all our inferences (“reasonings”)
“concerning causes and effects are deriv’d from nothing but custom” (p. 272). He
refers to customary transitions of thought, as opposed to formal reasoning that is
deductively valid or invalid. He leaves much open regarding the psychology of
inference, but seems not to be positing even a dispositional belief of any principle
governing inductive inferences.
Kornblith
It is largely with psychological aspects of inference and reason-giving that Hilary
Kornblith is concerned in “Distrusting Reason.” He notes that “The difference
between truth-responsive reason-giving and rationalization does not lie in fea-
tures intrinsic to the arguments given” (p. 278). His point here is not about the
conditions necessary for the premises of an inference to justify its conclusion in
the abstract; that is, his concern is not with deductive validity or inductive
strength (notions discussed in some detail in Chapter 6 of Epistemology). It is
with what is needed for a belief of the conclusion of an inference to be justiﬁed or
to constitute knowledge. For instance, I can give a good argument for a propo-
sition from premises that are only rationalizations: either I do not believe them at
all, or at least my belief of my conclusion is not based on my believing them. In
that case, assuming I have no other basis for that belief, it is ill-founded and
apparently does not constitute knowledge. The belief has, one might argue,
potential but not actual support from my reasons. There remains some contro-
versy in epistemology about whether this is so and, especially, why.
Inductive inference
With valid deductive inferences, there are questions about how justiﬁcation and
knowledge are transmitted from our premises to our conclusion and about how
much is transmitted, but there is little doubt that they are transmitted. With even
the best of inductive inferences, there are questions about whether any justiﬁca-
tion or knowledge is transmitted from the premises to the conclusion, and many
skeptics have doubted that they are.
Hume
In the much-discussed and enormously inﬂuential passages from Hume’s Enquiry
included in this section, he formulates this Problem of Induction. He says:
INTRODUCTION
12

These two propositions are far from being the same, I have found that such
an object has always been attended with such an effect, and I foresee,
that other objects, which are, in appearance, similar, will be attended with
similar effects. I shall allow, if you please, that the one proposition may
be justly inferred from the other . . . it always is inferred. But if you insist
that the inference is made by a chain of reasoning, I desire you to produce
that reasoning. The connection between these propositions is not intuitive.
(p. 303)
One might think that there is an unstated premise in such reasonings: roughly
that nature is uniform. But to claim that nature is uniform would beg the ques-
tion, for one would be entitled to hold such a premise only on the basis of the
kinds of inference whose capacity to transmit justiﬁcation and knowledge is in
question (see, for example, p. 305). Given these points, one might also wonder
why Hume entitles his next chapter “Skeptical Solution of These Doubts.” There
has been much discussion of whether in the end Hume really is a skeptic about
induction. It may be that he intends a kind of pragmatic solution. He says, for
instance, “Nature will always retain her rights, and prevail in the end over any ab-
stract reasoning whatever” (pp. 306–7). But does it solve an intellectual problem
to say that we are built so that our intellectual conduct will in the end ignore it?
Edwards
Paul Edwards is among the majority of contemporary philosophers in thinking it
does not solve the problem. In “Russell’s Doubts About Induction” he attacks the
view, held by Hume and, in a different form, by Russell, that the connection
between what we properly consider good inductive grounds and the conclusion
we take them to support is, as Hume said, “not intuitive.” Edwards’s special
focus is the notion of a reason. He grants that the premises of a valid deductive
argument can provide a (deductive) reason for their conclusion. But he contends
that this is not the only kind of reason. To deny that the premise of a good
inductive argument can also provide a reason is made to seem plausible only by in
effect redeﬁning inductive reasons in accord with deductive standards. Thus, it is
plausible to say that our repeated experience of things thrown from a window
falling to the ground provides no “reason” to believe the next one will fall only if
one means by “reason” deductively entailing ground. It is uncontroversial that
there is not this kind of reason here; but why is the inference to the conclusion
that the object will fall any less “intuitive” than in the deductive case? Edwards
sees no good reason, then, in Russell (or Hume) for denying that if you have a
good inductive argument for a conclusion and you know or justiﬁedly believe
your premises, your knowledge or justiﬁcation can be transmitted from your
premises to the conclusion you infer from them.
Goodman
One might think that if the problem of induction could be solved, whether along
the lines Edwards proposes or in some other way, inductive inferences might
be taken to be unproblematic to the extent that deductive inferences are.
But that is not so. Nelson Goodman has posed what he calls “The New Riddle
of Induction.” To see it, suppose that by standard inductive inference we are
INTRODUCTION
13

justiﬁed in believing that all emeralds are green. Notice that our evidence is a
matter of emeralds being observed before midnight tonight and found to be
green. But suppose that we had noted that they were also “grue”: that is,
observed before midnight tonight and found to be green, or otherwise blue. Don’t
we now have just as good inductive ground for saying that all emeralds are grue?
But if we do, why shouldn’t we have as much justiﬁcation for expecting a so far
unobserved emerald to be found to be blue after midnight as to be found to be
green? After all, we have apparently conﬁrmed that all emeralds are grue, and
since the emerald in question is not observed before midnight the only way it can
satisfy that conﬁrmed hypothesis after midnight is by being blue. There have been
many attempts to deal with this problem. Goodman’s own (given later in Fact,
Fiction, and Forecast and not reprinted here) appeals to the “entrenchment” of
certain terms, such as “green,” as against the artiﬁciality of predicates like
“grue.” This is reminiscent of Hume’s comfortable appeal to the sovereignty of
nature in our habits of inductive inference.
Foster
It may be, however, that John Foster’s “Induction, Explanation and Natural
Necessity” can be plausibly viewed as addressing both the Humean problem (as it
is mainly intended to do) and the new riddle. Foster above all makes use of the
idea that explanatory inferences have a special status, and he takes the hypothesis
of underlying natural law to explain best the kinds of regularities whose observa-
tion provides a basis for inductive inference. One might say, on this kind of basis,
that whereas the proposition that all emeralds are green might explain our past
observations of their color, this is not explained by the hypothesis that all emer-
alds are grue. But what constitutes an explanation? And when are we justiﬁed in
thinking we have one? These are among the enduring questions overlapping
epistemology and the philosophy of science.
Howson and Urbach and Stove
The selections from Howson and Urbach and from Stove lead to yet another
attempt to deal with the problem of induction, this time on the basis of consider-
ations concerning probability. Howson and Urbach set out some basic elements
in probability theory. These are important in understanding reasoning and justi-
ﬁcation in general (and they help in understanding the chapter on inference in
Epistemology). They also set the stage for Stove’s proposed solution to the prob-
lem of induction. In general terms, his contention is that “most large samples are,
because most large samples arithmetically must be, representative ones” (p. 358).
Suppose we have experience (as we do) with huge numbers of “heavy” objects
falling to the ground when released in mid-air: many pieces of tableware,
many pencils, many stones, etc. Can anyone doubt that most of the samples are
representative of a genuine natural pattern?
I am afraid that where the question is “Can anyone doubt . . .?” the answer
usually is “At least some philosopher can.” Goodman would perhaps ask: just
what pattern is represented by the conﬁrmatory ﬁndings? Others might ask: what
if there is an inﬁnite number of specimens? Hume might point out, after all, that it
is not intuitive that there cannot be an inﬁnite number of objects of the broad
“kind” we have observed falling. Still, it does seem incredible that there not be a
INTRODUCTION
14

representativeness in such cases, to use a term that straddles the psychological
notion of what we cannot—by nature, as Hume might put it—believe and the
normative notion of what we may justiﬁedly reject. The problem of induction
remains a challenge to philosophy.
The architecture of knowledge
Whatever we say about the capacity of inference to transmit justiﬁcation and
knowledge from premises to conclusions, our normal common-sense assumption
is that we do have not only non-inferential knowledge and non-inferential justi-
ﬁed belief, but inferential knowledge and inferentially justiﬁed belief. Suppose
this is so. There will then be interesting questions about the structure of the body
of knowledge or of justiﬁed belief on the part of any given person. The natural
picture, prominent in the history of philosophy and evident in many of the read-
ings in this book, is that a body of knowledge consists of a foundation of non-
inferential knowledge and a superstructure of knowledge that is in some sense
inferentially based on the foundations. The same seems a natural picture for
justiﬁed beliefs—which, when true, may constitute knowledge. This picture has
been challenged.
Sextus Empiricus
In the selection from Sextus Empiricus we ﬁnd what seems to be a presupposition
that the foundationalist picture just sketched is structurally correct together with
a rejection of the assumption that the foundations are solid. He is a skeptic, and
he maintains, in effect, that foundations can always be undermined by certain
forces. Dialectical challenges—the kind that occur in argumentative discourse—
are what he chieﬂy has in mind (p. 373). The relation between the admissibility of
certain foundational elements and the person’s capacity to defend them is dis-
cussed in Epistemology, both in Chapter 8, on the architecture of knowledge, and
in the ﬁnal chapter, on skepticism.
Oakley
There is another way in which the common-sense version of the foundationalist
view can be skeptically challenged. The paper by I.T. Oakley claims that even our
most conﬁdent perceptual beliefs—which a plausible foundationalism is likely to
construe as commonly constituting perceptual knowledge—are dependent on
background assumptions in a way that defeats the common-sense view. He holds
that “to be justiﬁed in a perception-based belief . . . it is necessary that he [the
person in question] be justiﬁed in believing, inter alia, that he has the relevant
skills, and also that there are no special circumstances currently interfering with
his exercise of them” (p. 377). But how would one be justiﬁed in those beliefs
without depending on still others (perhaps including some perceptual ones)? The
same strategy can be used against other claims to possess justiﬁed belief, and
Oakley concludes with a quite general skepticism.
BonJour
The selections from BonJour indicate how a coherentist might criticize the foun-
dationalist picture and at the same time make a case against skepticism. In “The
INTRODUCTION
15

Elements of Coherentism” he lays out a conception of how knowledge can be
accounted for without appeal to foundations in experience, but rather in terms of
how the beliefs constituting knowledge cohere (or in a special way “hang
together”). In his treatment of coherence and observation (drawn from his next
chapter in the book from which the selections come), he grants that if a coherent
body of beliefs is to contain knowledge of the external world, it must incorporate
some beliefs that in some way are tied to observation. His point is not that
justiﬁcation of beliefs about the world requires more than coherence; it is that a
coherent system of justiﬁed beliefs about the world should not also be taken to
constitute knowledge, and hence to be true, unless some are tied to observation.
After all, he is not maintaining a coherence theory of truth, only of justiﬁcation
and of knowledge given the assumption of observations of the world that know-
ledge is supposed to represent. Truth, as opposed to justiﬁcation, is not supposed
to be analyzed in terms of coherence; hence it should be no surprise that know-
ledge, which entails truth, requires something more than coherence. This does
not force him to treat observational beliefs as non-inferentially justiﬁed, as a
foundationalist would tend to do; but it does require giving such beliefs a role
that is not earned entirely through coherence among beliefs, and it implies
according them a measure of epistemic privilege.
In his next chapter, “Answers to Objections,” BonJour replies to a number of
charges against coherentism that have appeared in the literature. One in particu-
lar deserves mention, and it would likely be pressed from the perspective of
Oakley’s understanding of justiﬁcation and knowledge. It is that in granting that
we may assume that we are approximately right about what beliefs we have,
BonJour is in effect presenting “a version of weak foundationalism in which the
foundational beliefs are the person’s metabeliefs about the composition of his
own system of beliefs” (p. 400). BonJour grants that “there is something to this
objection,” but argues that metabeliefs are not treated as they would be on a
foundationalist view (p. 400). Oakley would reply that our justiﬁcation for the
assumption that we are generally right about what our beliefs are depends on
many other assumptions. To this BonJour would rejoin that coherence among the
relevant assumptions is sufﬁcient for the justiﬁcation of each.
Alston
It is in William P. Alston’s “Has Foundationalism been Refuted?” that we ﬁnd
points that support the traditional foundationalist picture against both the kind
of coherentist objections posed by BonJour and the skeptical attack of Oakley. A
central point of Alston’s is that “Minimal Foundationalism [the kind supported
by the classical regress argument, which he states and discusses on pp. 412–13]
does not require one to be able to show that one’s foundations have the required
status, but only that they do” (p. 406). Thus, if sensory experience justiﬁes an
observational belief, that belief can serve as a foundation even if one cannot ﬁnd
some other justiﬁed belief to supply a premise for the observational one. And
unless one simply assumed that having justiﬁcation entails being able to show
that one has it, why would one demand the higher-order capacity to show this, a
capacity that both BonJour and Oakley apparently think one needs?
An analogy may help here. We can have virtues we cannot show we have.
Indeed, with the virtue of humility it might be quite easy to see why. Why can’t
INTRODUCTION
16

justiﬁcation be similar on this count? A related point is this. If, with foundational-
ists, one thinks that justiﬁcation cannot be grounded in an inﬁnite or circular
chain of “justiﬁcations,” one would, on quite systematic grounds, reject the
showing requirement. For if to be justiﬁed in believing p, one must be able to
show that p, and if we can show that p only if we bring to bear a justiﬁed belief of
some premise supporting p, then we cannot show anything without having an
inﬁnite number of justiﬁed beliefs or circling back to, say, p itself as justifying
some premise for it. The burden of proof is surely on the skeptic or other
proponents of the showing requirement here.
I should add that there is another point (developed in Chapter 7 of Epistemol-
ogy) that can be used to undermine both the showing requirement and Oakley’s
dependency argument. It is that there is a distinction between positive and nega-
tive epistemic and justiﬁcatory dependency, and only the former is needed for
justiﬁcation. Consider an analogy. We should not say that your source of income
is the institution of money and banking, even though your income negatively
depends on that, in the sense that you would not have income apart from it. The
source is (say) your salary, and your income positively depends on that. Similarly,
your justiﬁcation does not positively depend on justiﬁcation for denying skeptical
possibilities. Granting that you might not be justiﬁed in believing there is paper
before you if you knew that you had recently been hallucinating paper when
there was none before you, why should we say that your justiﬁcation for this
normally depends on your knowing, or even on your justiﬁcation for believing,
that you have not been hallucinating? You might need such a premise to rebut an
attack on your justiﬁcation. But do we have only what we can protect from
attack? It seems not, and the skeptic in any case apparently cannot show
otherwise.
Haack
In the last selection on the architecture of knowledge, Susan Haack proposes a
“foundherentist” view meant to capture the advantages of both foundationalism
and coherentism without the deﬁciencies of either. Her central analogy is that of
justiﬁcation for beliefs formed in doing a crossword puzzle: both foundational
assumptions, such as that a line in the puzzle must ﬁt a clue, and coherence
considerations involving the mutual ﬁt among different lines, ﬁgure essentially.
Her paradigmatic coherentist is BonJour; her paradigmatic foundationalists seem
to be less recent writers. A fruitful comparison is with the moderate foundational-
ism I have set out in Chapter 7 of Epistemology. An interesting question to pose
for her foundherentist view is whether the data supporting it can be accom-
modated by a moderate foundationalism in which (as would be normal) the
principle that what best explains propositions we are justiﬁed in believing is itself
prima facie justiﬁed. This is a principle on which, if one is perceptually justiﬁed in
believing there is smoke pouring from a window, one thereby acquires justiﬁca-
tion for believing that there is a ﬁre inside. The latter proposition certainly
coheres with the former. But is that what justiﬁes it, or is its coherence with
the former a consequence of its being inferrable from that by a principle that
some foundationalists would take to be a priori, or at least non-inferentially,
justiﬁed?
INTRODUCTION
17

The analysis of knowledge
It is fortunate for epistemological inquiry that much can be illuminatingly said
about knowledge without our having a wholly satisfactory analysis of the con-
cept and even if we have reason to doubt that such an analysis can be found. This
point is illustrated by the readings in the previous sections. But as difﬁcult as the
task is, we should surely not give up the quest, and promising attempts have been
and continue to be made in the ﬁeld.
Ayer
The selection from Ayer sets the stage for the problem of analyzing knowledge
(strictly speaking, the concept of knowledge). Ayer conceives knowledge as surety
regarding a true proposition that one is, and has the right to be, sure of (p. 442).
Since being sure of a proposition entails believing it, and since having the right
to be sure seems to be equivalent to having justiﬁcation for believing it, this
characterization and others like it have come to be conceived as the view that
knowledge is analyzable as justiﬁed true belief.
Gettier
Edmund Gettier’s famous little paper shows that this analysis is too broad. An
example different from his (drawn from Chapter 8 of Epistemology) illustrates
the point more brieﬂy. You enter an apartment and see a very lifelike picture of
your hostess right before you. It looks to you as if she is in front of you facing in
your direction, and she is—behind the wall on which the picture hangs. So (hav-
ing no reason to suspect that there is such a picture), you are justiﬁed in your true
belief. But you do not even see her and do not know she is facing you. There are
many ways to respond to the problem.
Clark
Michael Clark, in the next selection, requires that one’s belief be “fully
grounded.” But granting that my belief about my hostess is not grounded in the
right way, why is it not fully grounded? My sensory experience can be just what it
would be if my hostess were standing directly before me.
Goldman
In Alvin I. Goldman’s “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” we get an answer: there is
no causal chain running from her to my senses, but only from the picture to them.
Among the theoretical questions raised by this approach, however, is how it
accounts for a priori knowledge. If Russell and others are right in thinking that
such knowledge rests on a grasp of relations between universals, which are
abstract, must we then say that universals can ﬁgure as causes—or ﬁgure in
causal connections in a way appropriate to ground a priori knowledge of the
propositions in which those universals are central?
Lehrer and Paxson
Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson make use not of causal concepts, but of
the notion of defeasibility, in understanding knowledge. This rescues the spirit
of the justiﬁed true belief account; we must simply require that the justiﬁcation
INTRODUCTION
18

not be defeated. There are, however, difﬁculties in understanding the notion of
defeasibility, which is quite complicated (see, for example, p. 468). One question
that arises here, as with other accounts of knowledge, is whether a notion pre-
supposed in the account is sufﬁciently clear to advance our understanding of the
concept under analysis. Whatever we say about this in connection with defeas-
ibility, the notion provides a distinctive way to seek an understanding of
knowledge.
Nozick
In the selection from Robert Nozick, a quite different strategy is pursued, one
that helps in dealing with skepticism as well as in understanding knowledge.
The analysis is, on the face of it, simple. The intuitive idea is that knowledge
“tracks” the truth of the proposition known. This suggests a causal concep-
tion, as in the case of tracking an animal, but is not expressed in causal
language. Rather, the idea is that knowledge is a true belief such that if the
proposition in question were not true, you would not believe it and, if it were
true, you would (pp. 477–8). A major question here is how to ﬁgure out what
one would believe and what one would not. This is a difﬁcult question. What-
ever we say about it, we should grant that at least we have intuitions about
such matters and these can be useful in understanding knowledge whatever
analysis we give of the notion.
DeRose
So far, I have (generally in line with the readings mentioned) spoken as if, in
attributing knowledge to people, we were presupposing a constant standard of
grounding of the belief in question. But Keith DeRose denies this. He considers
two cases in which he is asked by his wife whether the bank is open. In one, the
matter is routine; in the other, it is of great importance. He knows it is open in
the ﬁrst, but in the second he does not know without getting further evidence.
The context of her question is crucial; hence the name “contextualism” for the
view. Speciﬁcally, “Attributor factors set a certain standard the putative subject
of knowledge must live up to in order to make the knowledge attribution true”
(p. 497). This is why he can know in one case—in which the context does not
demand a high standard for truly attributing knowledge to someone—and not in
the other. The implications of this position for skepticism, as well as for under-
standing knowledge in ordinary cases (on almost any analysis of knowledge we
might plausibly give), are signiﬁcant. We can maintain that the skeptic provides a
context in which the attributor standards are artiﬁcially high. If we do not meet
them, then, it does not follow that we do not have knowledge in the ordinary
sense of the term, but at most that we do not meet the jacked-up standards
invoked by the skeptic and hence do not have knowledge in the sense that the
skeptic is (at least implicitly) giving to the term. We may, then, still have know-
ledge more or less when we reﬂectively think we do.
Skepticism
On the basis of the epistemological readings and reﬂections now behind us, we
can fruitfully consider the difﬁcult problem of skepticism. It has already surfaced,
INTRODUCTION
19

but let us begin with a word about its Cartesian form as a background commonly
presupposed in the ﬁeld of epistemology.
Descartes
In René Descartes’s ﬁrst two Meditations (reprinted below after a synopsis of his
entire set of Meditations), he formulates a powerful skeptical challenge (First
Meditation) and then overcomes it to his satisfaction (Second Meditation). One
of the noteworthy elements in these meditations is the notion of certainty that
emerges. In some contexts it sounds as if he may be speaking of psychological
certainty, roughly a virtually maximal degree of conviction regarding a prop-
osition. But most of the time it seems clear that his concern is to achieve epistemic
certainty, which is roughly a matter of being both true and utterly beyond any
reasonable doubt. Psychological certainty is quite possible regarding a false
proposition; epistemic certainty is not. I can be certain of a falsehood; but a
falsehood cannot be a certainty. Descartes has a high standard for certainty, and
later skeptics have tended to adopt a similarly high one, although it is possible to
be skeptical about whether there is even justiﬁcation of a kind possible without
achieving epistemic certainty. Chapter 8 of Epistemology distinguishes these
kinds of certainty in some detail and connects both with the notion of knowledge.
The standard of certainty that emerges in Descartes’s Second Meditation is
that of clarity and distinctness. Much can (and has been) said about what this is,
but it is important to see that it is a status possible for beliefs about the external
world, such as that the same piece of wax endures through the transformative
changes it undergoes upon being melted. Moreover, that case is signiﬁcant
because for Descartes “the nature of this piece of wax . . . is perceived by the
mind alone” (p. 522). This is one among many places in which his rationalism
emerges: for him (putting the point in rough terms), reason rather than experi-
ence is the most important element in grounding knowledge. Indeed, later in the
work he uses reason (together with data available to pure thought) to prove that
God exists and that, since God is not a deceiver, we are not created in a way that
allows our truly clear and distinct ideas, as opposed to our uncritically formed
ones, to be false. God has built us so that, through (say) carelessness we can
misuse our native intellectual equipment, but not with a design defect that would
allow our truly competent efforts to fail. Here Descartes’s theology plays a
central role in his epistemology.
Putnam
If Descartes’s theology is rejected, his First Meditation still stands as a powerful
statement of the idea that one could be a lone ego hallucinating a non-existent
external world. A contemporary version of the idea is that one could be a “brain
in a vat,” i.e., a brain that (with or without scientists to control the inputs)
sustains one’s thoughts and provides all the sense experience one now has. Hilary
Putnam, however, is quite anti-Cartesian in this matter. He makes a case that,
owing to how language and conceptualization work, “although the people in
that possible world [in which they are brains in a vat over their whole existence]
can think and ‘say’ any words we can think and say, they cannot (I claim) refer to
what we can refer to. In particular they cannot think or say that they are brains in
a vat (even by thinking ‘we are brains in a vat’)” (p. 529). If this is right, then
INTRODUCTION
20

regardless of what we say, we cannot raise the Cartesian skeptical worry. This
sort of strategy is sometimes called a dissolution of a problem, as opposed to a
solution.
The other selections in the section of the book on skepticism do not attempt a
dissolution (at least not of this kind), but concentrate on meeting the skeptic in a
more direct way. They grant (at least for the sake of argument) that we can
formulate the problem in the way Descartes did (or in terms of the possibility of
being just a brain in a vat) and defend the common-sense view that we do have a
good deal of knowledge of external things.
Dretske
Fred Dretske’s paper foreshadows the contextualist view put forward by DeRose.
When we see a zebra in a zoo (to use Dretske’s example), do we, under the usual
conditions, know that it is one even though we could not distinguish it, at the
distance from which we see it, from a mule painted to look like one? It would be
one thing if zoos were known to pull off such pranks, but this is not so. In the
context, the possibility that we see only a painted mule is not a “relevant alterna-
tive.” On the kind of view Dretske is presenting—now called relevant alternatives
theory—one can know that p even if one cannot discriminate it from irrelevant
alternatives. We do need to be able to distinguish it from relevant ones, as where
zoos are known for such substitutions.
Another question that comes to the fore in Dretske’s paper is the problem of
“closure” for knowledge. In one form the question is whether there is a sort of
closed though potentially expanding circle around knowledge, in the sense that
for anything that one knows, one also knows every deductive consequence of it
(every proposition entailed by it). Thus, suppose I know that I cannot tell the
zebra I see (at the distance in question) from a mule painted to look like a zebra.
Still, since its being a zebra entails that it is not a mule and I know that it is a
zebra, don’t I still know that it is not a mule? Dretske, Nozick, and others say we
do not and do not need to know this. Others hold that we need to and we do.
Skeptics maintain that we “need” to and we do not. In Chapter 6 of Epistemol-
ogy I argue that we do not need to, and my ﬁnal chapter, on skepticism, develops
this position.
Klein
Peter Klein, by contrast, argues that skeptics cannot show that we would not
know in such a case that the animal is not a mule (his focus is on justiﬁcation, but
he apparently intends his main points to apply to knowledge as well). Among the
things he does are two of special interest here. First, he defends a closure principle
for justiﬁcation, roughly that if one is justiﬁed in believing that p, and p entails q,
one is also justiﬁed in believing q (and here he critically discusses in detail an
example I introduced against such a principle in Chapter 6 of Epistemology).
Second, he argues that the skeptic cannot motivate the skeptical attack without
granting to common sense enough to rebut skepticism in the ways he outlines. A
distinctive element of this approach is the way it combines a rejection of skepti-
cism with an acceptance of a major principle the skeptic uses and an account of
how skepticism may be plausible.
INTRODUCTION
21

Huemer
The paper on this issue by Michael Huemer deals with both Dretske’s and Klein’s
papers. Arguing that neither succeeds against the skeptic, he contends that a
direct realist account can supplement what they have done in a way that does
succeed. Huemer’s strategy is to take perceptual beliefs as a direct realist does:
they are foundational and in general not in need of explanation. They are “not
inferred from evidence” (p. 588)—a view defended in detail in Chapter 1 and
elsewhere in Epistemology. Given this, we may properly appeal to their content
in explanations in a way we may not appeal to the content of skeptical scenarios,
and “the direct realist can easily refute the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis on the basis
of his beliefs about the external world” (p. 587). These beliefs give us a reason to
reject the kinds of artiﬁcial explanations of our experience which the skeptic
would have to give.
Chisholm
The entire debate between main-line epistemologists and skeptics is placed in a
broader context by R.M. Chisholm in his widely discussed paper “The Problem
of the Criterion”. The problem—called the “diallelus” by the ancients—is quite
general, affecting any attempt at philosophical analysis. As applied to the notion
of knowledge, it is this: if we have no criterion for knowledge, how do we recog-
nize an instance of knowledge?—but if we cannot recognize an instance, then
how can we ever have a criterion for knowledge? Chisholm notes three important
responses:
there is scepticism (you cannot answer either question without presuppos-
ing an answer to the other, and therefore the questions cannot be answered
at all); there is “methodism” (you begin with an answer to B [the ﬁrst
question]); and there is “particularism” (you begin with an answer to A
[the second question]). I suggest the third possibility is more reasonable.
(p. 596)
What follows in the paper is an articulation of some of the basic epistemological
categories we must understand in order to be critical particularists. Chisholm
does not claim to prove that particularism is correct. He does, however, conclude
with an afﬁrmation it licenses: “in favor of our approach there is the fact that we
do know many things, after all” (p. 601).
Moore
It seems ﬁtting to close the section on skepticism with the selections from G.E.
Moore’s classic afﬁrmation of common sense against skepticism, “Proof of an
External World”. How might we know that there is an external world? Cutting
the Gordian knot, Moore simply held up his hands and said “Here is one hand”
and “Here is another” (p. 602) Isn’t it obvious that this “proves” there is an
external world? Responses have varied: there is, for instance, annoyance,
incredulity, and amusement. For this book, the interesting thing is to compare
what Moore says with what the other defenders of common sense have main-
tained. One question is what constitutes a proof (a topic discussed in Chapter 9
of Epistemology in the section that explores the sense, if any, in which scientiﬁc
INTRODUCTION
22

hypotheses are “proved”). Chisholm, for instance, does not claim the possibility
of a proof when he says that we do know many things.
It might seem that Moore is loose in speaking of proof, but he is more dis-
criminating than one might at ﬁrst sight think. He grants, for instance, that he
does not have a proof that he is not dreaming. Rather, he has “conclusive reasons
for asserting that I am not now dreaming” (p. 605). We might wonder just how
much of a concession this is to Cartesian skepticism—if any. But it is not only
Cartesian skepticism that Moore rejects. In “Hume’s Theory Examined” Moore
also rejects a similar skeptical position he ﬁnds in Hume, and he does so in a way
that suggests he endorses a kind of closure principle, perhaps one like the kind
defended by Klein. “I do know that this pencil exists; but I could not know this,
if Hume’s principles were true; therefore, Hume’s principles, one or both of
them, are false” (p. 606). The underlying strategy Moore uses is, like Chisholm’s,
a foundationalist version of what might be called epistemological common-
sensism. Moore says:
It is certain, then, that if any proposition whatever is ever known by us
mediately [roughly, inferentially], or because some other proposition is
known from which it follows, some one proposition at least, must also be
known by us immediately . . . hence it follows that the conditions necessary
to make an argument good and conclusive may just as well be satisﬁed,
when the premiss is only known immediately, as when there are other
arguments in its favour . . . . Therefore my argument: “I know this pencil to
exist; therefore, Hume’s principles are false”; may be just as good an argu-
ment as any other, even though its premiss . . . is only known immediately.
(p. 609)
Moore is, then, appealing to “the argument from a particular case” (pp. 609–10).
Here he is fruitfully compared with Chisholm.
Another comparison worth pursuing is to my chapter on skepticism in Epis-
temology. There and elsewhere I distinguish between simple perceptual proposi-
tions, such as that there is a pencil in my hand, and epistemic propositions built
from these, such as that I know that there is a pencil in my hand. In various parts
of my book I defend the view that we have non-inferential justiﬁcation for pro-
positions of the ﬁrst kind. But it is more difﬁcult to defend the position, held by
Moore and probably Chisholm, that we have non-inferential knowledge of epi-
stemic propositions. It may be, however, that we do; and even if we do not, there
are many things that can be said against the skeptic.
One simple point to keep in mind here is this. We should distinguish between
rebutting a skeptical case, which is showing that it is unsound, and refuting it,
which is showing that its main conclusion is false, for instance that there is,
contrary to skepticism, knowledge of the external world. Much of the argumen-
tation against skepticism laid out in this section of the volume is devoted to its
attempted refutation. But although refutation sufﬁces for rebuttal, rebuttal does
not require refutation. We can show a skeptical argument unsound, for example,
without showing its conclusion to be false. The prospects for refutation of skepti-
cism in its most plausible forms may be good; but whatever they are, the
prospects for rebuttal are better. Chapter 10 of Epistemology discusses both
INTRODUCTION
23

the distinction between refutation and rebuttal and its implications for the
assessment of the controversy between common-sense epistemology and
skepticism.
It would be misleading to conclude this introduction without emphasizing that
although skeptical concerns are pervasive in epistemology, they are not the
central rationale for studying the subject. They surely provide a sufﬁcient reason
for doing so, but the nature of knowledge and justiﬁcation is of enormous interest
even apart from skepticism. This is particularly so if they are seen in context, as
arising in perception, consciousness, memory, reﬂection, and through testimony;
as extended by inference and structured in accordance with both our psycho-
logical and our epistemological nature; and as extending (I think) into ethics as
well as science and, for people of appropriate experience and understanding, into
the aesthetic and theological realms. The study of all this does not make it obvi-
ous just what constitutes knowledge or how to vindicate the common-sense view
that we have a great deal of it. But this volume contains a great deal of what is
needed to search out plausible solutions to those intriguing problems.
INTRODUCTION
24

PART I
SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION
AND KNOWLEDGE


1
PERCEPTION
According to common sense, perception, the exercise of the ﬁve senses, is the chief
means by which we know about the world around us. For this reason, a basic under-
standing of the nature of perception is important to epistemology. A theory of percep-
tion should answer such questions as: What is it to perceive something?, What sorts
of things does perception make us aware of?, and How does perception enable us to
gain knowledge of the world around us? The reading selections in this chapter discuss
four traditional philosophical positions, each of which addresses one or more of
those questions:
1.
Representationalism, also known as “indirect realism,” maintains that in percep-
tion, we are directly aware of certain internal, mental states or entities—referred
to by various philosophers as “ideas” (Locke), “impressions” (Hume), “mental
images,” or “sense data” (Russell)—and we are indirectly aware of external
things (that is, our awareness of them depends on our awareness of the
images). The mental images are usually said to be caused by external, physical
objects/events and to “represent” the latter. Representationalists usually also
say that we can have knowledge or justiﬁed beliefs about the external world by
inferring facts about external objects from the character of the mental images.
Usually, it is thought that the hypothesis of external objects (objects existing
independent of the mind) having certain characteristics provides the best
explanation for why we have the sort of sense data that we do. Representational-
ism, more than any other position, probably deserves to be called the traditional
theory of perception among philosophers.
2.
By contrast, direct realists maintain that in perception, we are directly aware of
external objects, that is, that our awareness of external objects does not depend
upon the awareness of mental images or any other non-external things. Direct
realists also generally claim that we have immediate (non-inferential) knowledge
of the existence of, and some of the properties of, the external objects that we
perceive. This view has sometimes been called “naive realism” (chieﬂy by its
opponents), partly because it seems to be the view of common sense and also,
probably, partly because its opponents have considered it too simplistic.
3.
Idealism holds that there is no external world; all there are are minds and
“ideas” in the mind. Perception, on this view, is simply the process of experi-
encing a certain particularly vivid sort of idea. (Note that “idea” is here used in
an extended sense—it covers all mental phenomena.) There is thus no problem
about how we know about external objects. Very few philosophers hold this
27

position today, although it enjoyed surprising popularity during the nineteenth
century.
4.
Finally, skepticism holds that we cannot know whether there is an external world
or not; nor can we know, if there is, what it is like. Note that this position is not
idealism, because the skeptic, unlike the idealist, does not deny the existence of
external objects; he merely says that we do not know they exist.
Each of the selections in this chapter discusses one or more of the above theories.
John Locke in the seventeenth century gave what is perhaps the classic exposition
of representationalism, to which later thinkers would respond. Locke uses the term
“idea” to refer to any mental object that we are immediately aware of. In his view, all
our “ideas” come either from “sensation” (meaning the ﬁve senses) or from “reﬂec-
tion” (meaning one’s introspective observation of the operations of one’s own mind).
In normal sense perception, an external object causes us to experience an idea that
represents that object. It was Locke’s view that the external object resembles the
idea we have of it in respect of spatial properties—e.g., if you see a round tomato,
then you will have a round (tomato-shaped) image in your mind.
Locke also thought (although this is not discussed in the selection printed here)
that there were other properties—including colors, tastes, smells, and sounds—that
either were not really in the external object or existed only as dispositions the object
had to cause certain kinds of sensations in us. For instance, your sensation of
redness (unlike your idea of roundness) does not resemble any property in the phys-
ical tomato; the tomato just has a power to produce that sensation in you. The latter
properties (colors, tastes, etc.) he called “secondary qualities.” The properties of
objects that resemble our ideas (chieﬂy spatial properties and mathematical proper-
ties, such as quantity) he called “primary qualities.” We won’t here go into the
reasons that Locke believed in this distinction, although it comes up again in the
Berkeley selection.
How do we know that there actually are external objects? Locke admits that one
cannot be as certain of the existence of external things as one can of one’s own
existence (that is, of the existence of one’s own mind), but he thinks it is rational to
assume that our senses are trustworthy. Among other things, he states that our
sensory ideas must be caused by external objects, since we do not have control over
our sense perceptions, whereas we would have control over them if we caused them.
He also points out that the information we acquire from different senses tends to ﬁt
together, which would be unlikely if our senses were generally unreliable. For
instance, when one sees an object, one can usually also reach out and touch that
object, and the shape it looks to have will generally be the same as the shape one
feels. The things one perceives also have steady characteristics and obey regular
laws; for instance, one can write down some words on a page, and the words will stay
there, and be perceived by other people, just as you originally wrote them, even if you
have forgotten what you wrote. This tends to show that the perceptions you experi-
ence are caused by things that exist independent of your mind, i.e., external objects.
Reacting in large part to Locke, Bishop George Berkeley became the ﬁrst idealist in
Western philosophical history, declaring that only minds and ideas in the mind
existed. Odd as this sounds, it was a natural development after Locke: if the only
things we are immediately aware of are ideas, why think that anything other than
ideas exists? If we had the same ideas but there were no external objects, Berkeley
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
28

argued, everything would seem exactly the same as it does now. As for what causes
our ideas, Berkeley proposed that God plants certain ideas in our minds on an
ongoing basis and makes sure to coordinate different people’s ideas (so that you
and I can both see a table at the same time, for instance). The ideas caused by God
are the really vivid ones that we have no control over—otherwise known as “sense
perceptions.” (There are also some less vivid ideas that we have control over—the
ideas created in imagination—which are not caused by God.) Berkeley insisted that
he was not denying the reality of tables, rocks, and so on; rather, he was just saying
that those things are collections of ideas (tables are real because ideas are perfectly
real as ideas in the mind). However, most other philosophers have thought that he
was denying the reality of those objects, in spite of his claim to the contrary.
What arguments did Berkeley have? Three main ones. One was the argument given
in the last paragraph, that we have no reason for believing in external objects.
Second, Berkeley argued that we could not have any coherent conception of
what external objects were like. Locke had said that they resembled our ideas, but
Berkeley argued that nothing could resemble an idea, except another idea. Locke
had deployed arguments to show that our ideas of “secondary qualities” did not
resemble qualities in the external objects. Berkeley showed that the same kind of
arguments could be used to argue that primary qualities were not in external objects
either, leaving external objects with no (comprehensible) qualities at all, and it did not
seem reasonable to believe in things with no qualities. Third, Berkeley argued that
the concept of an external object—a thing existing completely independent of the
mind—was self-contradictory. Roughly, he argued that one could not conceive of
anything existing outside the mind, because if one tried to conceive of such a thing,
the thing would then, by the very fact that one was conceiving of it, be in one’s own
mind (section 23). Since he also thought that anything that was inconceivable was
impossible, he concluded that external objects could not exist.
Most of his contemporaries in the eighteenth century seem to have regarded
Berkeley’s position as absurd, although they could not refute his arguments on an
intellectual level. Dr. Samuel Johnson was informed of Berkeley’s theory and asked
how he would refute it. Johnson, famously, proceeded to kick a rock, saying, “I refute
it thus.” Berkeley, of course, would have said that the pain Johnson felt in his foot
was just another idea in his mind.
David Hume (writing in the eighteenth century, shortly after Berkeley) criticizes
direct realism, using a famous argument called “the argument from illusion.” The
argument begins by observing that the character of our sensory experiences often
varies even when there is no change in the physical object we are putatively perceiv-
ing. For example, as one moves farther away from a table, the table looks smaller, but
there is no objective change in the physical table. This allegedly shows that one is not
genuinely perceiving the real table. Rather, one is perceiving an image of the table in
one’s mind. Ordinary people, Hume thinks, commonly confuse this image with the
real object. The image represents the physical table but is not identical with it, since
the image can get smaller while the real table stays the same size. Hume thus favors
indirect realism over direct realism.
Hume also puts forward a skeptical argument. Since we are only directly aware of
sensory images, in order to have any knowledge of the external world, we must be
able to verify that sensory images of a particular kind are caused by physical objects
of a particular kind. For instance, in order to have knowledge of a physical table, we
PERCEPTION
29

must be able to verify that table-images are caused by real, physical tables. Accord-
ing to Hume, the only way we can ever know that one kind of thing, A, causes another
kind of thing, B, is by experience: speciﬁcally, we must observe instances of A being
followed by instances of B, on a number of occasions.1 But we have already estab-
lished that one can never really observe physical objects but only their images;
therefore, we cannot know anything about the causal relations physical objects stand
in.
Thus, Hume holds an unusual combination of indirect realism and skepticism: he
believes that our sensory images are representations of real things existing outside
the mind, but he also believes that that belief cannot be rationally defended. These
seemingly conﬂicting beliefs are to some extent reconciled when we note that in
Hume’s view, it is a mistake to demand rational justiﬁcations for all our beliefs; many
(perhaps all) of our beliefs are the product of ineradicable instincts, rather than
reason, and Hume does not see this as a problem.
Thomas Reid developed his direct realist theory of perception mainly in response
to Hume and Berkeley. He conceded that Berkeley’s arguments would be irrefutable
if one accepted the premise (which Locke and Hume had both adopted) that we can
only directly perceive ideas. Reid, in fact, had been a follower of Berkeley at one time
in his life, until he (Reid) noticed that if Berkeley’s theory were true, there would be no
reason to believe that other people were conscious, since the “other people” he
perceived were just ideas in his own mind. He considered this consequence to be
unacceptable, so he turned to questioning Berkeley’s starting premise. Reid con-
cluded, against Berkeley, Hume, and Locke, that we do not perceive ideas; rather, we
perceive physical objects, directly. He also concluded that we are justiﬁed in believing
in external objects without the need for any argument for their existence. He com-
pares the principle that the things we perceive exist, to the axioms of a mathematical
system—both, he thinks, should be accepted as self-evident.
The only argument Reid could ﬁnd against direct realism was Hume’s argument
from illusion (see above). Reid proposed to explain Hume’s phenomenon by drawing
a distinction between the “apparent magnitude” and the “real magnitude” of the
table. What he probably meant by the “apparent magnitude” of the table was its
angular size, relative to the eye. To explain: imagine drawing a line connecting one
extremity of the table to your eye. Draw another line connecting the other extremity of
the table to the same eye. The angle that the two lines make where they meet is the
angular size of the table, relative to the point where the eye is located. The “real
magnitude” of the table is just its length, as measured in feet, inches, etc. Reid
explains that the table “appears smaller” as you move away from it, not because you
are perceiving an image, but because you perceive the angular magnitude of the table
by the sense of sight (the real magnitude is perceived by the sense of touch), and the
angular magnitude of the table decreases with distance, as dictated by the laws of
geometry. In fact, the phenomenon is exactly what you should expect if you are
seeing a real table; therefore, if anything, Hume’s experiment gives evidence that we
are perceiving the real table.
Bertrand Russell (one of the most important twentieth-century philosophers)
defended a form of indirect realism. His view came to be called “the sense data
theory,” since he used the term “sense data” to refer to the mental images that, in
his view, we are directly aware of in perception. Russell deploys versions of the
argument from illusion, noting that the apparent shape and color of a table depend
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
30

not just upon the properties of the table, but also upon the location of the observer
and the lighting conditions. He thinks that this refutes direct realism, and he goes on
to ask whether and how we can have knowledge of external, physical objects. While
he concedes that we can never be certain that external objects exist, he argues that
it is highly probable that they do. The reason is that the hypothesis of a world of
external objects, which exist even when we are not looking at them, provides the
simplest explanation for our sense data (our sense data behave just the way they
would behave if they were caused by physical objects), and we have no positive
reason to doubt the existence of external objects.
Lastly, the selections from John Austin (based on a series of lectures that he gave)
criticize the argument from illusion and the sense data theory. Austin responds
speciﬁcally to A.J. Ayer, whose views were very similar to those of Russell. Austin
practised a style of philosophy popular in the twentieth century known as “ordinary
language philosophy,” which held that the job of philosophers was to analyze the way
people use language. He argues that the argument from illusion draws plausibility
from various misuses of language. Austin also points out an important non sequitur
in the argument as Ayer presents it: Ayer discusses the famous optical illusion in
which a straight stick, when halfway immersed in water, appears bent. Ayer claims
that in this case what one sees cannot be the real stick. As Austin notes, from the
fact that the stick looks bent, it does not follow that one is seeing something that is
bent, nor does it follow that one is not seeing the actual stick. Rather, one is seeing a
straight stick that appears bent. Austin sees no difﬁculty in this. Other versions of the
argument from illusion seem to involve the same fallacy. Austin does not put forward
any positive arguments for an alternative theory of perception (although presumably
he would endorse direct realism), preferring instead to focus on criticizing the
motivations offered for sense data.
Note
1. He discusses this point at greater length in section IV of his Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding, reprinted in Chapter 6 of this volume.
PERCEPTION
31

John Locke, Essay Concerning
Human Understanding
(Book I, Chapter i)
§ 8. Thus much I thought necessary to say concerning the Occasion of this
Enquiry into humane Understanding. But, before I proceed on to what I have
thought on this Subject, I must here in the Entrance beg pardon of my Reader, for
the frequent use of the Word Idea, which he will ﬁnd in the following Treatise. It
being that Term, which, I think, serves best to stand for whatsoever is the Object
of the Understanding when a Man thinks, I have used it to express whatever is
meant by Phantasm, Notion, Species, or whatever it is, which the Mind can be
employ’d about in thinking; and I could not avoid frequently using it.
I presume it will be easily granted me, that there are such Ideas in Men’s
Minds; every one is conscious of them in himself, and Men’s Words and Actions
will satisfy him, that they are in others.
Our ﬁrst Enquiry then shall be, how they come into the Mind.
(Book II, Chapter i)
§ 2. Let us then suppose the Mind to be, as we say, white Paper, void of all
Characters, without any Ideas; How comes it to be furnished? Whence comes it
by that vast store, which the busy and boundless Fancy of Man has painted on it,
with an almost endless variety? Whence has it all the materials of Reason and
Knowledge? To this I answer, in one word, From Experience: In that, all our
Knowledge is founded; and from that it ultimately derives it self. Our Observa-
tion employ’d either about external, sensible Objects; or about the internal
Operations of our Minds, perceived and reﬂected on by our selves, is that, which
supplies our Understandings with all the materials of thinking. These two are the
Fountains of Knowledge, from whence all the Ideas we have, or can naturally
have, do spring.
§ 3. First, Our Senses, conversant about particular sensible Objects, do convey
into the Mind, several distinct Perceptions of things, according to those various
ways, wherein those Objects do affect them: And thus we come by those Ideas,
we have of Yellow, White, Heat, Cold, Soft, Hard, Bitter, Sweet, and all those
J. Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. P.H. Nidditch (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1975).
32

which we call sensible qualities, which when I say the senses convey into the
mind, I mean, they from external Objects convey into the mind what produces
there those Perceptions. This great Source, of most of the Ideas we have, depend-
ing wholly upon our Senses, and derived by them to the Understanding, I call
SENSATION.
(Book II, Chapter xxxii)
§ 3. But ’tis not in that metaphysical Sense of Truth, which we enquire here, when
we examine, whether our Ideas are capable of being true or false; but in the more
ordinary Acceptation of those Words: And so I say, that the Ideas in our Minds,
being only so many Perceptions, or Appearances there, none of them are false.
The Idea of a Centaur, having no more Falshood in it, when it appears in our
Minds; than the Name Centaur has Falshood in it, when it is pronounced by our
Mouths, or written on Paper. For Truth or Falshood, lying always in some
Afﬁrmation, or Negation, Mental or Verbal, our Ideas are not capable any of
them of being false, till the Mind passes some Judgment on them; that is, afﬁrms
or denies something of them.
§ 4. When-ever the Mind refers any of its Ideas to any thing extraneous to
them, they are then capable to be called true or false. Because the Mind in such a
reference, makes a tacit Supposition of their Conformity to that Thing: which
Supposition, as it happens to be true or false; so the Ideas themselves come to be
denominated.
(Book IV, Chapter xi)
Of our Knowledge of the Existence of other Things
§ 1. The Knowledge of our own Being, we have by intuition. The Existence of a
GOD, Reason clearly makes known to us, as has been shewn.
The Knowledge of the Existence of any other thing we can have only by
Sensation: For there being no necessary connexion of real Existence, with any
Idea a Man hath in his Memory, nor of any other Existence but that of GOD,
with the Existence of any particular Man; no particular Man can know the
Existence of any other Being, but only when by actual operating upon him, it
makes it self perceived by him. For the having the Idea of any thing in our Mind,
no more proves the Existence of that Thing, than the picture of a Man evidences
his being in the World, or the Visions of a Dream make thereby a true History.
§ 2. ’Tis therefore the actual receiving of Ideas from without, that gives us
notice of the Existence of other Things, and makes us know, that something doth
exist at that time without us, which causes that Idea in us, though perhaps we
neither know nor consider how it does it: For it takes not from the certainty of
our Senses, and the Ideas we receive by them, that we know not the manner
wherein they are produced: v.g. whilst I write this, I have, by the Paper affecting
my Eyes, that Idea produced in my Mind, which whatever Object causes, I call
White; by which I know, that that Quality or Accident (i.e. whose appearance
before my Eyes, always causes that Idea) doth really exist, and hath a Being
without me. And of this, the greatest assurance I can possibly have, and to which
ESSAY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
33

my Faculties can attain, is the Testimony of my Eyes, which are the proper and
sole Judges of this thing, whose Testimony I have reason to rely on, as so certain,
that I can no more doubt, whilst I write this, that I see White and Black, and that
something really exists, that causes that Sensation in me, than that I write or
move my Hand; which is a Certainty as great, as humane Nature is capable of,
concerning the Existence of any thing, but a Man’s self alone, and of GOD.
§ 3. The Notice we have by our Senses, of the existing of Things without us,
though it be not altogether so certain, as our intuitive Knowledge, or the Deduc-
tions of our Reason, employ’d about the clear abstract Ideas of our own Minds;
yet it is an assurance that deserves the name of Knowledge. If we persuade our
selves, that our Faculties act and inform us right, concerning the existence of
those Objects that affect them, it cannot pass for an ill-grounded conﬁdence: For
I think no body can, in earnest, be so sceptical, as to be uncertain of the Existence
of those Things which he sees and feels. At least, he that can doubt so far, (what-
ever he may have with his own Thoughts) will never have any Controversies with
me; since he can never be sure I say any thing contrary to his Opinion. As to my
self, I think GOD has given me assurance enough of the Existence of Things
without me: since by their different application, I can produce in my self both
Pleasure and Pain, which is one great Concernment of my present state. This is
certain, the conﬁdence that our Faculties do not herein deceive us, is the greatest
assurance we are capable of, concerning the Existence of material Beings. For we
cannot act any thing, but by our Faculties; nor talk of Knowledge it self, but by
the help of those Faculties, which are ﬁtted to apprehend even what Knowledge
is. But besides the assurance we have from our Senses themselves, that they do
not err in the Information they give us, of the Existence of Things without us,
when they are affected by them, we are farther conﬁrmed in this assurance, by
other concurrent Reasons.
§ 4. First, ’Tis plain, those Perceptions are produced in us by exteriour Causes
affecting our Senses: Because those that want the Organs of any Sense, never can
have the Ideas belonging to that Sense produced in their Minds. This is too
evident to be doubted: and therefore we cannot but be assured, that they come in
by the Organs of that Sense, and no other way. The Organs themselves, ’tis plain,
do not produce them: for then the Eyes of a Man in the dark, would produce
Colours, and his Nose smell Roses in the Winter: but we see no body gets the
relish of a Pine-apple, till he goes to the Indies, where it is, and tastes it.
§ 5. Secondly, Because sometimes I ﬁnd, that I cannot avoid the having those
Ideas produced in my Mind. For though when my Eyes are shut, or Windows fast,
I can at Pleasure re-call to my Mind the Ideas of Light, or the Sun, which former
Sensations had lodg’d in my Memory; so I can at pleasure lay by that Idea, and
take into my view that of the smell of a Rose, or taste of Sugar. But if I turn my
Eyes at noon towards the Sun, I cannot avoid the Ideas, which the Light, or Sun,
then produces in me. So that there is a manifest difference, between the Ideas laid
up in my Memory; (over which, if they were there only, I should have constantly
the same power to dispose of them, and lay them by at pleasure) and those which
force themselves upon me, and I cannot avoid having. And therefore it must
needs be some exteriour cause, and the brisk acting of some Objects without me,
whose efﬁcacy I cannot resist, that produces those Ideas in my Mind, whether I
will, or no. Besides, there is no body who doth not perceive the difference in
JOHN LOCKE
34

himself, between contemplating the Sun, as he hath the Idea of it in his Memory,
and actually looking upon it: Of which two, his perception is so distinct, that few
of his Ideas are more distinguishable one from another. And therefore he hath
certain knowledge, that they are not both Memory, or the Actions of his Mind,
and Fancies only within him; but that actual seeing hath a Cause without.
§ 6. Thirdly, Add to this, that many of those Ideas are produced in us with
pain, which afterwards we remember without the least offence. Thus the pain of
Heat or Cold, when the Idea of it is revived in our Minds, gives us no disturbance;
which, when felt, was very troublesome, and is again, when actually repeated:
which is occasioned by the disorder the external Object causes in our Bodies,
when applied to it: And we remember the pain of Hunger, Thirst, or the Head-
ach, without any pain at all; which would either never disturb us, or else con-
stantly do it, as often as we thought of it, were there nothing more but Ideas
ﬂoating in our Minds, and appearances entertaining our Fancies, without the real
Existence of Things affecting us from abroad. The same may be said of Pleasure,
accompanying several actual Sensations: And though mathematical demonstra-
tions depend not upon sense, yet the examining them by Diagrams, gives great
credit to the Evidence of our Sight, and seems to give it a Certainty approaching
to that of the Demonstration it self. For it would be very strange, that a Man
should allow it for an undeniable Truth, that two Angles of a Figure, which he
measures by Lines and Angles of a Diagram, should be bigger one than the other;
and yet doubt of the Existence of those Lines and Angles, which by looking on, he
makes use of to measure that by.
§ 7. Fourthly, Our Senses, in many cases bear witness to the Truth of each
other’s report, concerning the Existence of sensible Things without us. He that
sees a Fire, may, if he doubt whether it be any thing more than a bare Fancy, feel
it too; and be convinced, by putting his Hand in it. Which certainly could never
be put into such exquisite pain, by a bare Idea or Phantom, unless that the pain be
a fancy too: Which yet he cannot, when the Burn is well, by raising the Idea of it,
bring upon himself again.
Thus I see, whilst I write this, I can change the Appearance of the Paper; and by
designing the Letters, tell before-hand what new Idea it shall exhibit the very next
moment, barely by drawing my Pen over it: which will neither appear (let me
fancy as much as I will) if my Hand stands still; or though I move my Pen, if my
Eyes be shut: Nor when those Characters are once made on the Paper, can I chuse
afterwards but see them as they are; that is, have the Ideas of such Letters as I
have made. Whence it is manifest, that they are not barely the Sport and Play of
my own Imagination, when I ﬁnd, that the Characters, that were made at the
pleasure of my own Thoughts, do not obey them; nor yet cease to be, whenever I
shall fancy it, but continue to affect my Senses constantly and regularly, accord-
ing to the Figures I made them. To which if we will add, that the sight of those
shall, from another Man, draw such Sounds, as I before-hand design they shall
stand for, there will be little reason left to doubt, that those Words, I write, do
really exist without me, when they cause a long series of regular Sounds to affect
my Ears, which could not be the effect of my Imagination, nor could my Memory
retain them in that order.
ESSAY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
35

QUESTIONS
1
For Locke, what is an “idea”?
2
According to Locke, can we know of the existence of external objects? Can we be
certain of it?
3
Locke says that there are some ideas he cannot avoid having. What is this
supposed to show?
4
Locke gives an example of writing some words on a page. How can he tell that
the written words exist outside of his mind?
JOHN LOCKE
36

George Berkeley, Of the Principles of
Human Knowledge
It is evident to any one who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge,
that they are either ideas actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are
perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or lastly, ideas
formed by help of memory and imagination—either compounding, dividing, or
barely representing those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways. By sight I
have the ideas of light and colours, with their several degrees and variations. By
touch I perceive hard and soft, heat and cold, motion and resistance, and of all
these more and less either as to quantity or degree. Smelling furnishes me with
odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing conveys sounds to the mind in all their
variety of tone and composition. And as several of these are observed to accom-
pany each other, they come to be marked by one name, and so to be reputed as
one thing. Thus, for example, a certain colour, taste, smell, ﬁgure and consistence
having been observed to go together, are accounted one distinct thing, signiﬁed by
the name apple; other collections of ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and
the like sensible things—which as they are pleasing or disagreeable excite the
passions of love, hatred, joy, grief, and so forth.
2. But, besides all that endless variety of ideas or objects of knowledge, there is
likewise something which knows or perceives them, and exercises divers oper-
ations, as willing, imagining, remembering, about them. This perceiving, active
being is what I call mind, spirit, soul, or myself. By which words I do not denote
any one of my ideas, but a thing entirely distinct from them, wherein, they exist,
or, which is the same thing, whereby they are perceived—for the existence of an
idea consists in being perceived.
3. That neither our thoughts, nor passions, nor ideas formed by the imagin-
ation, exist without the mind, is what everybody will allow. And it seems no less
evident that the various sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however
blended or combined together (that is, whatever objects they compose), cannot
exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving them.—I think an intuitive knowledge
may be obtained of this by any one that shall attend to what is meant by the term
exists, when applied to sensible things. The table I write on I say exists, that is, I
see and feel it; and if I were out of my study I should say it existed—meaning
thereby that if I was in my study I might perceive it, or that some other spirit
actually does perceive it. There was an odour, that is, it was smelt; there was a
George Berkeley, The Principles of Human Knowledge (Chicago: Open Court, 1904).
37

sound, that is, it was heard; a colour or ﬁgure, and it was perceived by sight or
touch. This is all that I can understand by these and the like expressions. For as to
what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without any relation to
their being perceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible. Their esse is percipi, nor
is it possible they should have any existence out of the minds or thinking things
which perceive them.
4. It is indeed an opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses,
mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects, have an existence, nat-
ural or real, distinct from their being perceived by the understanding. But,
with how great an assurance and acquiescence soever this principle may be
entertained in the world, yet whoever shall ﬁnd in his heart to call it in ques-
tion may, if I mistake not, perceive it to involve a manifest contradiction. For,
what are the fore-mentioned objects but the things we perceive by sense? and
what do we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations? and is it not plainly
repugnant that any one of these, or any combination of them, should exist
unperceived?
5. If we thoroughly examine this tenet it will, perhaps, be found at bottom to
depend on the doctrine of abstract ideas. For can there be a nicer strain of
abstraction than to distinguish the existence of sensible objects from their being
perceived, so as to conceive them existing unperceived? Light and colours, heat
and cold, extension and ﬁgures—in a word the things we see and feel—what are
they but so many sensations, notions, ideas, or impressions on the sense? and is it
possible to separate, even in thought, any of these from perception? For my part,
I might as easily divide a thing from itself. I may, indeed, divide in my thoughts,
or conceive apart from each other, those things which, perhaps I never perceived
by sense so divided. Thus, I imagine the trunk of a human body without the
limbs, or conceive the smell of a rose without thinking on the rose itself. So far, I
will not deny, I can abstract—if that may properly be called abstraction which
extends only to the conceiving separately such objects as it is possible may really
exist or be actually perceived asunder. But my conceiving or imagining power
does not extend beyond the possibility of real existence or perception. Hence, as
it is impossible for me to see or feel anything without an actual sensation of that
thing, so is it impossible for me to conceive in my thoughts any sensible thing or
object distinct from the sensation or perception of it.
6. Some truths there are so near and obvious to the mind that a man need only
open his eyes to see them. Such I take this important one to be, viz., that all the
choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which
compose the mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a mind,
that their being is to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are
not actually perceived by me, or do not exist in my mind or that of any other
created spirit, they must either have no existence at all, or else subsist in the mind
of some Eternal Spirit—it being perfectly unintelligible, and involving all the
absurdity of abstraction, to attribute to any single part of them an existence
independent of a spirit. To be convinced of which, the reader need only reﬂect,
and try to separate in his own thoughts the being of a sensible thing from its being
perceived.
7. From what has been said it follows there is not any other Substance than
Spirit, or that which perceives. But, for the fuller proof of this point, let it be
GEORGE BERKELEY
38

considered the sensible qualities are colour, ﬁgure, motion, smell, taste, etc.,
i.e. the ideas perceived by sense. Now, for an idea to exist in an unperceiving
thing is a manifest contradiction, for to have an idea is all one as to perceive;
that therefore wherein colour, ﬁgure, and the like qualities exist must perceive
them; hence it is clear there can be no unthinking substance or substratum of
those ideas.
8. But, say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the mind, yet
there may be things like them, whereof they are copies or resemblances, which
things exist without the mind in an unthinking substance. I answer, an idea can be
like nothing but an idea; a colour or ﬁgure can be like nothing but another colour
or ﬁgure. If we look but never so little into our thoughts, we shall ﬁnd it impos-
sible for us to conceive a likeness except only between our ideas. Again, I ask
whether those supposed originals or external things, of which our ideas are the
pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable or no? If they are, then they
are ideas and we have gained our point; but if you say they are not, I appeal to
any one whether it be sense to assert a colour is like something which is invisible;
hard or soft, like something which is intangible; and so of the rest.
9. Some there are who make a distinction betwixt primary and secondary
qualities. By the former they mean extension, ﬁgure, motion, rest, solidity or
impenetrability, and number; by the latter they denote all other sensible qualities,
as colours, sounds, tastes, and so forth. The ideas we have of these they acknow-
ledge not to be the resemblances of anything existing without the mind, or
unperceived, but they will have our ideas of the primary qualities to be patterns
or images of things which exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance
which they call Matter. By Matter, therefore, we are to understand an inert,
senseless substance, in which extension, ﬁgure, and motion do actually subsist.
But it is evident from what we have already shown, that extension, ﬁgure, and
motion are only ideas existing in the mind, and that an idea can be like nothing
but another idea, and that consequently neither they nor their archetypes can
exist in an unperceiving substance. Hence, it is plain that the very notion of what
is called Matter or corporeal substance, involves a contradiction in it.
10. They who assert that ﬁgure, motion, and the rest of the primary or ori-
ginal qualities do exist without the mind in unthinking substance, do at the same
time acknowledge that colours, sounds, heat, cold, and such-like secondary qual-
ities, do not—which they tell us are sensations existing in the mind alone, that
depend on and are occasioned by the different size, texture, and motion of the
minute particles of matter. This they take for an undoubted truth, which they can
demonstrate beyond all exception. Now, if it be certain that those original qual-
ities are inseparably united with the other sensible qualities, and not, even in
thought, capable of being abstracted from them, it plainly follows that they exist
only in the mind. But I desire any one to reﬂect and try whether he can, by any
abstraction of thought, conceive the extension and motion of a body without all
other sensible qualities. For my own part, I see evidently that it is not in my power
to frame an idea of a body extended and moving, but I must withal give it some
colour or other sensible quality which is acknowledged to exist only in the mind.
In short, extension, ﬁgure, and motion, abstracted from all other qualities, are
inconceivable. Where therefore the other sensible qualities are, there must these
be also, to wit, in the mind and nowhere else.
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
39

11. Again, great and small, swift and slow, are allowed to exist nowhere
without the mind, being entirely relative, and changing as the frame or position
of the organs of sense varies. The extension therefore which exists without the
mind is neither great nor small, the motion neither swift nor slow, that is, they are
nothing at all. But, say you, they are extension in general, and motion in general:
thus we see how much the tenet of extended movable substances existing without
the mind depends on the strange doctrine of abstract ideas. And here I cannot but
remark how nearly the vague and indeterminate description of Matter or corpor-
eal substance, which the modern philosophers are run into by their own prin-
ciples, resembles that antiquated and so much ridiculed notion of materia prima,
to be met with in Aristotle and his followers. Without extension solidity cannot
be conceived; since therefore it has been shewn that extension exists not in an
unthinking substance, the same must also be true of solidity.
12. That number is entirely the creature of the mind, even though the other
qualities be allowed to exist without, will be evident to whoever considers that
the same thing bears a different denomination of number as the mind views it
with different respects. Thus, the same extension is one, or three, or thirty-six,
according as the mind considers it with reference to a yard, a foot, or an inch.
Number is so visibly relative, and dependent on men’s understanding, that it is
strange to think how any one should give it an absolute existence without the
mind. We say one book, one page, one line, etc.; all these are equally units,
though some contain several of the others. And in each instance, it is plain, the
unit relates to some particular combination of ideas arbitrarily put together by
the mind.
13. Unity I know some will have to be a simple or uncompounded idea,
accompanying all other ideas into the mind. That I have any such idea answering
the word unity I do not ﬁnd; and if I had, methinks I could not miss ﬁnding it: on
the contrary, it should be the most familiar to my understanding, since it is said to
accompany all other ideas, and to be perceived by all the ways of sensation and
reﬂexion. To say no more, it is an abstract idea.
14. I shall farther add, that, after the same manner as modern philosophers
prove certain sensible qualities to have no existence in Matter, or without the
mind, the same thing may be likewise proved of all other sensible qualities what-
soever. Thus, for instance, it is said that heat and cold are affections only of the
mind, and not at all patterns of real beings, existing in the corporeal substances
which excite them, for that the same body which appears cold to one hand seems
warm to another. Now, why may we not as well argue that ﬁgure and extension
are not patterns or resemblances of qualities existing in Matter, because to the
same eye at different stations, or eyes of a different texture at the same station,
they appear various, and cannot therefore be the images of anything settled and
determinate without the mind? Again, it is proved that sweetness is not really in
the sapid thing, because the thing remaining unaltered the sweetness is changed
into bitter, as in case of a fever or otherwise vitiated palate. Is it not as reasonable
to say that motion is not without the mind, since if the succession of ideas in
the mind become swifter, the motion, it is acknowledged, shall appear slower
without any alteration in any external object?
15. In short, let any one consider those arguments which are thought mani-
festly to prove that colours and taste exist only in the mind, and he shall ﬁnd they
GEORGE BERKELEY
40

may with equal force be brought to prove the same thing of extension, ﬁgure, and
motion. Though it must be confessed this method of arguing does not so much
prove that there is no extension or colour in an outward object, as that we do not
know by sense which is the true extension or colour of the object. But the argu-
ments foregoing plainly show it to be impossible that any colour or extension at
all, or other sensible quality whatsoever, should exist in an unthinking subject
without the mind, or in truth, that there should be any such thing as an outward
object.
16. But let us examine a little the received opinon.—It is said extension is a
mode or accident of Matter, and that Matter is the substratum that supports it.
Now I desire that you would explain to me what is meant by Matter’s supporting
extension. Say you, I have no idea of Matter and therefore cannot explain it. I
answer, though you have no positive, yet, if you have any meaning at all, you
must at least have a relative idea of Matter; though you know not what it is, yet
you must be supposed to know what relation it bears to accidents, and what is
meant by its supporting them. It is evident “support” cannot here be taken in its
usual or literal sense—as when we say that pillars support a building; in what
sense therefore must it be taken?
17. If we inquire into what the most accurate philosophers declare themselves
to mean by material substance, we shall ﬁnd them acknowledge they have no
other meaning annexed to those sounds but the idea of Being in general, together
with the relative notion of its supporting accidents. The general idea of Being
appeareth to me the most abstract and incomprehensible of all other; and as for
its supporting accidents, this, as we have just now observed, cannot be under-
stood in the common sense of those words; it must therefore be taken in some
other sense, but what that is they do not explain. So that when I consider the two
parts or branches which make the signiﬁcation of the words material substance, I
am convinced there is no distinct meaning annexed to them. But why should we
trouble ourselves any farther, in discussing this material substratum or support of
ﬁgure and motion, and other sensible qualities? Does it not suppose they have an
existence without the mind? And is not this a direct repugnancy, and altogether
inconceivable?
18. But, though it were possible that solid, ﬁgured, movable substances may
exist without the mind, corresponding to the ideas we have of bodies, yet how is
it possible for us to know this? Either we must know it by sense or by reason. As
for our senses, by them we have the knowledge only of our sensations, ideas, or
those things that are immediately perceived by sense, call them what you will: but
they do not inform us that things exist without the mind, or unperceived, like to
those which are perceived. This the materialists themselves acknowledge. It
remains therefore that if we have any knowledge at all of external things, it must
be by reason, inferring their existence from what is immediately perceived by
sense. But what reason can induce us to believe the existence of bodies without
the mind, from what we perceive, since the very patrons of Matter themselves do
not pretend there is any necessary connexion betwixt them and our ideas? I say it
is granted on all hands (and what happens in dreams, phrensies, and the like, puts
it beyond dispute) that it is possible we might be affected with all the ideas we
have now, though there were no bodies existing without resembling them. Hence,
it is evident the supposition of external bodies is not necessary for the producing
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
41

our ideas; since it is granted they are produced sometimes, and might possibly be
produced always in the same order, we see them in at present, without their
concurrence.
19. But, though we might possibly have all our sensations without them, yet
perhaps it may be thought easier to conceive and explain the manner of their
production, by supposing external bodies in their likeness rather than otherwise;
and so it might be at least probable there are such things as bodies that excite
their ideas in our minds. But neither can this be said; for, though we give the
materialists their external bodies, they by their own confession are never the
nearer knowing how our ideas are produced; since they own themselves unable to
comprehend in what manner body can act upon spirit, or how it is possible it
should imprint any idea in the mind. Hence it is evident the production of ideas
or sensations in our minds can be no reason why we should suppose Matter or
corporeal substances, since that is acknowledged to remain equally inexplicable
with or without this supposition. If therefore it were possible for bodies to exist
without the mind, yet to hold they do so, must needs be a very precarious opin-
ion; since it is to suppose, without any reason at all, that God has created
innumerable beings that are entirely useless, and serve to no manner of purpose.
20. In short, if there were external bodies, it is impossible we should ever
come to know it; and if there were not, we might have the very same reasons to
think there were that we have now. Suppose—what no one can deny possible—
an intelligence without the help of external bodies, to be affected with the same
train of sensations or ideas that you are, imprinted in the same order and with
like vividness in his mind. I ask whether that intelligence hath not all the reason
to believe the existence of corporeal substances, represented by his ideas, and
exciting them in his mind, that you can possibly have for believing the same
thing? Of this there can be no question—which one consideration were enough to
make any reasonable person suspect the strength of whatever arguments he may
think himself to have, for the existence of bodies without the mind.
21. Were it necessary to add any farther proof against the existence of Matter
after what has been said, I could instance several of those errors and difﬁculties
(not to mention impieties) which have sprung from that tenet. It has occasioned
numberless controversies and disputes in philosophy, and not a few of far greater
moment in religion. But I shall not enter into the detail of them in this place, as
well because I think arguments a posteriori are unnecessary for conﬁrming what
has been, if I mistake not, sufﬁciently demonstrated a priori, as because I shall
hereafter ﬁnd occasion to speak somewhat of them.
22. I am afraid I have given cause to think I am needlessly prolix in handling
this subject. For, to what purpose is it to dilate on that which may be demon-
strated with the utmost evidence in a line or two, to any one that is capable of the
least reﬂexion? It is but looking into your own thoughts, and so trying whether
you can conceive it possible for a sound, or ﬁgure, or motion, or colour to exist
without the mind or unperceived. This easy trial may perhaps make you see that
what you contend for is a downright contradiction. Insomuch that I am content
to put the whole upon this issue.—If you can but conceive it possible for one
extended movable substance, or, in general, for any one idea, or anything like
an idea, to exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it, I shall readily give up
the cause. And, as for all that compages of external bodies you contend for, I
GEORGE BERKELEY
42

shall grant you its existence, though you cannot either give me any reason why
you believe it exists, or assign any use to it when it is supposed to exist. I say,
the bare possibility of your opinion’s being true shall pass for an argument that it
is so.
23. But, say you, surely there is nothing easier than for me to imagine trees, for
instance, in a park, or books existing in a closet, and nobody by to perceive them.
I answer, you may so, there is no difﬁculty in it; but what is all this, I beseech you,
more than framing in your mind certain ideas which you call books and trees,
and the same time omitting to frame the idea of any one that may perceive them?
But do not you yourself perceive or think of them all the while? This therefore is
nothing to the purpose; it only shews you have the power of imagining or form-
ing ideas in your mind: but it does not shew that you can conceive it possible the
objects of your thought may exist without the mind. To make out this, it is
necessary that you conceive them existing unconceived or unthought of, which is
a manifest repugnancy. When we do our utmost to conceive the existence of
external bodies, we are all the while only contemplating our own ideas. But the
mind taking no notice of itself, is deluded to think it can and does conceive bodies
existing unthought of or without the mind, though at the same time they are
apprehended by or exist in itself. A little attention will discover to any one the
truth and evidence of what is here said, and make it unnecessary to insist on any
other proofs against the existence of material substance.
24. It is very obvious, upon the least inquiry into our thoughts, to know
whether it is possible for us to understand what is meant by the absolute exist-
ence of sensible objects in themselves, or without the mind. To me it is evident
those words mark out either a direct contradiction, or else nothing at all. And to
convince others of this, I know no readier or fairer way than to entreat they
would calmly attend to their own thoughts; and if by this attention the emptiness
or repugnancy of those expressions does appear, surely nothing more is requisite
for the conviction. It is on this therefore that I insist, to wit, that . . . the absolute
existence of unthinking things . . . are words without a meaning, or which include
a contradiction. This is what I repeat and inculcate, and earnestly recommend to
the attentive thoughts of the reader. . . .
33. The ideas imprinted on the Senses by the Author of nature are called real
things; and those excited in the imagination being less regular, vivid, and con-
stant, are more properly termed ideas, or images of things, which they copy and
represent. But then our sensations, be they never so vivid and distinct, are never-
theless ideas, that is, they exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as truly as the
ideas of its own framing. The ideas of Sense are allowed to have more reality in
them, that is, to be more strong, orderly, and coherent than the creatures of the
mind; but this is no argument that they exist without the mind. They are also less
dependent on the spirit, or thinking substance which perceives them, in that they
are excited by the will of another and more powerful spirit; yet still they are ideas,
and certainly no idea, whether faint or strong, can exist otherwise than in a mind
perceiving it.
34. Before we proceed any farther it is necessary we spend some time in
answering objections which may probably be made against the principles we
have hitherto laid down. In doing of which, if I seem too prolix to those of quick
apprehensions, I hope it may be pardoned, since all men do not equally
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
43

apprehend things of this nature, and I am willing to be understood by every
one.
First, then, it will be objected that by the foregoing principles all that is real
and substantial in nature is banished out of the world, and instead thereof a
chimerical scheme of ideas takes place. All things that exist, exist only in the
mind, that is, they are purely notional. What therefore becomes of the sun, moon
and stars? What must we think of houses, rivers, mountains, trees, stones; nay,
even of our own bodies? Are all these but so many chimeras and illusions on the
fancy? To all which, and whatever else of the same sort may be objected, I answer,
that by the principles premised we are not deprived of any one thing in nature.
Whatever we see, feel, hear, or anywise conceive or understand remains as secure
as ever, and is as real as ever. There is a rerum natura, and the distinction between
realities and chimeras retains its full force. This is evident from sect. 29, 30, and
33, where we have shewn what is meant by real things in opposition to chimeras
or ideas of our own framing; but then they both equally exist in the mind, and in
that sense they are alike ideas.
35. I do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can appre-
hend either by sense or reﬂexion. That the things I see with my eyes and touch
with my hands do exist, really exist, I make not the least question. The only thing
whose existence we deny is that which philosophers call Matter or corporeal
substance. And in doing of this there is no damage done to the rest of mankind,
who, I dare say, will never miss it. The Atheist indeed will want the colour of an
empty name to support his impiety; and the Philosophers may possibly ﬁnd they
have lost a great handle for triﬂing and disputation.
36. If any man thinks this detracts from the existence or reality of things, he is
very far from understanding what hath been premised in the plainest terms I
could think of. Take here an abstract of what has been said:—There are spiritual
substances, minds, or human souls, which will or excite ideas in themselves at
pleasure; but these are faint, weak, and unsteady in respect of others they per-
ceive by sense—which, being impressed upon them according to certain rules or
laws of nature, speak themselves the effects of a mind more powerful and wise
than human spirits. These latter are said to have more reality in them than the
former:—by which is meant that they are more affecting, orderly, and distinct,
and that they are not ﬁctions of the mind perceiving them. And in this sense the
sun that I see by day is the real sun, and that which I imagine by night is the idea
of the former. In the sense here given of reality it is evident that every vegetable,
star, mineral, and in general each part of the mundane system, is as much a real
being by our principles as by any other. Whether others mean anything by the
term reality different from what I do, I entreat them to look into their own
thoughts and see.
37. It will be urged that thus much at least is true, to wit, that we take away
all corporeal substances. To this my answer is, that if the word substance be
taken in the vulgar sense—for a combination of sensible qualities, such as exten-
sion, solidity, weight, and the like—this we cannot be accused of taking away:
but if it be taken in a philosophic sense—for the support of accidents or qualities
without the mind—then indeed I acknowledge that we take it away, if one may
be said to take away that which never had any existence, not even in the
imagination.
GEORGE BERKELEY
44

38. But after all, say you, it sounds very harsh to say we eat and drink ideas,
and are clothed with ideas. I acknowledge it does so—the word idea not being
used in common discourse to signify the several combinations of sensible qual-
ities which are called things; and it is certain that any expression which varies
from the familiar use of language will seem harsh and ridiculous. But this doth
not concern the truth of the proposition, which in other words is no more than to
say, we are fed and clothed with those things which we perceive immediately by
our senses. The hardness or softness, the colour, taste, warmth, ﬁgure, or suchlike
qualities, which combined together constitute the several sorts of victuals and
apparel, have been shewn to exist only in the mind that perceives them; and this is
all that is meant by calling them ideas; which word if it was as ordinarily used as
thing, would sound no harsher nor more ridiculous than it. I am not for disputing
about the propriety, but the truth of the expression. If therefore you agree with
me that we eat and drink and are clad with the immediate objects of sense, which
cannot exist unperceived or without the mind, I shall readily grant it is more
proper or conformable to custom that they should be called things rather than
ideas.
39. If it be demanded why I make use of the word idea, and do not rather in
compliance with custom call them things; I answer, I do it for two reasons:—ﬁrst,
because the term thing in contradistinction to idea, is generally supposed to
denote somewhat existing without the mind; secondly, because thing hath a more
comprehensive signiﬁcation than idea, including spirit or thinking things as well
as ideas. Since therefore the objects of sense exist only in the mind, and are withal
thoughtless and inactive, I chose to mark them by the word idea, which implies
those properties.
40. But, say what we can, some one perhaps may be apt to reply, he will still
believe his senses, and never suffer any arguments, how plausible soever, to pre-
vail over the certainty of them. Be it so; assert the evidence of sense as high as you
please, we are willing to do the same. That what I see, hear, and feel doth exist,
that is to say, is perceived by me, I no more doubt than I do of my own being. But
I do not see how the testimony of sense can be alleged as a proof for the existence
of anything which is not perceived by sense. We are not for having any man turn
sceptic and disbelieve his senses; on the contrary, we give them all the stress and
assurance imaginable; nor are there any principles more opposite to Scepticism
than those we have laid down, as shall be hereafter clearly shewn.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Berkeley, what kinds of things are there?
2
Does Berkeley believe in abstract ideas?
3
According to Berkeley, what is the cause of our ideas?
4
Does Berkeley think that physical objects such as rocks, tables, etc. do not
exist?
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE
45

David Hume “Of the Academical or
Sceptical Philosophy”
Part I
There is not a greater number of philosophical reasonings, displayed upon any
subject, than those, which prove the existence of a Deity, and refute the fallacies
of Atheists; and yet the most religious philosophers still dispute whether any man
can be so blinded as to be a speculative atheist. How shall we reconcile these
contradictions? The knights-errant, who wandered about to clear the world of
dragons and giants, never entertained the least doubt with regard to the existence
of these monsters.
The Sceptic is another enemy of religion, who naturally provokes the indigna-
tion of all divines and graver philosophers; though it is certain, that no man ever
met with any such absurd creature, or conversed with a man, who had no opin-
ion or principle concerning any subject, either of action or speculation. This
begets a very natural question; What is meant by a sceptic? And how far it is
possible to push these philosophical principles of doubt and uncertainty?
There is a species of scepticism, antecedent to all study and philosophy, which
is much inculcated by Des Cartes and others, as a sovereign preservative against
error and precipitate judgement. It recommends an universal doubt, not only of
all our former opinions and principles, but also of our very faculties; of whose
veracity, say they, we must assure ourselves, by a chain of reasoning, deduced
from some original principle, which cannot possibly be fallacious or deceitful.
But neither is there any such original principle, which has a prerogative above
others, that are self-evident and convincing: or if there were, could we advance a
step beyond it, but by the use of those very faculties, of which we are supposed to
be already difﬁdent. The Cartesian doubt, therefore, were it ever possible to be
attained by any human creature (as it plainly is not) would be entirely incurable;
and no reasoning could ever bring us to a state of assurance and conviction upon
any subject.
It must, however, be confessed, that this species of scepticism, when more
moderate, may be understood in a very reasonable sense, and is a necessary
David Hume, “Of the Academical or Sceptical Philosophy,” An Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding, in Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concern-
ing the Principles of Morals, 2nd edn, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1902).
46

preparative to the study of philosophy, by preserving a proper impartiality in our
judgements, and weaning our mind from all those prejudices, which we may have
imbibed from education or rash opinion. To begin with clear and self-evident
principles, to advance by timorous and sure steps, to review frequently our con-
clusions, and examine accurately all their consequences; though by these means
we shall make both a slow and a short progress in our systems; are the only
methods, by which we can ever hope to reach truth, and attain a proper stability
and certainty in our determinations.
There is another species of scepticism, consequent to science and enquiry,
when men are supposed to have discovered, either the absolute fallaciousness of
their mental faculties, or their unﬁtness to reach any ﬁxed determination in all
those curious subjects of speculation, about which they are commonly employed.
Even our very senses are brought into dispute, by a certain species of philo-
sophers; and the maxims of common life are subjected to the same doubt as the
most profound principles or conclusions of metaphysics and theology. As these
paradoxical tenets (if they may be called tenets) are to be met with in some
philosophers, and the refutation of them in several, they naturally excite our
curiosity, and make us enquire into the arguments, on which they may be
founded.
I need not insist upon the more trite topics, employed by the sceptics in all ages,
against the evidence of sense; such as those which are derived from the imperfec-
tion and fallaciousness of our organs, on numberless occasions; the crooked
appearance of an oar in water; the various aspects of objects, according to their
different distances; the double images which arise from the pressing one eye; with
many other appearances of a like nature. These sceptical topics, indeed, are only
sufﬁcient to prove, that the senses alone are not implicitly to be depended on; but
that we must correct their evidence by reason, and by considerations, derived
from the nature of the medium, the distance of the object, and the disposition of
the organ, in order to render them, within their sphere, the proper criteria of
truth and falsehood. There are other more profound arguments against the
senses, which admit not of so easy a solution.
It seems evident, that men are carried, by a natural instinct or prepossession, to
repose faith in their senses; and that, without any reasoning, or even almost
before the use of reason, we always suppose an external universe, which depends
not on our perception, but would exist, though we and every sensible creature
were absent or annihilated. Even the animal creation are governed by a like
opinion, and preserve this belief of external objects, in all their thoughts, designs,
and actions.
It seems also evident, that, when men follow this blind and powerful instinct of
nature, they always suppose the very images, presented by the senses, to be the
external objects, and never entertain any suspicion, that the one are nothing but
representations of the other. This very table, which we see white, and which we
feel hard, is believed to exist, independent of our perception, and to be something
external to our mind, which perceives it. Our presence bestows not being on it:
our absence does not annihilate it. It preserves its existence uniform and entire,
independent of the situation of intelligent beings, who perceive or contemplate it.
But this universal and primary opinion of all men is soon destroyed by the
slightest philosophy, which teaches us, that nothing can ever be present to the
“OF THE ACADEMICAL OR SCEPTICAL PHILOSOPHY”
47

mind but an image or perception, and that the senses are only the inlets, through
which these images are conveyed, without being able to produce any immediate
intercourse between the mind and the object. The table, which we see, seems to
diminish, as we remove farther from it: but the real table, which exists independ-
ent of us, suffers no alteration: it was, therefore, nothing but its image, which
was present to the mind. These are the obvious dictates of reason; and no man,
who reﬂects, ever doubted, that the existences, which we consider, when we say,
this house and that tree, are nothing but perceptions in the mind, and ﬂeeting
copies or representations of other existences, which remain uniform and
independent.
So far, then, are we necessitated by reasoning to contradict or depart from the
primary instincts of nature, and to embrace a new system with regard to the
evidence of our senses. But here philosophy ﬁnds herself extremely embarrassed,
when she would justify this new system, and obviate the cavils and objections of
the sceptics. She can no longer plead the infallible and irresistible instinct of
nature: for that led us to a quite different system, which is acknowledged fallible
and even erroneous. And to justify this pretended philosophical system, by a
chain of clear and convincing argument, or even any appearance of argument,
exceeds the power of all human capacity.
By what argument can it be proved, that the perceptions of the mind must be
caused by external objects, entirely different from them, though resembling them
(if that be possible) and could not arise either from the energy of the mind itself,
or from the suggestion of some invisible and unknown spirit, or from some other
cause still more unknown to us? It is acknowledged, that, in fact, many of these
perceptions arise not from anything external, as in dreams, madness, and other
diseases. And nothing can be more inexplicable than the manner, in which body
should so operate upon mind as ever to convey an image of itself to a substance,
supposed of so different, and even contrary a nature.
It is a question of fact, whether the perceptions of the senses be produced by
external objects, resembling them: how shall this question be determined? By
experience surely; as all other questions of a like nature. But here experience is,
and must be entirely silent. The mind has never anything present to it but the
perceptions, and cannot possibly reach any experience of their connexion
with objects. The supposition of such a connexion is, therefore, without any
foundation in reasoning.
To have recourse to the veracity of the supreme Being, in order to prove the
veracity of our senses, is surely making a very unexpected circuit. If his veracity
were at all concerned in this matter, our senses would be entirely infallible;
because it is not possible that he can ever deceive. Not to mention, that, if the
external world be once called in question, we shall be at a loss to ﬁnd arguments,
by which we may prove the existence of that Being or any of his attributes.
This is a topic, therefore, in which the profounder and more philosophical
sceptics will always triumph, when they endeavour to introduce an universal
doubt into all subjects of human knowledge and enquiry. Do you follow the
instincts and propensities of nature, may they say, in assenting to the veracity of
sense? But these lead you to believe that the very perception or sensible image is
the external object. Do you disclaim this principle, in order to embrace a more
rational opinion, that the perceptions are only representations of something
DAVID HUME
48

external? You here depart from your natural propensities and more obvious
sentiments; and yet are not able to satisfy your reason, which can never ﬁnd
any convincing argument from experience to prove, that the perceptions are
connected with any external objects.
There is another sceptical topic of a like nature, derived from the most pro-
found philosophy; which might merit our attention, were it requisite to dive so
deep, in order to discover arguments and reasonings, which can so little serve to
any serious purpose. It is universally allowed by modern enquirers, that all the
sensible qualities of objects, such as hard, soft, hot, cold, white, black, &c. are
merely secondary, and exist not in the objects themselves, but are perceptions of
the mind, without any external archetype or model, which they represent. If this
be allowed, with regard to secondary qualities, it must also follow, with regard to
the supposed primary qualities of extension and solidity; nor can the latter be any
more entitled to that denomination than the former. The idea of extension is
entirely acquired from the senses of sight and feeling; and if all the qualities,
perceived by the senses, be in the mind, not in the object, the same conclusion
must reach the idea of extension, which is wholly dependent on the sensible ideas
or the ideas of secondary qualities. Nothing can save us from this conclusion, but
the asserting, that the ideas of those primary qualities are attained by Abstrac-
tion, an opinion, which, if we examine it accurately, we shall ﬁnd to be unintelli-
gible, and even absurd. An extension, that is neither tangible nor visible, cannot
possibly be conceived: and a tangible or visible extension, which is neither hard
nor soft, black nor white, is equally beyond the reach of human conception. Let
any man try to conceive a triangle in general, which is neither Isosceles nor
Scalenum, nor has any particular length or proportion of sides; and he will soon
perceive the absurdity of all the scholastic notions with regard to abstraction and
general ideas.1
Thus the ﬁrst philosophical objection to the evidence of sense or to the opinion
of external existence consists in this, that such an opinion, if rested on natural
instinct, is contrary to reason, and if referred to reason, is contrary to natural
instinct, and at the same time carries no rational evidence with it, to convince an
impartial enquirer. The second objection goes farther, and represents this opinion
as contrary to reason: at least, if it be a principle of reason, that all sensible
qualities are in the mind, not in the object. Bereave matter of all its intelligible
qualities, both primary and secondary, you in a manner annihilate it, and leave
only a certain unknown, inexplicable something, as the cause of our perceptions;
a notion so imperfect, that no sceptic will think it worth while to contend
against it.
Note
1
This argument is drawn from Dr. Berkeley; and indeed most of the writings of that
very ingenious author form the best lessons of scepticism, which are to be found
either among the ancient or modern philosophers, Bayle not excepted. He pro-
fesses, however, in his title-page (and undoubtedly with great truth) to have
composed his book against the sceptics as well as against the atheists and free-
thinkers. But that all his arguments, though otherwise intended, are, in reality,
merely sceptical, appears from this, that they admit of no answer and produce no
“OF THE ACADEMICAL OR SCEPTICAL PHILOSOPHY”
49

conviction. Their only effect is to cause that momentary amazement and
irresolution and confusion, which is the result of scepticism.
QUESTIONS
1
In Hume’s example, what happens to the table we see as we move away from it?
2
What happens to the real table?
3
According to Hume, what is “present to the mind” when we look at the table?
4
According to Hume, how, if at all, could it be proved that the perceptions of the
mind must be caused by external objects?
DAVID HUME
50

Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual
Powers of Man
Essay Two Of the powers we have by means of our external senses
Chapter 5 Of perception
In speaking of the impressions made on our organs in perception, we build upon
facts borrowed from anatomy and physiology, for which we have the testimony
of our senses. But, being now to speak of perception itself, which is solely an act
of the mind, we must appeal to another authority. The operations of our minds
are known, not by sense, but by consciousness, the authority of which is as
certain and as irresistible as that of sense.
In order, however, to our having a distinct notion of any of the operations of
our own minds, it is not enough that we be conscious of them; for all men have
this consciousness. It is farther necessary that we attend to them while they are
exerted, and reﬂect upon them with care, while they are recent and fresh in our
memory. It is necessary that, by employing ourselves frequently in this way, we
get the habit of this attention and reﬂection; and, therefore, for the proof of facts
which I shall have occasion to mention upon this subject, I can only appeal to
the reader’s own thoughts, whether such facts are not agreeable to what he is
conscious of in his own mind.
If, therefore, we attend to that act of our mind which we call the perception of
an external object of sense, we shall ﬁnd in it these three things:—First, Some
conception or notion of the object perceived; Secondly, A strong and irresistible
conviction and belief of its present existence; and, Thirdly, That this conviction
and belief are immediate, and not the effect of reasoning.
First, It is impossible to perceive an object without having some notion or
conception of that which we perceive. We may, indeed, conceive an object which
we do not perceive; but, when we perceive the object, we must have some concep-
tion of it at the same time; and we have commonly a more clear and steady notion
of the object while we perceive it, than we have from memory or imagination
when it is not perceived. Yet, even in perception, the notion which our senses give
of the object may be more or less clear, more or less distinct, in all possible
degrees.
Thus we see more distinctly an object at a small than at a great distance. An
Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, in Inquiry and Essays, ed.
R. Beanblossom and K. Lehrer (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1983).
51

object at a great distance is seen more distinctly in a clear than in a foggy day. An
object seen indistinctly with the naked eye, on account of its smallness, may be
seen distinctly with a microscope. The objects in this room will be seen by a
person in the room less and less distinctly as the light of the day fails; they pass
through all the various degrees of distinctness according to the degrees of the
light, and, at last, in total darkness they are not seen at all. What has been said of
the objects of sight is so easily applied to the objects of the other senses, that the
application may be left to the reader.
In a matter so obvious to every person capable of reﬂection, it is necessary only
farther to observe, that the notion which we get of an object, merely by our
external sense, ought not to be confounded with that more scientiﬁc notion
which a man, come to the years of understanding, may have of the same object,
by attending to its various attributes, or to its various parts, and their relation to
each other, and to the whole. Thus, the notion which a child has of a jack for
roasting meat, will be acknowledged to be very different from that of a man who
understands its construction, and perceives the relation of the parts to one
another, and to the whole. The child sees the jack and every part of it as well as
the man. The child, therefore, has all the notion of it which sight gives; whatever
there is more in the notion which the man forms of it, must be derived from other
powers of the mind, which may afterwards be explained. This observation is
made here only that we may not confound the operations of different powers of
the mind, which by being always conjoined after we grow up to understanding,
are apt to pass for one and the same.
Secondly, In perception we not only have a notion more or less distinct of the
object perceived, but also an irresistible conviction and belief of its existence.
This is always the case when we are certain that we perceive it. There may be a
perception so faint and indistinct as to leave us in doubt whether we perceive the
object or not. Thus, when a star begins to twinkle as the light of the sun with-
draws, one may, for a short time, think he sees it without being certain, until the
perception acquire some strength and steadiness. When a ship just begins to
appear in the utmost verge of the horizon, we may at ﬁrst be dubious whether we
perceive it or not; but when the perception is in any degree clear and steady, there
remains no doubt of its reality; and when the reality of the perception is ascer-
tained, the existence of the object perceived can no longer be doubted.
By the laws of all nations, in the most solemn judicial trials, wherein men’s
fortunes and lives are at stake, the sentence passes according to the testimony of
eye or ear witnesses of good credit. An upright judge will give a fair hearing to
every objection that can be made to the integrity of a witness, and allow it to be
possible that he may be corrupted; but no judge will ever suppose that witnesses
may be imposed upon by trusting to their eyes and ears. And if a sceptical counsel
should plead against the testimony of the witnesses, that they had no other evi-
dence for what they declared but the testimony of their eyes and ears, and that we
ought not to put so much faith in our senses as to deprive men of life or fortune
upon their testimony, surely no upright judge would admit a plea of this kind. I
believe no counsel, however sceptical, ever dared to offer such an argument; and,
if it was offered, it would be rejected with disdain.
Can any stronger proof be given that it is the universal judgment of mankind
that the evidence of sense is a kind of evidence which we may securely rest upon
THOMAS REID
52

in the most momentous concerns of mankind; that it is a kind of evidence against
which we ought not to admit any reasoning; and, therefore, that to reason either
for or against it is an insult to common sense?
The whole conduct of mankind in the daily occurrences of life, as well as the
solemn procedure of judicatories in the trial of causes civil and criminal, demon-
strates this. I know only of two exceptions that may be offered against this being
the universal belief of mankind.
The ﬁrst exception is that of some lunatics who have been persuaded of things
that seem to contradict the clear testimony of their senses. It is said there have
been lunatics and hypochondriacal persons, who seriously believed themselves to
be made of glass; and, in consequence of this, lived in continual terror of having
their brittle frame shivered into pieces.
All I have to say to this is, that our minds, in our present state, are, as well as
our bodies, liable to strange disorders; and, as we do not judge of the natural
constitution of the body from the disorders or diseases to which it is subject from
accidents, so neither ought we to judge of the natural powers of the mind from its
disorders, but from its sound state. It is natural to man, and common to the
species, to have two hands and two feet; yet I have seen a man, and a very
ingenious one, who was born without either hands or feet. It is natural to man to
have faculties superior to those of brutes; yet we see some individuals whose
faculties are not equal to those of many brutes; and the wisest man may, by
various accidents, be reduced to this state. General rules that regard those whose
intellects are sound are not overthrown by instances of men whose intellects are
hurt by any constitutional or accidental disorder.
The other exception that may be made to the principle we have laid down is
that of some philosophers who have maintained that the testimony of sense is
fallacious, and therefore ought never to be trusted. Perhaps it might be a suf-
ﬁcient answer to this to say, that there is nothing so absurd which some philo-
sophers have not maintained. It is one thing to profess a doctrine of this kind,
another seriously to believe it, and to be governed by it in the conduct of life. It is
evident that a man who did not believe his senses could not keep out of harm’s
way an hour of his life; yet, in all the history of philosophy, we never read of any
sceptic that ever stepped into ﬁre or water because he did not believe his senses, or
that shewed in the conduct of life less trust in his senses than other men have. This
gives us just ground to apprehend that philosophy was never able to conquer that
natural belief which men have in their senses; and that all their subtile reasonings
against this belief were never able to persuade themselves.
It appears, therefore, that the clear and distinct testimony of our senses carries
irresistible conviction along with it to every man in his right judgment.
I observed, Thirdly, That this conviction is not only irresistible, but it is
immediate, that is, it is not by a train of reasoning and argumentation that we
come to be convinced of the existence of what we perceive; we ask no argument
for the existence of the object, but that we perceive it; perception commands
our belief upon its own authority, and disdains to rest its authority upon any
reasoning whatsoever.
The conviction of a truth may be irresistible, and yet not immediate. Thus, my
conviction that the three angles of every plain triangle are equal to two right
angles, is irresistible, but it is not immediate; I am convinced of it by
ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
53

demonstrative reasoning. There are other truths in mathematics of which we
have not only an irresistible but an immediate conviction. Such are the axioms.
Our belief of the axioms in mathematics is not grounded upon argument—
arguments are grounded upon them; but their evidence is discerned immediately
by the human understanding.
It is, no doubt, one thing to have an immediate conviction of a self-evident
axiom; it is another thing to have an immediate conviction of the existence of
what we see; but the conviction is equally immediate and equally irresistible in
both cases. No man thinks of seeking a reason to believe what he sees; and, before
we are capable of reasoning, we put no less conﬁdence in our senses than after.
The rudest savage is as fully convinced of what he sees, and hears, and feels, as
the most expert logician. The constitution of our understanding determines us to
hold the truth of a mathematical axiom as a ﬁrst principle, from which other
truths may be deduced, but it is deduced from none; and the constitution of our
power of perception determines us to hold the existence of what we distinctly
perceive as a ﬁrst principle, from which other truths may be deduced; but it is
deduced from none. What has been said of the irresistible and immediate belief of
the existence of objects distinctly perceived, I mean only to afﬁrm with regard to
persons so far advanced in understanding as to distinguish objects of mere
imagination from things which have a real existence. Every man knows that he
may have a notion of Don Quixote, or of Garagantua, without any belief that
such persons ever existed; and that of Julius Caesar and Oliver Cromwell, he has
not only a notion, but a belief that they did really exist. But whether children,
from the time that they begin to use their senses, make a distinction between
things which are only conceived or imagined, and things which really exist, may
be doubted. Until we are able to make this distinction, we cannot properly be said
to believe or to disbelieve the existence of anything. The belief of the existence of
anything seems to suppose a notion of existence—a notion too abstract, perhaps,
to enter into the mind of an infant. I speak of the power of perception in those
that are adult and of a sound mind, who believe that there are some things which
do really exist; and that there are many things conceived by themselves, and
by others, which have no existence. That such persons do invariably ascribe
existence to everything which they distinctly perceive, without seeking reasons
or arguments for doing so, is perfectly evident from the whole tenor of human
life.
The account I have given of our perception of external objects, is intended as a
faithful delineation of what every man, come to years of understanding, and
capable of giving attention to what passes in his own mind, may feel in himself. In
what manner the notion of external objects, and the immediate belief of their
existence, is produced by means of our senses, I am not able to shew, and I do not
pretend to shew. . . .
Chapter 10 Of the sentiments of Bishop Berkeley
George Berkeley, afterwards Bishop of Cloyne, published his “New Theory of
Vision,” in 1709; his “Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge,”
in 1710; and his “Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous,” in 1713; being then
a Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. He is acknowledged universally to have great
THOMAS REID
54

merit, as an excellent writer, and a very acute and clear reasoner on the most
abstract subjects, not to speak of his virtues as a man, which were very conspicu-
ous; yet the doctrine chieﬂy held forth in the treatises above mentioned, especially
in the two last, has generally been thought so very absurd, that few can be
brought to think that he either believed it himself, or that he seriously meant to
persuade others of its truth.
He maintains, and thinks he has demonstrated, by a variety of arguments,
grounded on principles of philosophy universally received, that there is no such
thing as matter in the universe; that sun and moon, earth and sea, our own
bodies, and those of our friends, are nothing but ideas in the minds of those who
think of them, and that they have no existence when they are not the objects of
thought; that all that is in the universe may be reduced to two categories—to wit,
minds, and ideas in the mind.
But, however absurd this doctrine might appear to the unlearned, who con-
sider the existence of the objects of sense as the most evident of all truths, and
what no man in his senses can doubt, the philosophers who had been accustomed
to consider ideas as the immediate objects of all thought, had no title to view this
doctrine of Berkeley in so unfavourable a light.
They were taught by Des Cartes, and by all that came after him, that the
existence of the objects of sense is not self-evident, but requires to be proved by
arguments; and, although Des Cartes, and many others, had laboured to ﬁnd
arguments for this purpose, there did not appear to be that force and clearness in
them which might have been expected in a matter of such importance. Mr Norris
had declared that, after all the arguments that had been offered, the existence of
an external world is only probable, but by no means certain. Malebranche
thought it rested upon the authority of revelation, and that the arguments drawn
from reason were not perfectly conclusive. Others thought that the argument
from revelation was a mere sophism, because revelation comes to us by our
senses, and must rest upon their authority.
Thus we see that the new philosophy had been making gradual approaches
towards Berkeley’s opinion; and, whatever others might do, the philosophers had
no title to look upon it as absurd, or unworthy of a fair examination. . . .
In the “Theory of Vision,” he goes no farther than to assert that the objects of
sight are nothing but ideas in the mind, granting, or at least not denying, that
there is a tangible world, which is really external, and which exists whether we
perceive it or not. Whether the reason of this was, that his system had not, at that
time, wholly opened to his own mind, or whether he thought it prudent to let it
enter into the minds of his readers by degrees, I cannot say. I think he insinuates
the last as the reason, in the “Principles of Human Knowledge.”
The “Theory of Vision,” however, taken by itself, and without relation to the
main branch of his system, contains very important discoveries, and marks of
great genius. He distinguishes more accurately than any that went before him,
between the immediate objects of sight, and those of the other senses which are
early associated with them. He shews that distance, of itself and immediately, is
not seen; but that we learn to judge of it by certain sensations and perceptions
which are connected with it. This is a very important observation; and, I believe,
was ﬁrst made by this author. It gives much new light to the operations of our
senses, and serves to account for many phaenomena in optics, of which the
ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
55

greatest adepts in that science had always either given a false account, or acknow-
ledged that they could give none at all.
We may observe, by the way, that the ingenious author seems not to have
attended to a distinction by which his general assertion ought to have been
limited. It is true that the distance of an object from the eye is not immediately
seen; but there is a certain kind of distance of one object from another which we
see immediately. The author acknowledges that there is a visible extension, and
visible ﬁgures, which are proper objects of sight; there must therefore be a visible
distance. Astronomers call it angular distance; and, although they measure it by
the angle, which is made by two lines drawn from the eye to the two distant
objects, yet it is immediately perceived by sight, even by those who never thought
of that angle.
He led the way in shewing how we learn to perceive the distance of an object
from the eye, though this speculation was carried farther by others who came
after him. He made the distinction between that extension and ﬁgure which we
perceive by sight only, and that which we perceive by touch; calling the ﬁrst,
visible, the last, tangible extension and ﬁgure. He shewed, likewise, that tangible
extension, and not visible, is the object of geometry, although mathematicians
commonly use visible diagrams in their demonstrations.
The notion of extension and ﬁgure which we get from sight only, and that
which we get from touch, have been so constantly conjoined from our infancy in
all the judgments we form of the objects of sense, that it required great abilities to
distinguish them accurately, and to assign to each sense what truly belongs to it;
“so difﬁcult a thing it is,” as Berkeley justly observes, “to dissolve an union so
early begun, and conﬁrmed by so long a habit.” This point he was laboured,
through the whole of the essay on vision, with that uncommon penetration and
judgment which he possessed, and with as great success as could be expected in a
ﬁrst attempt upon so abstruse a subject.
He concludes this essay, by shewing, in no less than seven sections, the notions
which an intelligent being, endowed with sight, without the sense of touch, might
from of the objects of sense. This speculation, to shallow thinkers, may appear to
be egregious triﬂing. To Bishop Berkeley it appeared in another light, and will do
so to those who are capable of entering into it, and who know the importance of
it, in solving many of the phaenomena of vision. He seems, indeed, to have
exerted more force of genius in this than in the main branch of his system.
In the new philosophy, the pillars by which the existence of a material world
was supported, were so feeble that it did not require the force of a Samson to
bring them down; and in this we have not so much reason to admire the strength
of Berkeley’s genius, as his boldness in publishing to the world an opinion which
the unlearned would be apt to interpret as the sign of a crazy intellect. A man who
was ﬁrmly persuaded of the doctrine universally received by philosophers con-
cerning ideas, if he could but take courage to call in question the existence of a
material world, would easily ﬁnd unanswerable arguments in that doctrine.
“Some truths there are,” says Berkeley, “so near and obvious to the mind, that a
man need only open his eyes to see them. Such,” he adds, “I take this important
one to be, that all the choir of heaven, and furniture of the earth—in a word, all
those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world—have not any sub-
sistence without a mind.” Princ. § 6.
THOMAS REID
56

The principle from which this important conclusion is obviously deduced, is
laid down in the ﬁrst sentence of his principles of knowledge, as evident; and,
indeed, it has always been acknowledged by philosophers. “It is evident,” says
he, “to any one who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge, that they
are either ideas actually imprinted on the senses, or else such as are perceived, by
attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or, lastly, ideas formed
by help of memory and imagination, either compounding, dividing, or barely
representing those originally perceived in the foresaid ways.”
This is the foundation on which the whole system rests. If this be true, then
indeed, the existence of a material world must be a dream that has imposed upon
all mankind from the beginning of the world.
The foundation on which such a fabric rests ought to be very solid and well
established; yet Berkeley says nothing more for it than that it is evident. If he
means that it is self-evident, this indeed might be a good reason for not offering
any direct argument in proof of it. But I apprehend this cannot justly be said. Self-
evident propositions are those which appear evident to every man of sound
understanding who apprehends the meaning of them distinctly, and attends to
them without prejudice. Can this be said of this proposition, That all the objects
of our knowledge are ideas in our own minds? I believe that, to any man
uninstructed in philosophy, this proposition will appear very improbable, if not
absurd. However scanty his knowledge may be, he considers the sun and moon,
the earth and sea, as objects of it; and it will be difﬁcult to persuade him that
those objects of his knowledge are ideas in his own mind, and have no existence
when he does not think of them. If I may presume to speak my own sentiments, I
once believed this doctrine of ideas so ﬁrmly as to embrace the whole of Berke-
ley’s system in consequence of it; till, ﬁnding other consequences to follow from
it, which gave me more uneasiness than the want of a material world, it came into
my mind, more than forty years ago, to put the question, What evidence have I
for this doctrine, that all the objects of my knowledge are ideas in my own mind?
From that time to the present I have been candidly and impartially, as I think,
seeking for the evidence of this principle, but can ﬁnd none, excepting the
authority of philosophers.
We shall have occasion to examine its evidence afterwards. I would at present
only observe, that all the arguments brought by Berkeley against the existence of
a material world are grounded upon it; and that he has not attempted to give any
evidence for it, but takes it for granted, as other philosophers had done before
him.
But, supposing this principle to be true, Berkeley’s system is impregnable. No
demonstration can be more evident than his reasoning from it. Whatever is per-
ceived is an idea, and an idea can only exist in a mind. It has no existence when it
is not perceived; nor can there be anything like an idea, but an idea. . . .
Berkeley foresaw the opposition that would be made to his system, from two
different quarters: ﬁrst, from the philosophers; and, secondly, from the vulgar,
who are led by the plain dictates of nature. The ﬁrst he had the courage to oppose
openly and avowedly; the second, he dreaded much more, and, therefore, takes a
great deal of pains, and, I think, uses some art, to court into his party. This is
particularly observable in his “Dialogues.” He sets out with a declaration, Dial.
1, “That, of late, he had quitted several of the sublime notions he had got in the
ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
57

schools of the philosophers, for vulgar opinions,” and assures Hylas, his fellow-
dialogist, “That, since this revolt from metaphysical notions to the plain dictates
of nature and common sense, he found his understanding strangely enlightened;
so that he could now easily comprehend a great many things, which before were
all mystery and riddle.” Pref. to Dial. “If his principles are admitted for true, men
will be reduced from paradoxes to common sense.” At the same time, he acknow-
ledges, “That they carry with them a great opposition to the prejudices of philo-
sophers, which have so far prevailed against the common sense and natural
notions of mankind.”
When Hylas objects to him, Dial. 3, “You can never persuade me, Philonous,
that the denying of matter or corporeal substance is not repugnant to the uni-
versal sense of mankind”—he answers, “I wish both our opinions were fairly
stated, and submitted to the judgment of men who had plain common sense,
without the prejudices of a learned education. Let me be represented as one who
trusts his senses, who thinks he knows the things he sees and feels, and entertains
no doubt of their existence.—If by material substance is meant only sensible
body, that which is seen and felt, (and the unphilosophical part of the world, I
dare say, mean no more,) then I am more certain of matter’s existence than you or
any other philosopher pretend to be. If there be anything which makes the gener-
ality of mankind averse from the notions I espouse, it is a misapprehension that I
deny the reality of sensible things: but, as it is you who are guilty of that, and not
I, it follows, that, in truth, their aversion is against your notions, and not mine. I
am content to appeal to the common sense of the world for the truth of my
notion. I am of a vulgar cast, simple enough to believe my senses, and to leave
things as I ﬁnd them. I cannot, for my life, help thinking that snow is white and
ﬁre hot.”
These passages shew sufﬁciently the author’s concern to reconcile his system to
the plain dictates of nature and common sense, while he expresses no concern to
reconcile it to the received doctrines of philosophers. He is fond to take part with
the vulgar against the philosophers, and to vindicate common sense against their
innovations. What pity is it that he did not carry this suspicion of the doctrine of
philosophers so far as to doubt of that philosophical tenet on which his whole
system is built—to wit, that the things immediately perceived by the senses are
ideas which exist only in the mind!
After all, it seems no easy matter to make the vulgar opinion and that of
Berkeley to meet. And, to accomplish this, he seems to me to draw each out of its
line towards the other, not without some straining.
The vulgar opinion he reduces to this, that the very things which we perceive
by our senses do really exist. This he grants; for these things, says he, are ideas in
our minds, or complexions of ideas, to which we give one name, and consider as
one thing; these are the immediate objects of sense, and these do really exist. As to
the notion that those things have an absolute external existence, independent of
being perceived by any mind, he thinks that this is no notion of the vulgar, but a
reﬁnement of philosophers; and that the notion of material substance, as a sub-
stratum, or support of that collection of sensible qualities to which we give the
name of an apple or a melon, is likewise an invention of philosophers, and is not
found with the vulgar till they are instructed by philosophers. The substance not
being an object of sense, the vulgar never think of it; or, if they are taught the use
THOMAS REID
58

of the word, they mean no more by it but that collection of sensible qualities
which they, from ﬁnding them conjoined in nature, have been accustomed to call
by one name, and to consider as one thing.
Thus he draws the vulgar opinion near to his own; and, that he may meet it
half way, he acknowledges that material things have a real existence out of the
mind of this or that person; but the question, says he, between the materialist and
me, is, Whether they have an absolute existence distinct from their being per-
ceived by God, and exterior to all minds? This, indeed, he says, some heathens
and philosophers have afﬁrmed; but whoever entertains notions of the Deity,
suitable to the Holy Scripture, will be of another opinion.
But here an objection occurs, which it required all his ingenuity to answer. It is
this: The ideas in my mind cannot be the same with the ideas of any other mind;
therefore, if the objects I perceive be only ideas, it is impossible that the objects I
perceive can exist anywhere, when I do not perceive them; and it is impossible
that two or more minds can perceive the same object.
To this Berkeley answers, that this objection presses no less the opinion of the
materialist philosopher than his. But the difﬁculty is to make his opinion coincide
with the notions of the vulgar, who are ﬁrmly persuaded that the very identical
objects which they perceive, continue to exist when they do not perceive them;
and who are no less ﬁrmly persuaded that, when ten men look at the sun or the
moon, they all see the same individual object.
To reconcile this repugnancy, he observes, Dial. 3—“That, if the term same be
taken in the vulgar acceptation, it is certain (and not at all repugnant to the
principles he maintains) that different persons may perceive the same thing; or
the same thing or idea exist in different minds. Words are of arbitrary imposition;
and, since men are used to apply the word same, where no distinction or variety is
perceived, and he does not pretend to alter their perceptions, it follows that, as
men have said before, several saw the same thing, so they may, upon like occa-
sions, still continue to use the same phrase, without any deviation, either from
propriety of language, or the truth of things; but, if the term same be used in the
acceptation of philosophers, who pretend to an abstracted notion of identity,
then, according to their sundry deﬁnitions of this term, (for it is not yet agreed
wherein that philosophic identity consists,) it may or may not be possible for
divers persons to perceive the same things; but whether philosophers shall think
ﬁt to call a thing the same or no is, I conceive, of small importance. Men may
dispute about identity and diversity, without any real difference in their thoughts
and opinions, abstracted from names.”
Upon the whole, I apprehend that Berkeley has carried this attempt to recon-
cile his system to the vulgar opinion farther than reason supports him; and he was
no doubt tempted to do so, from a just apprehension that, in a controversy of this
kind, the common sense of mankind is the most formidable antagonist.
Berkeley has employed much pains and ingenuity to shew that his system, if
received and believed, would not be attended with those bad consequences in the
conduct of life, which superﬁcial thinkers may be apt to impute to it. His system
does not take away or make any alteration upon our pleasures or our pains: our
sensations, whether agreeable or disagreeable, are the same upon his system as
upon any other. These are real things, and the only things that interest us. They
are produced in us according to certain laws of nature, by which our conduct will
ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
59

be directed in attaining the one, and avoiding the other; and it is of no moment to
us, whether they are produced immediately by the operation of some powerful
intelligent being upon our minds; or by the mediation of some inanimate being
which we call matter.
The evidence of an all-governing mind, so far from being weakened, seems to
appear even in a more striking light upon his hypothesis, than upon the common
one. The powers which inanimate matter is supposed to possess, have always
been the stronghold of atheists, to which they had recourse in defence of their
system. This fortress of atheism must be most effectually overturned, if there is no
such thing as matter in the universe. In all this the Bishop reasons justly and
acutely. But there is one uncomfortable consequence of his system, which he
seems not to have attended to, and from which it will be found difﬁcult, if at all
possible, to guard it.
The consequence I mean is this—that, although it leaves us sufﬁcient evidence
of a supreme intelligent mind, it seems to take away all the evidence we have of
other intelligent beings like ourselves. What I call a father, a brother, or a friend,
is only a parcel of ideas in my own mind; and, being ideas in my mind, they
cannot possibly have that relation to another mind which they have to mine, any
more than the pain felt by me can be the individual pain felt by another. I can ﬁnd
no principle in Berkeley’s system, which affords me even probable ground to
conclude that there are other intelligent beings, like myself, in the relations of
father, brother, friend, or fellow-citizen. I am left alone, as the only creature of
God in the universe, in that forlorn state of egoism into which it is said some
of the disciples of Des Cartes were brought by his philosophy.
Of all the opinions that have ever been advanced by philosophers, this of
Bishop Berkeley, that there is no material world, seems the strangest, and the
most apt to bring philosophy into ridicule with plain men who are guided by the
dictates of nature and common sense. . . .
Chapter 14 Reﬂections on the common theory of ideas
There remains only one other argument that I have been able to ﬁnd urged
against our perceiving external objects immediately. It is proposed by Mr Hume,
who, in the essay already quoted, after acknowledging that it is an universal and
primary opinion of all men, that we perceive external objects immediately, sub-
joins what follows:—
“But this universal and primary opinion of all men is soon destroyed by the
slightest philosophy, which teaches us that nothing can ever be present to the
mind but an image or perception; and that the senses are only the inlets through
which these images are received, without being ever able to produce any immedi-
ate intercourse between the mind and the object. The table, which we see, seems
to diminish as we remove farther from it: but the real table, which exists
independent of us, suffers no alteration. It was, therefore, nothing but its image
which was present to the mind. These are the obvious dictates of reason; and no
man who reﬂects ever doubted that the existences which we consider, when we
say this house, and that tree, are nothing but perceptions in the mind, and ﬂeeting
copies and representations of other existences, which remain uniform and
independent. So far, then, we are necessitated, by reasoning, to depart from the
THOMAS REID
60

primary instincts of nature, and to embrace a new system with regard to the
evidence of our senses.”
We have here a remarkable conﬂict between two contradictory opinions,
wherein all mankind are engaged. On the one side stand all the vulgar, who are
unpractised in philosophical researches, and guided by the uncorrupted primary
instincts of nature. On the other side stand all the philosophers, ancient and
modern; every man, without exception, who reﬂects. In this division, to my great
humiliation, I ﬁnd myself classed with the vulgar. . . .
To judge of the strength of this argument, it is necessary to attend to a distinc-
tion which is familiar to those who are conversant in the mathematical sciences—
I mean the distinction between real and apparent magnitude. The real magnitude
of a line is measured by some known measure of length—as inches, feet, or miles;
the real magnitude of a surface or solid, by known measures of surface or of
capacity. This magnitude is an object of touch only, and not of sight; nor could
we even have had any conception of it, without the sense of touch; and Bishop
Berkeley, on that account, calls it tangible magnitude.
Apparent magnitude is measured by the angle which an object subtends at the
eye. Supposing two right lines drawn from the eye to the extremities of the object
making an angle, of which the object is the subtense, the apparent magnitude is
measured by this angle. This apparent magnitude is an object of sight, and not of
touch. Bishop Berkeley calls it visible magnitude.
If it is asked what is the apparent magnitude of the sun’s diameter, the answer
is, that it is about thirty-one minutes of a degree. But, if it is asked what is the real
magnitude of the sun’s diameter, the answer must be, so many thousand miles, or
so many diameters of the earth. From which it is evident that real magnitude, and
apparent magnitude, are things of a different nature, though the name of magni-
tude is given to both. The ﬁrst has three dimensions, the last only two; the ﬁrst is
measured by a line, the last by an angle.
From what has been said, it is evident that the real magnitude of a body must
continue unchanged, while the body is unchanged. This we grant. But is it like-
wise evident, that the apparent magnitude must continue the same while the body
is unchanged? So far otherwise, that every man who knows anything of math-
ematics can easily demonstrate, that the same individual object, remaining in the
same place, and unchanged, must necessarily vary in its apparent magnitude,
according as the point from which it is seen is more or less distant; and that
its apparent length or breadth will be nearly in a reciprocal proportion to the
distance of the spectator. This is as certain as the principles of geometry.
We must likewise attend to this—that, though the real magnitude of a body is
not originally an object of sight, but of touch, yet we learn by experience to judge
of the real magnitude in many cases by sight. We learn by experience to judge of
the distance of a body from the eye within certain limits; and, from its distance
and apparent magnitude taken together, we learn to judge of its real magnitude.
And this kind of judgment, by being repeated every hour and almost every
minute of our lives, becomes, when we are grown up, so ready and so habitual,
that it very much resembles the original perceptions of our senses, and may not
improperly be called acquired perception.
Whether we call it judgment or acquired perception is a verbal difference. But
it is evident that, by means of it, we often discover by one sense things which are
ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
61

properly and naturally the objects of another. Thus I can say, without impropri-
ety, I hear a drum. I hear a great bell, or I hear a small bell; though it is certain
that the ﬁgure or size of the sounding body is not originally an object of hearing.
In like manner, we learn by experience how a body of such a real magnitude and
at such a distance appears to the eye. But neither its real magnitude, nor its
distance from the eye, are properly objects of sight, any more than the form of a
drum or the size of a bell, are properly objects of hearing.
If these things be considered, it will appear that Mr Hume’s argument hath no
force to support his conclusion—nay, that it leads to a contrary conclusion. The
argument is this: the table we see seems to diminish as we remove farther from it;
that is, its apparent magnitude is diminished; but the real table suffers no
alteration—to wit, in its real magnitude; therefore, it is not the real table we see. I
admit both the premises in this syllogism, but I deny the conclusion. The syllo-
gism has what the logicians call two middle terms; apparent magnitude is the
middle term in the ﬁrst premise; real magnitude in the second. Therefore, accord-
ing to the rules of logic, the conclusion is not justly drawn from the premises; but,
laying aside the rules of logic, let us examine it by the light of common sense.
Let us suppose, for a moment, that it is the real table we see: Must not this real
table seem to diminish as we remove farther from it? It is demonstrable that it
must. How then can this apparent diminution be an argument that it is not the
real table? When that which must happen to the real table, as we remove farther
from it, does actually happen to the table we see, it is absurd to conclude from
this, that it is not the real table we see. It is evident, therefore, that this ingenious
author has imposed upon himself by confounding real magnitude with apparent
magnitude, and that his argument is a mere sophism.
I observed that Mr Hume’s argument not only has no strength to support his
conclusion, but that it leads to the contrary conclusion—to wit, that it is the real
table we see; for this plain reason, that the table we see has precisely that appar-
ent magnitude which it is demonstrable the real table must have when placed at
that distance.
This argument is made much stronger by considering that the real table may be
placed successively at a thousand different distances, and, in every distance, in a
thousand different positions; and it can be determined demonstratively, by the
rules of geometry and perspective, what must be its apparent magnitude and
apparent ﬁgure, in each of those distances and positions. Let the table be placed
successively in as many of those different distances and different positions as you
will, or in them all; open your eyes and you shall see a table precisely of that
apparent magnitude, and that apparent ﬁgure, which the real table must have in
that distance and in that position. Is not this a strong argument that it is the real
table you see? . . .
Thus, I have considered every argument I have found advanced to prove the
existence of ideas, or images of external things, in the mind; and, if no better
arguments can be found, I cannot help thinking that the whole history of phil-
osophy has never furnished an instance of an opinion so unanimously entertained
by philosophers upon so slight grounds.
A third reﬂection I would make upon this subject is, that philosophers, not-
withstanding their unanimity as to the existence of ideas, hardly agree in any one
thing else concerning them. If ideas be not a mere ﬁction, they must be, of all
THOMAS REID
62

objects of human knowledge, the things we have best access to know, and to be
acquainted with; yet there is nothing about which men differ so much.
A fourth reﬂection is, that ideas do not make any of the operations of the mind
to be better understood, although it was probably with that view that they have
been ﬁrst invented, and afterwards so generally received.
We are at a loss to know how we perceive distant objects; how we remember
things past; how we imagine things that have no existence. Ideas in the mind seem
to account for all these operations: they are all by the means of ideas reduced to
one operation—to a kind of feeling, or immediate perception of things present
and in contact with the percipient; and feeling is an operation so familiar that we
think it needs no explication, but may serve to explain other operations.
But this feeling, or immediate perception, is as difﬁcult to be comprehended as
the things which we pretend to explain by it. Two things may be in contact
without any feeling or perception; there must therefore be in the percipient a
power to feel or to perceive. How this power is produced, and how it operates, is
quite beyond the reach of our knowledge. As little can we know whether this
power must be limited to things present, and in contact with us. Nor can any man
pretend to prove that the Being who gave us the power to perceive things present,
may not give us the power to perceive things that are distant, to remember things
past, and to conceive things that never existed. . . .
QUESTIONS
1
What three elements does Reid ﬁnd in every perception?
2
According to Reid, what premise does Berkeley’s whole system rest on?
3
What does Reid mean by the “visible magnitude” of an object?
4
According to Reid, what does Hume’s experiment with the table really show?
ESSAYS ON THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS OF MAN
63

Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy
Chapter I Appearance and reality
Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable man
could doubt it? This question, which at ﬁrst sight might not seem difﬁcult, is
really one of the most difﬁcult that can be asked. When we have realized the
obstacles in the way of a straightforward and conﬁdent answer, we shall be well
launched on the study of philosophy—for philosophy is merely the attempt to
answer such ultimate questions, not carelessly and dogmatically, as we do in
ordinary life and even in the sciences, but critically, after exploring all that makes
such questions puzzling, and after realizing all the vagueness and confusion that
underlie our ordinary ideas.
In daily life, we assume as certain many things which, on a closer scrutiny, are
found to be so full of apparent contradictions that only a great amount of
thought enables us to know what it is that we really may believe. In the search for
certainty, it is natural to begin with our present experiences, and in some sense,
no doubt, knowledge is to be derived from them. But any statement as to what it
is that our immediate experiences make us know is very likely to be wrong. It
seems to me that I am now sitting in a chair, at a table of a certain shape, on which
I see sheets of paper with writing or print. By turning my head I see out of the
window buildings and clouds and the sun. I believe that the sun is about ninety-
three million miles from the earth; that it is a hot globe many times bigger than
the earth; that, owing to the earth’s rotation, it rises every morning, and will
continue to do so for an indeﬁnite time in the future. I believe that, if any other
normal person comes into my room, he will see the same chairs and tables and
books and papers as I see, and that the table which I see is the same as the table
which I feel pressing against my arm. All this seems to be so evident as to be
hardly worth stating, except in answer to a man who doubts whether I know
anything. Yet all this may be reasonably doubted, and all of it requires much
careful discussion before we can be sure that we have stated it in a form that is
wholly true.
To make our difﬁculties plain, let us concentrate attention on the table. To the
eye it is oblong, brown and shiny, to the touch it is smooth and cool and hard;
when I tap it, it gives out a wooden sound. Any one else who sees and feels and
Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press,
1997).
64

hears the table will agree with this description, so that it might seem as if no
difﬁculty would arise; but as soon as we try to be more precise our troubles begin.
Although I believe that the table is “really” of the same colour all over, the parts
that reﬂect the light look much brighter than the other parts, and some parts look
white because of reﬂected light. I know that, if I move, the parts that reﬂect the
light will be different, so that the apparent distribution of colours on the table
will change. It follows that if several people are looking at the table at the same
moment, no two of them will see exactly the same distribution of colours,
because no two can see it from exactly the same point of view, and any change in
the point of view makes some change in the way the light is reﬂected.
For most practical purposes these differences are unimportant, but to the
painter they are all-important: the painter has to unlearn the habit of thinking
that things seem to have the colour which common sense says they “really” have,
and to learn the habit of seeing things as they appear. Here we have already the
beginning of one of the distinctions that cause most trouble in philosophy—the
distinction between “appearance” and “reality”, between what things seem to be
and what they are. The painter wants to know what things seem to be, the
practical man and the philosopher want to know what they are; but the philo-
sopher’s wish to know this is stronger than the practical man’s, and is more
troubled by knowledge as to the difﬁculties of answering the question.
To return to the table. It is evident from what we have found, that there is no
colour which preeminently appears to be the colour of the table, or even of any
one particular part of the table—it appears to be of different colours from differ-
ent points of view, and there is no reason for regarding some of these as more
really its colour than others. And we know that even from a given point of view
the colour will seem different by artiﬁcial light, or to a colour-blind man, or to a
man wearing blue spectacles, while in the dark there will be no colour at all,
though to touch and hearing the table will be unchanged. This colour is not
something which is inherent in the table, but something depending upon the table
and the spectator and the way the light falls on the table. When, in ordinary life,
we speak of the colour of the table, we only mean the sort of colour which it will
seem to have to a normal spectator from an ordinary point of view under usual
conditions of light. But the other colours which appear under other conditions
have just as good a right to be considered real; and therefore, to avoid favourit-
ism, we are compelled to deny that, in itself, the table has any one particular
colour.
The same thing applies to the texture. With the naked eye one can see the
grain, but otherwise the table looks smooth and even. If we looked at it through a
microscope, we should see roughnesses and hills and valleys, and all sorts of
differences that are imperceptible to the naked eye. Which of these is the “real”
table? We are naturally tempted to say that what we see through the microscope
is more real, but that in turn would be changed by a still more powerful micro-
scope. If, then, we cannot trust what we see with the naked eye, why should we
trust what we see through a microscope? Thus, again, the conﬁdence in our
senses with which we began deserts us.
The shape of the table is no better. We are all in the habit of judging as to the
“real” shapes of things, and we do this so unreﬂectingly that we come to think we
actually see the real shapes. But, in fact, as we all have to learn if we try to draw, a
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
65

given thing looks different in shape from every different point of view. If our table
is “really” rectangular, it will look, from almost all points of view, as if it had two
acute angles and two obtuse angles. If opposite sides are parallel, they will look as
if they converged to a point away from the spectator; if they are of equal length,
they will look as if the nearer side were longer. All these things are not commonly
noticed in looking at a table, because experience has taught us to construct the
“real” shape from the apparent shape, and the “real” shape is what interests us as
practical men. But the “real” shape is not what we see; it is something inferred
from what we see. And what we see is constantly changing in shape as we move
about the room; so that here again the senses seem not to give us the truth about
the table itself, but only about the appearance of the table.
Similar difﬁculties arise when we consider the sense of touch. It is true that the
table always gives us a sensation of hardness, and we feel that it resists pressure.
But the sensation we obtain depends upon how hard we press the table and also
upon what part of the body we press with; thus the various sensations due to
various pressures or various parts of the body cannot be supposed to reveal
directly any deﬁnite property of the table, but at most to be signs of some prop-
erty which perhaps causes all the sensations, but is not actually apparent in any of
them. And the same applies still more obviously to the sounds which can be
elicited by rapping the table.
Thus it becomes evident that the real table, if there is one, is not the same as
what we immediately experience by sight or touch or hearing. The real table, if
there is one, is not immediately known to us at all, but must be an inference from
what is immediately known. Hence, two very difﬁcult questions at once arise;
namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what sort of object can it be?
It will help us in considering these questions to have a few simple terms of
which the meaning is deﬁnite and clear. Let us give the name of “sense-data” to the
things that are immediately known in sensation: such things as colours, sounds,
smells, hardnesses, roughnesses, and so on. We shall give the name “sensation” to
the experience of being immediately aware of these things. Thus, whenever we
see a colour, we have a sensation of the colour, but the colour itself is a sense-
datum, not a sensation. The colour is that of which we are immediately aware,
and the awareness itself is the sensation. It is plain that if we are to know any-
thing about the table, it must be by means of the sense-data—brown colour,
oblong shape, smoothness, etc.—which we associate with the table; but, for the
reasons which have been given, we cannot say that the table is the sense-data, or
even that the sense-data are directly properties of the table. Thus a problem arises
as to the relation of the sense-data to the real table, supposing there is such a
thing.
The real table, if it exists, we will call a “physical object”. Thus we have to
consider the relation of sense-data to physical objects. The collection of all
physical objects is called “matter”. Thus our two questions may be re-stated
as follows: (I) Is there any such thing as matter? (2) If so, what is its nature?
The philosopher who ﬁrst brought prominently forward the reasons for
regarding the immediate objects of our senses as not existing independently of
us was Bishop Berkeley (1685–1753). His Three Dialogues between Hylas and
Philonous, in Opposition to Sceptics and Atheists, undertake to prove that there
is no such thing as matter at all, and that the world consists of nothing but minds
BERTRAND RUSSELL
66

and their ideas. Hylas has hitherto believed in matter, but he is no match for
Philonous, who mercilessly drives him into contradictions and paradoxes, and
makes his own denial of matter seem, in the end, as if it were almost common
sense. The arguments employed are of very different value: some are important
and sound, others are confused or quibbling. But Berkeley retains the merit of
having shown that the existence of matter is capable of being denied without
absurdity, and that if there are any things that exist independently of us they
cannot be the immediate objects of our sensations.
There are two different questions involved when we ask whether matter exists,
and it is important to keep them clear. We commonly mean by “matter” something
which is opposed to “mind”, something which we think of as occupying space and
as radically incapable of any sort of thought or consciousness. It is chieﬂy in this
sense that Berkeley denies matter; that is to say, he does not deny that the sense-
data which we commonly take as signs of the existence of the table are really
signs of the existence of something independent of us, but he does deny that this
something is non-mental, that it is neither mind nor ideas entertained by some
mind. He admits that there must be something which continues to exist when we
go out of the room or shut our eyes, and that what we call seeing the table does
really give us reason for believing in something which persists even when we are
not seeing it. But he thinks that this something cannot be radically different in
nature from what we see, and cannot be independent of seeing altogether, though
it must be independent of our seeing. He is thus led to regard the “real” table as an
idea in the mind of God. Such an idea has the required permanence and
independence of ourselves, without being—as matter would otherwise be—
something quite unknowable, in the sense that we can only infer it, and can never
be directly and immediately aware of it.
Other philosophers since Berkeley have also held that, although the table does
not depend for its existence upon being seen by me, it does depend upon being
seen (or otherwise apprehended in sensation) by some mind—not necessarily the
mind of God, but more often the whole collective mind of the universe. This they
hold, as Berkeley does, chieﬂy because they think there can be nothing real—or at
any rate nothing known to be real—except minds and their thoughts and feelings.
We might state the argument by which they support their view in some such way
as this: “Whatever can be thought of is an idea in the mind of the person thinking
of it; therefore nothing can be thought of except ideas in minds; therefore
anything else is inconceivable, and what is inconceivable cannot exist.”
Such an argument, in my opinion, is fallacious; and of course those who
advance it do not put it so shortly or so crudely. But whether valid or not, the
argument has been very widely advanced in one form or another; and very many
philosophers, perhaps a majority, have held that there is nothing real except
minds and their ideas. Such philosophers are called “idealists”. When they come
to explaining matter, they either say, like Berkeley, that matter is really nothing
but a collection of ideas, or they say, like Leibniz (1646–1716), that what appears
as matter is really a collection of more or less rudimentary minds.
But these philosophers, though they deny matter as opposed to mind, neverthe-
less, in another sense, admit matter. It will be remembered that we asked two
questions; namely, (1) Is there a real table at all? (2) If so, what sort of object can
it be? Now both Berkeley and Leibniz admit that there is a real table, but Berkeley
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
67

says it is certain ideas in the mind of God, and Leibniz says it is a colony of souls.
Thus both of them answer our ﬁrst question in the afﬁrmative, and only diverge
from the views of ordinary mortals in their answer to our second question. In
fact, almost all philosophers seem to be agreed that there is a real table: they
almost all agree that, however much our sense-data—colour, shape, smoothness,
etc.—may depend upon us, yet their occurrence is a sign of something existing
independently of us, something differing, perhaps, completely from our sense-
data, and yet to be regarded as causing those sense-data whenever we are in a
suitable relation to the real table.
Now obviously this point in which the philosophers are agreed—the view that
there is a real table, whatever its nature may be—is vitally important, and it will
be worth while to consider what reasons there are for accepting this view before
we go on to the further question as to the nature of the real table. Our next
chapter, therefore, will be concerned with the reasons for supposing that there is a
real table at all.
Before we go farther it will be well to consider for a moment what it is that we
have discovered so far. It has appeared that, if we take any common object of the
sort that is supposed to be known by the senses, what the senses immediately tell
us is not the truth about the object as it is apart from us, but only the truth about
certain sense-data which, so far as we can see, depend upon the relations between
us and the object. Thus what we directly see and feel is merely “appearance”,
which we believe to be a sign of some “reality” behind. But if the reality is not
what appears, have we any means of knowing whether there is any reality at all?
And if so, have we any means of ﬁnding out what it is like?
Such questions are bewildering, and it is difﬁcult to know that even the stran-
gest hypotheses may not be true. Thus our familiar table, which has roused but
the slightest thoughts in us hitherto, has become a problem full of surprising
possibilities. The one thing we know about it is that it is not what it seems.
Beyond this modest result, so far, we have the most complete liberty of con-
jecture. Leibniz tells us it is a community of souls; Berkeley tells us it is an idea in
the mind of God; sober science, scarcely less wonderful, tells us it is a vast
collection of electric charges in violent motion.
Among these surprising possibilities, doubt suggests that perhaps there is no
table at all. Philosophy, if it cannot answer so many questions as we could wish,
has at least the power of asking questions which increase the interest of the
world, and show the strangeness and wonder lying just below the surface even in
the commonest things of daily life.
Chapter II The existence of matter
In this chapter we have to ask ourselves whether, in any sense at all, there is such
a thing as matter. Is there a table which has a certain intrinsic nature, and con-
tinues to exist when I am not looking, or is the table merely a product of my
imagination, a dream-table in a very prolonged dream? This question is of the
greatest importance. For if we cannot be sure of the independent existence of
objects, we cannot be sure of the independent existence of other people’s bodies,
and therefore still less of other people’s minds, since we have no grounds for
believing in their minds except such as are derived from observing their bodies.
BERTRAND RUSSELL
68

Thus if we cannot be sure of the independent existence of objects, we shall be left
alone in a desert—it may be that the whole outer world is nothing but a dream,
and that we alone exist. This is an uncomfortable possibility; but although it
cannot be strictly proved to be false, there is not the slightest reason to suppose
that it is true. In this chapter we have to see why this is the case.
Before we embark upon doubtful matters, let us try to ﬁnd some more or less
ﬁxed point from which to start. Although we are doubting the physical existence
of the table, we are not doubting the existence of the sense-data which made us
think there was a table; we are not doubting that, while we look, a certain colour
and shape appear to us, and while we press, a certain sensation of hardness is
experienced by us. All this, which is psychological, we are not calling in question.
In fact, whatever else may be doubtful, some at least of our immediate
experiences seem absolutely certain.
Descartes (1590–1650), the founder of modern philosophy, invented a method
which may still be used with proﬁt—the method of systematic doubt. He deter-
mined that he would believe nothing which he did not see quite clearly and
distinctly to be true. Whatever he could bring himself to doubt, he would doubt,
until he saw reason for not doubting it. By applying this method he gradually
became convinced that the only existence of which he could be quite certain was
his own. He imagined a deceitful demon, who presented unreal things to his
senses in a perpetual phantasmagoria; it might be very improbable that such a
demon existed, but still it was possible, and therefore doubt concerning things
perceived by the senses was possible.
But doubt concerning his own existence was not possible, for if he did not
exist, no demon could deceive him. If he doubted, he must exist; if he had any
experiences whatever, he must exist. Thus his own existence was an absolute
certainty to him. “I think, therefore I am,” he said (Cogito, ergo sum); and on the
basis of this certainty he set to work to build up again the world of knowledge
which his doubt had laid in ruins. By inventing the method of doubt, and by
showing that subjective things are the most certain, Descartes performed a great
service to philosophy, and one which makes him still useful to all students of the
subject.
But some care is needed in using Descartes’ argument. “I think, therefore I am”
says rather more than is strictly certain. It might seem as though we were quite
sure of being the same person to-day as we were yesterday, and this is no doubt
true in some sense. But the real Self is as hard to arrive at as the real table, and
does not seem to have that absolute, convincing certainty that belongs to particu-
lar experiences. When I look at my table and see a certain brown colour, what is
quite certain at once is not “I am seeing a brown colour”, but rather, “a brown
colour is being seen”. This of course involves something (or somebody) which (or
who) sees the brown colour; but it does not of itself involve that more or less
permanent person whom we call “I”. So far as immediate certainty goes, it might
be that the something which sees the brown colour is quite momentary, and not
the same as the something which has some different experience the next moment.
Thus it is our particular thoughts and feelings that have primitive certainty.
And this applies to dreams and hallucinations as well as to normal perceptions:
when we dream or see a ghost, we certainly do have the sensations we think we
have, but for various reasons it is held that no physical object corresponds to
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
69

these sensations. Thus the certainty of our knowledge of our own experiences
does not have to be limited in any way to allow for exceptional cases. Here,
therefore, we have, for what it is worth, a solid basis from which to begin our
pursuit of knowledge.
The problem we have to consider is this: Granted that we are certain of our
own sense-data, have we any reason for regarding them as signs of the existence
of something else, which we can call the physical object? When we have enumer-
ated all the sense-data which we should naturally regard as connected with the
table, have we said all there is to say about the table, or is there still something
else—something not a sense-datum, something which persists when we go out of
the room? Common sense unhesitatingly answers that there is. What can be
bought and sold and pushed about and have a cloth laid on it, and so on, cannot
be a mere collection of sense-data. If the cloth completely hides the table, we shall
derive no sense-data from the table, and therefore, if the table were merely sense-
data, it would have ceased to exist, and the cloth would be suspended in empty
air, resting, by a miracle, in the place where the table formerly was. This seems
plainly absurd; but whoever wishes to become a philosopher must learn not to be
frightened by absurdities.
One great reason why it is felt that we must secure a physical object in addition
to the sense-data, is that we want the same object for different people. When ten
people are sitting round a dinner-table, it seems preposterous to maintain that
they are not seeing the same tablecloth, the same knives and forks and spoons
and glasses. But the sense-data are private to each separate person; what is
immediately present to the sight of one is not immediately present to the sight of
another: they all see things from slightly different points of view, and therefore
see them slightly differently. Thus, if there are to be public neutral objects, which
can be in some sense known to many different people, there must be something
over and above the private and particular sense-data which appear to various
people. What reason, then, have we for believing that there are such public neu-
tral objects?
The ﬁrst answer that naturally occurs to one is that, although different people
may see the table slightly differently, still they all see more or less similar things
when they look at the table, and the variations in what they see follow the laws of
perspective and reﬂection of light, so that it is easy to arrive at a permanent object
underlying all the different people’s sense-data. I bought my table from the for-
mer occupant of my room; I could not buy his sense-data, which died when he
went away, but I could and did buy the conﬁdent expectation of more or less
similar sense-data. Thus it is the fact that different people have similar sense-data,
and that one person in a given place at different times has similar sense-data,
which makes us suppose that over and above the sense-data there is a permanent
public object which underlies or causes the sense-data of various people at vari-
ous times.
Now in so far as the above considerations depend upon supposing that there
are other people besides ourselves, they beg the very question at issue. Other
people are represented to me by certain sense-data, such as the sight of them or
the sound of their voices, and if I had no reason to believe that there were physical
objects independent of my sense-data, I should have no reason to believe that
other people exist except as part of my dream. Thus, when we are trying to show
BERTRAND RUSSELL
70

that there must be objects independent of our own sense-data, we cannot appeal
to the testimony of other people, since this testimony itself consists of sense-data,
and does not reveal other people’s experiences unless our own sense-data are
signs of things existing independently of us. We must therefore, if possible, ﬁnd,
in our own purely private experiences, characteristics which show, or tend to
show, that there are in the world things other than ourselves and our private
experiences.
In one sense it must be admitted that we can never prove the existence of things
other than ourselves and our experiences. No logical absurdity results from the
hypothesis that the world consists of myself and my thoughts and feelings and
sensations, and that everything else is mere fancy. In dreams a very complicated
world may seem to be present, and yet on waking we ﬁnd it was a delusion; that is
to say, we ﬁnd that the sense-data in the dream do not appear to have corres-
ponded with such physical objects as we should naturally infer from our sense-
data. (It is true that, when the physical world is assumed, it is possible to ﬁnd
physical causes for the sense-data in dreams: a door banging, for instance, may
cause us to dream of a naval engagement. But although, in this case, there is a
physical cause for the sense-data, there is not a physical object corresponding to
the sense-data in the way in which an actual naval battle would correspond.)
There is no logical impossibility in the supposition that the whole of life is a
dream, in which we ourselves create all the objects that come before us. But
although this is not logically impossible, there is no reason whatever to suppose
that it is true; and it is, in fact, a less simple hypothesis, viewed as a means of
accounting for the facts of our own life, than the common-sense hypothesis that
there really are objects independent of us, whose action on us causes our
sensations.
The way in which simplicity comes in from supposing that there really are
physical objects is easily seen. If the cat appears at one moment in one part of the
room, and at another in another part, it is natural to suppose that it has moved
from the one to the other, passing over a series of intermediate positions. But if it
is merely a set of sense-data, it cannot have ever been in any place where I did not
see it; thus we shall have to suppose that it did not exist at all while I was not
looking, but suddenly sprang into being in a new place. If the cat exists whether I
see it or not, we can understand from our own experience how it gets hungry
between one meal and the next; but if it does not exist when I am not seeing it, it
seems odd that appetite should grow during non-existence as fast as during exist-
ence. And if the cat consists only of sense-data, it cannot be hungry, since no
hunger but my own can be a sense-datum to me. Thus the behaviour of the sense-
data which represent the cat to me, though it seems quite natural when regarded
as an expression of hunger, becomes utterly inexplicable when regarded as mere
movement and changes of patches of colour, which are as incapable of hunger as
a triangle is of playing football.
But the difﬁculty in the case of the cat is nothing compared to the difﬁculty in
the case of human beings. When human beings speak—that is, when we hear
certain noises which we associate with ideas, and simultaneously see certain
motions of lips and expressions of face—it is very difﬁcult to suppose that what
we hear is not the expression of a thought, as we know it would be if we emitted
the same sounds. Of course similar things happen in dreams, where we are
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
71

mistaken as to the existence of other people. But dreams are more or less sug-
gested by what we call waking life, and are capable of being more or less
accounted for on scientiﬁc principles if we assume that there really is a physical
world. Thus every principle of simplicity urges us to adopt the natural view, that
there really are objects other than ourselves and our sense-data which have an
existence not dependent upon our perceiving them.
Of course it is not by argument that we originally come by our belief in an
independent external world. We ﬁnd this belief ready in ourselves as soon as we
being to reﬂect: it is what may be called an instinctive belief. We should never
have been led to question this belief but for the fact that, at any rate in the case of
sight, it seems as if the sense-datum itself were instinctively believed to be the
independent object, whereas argument shows that the object cannot be identical
with the sense-datum. This discovery, however—which is not at all paradoxical
in the case of taste and smell and sound, and only slightly so in the case of
touch—leaves undiminished our instinctive belief that there are objects corres-
ponding to our sense-data. Since this belief does not lead to any difﬁculties, but
on the contrary tends to simplify and systematize our account of our experiences,
there seems no good reason for rejecting it. We may therefore admit—though
with a slight doubt derived from dreams—that the external world does really
exist, and is not wholly dependent for its existence upon our continuing to per-
ceive it.
The argument which has led us to this conclusion is doubtless less strong than
we could wish, but it is typical of many philosophical arguments, and it is there-
fore worth while to consider brieﬂy its general character and validity. All know-
ledge, we ﬁnd, must be built up upon our instinctive beliefs, and if these are
rejected, nothing is left. But among our instinctive beliefs some are much stronger
than others, while many have, by habit and association, become entangled with
other beliefs, not really instinctive, but falsely supposed to be part of what is
believed instinctively.
Philosophy should show us the hierarchy of our instinctive beliefs, beginning
with those we hold most strongly, and presenting each as much isolated and as
free from irrelevant additions as possible. It should take care to show that, in the
form in which they are ﬁnally set forth, our instinctive beliefs do not clash, but
form a harmonious system. There can never be any reason for rejecting one
instinctive belief except that it clashes with others; thus, if they are found to
harmonize, the whole system becomes worthy of acceptance.
It is of course possible that all or any of our beliefs may be mistaken, and
therefore all ought to be held with at least some slight element of doubt. But we
cannot have reason to reject a belief except on the ground of some other belief.
Hence, by organizing our instinctive beliefs and their consequences, by consider-
ing which among them is most possible, if necessary, to modify or abandon, we
can arrive, on the basis of accepting as our sole data what we instinctively believe,
at an orderly systematic organization of our knowledge, in which, though the
possibility of error remains, its likelihood is diminished by the interrelation of the
parts and by the critical scrutiny which has preceded acquiescence.
This function, at least, philosophy can perform. Most philosophers, rightly or
wrongly, believe that philosophy can do much more than this—that it can give us
knowledge, not otherwise attainable, concerning the universe as a whole, and
BERTRAND RUSSELL
72

concerning the nature of ultimate reality. Whether this be the case or not, the
more modest function we have spoken of can certainly be performed by phil-
osophy, and certainly sufﬁces, for those who have once begun to doubt the
adequacy of common sense, to justify the arduous and difﬁcult labours that
philosophical problems involve.
QUESTIONS
1
What are “sense data”?
2
What is “idealism”?
3
According to Russell, what sorts of things can we be certain of?
4
Brieﬂy, what sort of reason does Russell say we have for believing in the exist-
ence of matter?
5
According to Russell, when should we reject an instinctive belief?
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
73

J.L. Austin, Sense and Sensibilia
III
The primary purpose of the argument from illusion is to induce people to accept
“sense-data” as the proper and correct answer to the question what they perceive
on certain abnormal, exceptional occasions; but in fact it is usually followed up
with another bit of argument intended to establish that they always perceive
sense-data. Well, what is the argument?
In Ayer’s statement it runs as follows.1 It is “based on the fact that material
things may present different appearances to different observers, or to the same
observer in different conditions, and that the character of these appearances is to
some extent causally determined by the state of the conditions and the observer”.
As illustrations of this alleged fact Ayer proceeds to cite perspective (“a coin
which looks circular from one point of view may look elliptical from another”);
refraction (“a stick which normally appears straight looks bent when it is seen in
water”); changes in colour-vision produced by drugs (“such as mescal”); mirror-
images; double vision; hallucination; apparent variations in tastes; variations in
felt warmth (“according as the hand that is feeling it is itself hot or cold”); vari-
ations in felt bulk (“a coin seems larger when it is placed on the tongue than when
it is held in the palm of the hand”); and the oft-cited fact that “people who have
had limbs amputated may still continue to feel pain in them”.
He then selects three of these instances for detailed treatment. First,
refraction—the stick which normally “appears straight” but “looks bent” when
seen in water. He makes the “assumptions” (a) that the stick does not really change
its shape when it is placed in water, and (b) that it cannot be both crooked and
straight.2 He then concludes (“it follows”) that “at least one of the visual appear-
ances of the stick is delusive”. Nevertheless, even when “what we see is not the real
quality of a material thing, it is supposed that we are still seeing something”—and
this something is to be called a “sense-datum”. A sense-datum is to be “the object
of which we are directly aware, in perception, if it is not part of any material
thing”. (The italics are mine throughout this and the next two paragraphs.)
Next, mirages. A man who sees a mirage, he says, is “not perceiving any
material thing; for the oasis which he thinks he is perceiving does not exist”. But
“his experience is not an experience of nothing”; thus “it is said that he is
experiencing sense-data, which are similar in character to what he would be
J.L. Austin, Sense and Sensibilia (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962).
74

experiencing if he were seeing a real oasis, but are delusive in the sense that the
material thing which they appear to present is not really there”.
Lastly, reﬂections. When I look at myself in a mirror “my body appears to be
some distance behind the glass”; but it cannot actually be in two places at once;
thus, my perceptions in this case “cannot all be veridical”. But I do see some-
thing; and if “there really is no such material thing as my body in the place where
it appears to be, what is it that I am seeing?” Answer—a sense-datum. Ayer adds
that “the same conclusion may be reached by taking any other of my examples”.
Now I want to call attention, ﬁrst of all, to the name of this argument—the
“argument from illusion”, and to the fact that it is produced as establishing the
conclusion that some at least of our “perceptions” are delusive. For in this there
are two clear implications—(a) that all the cases cited in the argument are cases of
illusions; and (b) that illusion and delusion are the same thing. But both of these
implications, of course, are quite wrong; and it is by no means unimportant to
point this out, for, as we shall see, the argument trades on confusion at just this
point.
What, then, would be some genuine examples of illusion? (The fact is that
hardly any of the cases cited by Ayer is, at any rate without stretching things, a
case of illusion at all.) Well, ﬁrst, there are some quite clear cases of optical
illusion—for instance the case we mentioned earlier in which, of two lines of
equal length, one is made to look longer than the other. Then again there are
illusions produced by professional “illusionists”, conjurors—for instance the
Headless Woman on the stage, who is made to look headless, or the ventrilo-
quist’s dummy which is made to appear to be talking. Rather different—not
(usually) produced on purpose—is the case where wheels rotating rapidly enough
in one direction may look as if they were rotating quite slowly in the opposite
direction. Delusions, on the other hand, are something altogether different from
this. Typical cases would be delusions of persecution, delusions of grandeur.
These are primarily a matter of grossly disordered beliefs (and so, probably,
behaviour) and may well have nothing in particular to do with perception.3 But I
think we might also say that the patient who sees pink rats has (suffers from)
delusions—particularly, no doubt, if, as would probably be the case, he is not
clearly aware that his pink rats aren’t real rats.4
The most important differences here are that the term “an illusion” (in a per-
ceptual context) does not suggest that something totally unreal is conjured up—
on the contrary, there just is the arrangement of lines and arrows on the page, the
woman on the stage with her head in a black bag, the rotating wheels; whereas
the term “delusion” does suggest something totally unreal, not really there at all.
(The convictions of the man who has delusions of persecution can be completely
without foundation.) For this reason delusions are a much more serious matter—
something is really wrong, and what’s more, wrong with the person who has
them. But when I see an optical illusion, however well it comes off, there is
nothing wrong with me personally, the illusion is not a little (or a large) peculiar-
ity or idiosyncrasy of my own; it is quite public, anyone can see it, and in many
cases standard procedures can be laid down for producing it. Furthermore, if we
are not actually to be taken in, we need to be on our guard; but it is no use to tell
the sufferer from delusions to be on his guard. He needs to be cured.
Why is it that we tend—if we do—to confuse illusions with delusions? Well,
SENSE AND SENSIBILIA
75

partly, no doubt the terms are often used loosely. But there is also the point that
people may have, without making this explicit, different views or theories about
the facts of some cases. Take the case of seeing a ghost, for example. It is not
generally known, or agreed, what seeing ghosts is. Some people think of seeing
ghosts as a case of something being conjured up, perhaps by the disordered
nervous system of the victim; so in their view seeing ghosts is a case of delusion.
But other people have the idea that what is called seeing ghosts is a case of being
taken in by shadows, perhaps, or reﬂections, or a trick of the light—that is, they
assimilate the case in their minds to illusion. In this way, seeing ghosts, for
example, may come to be labelled sometimes as “delusion”, sometimes as “illu-
sion”; and it may not be noticed that it makes a difference which label we use.
Rather, similarly, there seem to be different doctrines in the ﬁeld as to what
mirages are. Some seem to take a mirage to be a vision conjured up by the crazed
brain of the thirsty and exhausted traveller (delusion), while in other accounts it
is a case of atmospheric refraction, whereby something below the horizon is
made to appear above it (illusion). (Ayer, you may remember, takes the delusion
view, although he cites it along with the rest as a case of illusion. He says not that
the oasis appears to be where it is not, but roundly that “it does not exist”.)
The way in which the “argument from illusion” positively trades on not dis-
tinguishing illusions from delusions is, I think, this. So long as it is being sug-
gested that the cases paraded for our attention are cases of illusion, there is the
implication (from the ordinary use of the word) that there really is something
there that we perceive. But then, when these cases begin to be quietly called
delusive, there comes in the very different suggestion of something being con-
jured up, something unreal or at any rate “immaterial”. These two implications
taken together may then subtly insinuate that in the cases cited there really is
something that we are perceiving, but that this is an immaterial something;
and this insinuation, even if not conclusive by itself, is certainly well calculated
to edge us a little closer towards just the position where the sense-datum
theorist wants to have us.
So much, then—though certainly there could be a good deal more—about the
differences between illusions and delusions and the reasons for not obscuring
them. Now let us look brieﬂy at some of the other cases Ayer lists. Reﬂections, for
instance. No doubt you can produce illusions with mirrors, suitably disposed.
But is just any case of seeing something in a mirror an illusion, as he implies?
Quite obviously not. For seeing things in mirrors is a perfectly normal occur-
rence, completely familiar, and there is usually no question of anyone being taken
in. No doubt, if you’re an infant or an aborigine and have never come across a
mirror before, you may be pretty bafﬂed, and even visibly perturbed, when you
do. But is that a reason why the rest of us should speak of illusion here? And just
the same goes for the phenomena of perspective—again, one can play tricks with
perspective, but in the ordinary case there is no question of illusion. That a round
coin should “look elliptical” (in one sense) from some points of view is exactly
what we expect and what we normally ﬁnd; indeed, we should be badly put out if
we ever found this not to be so. Refraction again—the stick that looks bent in
water—is far too familiar a case to be properly called a case of illusion. We may
perhaps be prepared to agree that the stick looks bent; but then we can see that
it’s partly submerged in water, so that is exactly how we should expect it to look.
J.L. AUSTIN
76

It is important to realize here how familiarity, so to speak, takes the edge of
illusion. Is the cinema a case of illusion? Well, just possibly the ﬁrst man who ever
saw moving pictures may have felt inclined to say that here was a case of illusion.
But in fact it’s pretty unlikely that even he, even momentarily, was actually taken
in; and by now the whole thing is so ordinary a part of our lives that it never
occurs to us even to raise the question. One might as well ask whether producing
a photograph is producing an illusion—which would plainly be just silly.
Then we must not overlook, in all this talk about illusions and delusions, that
there are plenty of more or less unusual cases, not yet mentioned, which certainly
aren’t either. Suppose that a proof-reader makes a mistake—he fails to notice that
what ought to be “causal” is printed as “casual”; does he have a delusion? Or is
there an illusion before him? Neither, of course; he simply misreads. Seeing after-
images, too, though not a particularly frequent occurrence and not just an ordin-
ary case of seeing, is neither seeing illusions nor having delusions. And what
about dreams? Does the dreamer see illusions? Does he have delusions? Neither;
dreams are dreams. . . .
Next, let us have a look at the account Ayer himself gives of some at least
of the cases he cites. (In fairness we must remember here that Ayer has a
number of quite substantial reservations of his own about the merits and
efﬁcacy of the argument from illusion, so that it is not easy to tell just how
seriously he intends his exposition of it to be taken; but this is a point we shall
come back to.)
First, then, the familiar case of the stick in water. Of this case Ayer says (a) that
since the stick looks bent but is straight, “at least one of the visual appearances of
the stick is delusive”; and (b) that “what we see [directly anyway] is not the real
quality of [a few lines later, not part of] a material thing”. Well now: does the
stick “look bent” to begin with? I think we can agree that it does, we have no
better way of describing it. But of course it does not look exactly like a bent stick,
a bent stick out of water—at most, it may be said to look rather like a bent stick
partly immersed in water. After all, we can’t help seeing the water the stick is
partly immersed in. So exactly what in this case is supposed to be delusive? What
is wrong, what is even faintly surprising, in the idea of a stick’s being straight but
looking bent sometimes? Does anyone suppose that if something is straight, then
it jolly well has to look straight at all times and in all circumstances? Obviously
no one seriously supposes this. So what mess are we supposed to get into here,
what is the difﬁculty? For of course it has to be suggested that there is a
difﬁculty—a difﬁculty, furthermore, which calls for a pretty radical solution, the
introduction of sense-data. But what is the problem we are invited to solve in this
way?
Well, we are told, in this case you are seeing something; and what is this
something “if it is not part of any material thing”? But this question is, really,
completely mad. The straight part of the stick, the bit not under water, is presum-
ably part of a material thing; don’t we see that? And what about the bit under
water?—we can see that too. We can see, come to that, the water itself. In fact
what we see is a stick partly immersed in water; and it is particularly extraordin-
ary that this should appear to be called in question—that a question should be
raised about what we are seeing—since this, after all, is simply the description of
the situation with which we started. It was, that is to say, agreed at the start that
SENSE AND SENSIBILIA
77

we were looking at a stick, a “material thing”, part of which was under water. If,
to take a rather different case, a church were cunningly camouﬂaged so that it
looked like a barn, how could any serious question be raised about what we see
when we look at it? We see, of course, a church that now looks like a barn. We do
not see an immaterial barn, an immaterial church, or an immaterial anything else.
And what in this case could seriously tempt us to say that we do?
Notice, incidentally, that in Ayer’s description of the stick-in-water case, which
is supposed to be prior to the drawing of any philosophical conclusions, there has
already crept in the unheralded but important expression “visual appearances”—
it is, of course, ultimately to be suggested that all we ever get when we see is a
visual appearance (whatever that may be).
Consider next the case of my reﬂection in a mirror. My body, Ayer says,
“appears to be some distance behind the glass”; but as it’s in front, it can’t really
be behind the glass. So what am I seeing? A sense-datum. What about this? Well,
once again, although there is no objection to saying that my body “appears to be
some distance behind the glass”, in saying this we must remember what sort of
situation we are dealing with. It does not “appear to be” there in a way which
might tempt me (though it might tempt a baby or a savage) to go round the back
and look for it, and be astonished when this enterprise proved a failure. (To say
that A is in B doesn’t always mean that if you open B you will ﬁnd A, just as to say
that A is on B doesn’t always mean that you could pick it off—consider “I saw my
face in the mirror”, “There’s a pain in my toe”, “I heard him on the radio”, “I
saw the image on the screen”, &c. Seeing something in a mirror is not like seeing
a bun in a shop-window.) But does it follow that, since my body is not actually
located behind the mirror, I am not seeing a material thing? Plainly not. For one
thing, I can see the mirror (nearly always anyway). I can see my own body
“indirectly”, sc. in the mirror. I can also see the reﬂection of my own body or, as
some would say, a mirror-image. And a mirror-image (if we choose this answer)
is not a “sense-datum”; it can be photographed, seen by any number of people,
and so on. (Of course there is no question here of either illusion or delusion.) And
if the question is pressed, what actually is some distance, ﬁve feet say, behind the
mirror, the answer is, not a sense-datum, but some region of the adjoining room.
The mirage case—at least if we take the view, as Ayer does, that the oasis the
traveller thinks he can see “does not exist”—is signiﬁcantly more amenable to the
treatment it is given. For here we are supposing the man to be genuinely deluded,
he is not “seeing a material thing”.5 We don’t actually have to say, however, even
here that he is “experiencing sense-data”; for though, as Ayer says above, “it is
convenient to give a name” to what he is experiencing, the fact is that it already
has a name—a mirage. Again, we should be wise not to accept too readily the
statement that what he is experiencing is “similar in character to what he would
be experiencing if he were seeing a real oasis”. For is it at all likely, really, to be
very similar? And, looking ahead, if we were to concede this point we should ﬁnd
the concession being used against us at a later stage—namely, at the stage where
we shall be invited to agree that we see sense-data always, in normal cases too.
J.L. AUSTIN
78

V
I want now to take up again the philosophical argument as it is set out in the texts
we are discussing. As I mentioned earlier, the argument from illusion is intended
primarily to persuade us that, in certain exceptional, abnormal situations, what
we perceive—directly anyway—is a sense-datum; but then there comes a second
stage, in which we are to be brought to agree that what we (directly) perceive is
always a sense-datum, even in the normal, unexceptional case. It is this second
stage of the argument that we must now examine.
Ayer expounds the argument thus. There is, he says, “no intrinsic difference in
kind between those of our perceptions that are veridical in their presentation of
material things and those that are delusive. When I look at a straight stick, which
is refracted in water and so appears crooked, my experience is qualitatively the
same as if I were looking at a stick that really was crooked. . . .” If, however,
“when our perceptions were delusive, we were always perceiving something of a
different kind from what we perceived when they were veridical, we should
expect our experience to be qualitatively different in the two cases. We should
expect to be able to tell from the intrinsic character of a perception whether it was
a perception of a sense-datum or of a material thing. But this is not possible. . . .”
Price’s exposition of this point,6 to which Ayer refers us, is in fact not perfectly
analogous; for Price has already somehow reached the conclusion that we are
always aware of sense-data, and here is trying to establish only that we cannot
distinguish normal sense-data, as “parts of the surfaces of material things”, from
abnormal ones, not “parts of the surfaces of material things”. However, the argu-
ment used is much the same: “the abnormal crooked sense-datum of a straight
stick standing in water is qualitatively indistinguishable from a normal sense-
datum of a crooked stick”; but “is it not incredible that two entities so similar in all
these qualities should really be so utterly different: that the one should be a real
constituent of a material object, wholly independent of the observer’s mind and
organism, while the other is merely the ﬂeeting product of his cerebral processes?”
It is argued further, both by Ayer and Price, that “even in the case of veridical
perceptions we are not directly aware of material things” [or apud Price, that our
sense-data are not parts of the surfaces of material things] for the reason that
“veridical and delusive perceptions may form a continuous series. Thus, if I
gradually approach an object from a distance I may begin by having a series of
perceptions which are delusive in the sense that the object appears to be smaller
than it really is. Let us assume that this series terminates in a veridical percep-
tion.7 Then the difference in quality between this perception and its immediate
predecessor will be of the same order as the difference between any two delusive
perceptions that are next to one another in the series. . . .” But “these are differ-
ences of degree and not of kind. But this, it is argued, is not what we should
expect if the veridical perception were a perception of an object of a different
sort, a material thing as opposed to a sense-datum. Does not the fact that veridi-
cal and delusive perceptions shade into one another in the way that is indicated
by these examples show that the objects that are perceived in either case are
generically the same? And from this it would follow, if it was acknowledged that
the delusive perceptions were perceptions of sense-data, that what we directly
experienced was always a sense-datum and never a material thing.” As Price puts
SENSE AND SENSIBILIA
79

it, “it seems most extraordinary that there should be a total difference of nature
where there is only an inﬁnitesimal difference of quality”.8
Well, what are we to make of the arguments thus set before us?
1. It is pretty obvious, for a start, that the terms in which the argument is
stated by Ayer are grossly tendentious. Price, you remember, is not producing the
argument as a proof that we are always aware of sense-data; in his view that
question has already been settled, and he conceives himself to be faced here only
with the question whether any sense-data are “parts of the surfaces of material
objects”. But in Ayer’s exposition the argument is put forward as a ground for the
conclusion that what we are (directly) aware of in perception is always a sense-
datum; and if so, it seems a rather serious defect that this conclusion is practically
assumed from the very ﬁrst sentence of the statement of the argument itself. In
that sentence Ayer uses, not indeed for the ﬁrst time, the term “perceptions”
(which incidentally has never been deﬁned or explained), and takes it for granted,
here and throughout, that there is at any rate some kind of entities of which we
are aware in absolutely all cases—namely, “perceptions”, delusive or veridical.
But of course, if one has already been induced to swallow the idea that every case,
whether “delusive” or “veridical”, supplies us with “perceptions”, one is only
too easily going to be made to feel that it would be straining at a gnat not to
swallow sense-data in an equally comprehensive style. But in fact one has not
even been told what “perceptions” are; and the assumption of their ubiquity has
been slipped in without any explanation or argument whatever. But if those to
whom the argument is ostensibly addressed were not thus made to concede the
essential point from the beginning, would the statement of the argument be quite
such plain sailing?
2. Of course we shall also want to enter a protest against the argument’s bland
assumption of a simple dichotomy between “veridical and delusive experiences”.
There is, as we have already seen, no justiﬁcation at all either for lumping all so-
called “delusive” experiences together, or for lumping together all so-called “ver-
idical” experiences. But again, could the argument run quite so smoothly without
this assumption? It would certainly—and this, incidentally, would be all to the
good—take rather longer to state.
3. But now let us look at what the argument actually says. It begins, you will
remember, with an alleged statement of fact—namely, that “there is no intrinsic
difference in kind between those of our perceptions that are veridical in their
presentation of material things and those that are delusive” (Ayer), that “there is
no qualitative difference between normal sense-data as such and abnormal sense-
data as such” (Price). Now, waiving so far as possible the numerous obscurities in
and objections to this manner of speaking, let us ask whether what is being
alleged here is actually true. Is it the case that “delusive and veridical experiences”
are not “qualitatively different”? Well, at least it seems perfectly extraordinary to
say so in this sweeping way. Consider a few examples. I may have the experience
(dubbed “delusive” presumably) of dreaming that I am being presented to the
Pope. Could it be seriously suggested that having this dream is “qualitatively
indistinguishable” from actually being presented to the Pope? Quite obviously
not. After all, we have the phrase “a dream-like quality”; some waking experiences
are said to have this dream-like quality, and some artists and writers occasionally
try to impart it, usually with scant success, to their works. But of course, if the
J.L. AUSTIN
80

fact here alleged were a fact, the phrase would be perfectly meaningless, because
applicable to everything. If dreams were not “qualitatively” different from waking
experiences, then every waking experience would be like a dream; the dream-like
quality would be, not difﬁcult to capture, but impossible to avoid.9 It is true, to
repeat, that dreams are narrated in the same terms as waking experiences: these
terms, after all, are the best terms we have; but it would be wildly wrong to
conclude from this that what is narrated in the two cases is exactly alike. When
we are hit on the head we sometimes say that we “see stars”; but for all that,
seeing stars when you are hit on the head is not “qualitatively” indistinguishable
from seeing stars when you look at the sky.
Again, it is simply not true to say that seeing a bright green after-image against
a white wall is exactly like seeing a bright green patch actually on the wall; or that
seeing a white wall through blue spectacles is exactly like seeing a blue wall; or
that seeing pink rats in D.T.s is exactly like really seeing pink rats; or (once again)
that seeing a stick refracted in water is exactly like seeing a bent stick. In all these
cases we may say the same things (“It looks blue”, “It looks bent”, &c.), but this is
no reason at all for denying the obvious fact that the “experiences” are different.
4. Next, one may well wish at least to ask for the credentials of a curious
general principle on which both Ayer and Price seem to rely,10 to the effect that, if
two things are not “generically the same”, the same “in nature”, then they can’t
be alike, or even very nearly alike. If it were true, Ayer says, that from time to time
we perceived things of two different kinds, then “we should expect” them to be
qualitatively different. But why on earth should we?—particularly if, as he sug-
gests would be the case, we never actually found such a thing to be true. It is not
at all easy to discuss this point sensibly, because of the initial absurdity in the
hypothesis that we perceive just two kinds of things. But if, for example, I had
never seen a mirror, but were told (a) that in mirrors one sees reﬂections of things,
and (b) that reﬂections of things are not “generically the same” as things, is there
any reason why I should forthwith expect there to be some whacking big “qualita-
tive” difference between seeing things and seeing their reﬂections? Plainly not; if I
were prudent, I should simply wait and see what seeing reﬂections was like. If I
am told that a lemon is generically different from a piece of soap, do I “expect”
that no piece of soap could look just like a lemon? Why should I?
(It is worth noting that Price helps the argument along at this point by a bold
stroke of rhetoric: how could two entities be “qualitatively indistinguishable”, he
asks, if one is a “real constituent of a material object”, the other “a ﬂeeting
product of his cerebral processes”? But how in fact are we supposed to have been
persuaded that sense-data are ever ﬂeeting products of cerebral processes? Does
this colourful description ﬁt, for instance, the reﬂection of my face in a mirror?)
5. Another erroneous principle which the argument here seems to rely on is
this: that it must be the case that “delusive and veridical experiences” are not (as
such) “qualitatively” or “intrinsically” distinguishable—for if they were dis-
tinguishable, we should never be “deluded”. But of course this is not so. From the
fact that I am sometimes “deluded”, mistaken, taken in through failing to dis-
tinguish A from B, it does not follow at all that A and B must be indistinguish-
able. Perhaps I should have noticed the difference if I had been more careful or
attentive; perhaps I am just bad at distinguishing things of this sort (e.g. vintages);
perhaps, again, I have never learned to discriminate between them, or haven’t
SENSE AND SENSIBILIA
81

had much practice at it. As Ayer observes, probably truly, “a child who had not
learned that refraction was a means of distortion would naturally believe that the
stick really was crooked as he saw it”; but how is the fact that an uninstructed
child probably would not discriminate between being refracted and being
crooked supposed to establish the allegation that there is no “qualitative” differ-
ence between the two cases? What sort of reception would I be likely to get from
a professional tea-taster, if I were to say to him, “But there can’t be any difference
between the ﬂavours of these two brands of tea, for I regularly fail to distinguish
between them”? Again, when “the quickness of the hand deceives the eye”, it is
not that what the hand is really doing is exactly like what we are tricked into
thinking it is doing, but simply that it is impossible to tell what it is really doing.
In this case it may be true that we can’t distinguish, and not merely that we don’t;
but even this doesn’t mean that the two cases are exactly alike.
I do not, of course, wish to deny that there may be cases in which “delusive and
veridical experiences” really are “qualitatively indistinguishable”; but I certainly
do wish to deny (a) that such cases are anything like as common as both Ayer and
Price seem to suppose, and (b) that there have to be such cases to accommodate
the undoubted fact that we are sometimes “deceived by our senses”. We are not,
after all, quasi-infallible beings, who can be taken in only where the avoidance of
mistake is completely impossible. But if we are prepared to admit that there may
be, even that there are, some cases in which “delusive and veridical perceptions”
really are indistinguishable, does this admission require us to drag in, or even to
let in, sense-data? No. For even if we were to make the prior admission (which we
have so far found no reason to make) that in the “abnormal” cases we perceive
sense-data, we should not be obliged to extend this admission to the “normal”
cases too. For why on earth should it not be the case that, in some few instances,
perceiving one sort of thing is exactly like perceiving another?
6. There is a further quite general difﬁculty in assessing the force of this argu-
ment, which we (in common with the authors of our texts) have slurred over so
far. The question which Ayer invites us to consider is whether two classes of
“perceptions”, the veridical and the delusive, are or are not “qualitatively differ-
ent”, “intrinsically different in kind”; but how are we supposed to set about even
considering this question, when we are not told what “a perception” is? In par-
ticular, how many of the circumstances of a situation, as these would ordinarily
be stated, are supposed to be included in “the perception”? For example, to take
the stick in water again: it is a feature of this case that part of the stick is under
water, and water, of course, is not invisible; is the water, then, part of “the
perception”? It is difﬁcult to conceive of any grounds for denying that it is; but if
it is, surely this is a perfectly obvious respect in which “the perception” differs
from, is distinguishable from, the “perception” we have when we look at a bent
stick not in water. There is a sense, perhaps, in which the presence or absence of
water is not the main thing in this case—we are supposed to be addressing our-
selves primarily to questions about the stick. But in fact, as a great quantity of
psychological investigation has shown, discrimination between one thing and
another very frequently depends on such more or less extraneous concomitants of
the main thing, even when such concomitants are not consciously taken note of.
As I said, we are told nothing of what “a perception” is; but could any defensible
account, if such an account were offered, completely exclude all these highly
J.L. AUSTIN
82

signiﬁcant attendant circumstances? And if they were excluded—in some more or
less arbitrary way—how much interest or importance would be left in the conten-
tion that “delusive” and “veridical” perceptions are indistinguishable? Inevitably,
if you rule out the respects in which A and B differ, you may expect to be left with
respects in which they are alike.
I conclude, then, that this part of the philosophical argument involves (though
not in every case equally essentially) (a) acceptance of a quite bogus dichotomy of
all “perceptions” into two groups, the “delusive” and the “veridical”—to say
nothing of the unexplained introduction of “perceptions” themselves; (b) an
implicit but grotesque exaggeration of the frequency of “delusive perceptions”;
(c) a further grotesque exaggeration of the similarity between “delusive” percep-
tions and “veridical” ones; (d) the erroneous suggestion that there must be such
similarity, or even qualitative identity; (e) the acceptance of the pretty gratuitous
idea that things “generically different” could not be qualitatively alike; and (f )—
which is really a corollary of (c) and (a)—the gratuitous neglect of those more or
less subsidiary features which often make possible the discrimination of situa-
tions which, in other broad respects, may be roughly alike. These seem to be
rather serious deﬁciencies.
Notes
1 A.J. Ayer, The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge (London: Macmillan & Co.,
1963).
2 It is not only strange, but also important, that Ayer calls these “assumptions”.
Later on he is going to take seriously the notion of denying at least one of them,
which he could hardly do if he had recognized them here as the plain and
incontestable facts that they are.
3 The latter point holds, of course, for some uses of “illusion” too; there are the
illusions which some people (are said to) lose as they grow older and wiser.
4 Cp. the white rabbit in the play called Harvey.
5 Not even “indirectly”, no such thing is “presented”. Doesn’t this seem to make
the case, though more amenable, a good deal less useful to the philosopher?
It’s hard to see how normal cases could be said to be very like this.
6 Perception (London: Methuen & Co., 1950), p. 31.
7 But what, we may ask, does this assumption amount to? From what distance
does an object, a cricket-ball say, “look the size that it really is”? Six feet? Twenty
feet?
8 I omit from consideration a further argument cited by both Price and Ayer,
which makes play with the “causal dependence” of our “perceptions” upon
the conditions of observation and our own “physiological and psychological
states”.
9 This is part, no doubt only part, of the absurdity in Descartes’ toying with the
notion that the whole of our experience might be a dream.
10 Ayer in fact expresses qualms later: see p. 12.
SENSE AND SENSIBILIA
83

QUESTIONS
1
According to Austin, what is the difference between “illusions” and “delusions”?
2
What are the two stages of the argument from illusion?
3
According to Austin, what conclusion can we draw from the fact that the phrase
“a dream-like quality” is meaningful?
4
According to Austin, does either stage of the argument from illusion succeed?
FURTHER READING ON PERCEPTION
Adler, Mortimer, Ten Philosophical Mistakes (New York: Macmillan, 1985).
Armstrong, David, Perception and the Physical World (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1961).
Ayer, A.J., The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge (London: Macmillan, 1964).
Berkeley, George, Principles, Dialogues, and Correspondence (Indianapolis, Ind.:
Bobbs-Merrill, 1965).
Chisholm, Roderick, Perceiving: A Philosophical Study (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1957).
Crane, Tim (ed.) The Contents of Experience (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1992).
Fales, Evan, A Defense of the Given (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1986).
Fumerton, Richard, Metaphysical and Epistemological Problems of Perception
(Lincoln, Nebr.: University of Nebraska Press, 1985).
Grice, H.P., “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
supplementary volume 35 (1961): 121–68.
Huemer, Michael, Skepticism and the Veil of Perception (Lanham, Md.: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 2001).
Hume, David, Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the
Principles of Morals, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Clarendon, 1975).
Jackson, Frank, Perception: A Representative Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1977).
Kelley, David, The Evidence of the Senses (Baton Rouge, La.: Louisiana State
University Press, 1986).
McDowell, John, Mind and World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1994).
Peacocke, Christopher, Sense and Content (Oxford: Clarendon, 1983).
Pollock, John and Joseph Cruz, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, 2nd edn
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1999).
Price, H.H., Perception (London: Methuen, 1950).
Reid, Thomas, Inquiry and Essays, ed. Ronald Beanblossom and Keith Lehrer
(Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1983).
Wright, Edmond (ed.) New Representationalisms (Brookﬁeld, Vt.: Ashgate, 1993).
J.L. AUSTIN
84

2
MEMORY
The epistemology of memory is a neglected topic in philosophy, but memory plays an
essential role in almost all of our knowledge—almost all of what you now know
consists of things that you learned before now and that you presently remember—for
instance, who Abraham Lincoln was, what is the product of 7 and 4, and what the
beginning of this sentence was about. Epistemological questions about memory (as
distinct from psychological questions) include the likes of “How do we know that the
events we seem to remember actually happened?” and “What sort of justiﬁcation do
we have for believing p when we ‘remember that p’?”
It is useful to distinguish “event memory,” or “episodic memory” (remembering an
event that one previously witnessed), from factual memory (remembering a fact that
one previously learned). It is possible to have factual memory in the absence of any
relevant event memory. For instance, I remember that the Battle of Hastings took
place in 1066 (factual memory), but I am not old enough to remember the Battle of
Hastings itself, nor do I even remember my experience of ﬁrst learning about the
battle. Both of these kinds of memory play an important role in our retention of
knowledge, although factual memory seems to be more ubiquitous (it may be
entailed by event memory, even though the reverse entailment does not hold).
In the selection from The Analysis of Mind, Bertrand Russell makes two important
points about the nature of memory. The ﬁrst is that our memory beliefs (and, pre-
sumably, our memory experiences as well) are present states, even though they are
about past states. Thus, the occurrence of a given memory belief cannot logically
entail anything about the past. He illustrates this by introducing his famous “ﬁve
minute hypothesis”: the hypothesis that the world came into existence just ﬁve min-
utes ago, with all of us complete with false memories of the past. Though not a
plausible hypothesis, this is logically possible, since past events are distinct events
from our present memories of them. Russell’s second main observation is that event
memory cannot be merely a matter of having images. He says that one’s memory
images are also accompanied by (a) a feeling of pastness, which enables us to judge
roughly how long ago the remembered event occurred, and (b) a feeling of familiarity,
which we use to judge how reliable a memory image is.
Norman Malcolm provides a deﬁnition of factual memory. His deﬁnition states that
a person remembers that p if and only if the person knows that p because he previ-
ously knew that p. Malcolm goes on to explain this deﬁnition and defend it from
objections. Along the way, he addresses three epistemological questions concerning
memory beliefs. (a) When a person, S, remembers that p, what kind of knowledge
does S have? Malcolm answers that S’s knowledge is of the same kind as it was
85

when S originally came to know that p. For example, if S ﬁrst learned p through
perception, and he remembers it now, then S’s present knowledge is perceptual
knowledge. The reason for this is that S presently has the very same item of know-
ledge that he previously had; memory does not produce new items of knowledge, but
only enables one to retain knowledge. (b) When S remembers that p, does S have
grounds for believing that p? For similar reasons, Malcolm answers that S has the
same grounds, if any, that he originally had when he ﬁrst formed the belief that p. (c)
When S remembers that p, how certain is it that p? Malcolm answers that it is exactly
as certain that p as it was when S ﬁrst formed the belief. This seems to follow from
the answer to (b).
Malcolm’s theory does seem to have two problems. First, it does not seem to be
true that the level of certainty of a memory belief is the same as that of the original
belief. Since our memories are fallible (sometimes your memory plays tricks on you,
as we say), a memory belief that p is open to new possibilities of error not present
when one ﬁrst formed the belief that p; therefore, at least some of the time, a
memory belief ought to be counted less certain than the original belief. Second,
Malcolm denies that a memory experience (the experience of seeming to remember
that p) is part of one’s grounds for believing that p. But this seems to be mistaken.
Imagine a case in which, unbeknownst to him, S’s memory is deceiving him, so that
he seems to remember that p even though he actually never knew that p. As a result,
S quite understandably accepts p. It does not seem correct to say that in this case S
believes p for no reason, still less that he is entirely unjustiﬁed in believing p. But this
is what Malcolm’s theory would imply, since S never previously had reasons for
believing p and memory experiences do not generate new reasons for beliefs.
Because of the latter objection, Pollock and Cruz propose a different conception of
the justiﬁcation of memory beliefs. They propose that memory beliefs are “epistemo-
logically basic,” meaning that having an experience of seeming to remember that p
gives one a (new) justiﬁcation for believing p, distinct from the grounds one previously
had. This is similar to the way in which perceptual experiences justify one in believing
propositions about the physical world.
Pollock and Cruz focus on the role that memory plays in reasoning. Often, a per-
son’s beliefs depend upon a complex chain of reasoning which he cannot hold all in
mind at once. At any given time, he is only thinking of, say, the present step that he is
on and the step immediately preceding it. What makes one now justiﬁed in accepting
the present step, then, is one’s memory of the previous step (rather than the entire
series of previous steps). Pollock and Cruz distinguish the “genetic argument,” the
whole series of steps one goes through, from the “dynamic argument,” the steps one
is thinking of at the moment. Although one’s belief that p, when one comes to the end
of the chain of reasoning, is justiﬁed by the dynamic argument one is then entertain-
ing, the genetic argument remains relevant, because if one acquires grounds for
doubting that the genetic argument was correct (they call this having a “defeater”
for the genetic argument), then one ought to withhold belief from the ultimate conclu-
sion. A criticism of the genetic argument is a criticism of the belief that p.
Pollock and Cruz’s view of the epistemology of memory is subject to two objec-
tions. First, it seems to imply that the level of justiﬁcation for one’s belief can
increase (so the belief becomes more certain) merely by the passage of time. For if I
keep in mind my original justiﬁcation for believing p, while at the same time remem-
bering that p, according to Pollock and Cruz, I would then have two reasons for
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
86

believing p. This would seem to mean that I should now be more certain that p than I
was before. Second, a person might adopt the belief that p irrationally at ﬁrst but
later (perhaps after forgetting how he initially adopted the belief) have an experience
of seeming to remember that p. In Pollock and Cruz’s view, it appears, the initially
unjustiﬁed belief would now be justiﬁed.
The reading selection by the editor criticizes the theories of both Malcolm and
Pollock and Cruz. It proposes an alternative, “dualistic” view according to which the
justiﬁcation for a memory belief has two components: (a) the justiﬁcation one had for
adopting the belief initially and (b) the justiﬁcation, provided by one’s memory experi-
ences, that one has since had for retaining it. The degree of justiﬁcation of a memory
belief will be the product of the degree of justiﬁcation for adopting it and the degree of
justiﬁcation for retaining it. It is argued that this theory avoids the objections cited
above to Malcolm’s theory and to Pollock and Cruz’s theory.
MEMORY
87

Bertrand Russell, “Memory”
One reason for treating memory at this early stage is that it seems to be involved
in the fact that images are recognized as “copies” of past sensible experience. In
the preceding lecture. I alluded to Hume’s principle “that all our simple ideas in
their ﬁrst appearance are derived from simple impressions, which are cor-
respondent to them, and which they exactly represent.” Whether or not this
principle is liable to exceptions, everyone would agree that is has a broad meas-
ure of truth, though the word “exactly” might seem an overstatement, and it
might seem more correct to say that ideas approximately represent impressions.
Such modiﬁcations of Hume’s principle, however, do not affect the problem
which I wish to present for your consideration, namely: Why do we believe that
images are, sometimes or always, approximately or exactly, copies of sensations?
What sort of evidence is there? And what sort of evidence is logically possible?
The difﬁculty of this question arises through the fact that the sensation which an
image is supposed to copy is in the past when the image exists, and can therefore
only be known by memory, while, on the other hand, memory of past sensations
seems only possible by means of present images. How, then, are we to ﬁnd any
way of comparing the present image and the past sensation? The problem is just
as acute if we say that images differ from their prototypes as if we say that they
resemble them; it is the very possibility of comparison that is hard to understand.1
We think we can know that they are alike or different, but we cannot bring them
together in one experience and compare them. To deal with this problem, we
must have a theory of memory. In this way the whole status of images as “copies”
is bound up with the analysis of memory.
In investigating memory-beliefs, there are certain points which must be borne
in mind. In the ﬁrst place, everything constituting a memory-belief is happening
now, not in that past time to which the belief is said to refer. It is not logically
necessary to the existence of a memory-belief that the event remembered should
have occurred, or even that the past should have existed at all. There is no logical
impossibility in the hypothesis that the world sprang into being ﬁve minutes ago,
exactly as it then was, with a population that “remembered” a wholly unreal
past. There is no logically necessary connection between events at different times;
therefore nothing that is happening now or will happen in the future can disprove
the hypothesis that the world began ﬁve minutes ago. Hence the occurrences
which are called knowledge of the past are logically independent of the past; they
Bertrand Russell, The Analysis of Mind (London: Allen & Unwin, 1921).
88

are wholly analysable into present contents, which might, theoretically, be just
what they are even if no past had existed.
I am not suggesting that the non-existence of the past should be entertained as
a serious hypothesis. Like all sceptical hypotheses, it is logically tenable, but
uninteresting. All that I am doing is to use its logical tenability as a help in the
analysis of what occurs when we remember.
In the second place, images without beliefs are insufﬁcient to constitute mem-
ory; and habits are still more insufﬁcient. The behaviourist, who attempts to
make psychology a record of behaviour, has to trust his memory in making the
record. “Habit” is a concept involving the occurrence of similar events at differ-
ent times; if the behaviourist feels conﬁdent that there is such a phenomenon as
habit, that can only be because he trusts his memory, when it assures him that
there have been other times. And the same applies to images. If we are to know—
as it is supposed we do—that images are “copies,” accurate or inaccurate, of past
events, something more than the mere occurrence of images must go to constitute
this knowledge. For their mere occurrence, by itself, would not suggest any
connection with anything that had happened before.
Can we constitute memory out of images together with suitable beliefs? We
may take it that memory-images, when they occur in true memory, are (a) known
to be copies, (b) sometimes known to be imperfect copies (cf. footnote on previ-
ous page). How is it possible to know that a memory-image is an imperfect copy,
without having a more accurate copy by which to replace it? This would seem to
suggest that we have a way of knowing the past which is independent of images,
by means of which we can criticize image-memories. But I do not think such an
inference is warranted.
What results, formally, from our knowledge of the past through images of which
we recognize the inaccuracy, is that such images must have two characteristics by
which we can arrange them in two series, of which one corresponds to the more or
less remote period in the past to which they refer, and the other to our greater or
less conﬁdence in their accuracy. We will take the second of these points ﬁrst.
Our conﬁdence or lack of conﬁdence in the accuracy of a memory-image must,
in fundamental cases, be based upon a characteristic of the image itself, since we
cannot evoke the past bodily and compare it with the present image. It might be
suggested that vagueness is the required characteristic, but I do not think this is
the case. We sometimes have images that are by no means peculiarly vague,
which yet we do not trust—for example, under the inﬂuence of fatigue we may
see a friend’s face vividly and clearly, but horribly distorted. In such a case we
distrust our image in spite of its being unusually clear. I think the characteristic by
which we distinguish the images we trust is the feeling of familiarity that accom-
panies them. Some images, like some sensations, feel very familiar, while others
feel strange. Familiarity is a feeling capable of degrees. In an image of a well-
known face, for example, some parts may feel more familiar than others; when
this happens, we have more belief in the accuracy of the familiar parts than in
that of the unfamiliar parts. I think it is by this means that we become critical of
images, not by some imageless memory with which we compare them. I shall
return to the consideration of familiarity shortly.
I come now to the other characteristic which memory-images must have in
order to account for our knowledge of the past. They must have some
“MEMORY”
89

characteristic which makes us regard them as referring to more or less remote
portions of the past. That is to say if we suppose that A is the event remembered,
B the remembering, and the interval of time between A and B, there must be some
characteristic of B which is capable of degrees, and which, in accurately dated
memories, varies as t varies. It may increase as t increases, or diminish as t
increases. The question which of these occurs is not of any importance for the
theoretic serviceability of the characteristic in question.
In actual fact, there are doubtless various factors that concur in giving us the
feeling of greater or less remoteness in some remembered event. There may be a
speciﬁc feeling which could be called the feeling of “pastness,” especially where
immediate memory is concerned. But apart from this, there are other marks. One
of these is context. A recent memory has, usually, more context than a more
distant one. When a remembered event has a remembered context, this may
occur in two ways, either (a) by successive images in the same order as their
prototypes, or (b) by remembering a whole process simultaneously, in the same
way in which a present process may be apprehended, through akoluthic sensa-
tions which, by fading, acquire the mark of just-pastness in an increasing degree
as they fade, and are thus placed in a series while all sensibly present. It will be
context in this second sense, more specially, that will give us a sense of the
nearness or remoteness of a remembered event.
There is, of course, a difference between knowing the temporal relation of a
remembered event to the present, and knowing the time-order of two remembered
events. Very often our knowledge of the temporal relation of a remembered event
to the present is inferred from its temporal relations to other remembered events. It
would seem that only rather recent events can be placed at all accurately by means
of feelings giving their temporal relation to the present, but it is clear that such
feelings must play an essential part in the process of dating remembered events.
We may say, then, that images are regarded by us as more or less accurate
copies of past occurrences because they come to us with two sorts of feelings: (1)
Those that may be called feelings of familiarity; (2) those that may be collected
together as feelings giving a sense of pastness. The ﬁrst lead us to trust our
memories, the second to assign places to them in the time-order.
Note
1
How, for example, can we obtain such knowledge as the following: “If we look at,
say, a red nose and perceive it, and after a little while ekphore its memory-image,
we note immediately how unlike, in its likeness, this memory-image is to the
original perception” (A. Wohlgemuth, “On the Feelings and their Neural Correlate
with an Examination of the Nature of Pain,” Journal of Psychology, vol. viii, part iv,
June, 1917).
QUESTIONS
1
Describe Russell’s ﬁve-minute hypothesis.
2
According to Russell, what does the “feeling of pastness” enable us to judge?
3
According to Russell, what does the “feeling of familiarity” enable us to judge?
BERTRAND RUSSELL
90

Norman Malcolm, “A Deﬁnition of
Factual Memory”
Enough has been said in the previous two lectures to show that factual memory
(remembering that p) holds an important position in the family of concepts of
memory. Some forms of memory can be deﬁned in terms of factual memory plus
the purely logical notion of existential quantiﬁcation. Other forms are related to
factual memory as species to genus.1 Still other forms, not related to factual
memory in either of these two ways, imply it.2 I have not been able to discover
any form of memory which does not have at least this latter relation to factual
memory. I will not undertake to provide an account of the exact position that
factual memory occupies among the concepts of memory, but it has sufﬁcient
importance to make it worthwhile to attempt to deﬁne it.
In my second lecture I produced deﬁnitions of perceptual and personal mem-
ory. As we noted they are not deﬁnitions of memory, but only of the adverbs
“personally” and “perceptually,” as these modify the verb “remember.” That
they are not deﬁnitions of memory is shown by the fact that the verb “remember”
occurs in the deﬁniens of each of those deﬁnitions. The deﬁnition of factual
memory which I shall propose will really be a deﬁnition of memory—not of
memory in general, but of one use of the verb “remembers.” In this deﬁnition
that verb will not occur in the deﬁniens.
The deﬁnition is very simple. It is the following: A person, B, remembers that p
if and only if B knows that p because he knew that p. It will be convenient to say
that this deﬁnition is composed of three elements: the present knowledge that p,
the previous knowledge that p, and the relationship between the present and the
previous knowledge expressed by saying that B knows that p because he previ-
ously knew that p. Each element is a logically necessary condition and the con-
junction of them a logically sufﬁcient condition of factual memory.
I wish to discuss each of these three elements in turn. But before I do so I want
to anticipate one objection to the deﬁnition. Let us suppose that a man saw a bird
of striking appearance in his bird feeder last week, but did not know what bird it
was. While looking through a book about birds he comes upon a picture of a
cardinal and now knows it was a cardinal he saw. He might naturally say “I
remember that I saw a cardinal in the feeder last week.” But it is false that
previously he knew that he saw a cardinal. It might be concluded that the element
Norman Malcolm, Knowledge and Certainty (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice/Hall,
1963).
91

of previous knowledge is shown not to be a necessary condition of factual
memory.
I deal with this kind of case by distinguishing between what I call “elliptical”
and “nonelliptical” uses of the expression “remembers that p.” I believe that the
man in our example would agree to substitute for his sentence “I remember that I
saw a cardinal” the conjunctive sentence “I remember that I saw this bird (or: a
bird of this kind) and now I know it was a cardinal.” The sentence he originally
uttered was an ellipsis, in the grammarian’s sense, the meaning of which is given
by the conjunctive sentence. In this conjunction the ﬁrst conjunct expresses fac-
tual memory, the second conjunct expresses the new information. Another way
of putting the distinction is to say that the original sentence did not express
“pure” factual memory. In the conjunctive sentence substituted for it, the ﬁrst
conjunct expresses pure factual memory, the second conjunct expresses some-
thing other than memory. The whole conjunction expresses “impure” memory.
There could be many different kinds of impure factual memory. For example,
suppose that someone had often noticed, as a boy, that the house in which he
lived faced the setting sun. Years later, when conversing with someone, he sud-
denly realizes, for the ﬁrst time, that this implied that his house faced the west,
and he says “I remember that our house faced the west.” This sentence of his
expresses impure factual memory, which is a compound of pure factual memory
and present inference or realization. The deﬁnition I am presenting is intended
solely to be a deﬁnition of pure factual memory, with no admixture of inference
or present realization.
I turn now to a consideration of the three elements in the deﬁnition. The ﬁrst
two elements are present and previous knowledge, and so whatever is true of
knowledge will apply equally to both. In the history of the philosophy of memory
there has been a considerable amount of puzzlement and confusion about the
relation of memory to knowledge. First, if memory involves knowledge what
kind of knowledge is it? Second, if a person remembers that p just how certain is
it that p? Third, when a person remembers that p does he have grounds for saying
that p? These are some of the questions that puzzle us, and I hope that this
discussion will help to answer them.
Obviously one necessary condition for the knowledge that p is that p that
should be true. If p is false then B does not know, and did not know, that p; and
also B does not remember that p.
A second necessary condition for someone’s knowing that p may be expressed,
roughly, as the condition that he should be sure that p. Being unsure whether p is
true counts both against knowing that p and against remembering that p. If a
man previously knew that p and now not only is not sure but does not even
believe that p, we are sometimes ready to say “He really remembers it”: but what
we mean would also be expressed by saying “He will remember it” or “His
forgetting it is only temporary.” We should have to admit that at present he does
not remember it.
Of course there are many differences of degree in the conﬁdence with which
one believes or is sure of something. A person can be inclined to believe some-
thing and at the same time be quite unsure about it. Sometimes we should say
he knows the thing in question and sometimes that he does not, depending on
what contrasts we were making. Suppose some pupils were being tested on their
NORMAN MALCOLM
92

knowledge of Roman history. They are supposed to tell who killed Caesar.
Suppose that one of them, A, is inclined to think it was Brutus, but has little
conﬁdence in this answer. Should we say A knows that Brutus killed Caesar? If
we were comparing him with B, who believes that Cassius was the assassin, we
should say that A knows the answer but B does not. If we were comparing A with
C, who is certain that Brutus slew Caesar, we should say that C knows the answer
but A does not “really know” it, or does not know it “very well.” The same
considerations apply to the question of whether A remembers that Brutus killed
Caesar. Thus we can say, in summary, that if someone has no inclination to
believe that p, this counts absolutely against either his knowing or remembering
that p. If he has some inclination to believe that p but is unsure about it, whether
we say he does or does not know, or remember, that p depends on the compar-
isons we are making. In short, if one is unsure about something this can serve, in
some circumstances, to justify the claim that one does not know, and does not
remember, the something.
The considerations about truth and certainty, so far adduced, apply equally to
knowledge and memory. A third consideration is that of grounds for being sure
that p.3 It has often been supposed that, in addition to being right and being sure,
a further thing necessary for knowledge is the possession of grounds, or adequate
grounds, or conclusive grounds. I am not convinced that this third feature is a
requirement for knowledge, although I admit that not just any true belief is
knowledge. My discussion of this difﬁcult point will necessarily be skimpy.
In the ﬁrst place, I call attention to the knowledge that human beings normally
have of their own voluntary actions, both of what they are doing and what they
are going to do. Suppose a man was for a while undecided as to whether he would
quit his job, but now knows he will quit it. Should we expect him to have grounds
for being sure he will quit it? It is hard to see what this could mean.4 Could one
say that his grounds for being sure he will quit is his decision to quit? But in the
case, which is common enough, where a person is trying to make up his mind
whether or not he will quit his job, not through the consideration of evidence that
he will or will not quit it, but of reasons for and against quitting it—in this case,
what is his deciding to quit other than the transition from his being unsure about
it to his being sure that he will quit? In this example, his deciding what he will do
is the same thing as his becoming sure what he will do, and is not his grounds for
being sure. Nothing can be put forward as his grounds for being sure he will quit:
yet it is correct to say “He knows now that he will quit his job.”
In the second place, sometimes people know in advance about things they do
involuntarily. A nervous amateur actor, about to make his ﬁrst appearance on the
stage, might say with conviction, “I know I shall forget my lines.” Sure enough,
he does forget them. This use of “know” is entirely natural. Did he have grounds?
He could have been relying on some statistics—but that would not be the normal
case. We are willing to say that he knew he would forget his lines, yet we do not
expect him to have had evidence or grounds.5
In the third place, I can imagine a man who has unusual knowledge of the
whereabouts of various persons, of what they are engaged in, what will happen
to them, and so on. The man I am imagining (let us call him “the seer”) is sure
about these things and apparently is always right, but he does not have grounds
for being sure. He has no special sources of information, he does not make use of
“A DEFINITION OF FACTUAL MEMORY”
93

tips or hints, and he does not guess. But he can tell someone the whereabouts of
the son who left home ﬁve years ago and has not since been heard from. As his
powers became known, people would come to him to inquire about their rela-
tives and friends. I am supposing that in a large number of cases his answers have
proven true and in no cases have they proven false. It is unquestionable that
people would regard the seer as a source of information. “He informed me of the
whereabouts of my son” would be a natural thing to say about him: and also “He
knew the whereabouts of my son.” The seer, as said, does not have grounds for
being sure of the things he is sure of. He might even admit that he does not know
how he knows the things in question. Sometimes when a question is put to him he
has to wait a bit until the answer comes to him, like an inspiration; and some-
times he knows the answer immediately. But never is it a matter of grounds,
evidence, or reasoning.
It is sometimes held that a person cannot properly be said to know something
unless he is in a position to know it. But one might say that what is extraordinary
about the seer is that he knows things which he is not in a position to know. A.J.
Ayer says that “the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for knowing that some-
thing is the case are ﬁrst that what one is said to know be true, secondly that one
be sure of it, and thirdly that one should have the right to be sure.”6 I question the
third condition. I believe Ayer would agree with me that the seer knows the things
he reports, for Ayer says that if someone “were repeatedly successful in a given
domain” although “without appearing to have any adequate basis for it,” then
“we should grant him the right to be sure, simply on the basis of his success.”7
But I think it is odd to say that the seer has a right to be sure of what he is sure of.
The rest of us would have a right to be sure of something because the seer told us
so, and because (to the best of our knowledge) he is invariably right. We have
grounds for being sure. But the seer does not have our grounds, or any other
grounds. As said, he is not, in the ordinary meaning of the phrase, in a position to
know what he tells us. I cannot understand, therefore, the expression “has a right
to be sure” when it is applied to the seer, unless it merely means “knows what he
is sure of,” in which case it cannot express an element in the analysis of
knowledge.
I have argued, from several different kinds of cases, that having grounds for
being certain of something is not a necessary condition of knowing it. I imagine
there are still other kinds of cases. I suspect that a stronger candidate than
grounds or evidence, for being a necessary condition of knowledge, is the nega-
tive requirement that to know something one should not be certain of it because
of a mistake, e.g., because of mishearing what someone said or because of falla-
cious reasoning.
The connection of this discussion of grounds with the deﬁnition of factual
memory is that if having grounds is not a necessary condition of knowing
something there is then no reason to suppose it is a necessary condition of
remembering something.
When people do have grounds for being sure of something the grounds can
differ in strength. If an American living in England converts his dollar holdings
into pounds because he is sure that the American government is going to devalue
the dollar, his grounds for being sure could be of many sorts. Let us suppose there
are three people, A, B, and C, each of whom converts from dollars to pounds
NORMAN MALCOLM
94

because he is sure the dollar will be devalued. A’s grounds for being sure of this
are that several of his friends, who are “generally well-informed about develop-
ments in international ﬁnance,” are convinced it will happen. B’s grounds are
that a friend of his was told in conﬁdence by an American Treasury ofﬁcial that it
was “bound to happen.” C’s grounds are that the Secretary of the Treasury
himself, in his last news conference, said he “did not see how this step could be
avoided.” All three are right; the dollar is devalued.
A person commenting on the matter afterwards could correctly say that all
three knew the devaluation would occur (in contrast, for example, with D, whom
the devaluation took by surprise). The person commenting on the matter would
allow that B’s grounds for being sure of it were stronger than A’s, and that C’s
grounds were stronger still. Indeed, he would think that C’s grounds were “just
about as strong (or conclusive) as one could have in a matter of that sort.” As he
might put it, A’s grounds were pretty good, B’s grounds were even better, and C’s
grounds were as good as one could have. Another way to express the difference
would be to say that on A’s grounds it was “reasonably certain” it would happen;
on B’s grounds it was still more certain; and on C’s grounds it was as certain as
could be. Finally, another way to express it would be to say that although A knew
it would happen his knowledge of it was less certain than B’s, and B’s knowledge
was more certain than A’s although not as certain as C’s, and C’s knowledge of it
was as certain as knowledge can be in such matters. The interesting point here, if I
am right, is that in ordinary discourse we conceive of knowledge as being more or
less certain. We grade knowledge in terms of certainty. This grading of know-
ledge is solely in terms of the strength of the grounds. Grading knowledge as
more or less certain is equivalent to grading grounds as more or less conclusive. If
this is right, the assumption we are often tempted to make in philosophy, that if
someone really knows that p then he must have grounds which make it perfectly
certain or perfectly conclusive that p, is shown to be false. Knowledge is not all
wool and a yard wide.
Our deﬁnition of factual memory requires the elements of present and previous
knowledge. Let us raise again the questions that we put before: First, what kind
of knowledge is involved in memory? Second, when someone remembers that p
does he have grounds for being sure that p? Third, when someone remembers
that p, just how certain is it that p?
Let us consider the ﬁrst question, keeping in mind that memory involves both
previous and present knowledge. The element of previous knowledge involved in
memory can be any kind of knowledge at all. It might be the knowledge that a
person has of his own voluntary or involuntary actions; it might be knowledge
based on a newspaper report, or on a mathematical demonstration, or on an
inference from what someone said; it might be the kind of knowledge that the
seer has. Of what kind is the present knowledge involved in memory? Of exactly
the same kind that the previous knowledge was. I think that here it may be
misleading to speak of two elements of knowledge in memory, previous and
present knowledge. There are not two pieces of knowledge but one piece. Mem-
ory is the retention of knowledge. One knew something and still knows it. The
present knowledge in memory is the same as the previous knowledge.
Let us go to the second question: When someone remembers that p does he
have grounds for being sure that p? The answer is that he has the same grounds, if
“A DEFINITION OF FACTUAL MEMORY”
95

any, that he previously had.8 If B remembers that his friend, Robinson, was ill last
year, then B previously knew of the illness. His previous knowledge may have
been based on perception (He saw Robinson when the latter was ill); or on
testimony (Jones told him about Robinson’s illness); or on inference (B inferred
that Robinson was ill from his absence from work). B’s present knowledge that
Robinson was ill, if it is solely memory, has the same grounds. If the ground of his
previous knowledge was testimony then the ground of his present knowledge is
that same previous testimony. And so on. If what made him sure, previously, that
Robinson was ill was that Jones told him so, his present ground for being sure is
that Jones told him so previously. If a man’s previous knowledge that p had no
grounds, then in remembering that p his present knowledge has no grounds.
There is an interesting problem that arises here. If a man previously had
grounds for being sure that p, and now remembers that p, but does not remember
what his grounds were, does he have grounds for being sure that p? I will not go
into this point, but I am inclined to say that he has the same grounds he previ-
ously had. In some cases if a man cannot give any grounds for believing some-
thing it follows that he has no grounds. But I think this does not hold for the
special case of his forgetting what his grounds were. I should say it does not
follow that he has no grounds for being certain that p, any more than it follows
that he had no grounds. But by hypothesis he had grounds.
Our third question was: When someone remembers that p, how certain is it
that p? The answer I give is that his present knowledge that p has the same degree
of certainty that his previous knowledge that p had. Of course, if he has forgotten
what his grounds were, he may be less certain than he was—but that is a different
matter.
One thing which is obvious is that no matter how well a person remembers
something, his present knowledge cannot be superior to his previous knowledge.
His present knowledge that p, if it is solely memory, cannot be more certain than
was his previous knowledge that p. This fact provides one clear sense for the
claim that memory is not a source of knowledge.
When I remember that p, does my remembering it have grounds? If we are not
merely asking again whether my certainty that p has grounds, then this seems a
nonsensical question. If by “my remembering it” is meant the relation between
my present and my previous knowledge that p, then my remembering it cannot be
said to have or to lack grounds. This is reﬂected in the deﬁnition of factual
memory—knowing that p because one previously knew that p. It would be
unintelligible as well as ungrammatical to ask whether one had grounds for that.
Let us try to summarize brieﬂy the place of knowledge in factual memory. If a
person remembers that p then he knows that p and he knew it before. Knowing
implies being sure, save for the qualiﬁcation noted. There can be and are cases in
which people know things without having grounds for being sure. If the previous
knowledge was without grounds then the present knowledge is without grounds
(if the present knowledge is solely memory). When a man had grounds for his
previous knowledge that p, his previous knowledge was more or less certain,
depending on the strength of his grounds; and his present knowledge (if it is
solely memory) has this same degree of certainty regardless of whether he
remembers his grounds.
I turn now to the third element in the deﬁnition of factual memory. What does
NORMAN MALCOLM
96

it mean to say that someone knows that p because he previously knew that p?
Could it mean that the past knowledge caused the present knowledge? W. von
Leyden says that “it is part of the meaning of memory that, when it is correct, it is
causally dependent upon a previous perception.”9 He is saying, for example, that
someone’s memory of having seen the Queen Mary in drydock is causally
dependent on his having seen the Queen Mary in drydock. One might object to
the idea that the supposed effect is causally dependent on the supposed cause, for
the reason that the “effect” is logically dependent on the “cause.” It is logically
impossible that one should remember having seen x unless one saw it.
But we are concerned now with factual memory and whether it is a possibility
that the present knowledge that p is causally dependent on the previous know-
ledge that p. Here it is not true that there is logical implication, in either direction,
between supposed effect and supposed cause. Furthermore, one might think that
we must be justiﬁed in speaking of a “causal dependence” here, simply because it
is a natural use of language to say that someone knows that p “because” he knew
it before, or to say that his present knowledge is “due to” his previous
knowledge.
Granting this to be so, it does not tell us what this “causal dependence” means.
There is an important sense of “cause” in which a singular causal statement of
the form “x caused y” implies a general proposition of the form “In like circum-
stances, whenever x then y.” But this meaning of “cause” cannot be involved in
factual memory, since in saying that someone remembers that p, we are certainly
not committing ourselves to the truth of the general proposition that “In like
circumstances, whenever a person has previously known that p then he knows
that p,” even if we could give any clear meaning to it.
To come back to von Leyden, he holds that recollecting something implies that
there is “a memory process or causal chain stretching continuously from the
occurrence of x and the original experience of x up to the present recollection of
x.”10 Another way he puts it is to say that there is a “continuous connexion”
between a remembered fact and a present memory of it.11 Sometimes he calls it an
unbroken connection.12 But this requirement, he holds, creates a problem about
knowing whether anyone remembers anything! For, “the process of retention,”
says von Leyden, is “unobservable.”13 The “causal chain” implied by memory is
“elusive.”14 It is difﬁcult if not impossible, he says, to prove that an unbroken
connection or persisting process intervened between a past experience and one’s
present recollection of it.15 The conclusion drawn by him is that “no memory
statement is, strictly speaking, veriﬁable.”16 I think he means by this remark that
it is never veriﬁable that someone remembers something!
I should have thought a more reasonable conclusion would be that the concept
of memory carries no implication of a continuous process of retention or of an
unbroken causal connection. The imagery suggested by what von Leyden says is
fairly deﬁnite. Remembering consists in a certain process which begins at the time
a person witnesses or learns something. What the process is in its own nature is
not known. But it is there, going on, and the person’s occasional recollection of
what he witnessed or learned is a manifestation of this underlying process.
This picture gives rise to two sorts of skeptical reﬂection. First, perhaps the
underlying process is not always in operation during the intervals between the
manifestations of it, and consequently we are sometimes mistaken in thinking
“A DEFINITION OF FACTUAL MEMORY”
97

that we remember certain things even though we give the right answers. Second,
perhaps the required process is never there, and occurrences of so-called “recol-
lection” are never manifestations of a process of remembering, and we are always
deceived in thinking we remember something. It merely looks as if people
remember!
Rather than to dwell on the absurdity of this conclusion, I want to try to
explain the third element in the deﬁnition of factual memory. What does it mean
to say that A knows that p because he previously knew that p? It does not mean
that there is a “continuous” or “unbroken” connection between the previous and
the present knowledge, even if this were an intelligible notion. I am afraid my
explanation of the meaning of the “because” will be disappointing. I believe its
meaning is essentially negative. This will be brought out by reﬂecting on one sort
of consideration which would disprove the claim that A remembers that p. Sup-
pose we know that A had known at a previous time that Robinson walked across
Cayuga Lake when it was frozen. Suppose we also know that A knows it now.
Could it turn out that A’s present knowledge is not memory? Yes. If A were to tell
us that he would not have had his present knowledge of the incident had not
someone informed him of it just now, or had he not read about it in his diary a
moment ago, or had he not inferred it from some remarks he overheard just now,
then we should know that A’s present knowledge that Robinson walked across
the lake is not memory.
In this example, A had forgotten that p. But his having previously forgotten it
is not a sufﬁcient condition of his not remembering it. He might have forgotten it
and then later remembered it, just as it often happens that one is for a time unable
to remember a name and then ﬁnally does remember it. What keeps it from being
true that A remembered the incident is not that he had previously forgotten it, but
that he had just now learned about it over again. To say that A knows that p
because he previously knew that p implies that A has not just now learned over
again that p. This brings out, in part, the negative sense of the “because.”
Another expression we can use here is “source,” i.e., the source of A’s present
knowledge that p is his previous knowledge of it. This word carries a certain
physical imagery. A river has a source and stretches continuously from its source
to its mouth. The imagery of this word might play some part in producing von
Leyden’s inclination to postulate a “continuous connexion.” But when the word
“source” is used in the analysis of memory it must, like “because,” be understood
in a negative sense. To say “His previous knowledge is the source of his present
knowledge” implies that he has not just now learned over again that p.
The meaning of “just now” is, however, pretty indeﬁnite. If I was told some-
thing two hours ago would that be “just now”? Or would “just now” have to be
ten minutes or ten seconds ago? I believe this is an artiﬁcial problem. I think that
when we say “A remembers that p,” we refer, more or less vaguely, to a more or
less deﬁnite previous time when A knew that p. We are asserting that A remem-
bers that p from that time. This will imply that A has not learned over again that
p since that time. If this is correct we can get rid of the phrase “just now” in
stating our analysis of factual memory. The statement “He remembers that p”
will imply: “He knows that p, and at a previous time, t, he knew that p, and he
has not learned over again that p since t.” It would be up to the person who made
the original statement to specify the time, t, to which he refers.
NORMAN MALCOLM
98

There is another objection to this analysis of factual memory. Let us imagine
the following case: A man, B, learned that p. B then suffered an injury to a certain
part of his brain, as a result of which he no longer knew that p. Later an oper-
ation was performed on his brain which had the effect that again he knew that p.
At this later time it would be true that B knows that p and also that he knew that
p at a previous time, t, and that he had not learned over again that p since t. (The
operation on his brain, or the effect of it, cannot be called “learning over again”
that p.) Our proposed deﬁnition of factual memory is satisﬁed: yet should we
really wish to say that B remembers that p?
Whether we should say this or not may depend on what we suppose to be the
efﬁcacy of the brain surgery.17 If we supposed that what was done to B’s brain
would cause him to know that p, regardless of what his previous knowledge had
been18 (i.e., he would know that p even if he had not ever previously known that
p) then we should be disinclined to say that the operation had “restored his
memory,” and also disinclined to say, “Now he remembers that p.” If, on the
other hand, this operation could cause a person to know that p only if he had
previously known that p, then we should be inclined to say those things.
It appears, therefore, that in this described case we should call B’s present
knowledge that p memory, only if we supposed that he would not now know that
p had he not previously known that p. This ﬁts in with the general feature of
knowing something on the basis of memory, namely, that the present knowledge
must be dependent on previous knowledge. As suggested before, when we claim
that someone remembers a certain thing, we refer (more or less tacitly) to a
previous time, t1, when he knew the thing, and we are claiming that he remem-
bers it from that time. Our claim implies that he has not learned the thing over
again since t1.19 More generally, our claim implies that nothing whatever has
occurred at some later time, t2, such that his knowledge “dates” from t2 instead of
from t1. This general requirement eliminates the possibility that, for example, a
brain operation at t2 should have been a sufﬁcient condition of B’s present
knowledge.
The most concise and accurate formulation of this requirement which I have
been able to think of is this: A person, B, remembers that p from t, only if it is the
case that had B not known that p at t, he would not now know that p. The
negative counter-factual conditional statement “If B had not known at t that p,
he would not now know that p” does not express a law. It is similar in meaning to
such a statement as the following: “If you had not given me a cigar I should not
have one now.” This would simply mean that, in fact, no other opportunity of my
obtaining a cigar presented itself. Similarly, our negative counterfactual con-
ditional about B’s knowledge means that, as a matter of fact, if he had not
obtained this knowledge at t he would not have it now. This is a kind of thing we
often know to be true, just as we often know it to be true that this man would not
have a cigar now if someone had not given him the one he has. Nothing is
implied, in either case, about the existence of a causal chain or of a continuous
process.
I have been trying to explain the meaning of the third element in our deﬁnition
of factual memory, namely, the meaning of saying that someone now knows that
p because he previously knew it. Our deﬁnition of factual memory can now be
stated in full as follows: A person, B, remembers that p from a time, t, if and only
“A DEFINITION OF FACTUAL MEMORY”
99

if B knows that p, and B knew that p at t, and if B had not known at t that p he
would not now know that p.
One point should be mentioned here. Something may remind one of some fact.
You remember the latter because of something you saw or heard or thought. This
meaning of “because” is different from the meaning it has in the deﬁnition of
factual memory. Without going further into the matter, I will say that these two
meanings of “because” are quite compatible. It can be true both that a man
should now remember that p (which implies that he now knows that p because he
previously knew it) and also that something made him remember that p (i.e., he
remembered it because of something he perceived or thought). I think that this
second “because” has a genuine causal meaning.
It must be admitted that one feels some mystiﬁcation about my negative inter-
pretation of the words “because” or “source” in our deﬁnition of factual mem-
ory. It seems mysterious that a man should know that p, having previously
known it, unless there is something that comes between his previous and present
knowledge and ties them together. It is probably this feeling that chieﬂy contrib-
utes to von Leyden’s view of memory. We feel that there is a gap between the
previous and the present knowledge, but at the same time we do not know how
to ﬁll in the gap. Should we say that what ﬁlls it is some persisting state of the
brain or neural process? Whether or not it makes sense to postulate a speciﬁc
brain-state or neural process persisting between the previous and the present
knowledge that p, such a postulation is obviously not required by an analysis of
the concept of remembering. Our everyday veriﬁcations of whether some person
does or does not remember that p are not bound up with any questions about
what is and has been going on in his brain. Our use of the language of memory
carries no implications about inner physiology. Nor can we ﬁll the gap with a
continuous process of thinking about what is remembered. People could not
think, continuously and simultaneously, of all the things they remember. If we
resorted to unconscious thoughts in order to bridge the gap, we should then be in
a difﬁculty about the criterion we should use for the existence of those
unconscious thoughts. If we had no criterion our “solution” would, in a sense, be
unintelligible. If we used the existence of the gap itself as our criterion for the
existence of the unconscious thoughts that bridge the gap, then our solution
would solve nothing.
This feeling of the mysteriousness of memory, unless we assume a persisting
state or process between the previous and the present knowledge, provides one
metaphysical aspect of the topic of memory. I believe this feeling explains why it
is so commonly taken for granted, by philosophers, psychologists, and physiolo-
gists, that there is a “process of retention.” It would be a valuable piece of
philosophical work to explain why we have this feeling—what comparisons,
what analogies, give rise to it. My own guess would be that our strong desire for a
mechanism (either physical or mental) of memory arises from an abhorrence of
the notion of action at a distance-in-time.
Leaving aside the question of why we have it, the idea of there being a gap
between the previous and the present knowledge in memory is certainly a confu-
sion. There is a gap only if there is something missing. But what is missing? We
have no idea.
What could ﬁll the gap? I have mentioned three candidates: a persisting
NORMAN MALCOLM
100

physiological state or process; continuous thinking about what is remembered;
continuous unconscious thinking about what is remembered. We see that for
different reasons none of these candidates can be included in the truth conditions
for statements of the form “A remembers that p.” I believe we do not have the
conception of anything else that might ﬁll the gap. In a sense, therefore, we do not
know what it means to speak of a gap here.
All of us (myself too) tend to have a piece of imagery, namely, of a physical
gap. I can express that imagery with gestures. With a wave of the hand I can say,
“Over there is the previous knowledge that p, and over here is the present know-
ledge that p: but what connects the two?” Yet if someone were to take seriously
my pointing gestures and my expressions “Over there” and “Over here,” I should
be embarrassed. I have the imagery, together with the feeling that it illustrates
something signiﬁcant; but at the same time I cannot take it seriously. This is a
frequent predicament in philosophy.
Two additional objections to our deﬁnition of factual memory must be con-
sidered. The ﬁrst one is the following: Bodily sensations are among the objects of
memory. A person can remember that he had an earache and that the pain was
excruciating. But it is senseless, it may be said, to speak of someone’s knowing
that he is in pain.20 Our deﬁnition cannot be satisﬁed, therefore, since it requires
that a person who remembers that he had an earache should have previously
known that he had one. The time at which he had this previous knowledge would
have to be the very time at which he had the earache. For if it were at a later time,
his knowledge at this later time would itself be memory and, by our deﬁnition,
would require a previous knowledge. And so on. Our deﬁnition really requires
that a person who remembers that he had a certain sensation (solely on the basis
of having had it) must have shown that he was having it at the time he was having
it. But since this latter is nonsense, it would follow that one could not remember a
sensation. We can and do remember sensations, and so the deﬁnition is wrong.
My reply to this objection is to point out that a sense can be given to saying
that a person knows that he has a sensation at the time he has it. He knows it in
the sense that he can tell you that he has it. This is a signiﬁcant thing to say,
because a dog or a human baby cannot tell you that he has a painful ear, although
it could be determined that he has one. In this sense, there are various sensations
that lower animals and human infants have without knowing it, whereas human
adults both have them and know it. As a human being learns language he
acquires the capacity to know that he has those sensations. Therefore he can
subsequently remember that he had them. Our deﬁnition of factual memory in
terms of knowledge does not presuppose that knowledge is always the same
kind of thing. Any legitimate sense of “know” yields a legitimate sense of
“remember.”21
The second and ﬁnal objection to our deﬁnition, which I am going to consider,
is the following: A person can remember that he had a dream and what it was.
But a person cannot know that he is dreaming while he is dreaming. Remember-
ing that one had a dream cannot be analyzed, therefore, into knowing that one
had a dream because one previously knew it.
I believe this argument is sound. In my monograph on dreams I argue that the
sentence “I am asleep” cannot be used to express a judgment about one’s own
condition, i.e., one cannot judge that oneself is asleep.22 If this is correct then
“A DEFINITION OF FACTUAL MEMORY”
101

there cannot be such a thing as knowing that oneself is asleep, and from this it
follows that one cannot know that one is dreaming. One can know that one
dreamt but not that one is dreaming.
Is this knowledge that one dreamt memory, and if so, does our deﬁnition of
factual memory ﬁt it? There is no doubt that often the knowledge that one had a
dream is memory, e.g., when one knows that one had a dream last week or last
month. But if a person awakened suddenly from sleep and immediately declared
that he had a dream, should we call this remembering that he had a dream? I am
not sure: but if so then this use of “He remembers that p” does not fall under our
analysis of factual memory. We cannot hold that here “He remembers that he
dreamt” is equivalent to “He knows that he dreamt because he knew that he
dreamt,” since we should not know how to determine a previous time at which
he knew that he dreamt. It would not be satisfactory to hold that “At some
previous time he knew that he dreamt” means the same as “If he had been
awakened at some previous time he would have said that he dreamt,” since, in
our example, the latter might be false.
The conclusion I draw is, not that our deﬁnition of factual memory is wrong,
but that this special sense of remembering that one dreamt differs sharply from
the central use of the factual memory locution.23 Our deﬁnition gives a correct
account of the central use, but perhaps not of absolutely every use of this
locution.
Notes
1 For example, if a man “remembered to” water his horse it follows that he
remembered that he should water his horse and also that he watered it.
Remembering to do something appears to consist of remembering that one
should do it plus doing it.
2 Both personal and perceptual memory imply factual memory.
3 It is worth noting that we do not speak of a person’s grounds for knowing some-
thing, but of his grounds for believing it, being sure of it, asserting it, denying it,
saying it, or doubting it. On the other hand, we ask how he knew it.
4 Of course we might expect him to have grounds or reasons for quitting his job—a
different matter.
5 A friend of mine died after an illness of several weeks. Those who were with him
reported to me that he knew he would die on the night he did die. Am I supposed
to think that either they were wrong, or else that he had grounds for his convic-
tion? “He felt his life ebbing away.” What does this mean, except that he knew he
was dying?
6 The Problem of Knowledge (London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd., 1956), p. 34.
7 Ibid., p. 32.
8 This is true insofar as his present knowledge that p is solely memory. I am not
dealing with the case in which it is partly memory and partly present evidence.
9 Remembering (London: Gerald Duckworth & Co., Ltd., 1961), p. 31.
10 Ibid., p. 42.
11 Ibid., p. 45.
12 E.g., ibid., p. 40.
13 Ibid., p. 55.
NORMAN MALCOLM
102

14 Ibid., p. 46.
15 Ibid., p. 53.
16 Ibid., p. 43.
17 In my discussion of this point, I am indebted to John Rawls and David Sachs.
18 I do not assume that this is, or ever will be, a factual possibility. I am not entirely
sure that it even makes sense. But it is not clear to me that it does not, and so
my analysis of factual memory should take account of it.
19 It is worth remarking that if I have forgotten something temporarily, and then
suddenly remember it, it cannot be said that I have learned the thing over again.
This is because my present knowledge of it is “due” to my previous knowledge of
it.
20 “It can’t be said of me at all (except perhaps as a joke) that I know I am in pain”
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, tr. G. E. M. Anscombe [New
York: The Macmillan Company, 1953], sec. 246. See p. 110).
21 I do not believe there is any sense in which a dog or infant can be said to know
that it has some sensation. I accept the consequence that a dog cannot be said
to remember that he had a painful ear, and also the more interesting con-
sequence that a human being cannot be said to remember that he had one, if he
had it at a time before he knew enough language to be able to tell anyone that he
had it. This point is connected with what Wittgenstein says about William
James’s Ballard (Investigations, sec. 342).
22 Norman Malcolm, Dreaming, second impression (New York: Humanities Press
and London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, Ltd., 1962). See especially Chapters 3
and 9.
23 See Dreaming, pp. 56–59, for a discussion of the notion of remembering
dreams.
QUESTIONS
1
What is Malcolm’s deﬁnition of factual memory?
2
According to Malcolm, when S remembers that p, what grounds does S have for
believing that p?
3
According to Malcolm, when S remembers that p, how certain is it that p?
4
According to Malcolm, is memory a source of knowledge? (If no, what is it?)
“A DEFINITION OF FACTUAL MEMORY”
103

John Pollock and Joseph Cruz,
“Reasoning and Memory”
On the foundationalist’s proposal, epistemic ascent proceeds by reasoning, which
leads to the formation of new beliefs on the basis of previously held beliefs. But
now a surprising new issue arises. Just what are the beliefs from which we can
form new beliefs on the basis of argument?
Occurrent thoughts
We have thus far implicitly adopted a kind of “mental blackboard” picture of
reasoning according to which (1) we have an array of interconnected beliefs all
available for simultaneous inspection and evaluation and (2) arguments are built
out of these beliefs and are evaluated by such inspection. That is the picture
normally adopted, but it is unrealistic. To see this, let us begin by distinguishing
between thoughts and beliefs. At any given time, we are not thinking about most
of the things we believe at that time. We all believe that 2+2 = 4, but this is not
something that is likely to have “occurred to” the reader in the past ﬁve minutes.
It is not something that she has actually thought. Thoughts, on the other hand,
are what we are occurrently thinking. At any given time we are apt to have many
beliefs but few thoughts. It is difﬁcult to hold very many thoughts in mind at one
time. In particular, we rarely hold an entire argument (even a simple one) in mind
at one time. Psychological evidence indicates that people can hold about seven
items in mind at one time. There is some evidence that the number may be even
smaller for complex items like complicated propositions.1
The term “thought” is normally used to refer to either occurrent beliefs or to a
more general class of mental events that includes our entertaining ideas without
mentally endorsing them. In the latter sense thoughts may include hypotheses,
fears, musings, daydreams, and so on. However, we will restrict our use of the
term to occurrent beliefs. So thoughts are beliefs, but most beliefs are not
thoughts. Given this distinction, which are involved in arguments and in the
determination of justiﬁcation—beliefs in general or just thoughts? Reasoning is
an occurrent process, so it might seem that insofar as justiﬁcation emerges from
reasoning it can only be thoughts that enter into considerations of justiﬁcation.
The trouble with this is that we have too few occurrent thoughts at any one time
John L. Pollock and Joseph Cruz, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge (Lanham,
Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1999).
104

to be able to construct arguments out of them. Although reasoning is an occur-
rent process, that does not mean that we occurrently hold an entire argument in
mind. Rather, we progress through the argument one step at a time, occurrently
holding each step in mind as we come to it but not holding the entire argument in
mind. Memory plays an indispensable role in such reasoning, in at least two
ways. On the one hand, we employ memory to supply us with premises for
arguments. These premises will typically be the conclusions of earlier arguments,
but we do not have to rehearse those arguments in order to make new use of their
conclusions. We also keep track of the course of an argument by relying upon
memory to ensure that the ﬁrst part (which we are no longer holding in mind)
went all right and to alert us when there is a step in the argument for which we
subsequently acquire a defeater.
Memory as a source of knowledge
How do these observations about the role of memory in reasoning ﬁt into the
foundationalist picture of epistemic justiﬁcation? The foundationalist must say
different things about the different roles played by memory in reasoning. Let us
begin with what might be called “premise memory.” Most of the information at
our disposal at any given time is stored in memory and recalled when we need it.
What are we to say about the justiﬁedness of beliefs held on the basis of memory?
Reasoning is an occurrent process. It can proceed only in terms of what we
occurrently hold in mind. We do not have to hold the entire argument in mind in
order for it to justify its conclusion, but we do have to hold each step in mind as
we go through it. Thus memory can only contribute premises to an argument
insofar as we occurrently remember those premises. Furthermore, we can have
varying degrees of difﬁculty in recalling beliefs that are stored in memory. If we
remember something (hold it in memory) but are unable to occurrently recall it
just now, then it can play no role in justifying new beliefs. In other words, only
occurrent memory can supply premises for arguments.
Granted that only occurrent memory can supply premises, what are we to say
about the justiﬁcation of those premises and the justiﬁcation of conclusions
inferred from those premises? A common view has been that when we hold a
belief on the basis of remembering it, what determines whether the latter belief is
justiﬁed is the argument we instantiated when we ﬁrst acquired it.2 On this pic-
ture we have an evolving network of arguments that grows longer and more
complex over time. Old arguments are extended as we continue to reason from
their conclusions, and new arguments are added as we acquire new basic beliefs
and reason from them, but the old arguments do not drop out of the picture just
because we are no longer thinking about them. They continue to represent the
justiﬁcatory structure underlying our beliefs.
Critics of foundationalism commonly associate this picture with foundational-
ism,3 but foundationalists need not adopt such a picture and they would be well
advised not to. The difﬁculty with the picture is that it overlooks some important
facts about memory. It has already been noted that we can have varying degrees
of difﬁculty recalling things, and our memory is not infallible. Sometimes we
“remember” incorrectly. When that happens, what are we to say about the justi-
ﬁedness of beliefs inferred from the incorrect memories? We do not automatically
“REASONING AND MEMORY”
105

regard a person as unjustiﬁed in holding a belief just because that belief is inferred
from false memories. If he has no reason to suspect that his memory is faulty, we
regard his behavior as epistemically beyond reproach. This is true even if he is
misremembering. For example, consider a person who has all of his memories
altered artiﬁcially without his knowing it. Is he then unjustiﬁed in everything he
believes? Surely not. Recall that when we talk about justiﬁcation we have in mind
the reason-guiding sense of justiﬁcation. If a person has no reason to be suspi-
cious of his apparent memories, then he is doing the best he can if he simply
accepts them. Consequently, he is justiﬁed. But if he is misremembering, the belief
in question is not one that he previously held or for which he previously had
reasons. This seems to indicate that it is the process of remembering itself that
confers justiﬁcation on the use of a memory in a present argument, and not
whatever reasons one may or may not have had for that belief originally.
The only way the foundationalist can allow that the process of remembering
can confer justiﬁcation on a belief is by supposing that memory provides us with
epistemologically basic beliefs. It is important to realize that what is remembered
can be a proposition of any sort at all. Sometimes there is a temptation to suppose
that we can only remember facts about the past, but memory is just the process of
retrieving stored information, and that information can be of any sort. For
example, I can remember that 4+7 = 11. This is a timeless truth. I can remember
general truths, e.g., that birds ﬂy. And I can even remember facts about the
future, such as that there will not be another solar eclipse visible in North Amer-
ica until 2032. By deﬁnition, epistemologically basic beliefs comprise a privileged
subclass of the set of all possible beliefs, so it cannot be true that the proposition
remembered is always epistemologically basic. Rather, memory must operate on
analogy with sense perception. Sense perception provides us with beliefs about
material objects, but according to foundationalism it does so only indirectly by
providing us with beliefs about appearances from which we can infer beliefs
about material objects. Similarly, if we are to accommodate memory within
foundationalism, memory must provide us with beliefs about what we “seem to
remember” and then we infer the truth of what are ordinarily regarded as mem-
ory beliefs from these apparent memories. The viability of such an account turns
in part on whether there is such a psychological state of “seeming to remember”
that is analogous to being appeared to in some way or other. Some philosophers
have denied that there is any such state,4 but it is not too hard to see that they are
wrong. It is possible to hold the same belief on the basis of memory, or
perception, or for no reason at all, and when we hold the belief we can tell
introspectively which is the case. In other words, we can discriminate between
memory beliefs and other beliefs.5 But to say this is just to say that memory has an
introspectively distinguishable mental characteristic. The mental state so charac-
terized is the state of “seeming to remember.” This can be made clearer by con-
sidering an example. Imagine that you are trying to quote the ﬁrst line of a poem.
It is on the tip of your tongue, but you cannot quite get it. Finally, a friend tires of
watching you squirm and tells you the line. This can have two possible effects. It
may jog your memory so that the line comes ﬂooding back and you now remem-
ber it clearly. Alternatively, it may fail to jog your memory. You believe your
friend when he tells you how the lines goes, but you still do not remember it. In
either case you come to have the same occurrent belief about the line, but there is
JOHN POLLOCK AND JOSEPH CRUZ
106

a clear introspectible difference between the two cases. The difference is precisely
that in the ﬁrst case you come to be in the state of seeming to remember that the
line goes that way, whereas in the second case you have no such recollection.
Cases like this show that there is such a psychological state as that of seeming to
remember.
Given that there is such a state as seeming to remember, the natural move for
the foundationalist is to treat memory as a source of knowledge parallel to sense
perception and posit the following “mnemonic” defeasible reason:
“S seems to remember P” is a defeasible reason for S to believe P.
This becomes the foundationalist’s explanation for how memory can supply
premises for arguments that confer justiﬁcation on new beliefs. Furthermore,
it seems to be the only possible way to integrate premise memory into a
foundationalist theory.
Genetic arguments and dynamic arguments
What about the other aspects of memory as it is used in reasoning? We were led
to the topic of memory by the observation that the mental blackboard picture of
reasoning is wrong. We do not hold an entire argument in mind at one time.
Rather, we step through it sequentially, holding no more than a few lines at a time
in occurrent thought. Insofar as we have to know that the earlier parts of the
argument were all right, we must rely upon memory. It is tempting to try to
assimilate this use of memory to premise memory in the following way. Suppose
we reason through the complicated argument in Figure 1 and on that basis come
to believe Pn.
As we occurrently step through the ith line of the argument we may occur-
rently recall nothing earlier than the i-1st line. At that point, only memory can
certify that the earlier parts of the argument were all right. This suggests that
the basis upon which we actually come to believe Pi is not argument (1) at all,
but rather a much shorter argument whose ﬁrst premise is supplied by mem-
ory; see argument (2), Figure 2. Having inferred Pi-1, in order to proceed to Pi
all we have to do is remember Pi-1. Premise memory certiﬁes Pi-1, and then we
infer Pi from Pi-1. This is what justiﬁes us in coming to believe Pi.
But this is puzzling. It seems to indicate that argument (1) is not doing any
work. It is not on the basis of that argument that we become justiﬁed in holding
the individual beliefs comprising it. That argument represents the historical gen-
esis of the beliefs, but in an important sense it does not represent the dynamics of
their justiﬁcation. The latter is represented by lots of little arguments of the form
of argument (2). An apparent problem for this view is that we do not regard
argument (1) as irrelevant to our justiﬁcation. If we discover inadequacies in early
stages of argument (1) (e.g., if we acquire a defeater for a defeasible reason used
early in argument (1)), we take that to make us unjustiﬁed in holding the later
beliefs in the argument. How can it do that if we do not hold those beliefs on the
basis of argument (1)?
Argument (1) and argument (2) are both important in understanding the
justiﬁcation of Pi. We will distinguish between them by calling them the genetic
“REASONING AND MEMORY”
107

argument and the dynamic argument, respectively. Note that as we are using the
term, dynamic arguments do not always begin with apparent memories. They
might begin instead, for instance, with an appearance belief and infer a physical-
object belief. The important thing about dynamic arguments is that they repre-
sent what we are currently thinking. To use a computer metaphor, the dynamic
argument is short and ﬁts into “working memory”. We can regard the mental
blackboard picture as true of dynamic arguments.
The genetic argument and the dynamic argument are both relevant to justiﬁca-
tion, but in different ways. The dynamic argument is “positively relevant” in that
Figure 1
Argument (1)
Figure 2
Argument (2)
JOHN POLLOCK AND JOSEPH CRUZ
108

it tells us what makes us currently justiﬁed in believing Pi. The genetic argument
is not positively relevant in the same way. If we are no longer able to recall the
earlier steps of the genetic argument, it can play no positive role in the justiﬁca-
tion of our occurrent belief in Pi. On the other hand, the genetic argument is
“negatively relevant” to the justiﬁcation for our occurrently believing Pi because
if (a) we know that the genetic argument underlies our having come to believe Pi
and (b) we acquire a defeater for some step of the genetic argument, we regard
that as defeating our justiﬁcation for Pi.
How can we put these observations together into a coherent account of the
relationship between reasoning and justiﬁcation? Earlier it was suggested that
justiﬁcation can be identiﬁed with holding a belief on the basis of an undefeated
argument. But justiﬁcation cannot be identiﬁed with holding a belief on the basis
of an undefeated genetic argument. The genetic argument for a belief may stretch
back over a period of years as you slowly accumulate the diverse premises. If you
can no longer recall the arguments for some of those premises (which is quite
likely), then if you presently acquire a defeater for one of those early steps in the
argument but do not realize that it is a defeater or do not in any way appreciate
its relevance to Pi we would not regard the acquisition of that defeater as making
it unreasonable for you to believe Pi. (Intuitively, this is because you currently
believe Pi on the basis of the dynamic argument rather than the genetic argu-
ment.) Consequently, it is not a necessary condition for justiﬁed belief in Pi that
your genetic argument for Pi be undefeated.
Can we instead identify justiﬁcation with holding a belief on the basis of an
undefeated dynamic argument? We can once we recognize that genetic arguments
play a role in determining whether a dynamic argument based on memory is
undefeated. Such a dynamic argument proceeds in terms of the following
mnemonic defeasible reason:
“I seem to remember P” is a defeasible reason for me to believe P.
It is obvious upon reﬂection that one kind of defeater for this defeasible reason is
any reason for thinking that I do not actually remember P. A necessary condition
for remembering P is that one originally knew P. If, for instance, my original
belief in P was unjustiﬁed, but was retained in memory, then even though I now
seem to remember P, it would be incorrect to describe me now as remembering P.
Thus, any reason for thinking that I did not originally know P is also a reason
for thinking that I do not remember P now. I did not originally know P if there
is a true undefeated defeater for some step of the reasoning (i.e., the genetic
argument) underlying my belief in P. Thus the following is a defeater for the
mnemonic defeasible reason:
Q is true, and Q is a defeater for some step of my genetic argument for P.6
We will call this “the genetic defeater.” The concepts of a defeater and a genetic
argument seem like technical philosophical concepts not shared by the person on
the street. On this ground, it might be doubted that ordinary people actually have
beliefs of the form of the genetic defeater. But our contention is that they do.
They could not formulate them using this technical terminology, but they could
“REASONING AND MEMORY”
109

formulate them less clearly by saying things like, “In coming to believe P in the
ﬁrst place I assumed A and concluded B, but because Q is true, I should not have
done that.” There does not seem to be anything psychologically unrealistic about
supposing that people often have thoughts they could formulate in such a way as
this, and these are the thoughts expressed more precisely by the above formula-
tion of the genetic defeater.
Our proposal is that, on a foundationalist picture, justiﬁcation should be iden-
tiﬁed with holding a belief on the basis of an undefeated dynamic argument.
What we mean by this is that the arguments to which we appeal in determining
whether a dynamic argument is undefeated must all be in working memory at the
same time as the dynamic argument. This makes the requirement of being
undefeated a rather minimal one, because we cannot get much into working
memory at one time. From one point of view, formulating the requirement in this
way seems obviously correct—if we do not occurrently remember an argument
for a defeater, we cannot take it into account in deciding what to believe, and so
we should be deemed epistemically beyond reproach if we ignore it. On the other
hand, this makes the requirement that the dynamic argument be undefeated seem
so weak as to be virtually useless. It seems we will almost never have any defeat-
ing arguments in working memory at the same time as the argument to be
defeated, and so a dynamic argument will almost always be undefeated in this
sense. We contend, however, that this objection is wrong. As a matter of psycho-
logical fact, when we acquire a new belief that constitutes a defeater for the
genetic argument, we often remember that it does, and thus we add the dynamic
argument in Figure 3 to working memory.
Thus working memory comes to contain both argument (2) and argument (3),
and the latter is a defeating argument for the former. Hence argument (2) is not
undefeated.
Primed search
According to this account, if we have a defeater for the inference from A to B but
we do not remember inferring B from A in the genetic argument for P, then our
present belief in P is justiﬁed. That seems to be correct. The reason this does not
trivialize the requirement that the dynamic argument be undefeated is that we
Figure 3
JOHN POLLOCK AND JOSEPH CRUZ
110

frequently have the requisite memories. Memory allows us to monitor the course
of our arguments and alerts us when we subsequently encounter a defeater for an
earlier stage of an argument. This is how memory supplies us with genetic defeat-
ers. This aspect of memory is intriguing, partly because it does not ﬁt into naive
models of memory that would attempt to reduce all memory to premise memory.
In this connection, it might be tempting to suppose that we acquire genetic
defeaters by occurrently recalling the earlier parts of the genetic argument and
inspecting them to see whether each newly drawn conclusion constitutes a
defeater for any of the earlier steps. This would reduce the monitoring function of
memory to premise memory. But obviously, we do not really do it that way. To
suppose we must is to adopt a simplistic view of memory. This is best illustrated
by considering memory searches. When we search our memory for something, we
do not have to proceed sequentially through all the beliefs held in memory,
calling each to consciousness, inspecting it to see if it is what we are looking for,
and if it is not, then rejecting it and going on to the next item. For example, in
trying to remember someone’s name, despite the fact that this is something that
we can voluntarily undertake to do, the process whereby we do it is not a con-
scious process. We set ourselves to do it, and then we wait a moment and see
whether anything emerges into occurrent thought. If we are able to remember the
name, the only thing that occurs at a conscious level is the recollection of the
name. If we are unable to remember the name, we may feel frustrated and we may
continue to “try” to remember it, but nothing happens at the conscious level. The
point is that, to use computer jargon, human recollection involves built-in search
procedures. If asked to name a famous composer, my memory can ﬁnd one. It
does it by searching my unconscious memory for someone remembered as a
famous composer, and because it is searching unconscious memory, this search is
not something I do consciously.
Human recollection also involves a somewhat more complicated operation
that we might call “primed search.” Consider a birdwatcher who has a mental
list of rare birds he would like to observe. This need not be a ﬁxed list. Each
month he may add new birds to the list when he reads about them in his bird-
watcher’s magazine, and he strikes items off the list when he observes them.
Furthermore, the way in which the list evolves need not consist of his recalling the
entire list to mind and then altering it. He can alter such a mental list by adding or
deleting items without ever thinking about the list as a whole. Given such a list,
when our birdwatcher sees a bird on the list, he immediately recalls that it is one
of the listed birds and he may get very excited. The point is that one can prime
oneself to be on the lookout for things on such a nonoccurrent mental list. This is
an unconscious mental function that humans are capable of performing, and it
involves memory in accessing the list itself, but the memory processes involved
cannot be reduced to any kind of simple memory of individual facts.
Primed search is what is involved in monitoring our reasoning and being on
the lookout for newly inferred defeaters for previous steps of reasoning. We
remember what those earlier steps were, although we do not do so occurrently,
and we remain on the lookout for defeaters for those earlier steps, and when we
encounter such a defeater we then occurrently remember the earlier step and note
that we have a defeater. The only conscious output of this primed search consists
of occurrently remembering that a certain step occurred in the argument, and we
“REASONING AND MEMORY”
111

combine that with the observation that a particular newly acquired belief is a
defeater for that step. This is how we acquire a genetic defeater for a dynamic
argument.
To recapitulate, reﬂections on the role of memory in reasoning have led us to a
radically different picture of the relationship between reasoning and epistemic
justiﬁcation. We have been led to distinguish between the genetic argument for a
belief and the dynamic argument, concluding that it is only the latter that is
directly relevant to the assessment of the belief as justiﬁed or unjustiﬁed. The
genetic argument is indirectly relevant because genetic defeaters for the dynamic
argument appeal to the genetic argument and are supplied by some of the more
sophisticated operations of memory. Without these innovations, foundationalism
would be much less plausible.
Notes
1
The classic article on the limits of memory is George Miller, “The Magical
Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on our Capacity for Processing
Information” (Psychological Review 63, 1956: 81–97). Also see W. Kintsch and
J.M. Keenan, “Reading Rate and Retention as a Function of the Number of the
Propositions in the Base Structure of Sentences” (Cognitive Psychology 5, 1973:
257–74), and W. Kintsch, The Representation of Meaning in Memory (Hillsdale,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1974). For a thorough overview, see the
chapters on memory in John Anderson, Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications
(New York: W.H. Freeman, 1995).
2
See Norman Malcolm [this volume, pp. 95–6], and Robert Squires, “Memory
Unchained” (The Philosophical Review 77, 1969: 178–97). Of course, we can
also come to instantiate new arguments for old beliefs, in which case the source
of justiﬁcation may change, but the view is that that is not what is involved in
memory.
3
See Gilbert Harman, “Positive versus Negative Undermining in Belief Revision”
(Nous 18, 1984: 39–49)
4
Norman Malcolm [this volume, pp. 95–6], and Robert Squires, “Memory
Unchained”.
5
By “memory beliefs” we mean “putative memory beliefs.” We do not mean that
we can tell introspectively whether we are correctly remembering what we take
ourselves to be remembering.
6
There are other kinds of defeaters as well. The kind of defeater operative in
cases where we discover that we are misremembering is “I did not originally
believe P.”
QUESTIONS
1
According to Pollock and Cruz, in what way is the “mental blackboard” picture of
reasoning mistaken?
2
According to Pollock and Cruz, when S remembers that p, what sort of justiﬁca-
tion does S have for believing that p?
3
What is a “dynamic argument”?
JOHN POLLOCK AND JOSEPH CRUZ
112

Michael Huemer, “The Problem of
Memory Knowledge”
The sun is about 93 million miles away from the earth. How do I know that?
Well, I learned it once. I don’t know when or how I learned it, but I did, and I now
remember it. I couldn’t tell you how the distance to the sun was calculated either,
but it’s something that scientists have discovered. How do I know that scientists
have discovered it? Well, I don’t know how I learned that either, but I remember
it, too.
Even granting the reliability of scientists and other experts, this does not sound
like a very impressive justiﬁcation. Yet arguably, most of our knowledge is like
that. A few more examples: there is a 3-hour time difference between Los Angeles
and New York; Abraham Lincoln was President of the United States during the
Civil War; the word “tree” refers in English to a certain kind of plant; the square
on the hypotenuse of a right triangle equals the sum of the squares on the other
two sides; wood is a poor conductor of heat and electricity; China is in Asia. I
don’t know how I learned any of those facts, but however I learned them, I kept
them in memory since then (doubtless I gained numerous conﬁrmations of them
since the ﬁrst time I learned them, and I can’t speciﬁcally remember any of those
occasions either), and I have no serious doubt about any one of them.
What justiﬁes me in believing that the sun is 93 million miles from the earth?
The fact that I don’t remember my original reason for adopting that belief sug-
gests that whatever that reason was, it can not be considered a reason I now have
for my belief.1
In general, when S remembers that P, what kind of justiﬁcation does S have for
believing P? Three possible answers to this question naturally come to mind:
1. The inferential theory
First, perhaps my justiﬁcation is inferential. And perhaps it is something like this:
I now seem to remember that the earth is 93 million miles away from the sun. In
the past, I have generally found that expectations formed on the basis of my
seeming memories have been borne out. For example, I seemed to remember my
address, and when I went to that address, I found an apartment of just the sort I
Michael Huemer, “The Problem of Memory Knowledge,” Paciﬁc Philosophical
Quarterly 80 (1999), 346–57.
113

was expecting. This strongly conﬁrms that my seeming memories are highly
reliable. Therefore (probably), it is true that the sun is 93 million miles away from
the earth.
The most obvious problem here is one of circularity. How do I know that in
the past, my seeming memories have been corroborated? Well, I seem to remem-
ber that that’s generally been the case. But, on the present theory of memory
knowledge,2 I cannot trust that until I ﬁrst prove the reliability of my memory.
Therefore, I cannot use my past experiences in this way—nor, in fact, in any other
way—in my argument for the reliability of memory.
Thus, if any inferential account is to work, the premises of my argument must
rely solely on my present experiences and/or a priori insights. I can’t use any
previously-gained knowledge. It seems unlikely that I could derive the reliability
of memory from premises of this kind; at any rate, I have no idea how such an
inference would go. Additionally, an inferential theory would face two further
constraints that increase its difﬁculties. First, the argument would have to be
short and simple, such that one could hold it all in mind at once. Otherwise,
completion of the argument would depend on one’s remembering that the earlier
stages of the argument had been correctly executed, and this would illicitly
presuppose the reliability of memory.
Second, I would have to be in some sense using the argument every time I had a
justiﬁed memory belief. It would not be enough for me to go through the argu-
ment once, and thenceforth merely remember that I had demonstrated the reli-
ability of memory. For if merely remembering that my memory is reliable were
enough for me to be justiﬁed in believing my memory is reliable, then merely
remembering that the sun is 93 million miles away from the earth should be
sufﬁcient for me to be justiﬁed in believing that the sun in 93 million miles away
from the earth—contrary to the present theory, but in accord with the theory to
be considered in section 2.
Given that my belief that the sun is 93 million miles from the earth is continu-
ously present (it remains as a dispositional belief even when I’m not thinking
about it), I will apparently need to be employing the argument for the reliability
of memory continuously, if I am to keep my justiﬁcation. The defender of the
inferential account may claim that I am using this argument (whatever it is) for
the reliability of memory only unconsciously, but it remains implausible that I am
using it all the time, even unconsciously. Indeed, there is no evidence that I have
ever employed any such argument at all, so skepticism seems to be the price of the
inferential account.
2. The foundational theory
Perhaps, then, my justiﬁcation is non-inferential. Perhaps memory experiences
create the same sort of foundational justiﬁcation that (some epistemologists
argue) sensory experiences do. Just having an experience of seeming to perceive
that P makes one prima facie justiﬁed in believing that P, and similarly, having an
experience of seeming to remember that P makes one prima facie justiﬁed in
believing that P.3
This view has counter-intuitive results. Suppose I initially learn that P by
means of an a priori proof of it (the proof is short, so I can hold it all in mind at
MICHAEL HUEMER
114

once and do not need to use memory). So I have an adequate justiﬁcation for
believing P from the start, although the possibility of mistakes, even in short
proofs, makes my justiﬁcation less than completely conclusive. However, a few
moments pass, and I now am able, in addition, to recall that P. If I entertain the
proof while also remembering that P, I will now have two justiﬁcations for P, one
inferential and one foundational. Thus, my warrant becomes more secure with
the passage of time.4
Here’s another case. Suppose that I initially adopt the unjustiﬁed belief that P
(perhaps by wishful thinking or some such irrational process). The next day,
however, my belief is adequately justiﬁed, because I now seem to remember that
P. The passage of time has transformed my irrational belief into a rational one.
It might be argued that in this latter case, I have a defeater for P, since I can
recall that I adopted P by wishful thinking.5 Therefore, modify the case as fol-
lows: a number of years pass, and I no longer recall how I initially “learned” that
P, but I still clearly “remember” that P.6 For example, suppose that I initially
accepted the existence of life after death by wishful thinking. I now no longer
remember where I got that belief, but I just seem to remember that that’s some-
thing I know. On the other hand, my brother Pete adopted the same belief in
exactly the same way. However, his memory is better than mine, so he also
remembers how he got the belief. As a result, my belief system is rational and his
is not. That seems wrong.
To further conﬁrm that this result is wrong, Thomas Senor (1993) asks us to
consider an analogy to moral philosophy. Suppose there is a certain ruthless
tyrant, call him “Saddam,” who decides to viciously attack a neighboring coun-
try. Suppose that at the time he makes this choice, Saddam’s character is such
that it would be psychologically impossible for him to behave in any other way.
Suppose, however, that Saddam, having begun as a normal boy, acquired this
deplorable character as a result of a series of evil choices that he made of his own
free will. In this case, we would surely not excuse Saddam’s present actions on the
ground that he could not do otherwise. Rather, Saddam’s culpability in his past
choices follows him to the present day, rendering him culpable for the present evil
actions that ﬂow from them. Similarly, argues Senor, a person’s previous epi-
stemic irresponsibility follows him, making him epistemically blameworthy for
any present likely-to-be-false beliefs that result from his previous irrationality. A
present-day belief cannot be rendered epistemically justiﬁed by the fact that,
doing the best one can do now results in acceptance of the belief, if this situation
results from previous epistemic irrationality—just as a present-day action can not
be rendered morally blameless by the fact that, doing the best one can do now
results in performance of the action, if this situation results from previous
immorality.7
Both of the above cases—the case where memory would increase one’s justiﬁ-
cation for a belief, and the case where memory would convert an unjustiﬁed
belief into a justiﬁed one—point up the following general, intuitive constraint on
a theory of memory justiﬁcation: the justiﬁcation for a belief cannot be increased
by its passing into memory; it can only be lowered. The foundational theory fails
to account for this.8
“THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE”
115

3. The preservation theory
Here is a third view. When I remember that P, my justiﬁcation for believing P is
whatever it was to begin with. Memory just preserves the justiﬁcation (or lack of
it) of my beliefs.9 So my justiﬁcation for thinking that the sun is about 93 million
miles away is, perhaps, that Mrs. Kim in second grade told me that it was—even
if I don’t know that that is my justiﬁcation. On this view, the fact that I don’t
remember what my original justiﬁcation for P was does not prevent me from still
having that justiﬁcation for P. This seems more natural than the preceding two
theories.
But now recall Russell’s ﬁve-minute hypothesis.10 Suppose God created some-
one ﬁve minutes ago in exactly the state that I was in ﬁve minutes ago, sur-
rounded by exactly the same kinds of things. Call this person Mike2. Mike2 was
created complete with false memories of his past life, identical to my memories of
my past life. He thinks his name is “Mike” and is presently writing a paper about
the problem of memory knowledge. His situation would be (to him) indis-
tinguishable from my actual situation. Usually, this scenario is mentioned for the
purpose of asking, How do I know I’m not actually in that situation? But here I
mention it to make a positive point. What sort of things would it be rational for
Mike2 to believe? Pretty clearly, just the same things that it is rational for me,
now, to believe (modulo appropriate changes in indexical references). Most of
Mike2’s beliefs about his own past are false, but he has no way of knowing that,
and no more reason for suspecting it than I have for suspecting that my beliefs
about my past are false. So if I am justiﬁed in believing that I ate a bagel this
morning, Mike2 is justiﬁed (though mistaken) in believing that he ate a bagel this
morning. Furthermore, it seems that he has the same degree and kind of justiﬁca-
tion that I now have.
But of course, this contradicts the present theory of memory knowledge.
According to the present view, memory merely preserves one’s initial justiﬁca-
tion, if any, for a belief.11 So I am adequately justiﬁed in believing that I ate a
bagel this morning, on the basis of the sensory experiences I had then. Mike2 has
no such justiﬁcation, since he never had any sensory experience of eating a bagel.
At minimum, he does not have the same sort of justiﬁcation that I have, and it
appears that he has no justiﬁcation at all, since, on the preservation theory,
memory experiences are not themselves a source of justiﬁcation.12 On this theory,
then, Mike2 is highly irrational (unlike myself), even though he is intrinsically
identical to me.13
Thus, there is an interesting problem of memory knowledge. The three most
obvious theories of the justiﬁcation of memory beliefs are all unacceptable. How
can we ﬁnd a theory that is not subject to any of the preceding objections? Our
verdict on the case of Mike2 seems to demand that the justiﬁcation of memory
beliefs depend only on the current state of the believer, and not on his past;
otherwise, Mike2 would be found to be drastically less rational than myself. But
if the past history of a memory belief is thus irrelevant to its justiﬁcation, won’t
this allow us to construct cases where memory transforms an irrational belief into
a rational one (as in our objection to the foundational theory)? How, that is, can
we reconcile the principle that the degree of justiﬁcation of a remembered belief
can never exceed the original degree of justiﬁcation one had for its adoption, with
MICHAEL HUEMER
116

the apparent lesson of the ﬁve-minute hypothesis, that the past history of a belief
is irrelevant to its present justiﬁcation? It seems that our intuitions are simply
contradictory.
4. A solution: the dualistic theory
Not so. There is a theory that accommodates our intuitions about all of the cases,
incorporating elements of both the foundational view and the preservation view.
I call it the “dualistic theory” because it holds that the question, “What is my
justiﬁcation for believing that P?” requires a two-part answer: ﬁrst, why I was
justiﬁed in adopting the belief that P; and second, why I was justiﬁed in retaining
it.14 On this view, a belief is justiﬁed full stop if and only if one had an adequate
justiﬁcation for adopting it at some point, and thenceforward one was justiﬁed in
retaining it. The normal functioning of memory, in the absence of speciﬁc reasons
for revising a belief, constitutes an epistemically acceptable manner of retaining
beliefs.
So far, this sounds exactly like the preservation theory. However, we will see in
a moment how, having distinguished two parts of a belief’s justiﬁcation, the
dualistic theory is in a position to make an appropriate concession to the founda-
tionalist account that avoids the major objection to the preservation theory.
It is already clear that the present view avoids the foundationalist’s main prob-
lem. The dualistic view does not allow an initially irrational belief to become
rational merely by passing into memory, since a rational belief, in the full sense,
requires both rational acquisition and rational retention.
How, then, can the dualistic theory avoid the objection from the ﬁve-minute
hypothesis—how can it secure Mike2’s epistemic rationality? Simply by this
posit: coming to believe something by seeming to remember it (in the absence of
defeaters that one is aware of) is an epistemically rational way of acquiring the
belief. This posit captures the foundationalist intuition, that I am rational in
believing something I seem to remember even if on this particular occasion,
unbeknownst to me, my memory is deceiving me – even if, that is to say, I never
really had that belief before. From the standpoint of epistemic responsibility, this
is surely correct. The unfortunate Mike2 has not committed any epistemic
wrongs; he has done the best that could be expected of him. Our theory credits
him this: since Mike2 acquired his belief that he ate a bagel this morning by
seeming to remember it, he is rational in accepting it.15
But this posit does not introduce the possibility of memory’s converting an
irrational belief into a rational one. For the principle only applies to a case in
which having a seeming memory that P was actually one’s way of acquiring the
belief that P. Recall the case where I believe P by wishful thinking and later seem
to remember that P. Having a seeming memory in this case is not my method of
acquiring the belief; wishful thinking is. Apparent memory is only my way of
retaining the belief. Since a justiﬁed belief must have both a rational acquisition
method and a rational retention method, this belief is unjustiﬁed.
It must be admitted that this view can not maintain the supervenience of
epistemic justiﬁcation on the current, intrinsic state of the believer. That seem-
ingly desirable characteristic is genuinely inconsistent with the conjunction of
two other principles we have been assuming: ﬁrst, that memory can not convert
“THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE”
117

unjustiﬁed belief to justiﬁed belief; and second, that in typical circumstances our
remembered beliefs are justiﬁed. For it is possible to have two people who are in
the same state presently, each having forgotten his original reason for adopting P,
one of whom did and the other of whom did not originally have a good reason for
accepting P. The one person must be counted justiﬁed in his present belief (else we
have memory skepticism), and the other must be counted unjustiﬁed (else we
have an unjustiﬁed belief converted to a justiﬁed belief by the passage of time). It
follows that the justiﬁcatory status of the belief that P does not supervene on the
current, intrinsic state of the believer. Of course, it may still supervene on the
total history of intrinsic states of the believer.
To illustrate, return to the case of myself and Mike2. Let’s suppose that,
among many beliefs I have for which I do not remember my original reasons for
adopting them, there are some rational beliefs and a few irrational ones. I am
justiﬁed in believing P, say, but unjustiﬁed in believing Q. Mike2, likewise, will
be justiﬁed in believing P. But unlike me, on the present theory, Mike2 will also be
justiﬁed in believing Q, since he, unlike me, acquired the belief through apparent
memory. So there is one way in which the victim of the ﬁve-minute hypothesis
would be epistemically better off than we actually are—he has no fewer, and
possibly more, justiﬁed beliefs.
On reﬂection, we can see that this result is correct and that the principle of
current time-slice supervenience is therefore mistaken. For Mike2, there is no
relevant difference between his belief that Q and his belief that P. Both are
adopted in the same way, so if we grant that his belief that P is justiﬁed, we have
to allow his belief that Q to be justiﬁed similarly. Recall Senor’s analogy with
moral philosophy. Suppose that a person (call him “Saddam2”) were created and
placed at the head of a country, with a compulsion to invade a neighboring
country. Saddam2 is born lacking free will, his decision to invade already pre-
determined. In that case, Saddam2 could not be morally blamed for his action.
We have already said that Saddam, who acquired a similar psychological com-
pulsion through earlier bad choices, can be blamed for the same action. So the
moral culpability of a decision does not supervene on the internal state of the
agent at the time of decision-making; it depends, too, on the agent’s past choices.
Likewise, we should not be surprised that the epistemic status of a belief depends
in part on the believer’s past thought processes.
5. The theory extended: degrees of justiﬁcation
So far, I have stated the dualistic theory as a theory of when a memory belief is
justiﬁed or unjustiﬁed. But we can generalize the theory to give an account of the
degree of justiﬁcation that a belief has, and this generalization provides a further
demonstration of the superiority of the dualistic view. The natural extension of
the simple dualistic view would be to say that there are two degrees of justiﬁca-
tion involved in any belief—a degree of justiﬁcation associated with the adoption
of the belief, and a degree of justiﬁcation associated with its retention—and that
the overall level of justiﬁcation of a belief is the product of those two quantities.
The ﬁrst of these two quantities is simply a matter of the conclusiveness of the
grounds one originally had (again, this holds true even if one has forgotten those
grounds). We can think of it as a number between 0 and 1, with 1 representing
MICHAEL HUEMER
118

infallible justiﬁcation for believing the proposition in question, and 0 represent-
ing infallible justiﬁcation for disbelieving it. The second quantity is a matter of
the credibility of one’s memory, and it too, can be thought of as a number
between 0 and 1. If one has a relatively faint memory, such that one is quite
unsure whether one really remembers that P or not, then this number will be close
to ½ (not 0, for even the faintest of memories would not be evidence against P). If
one has a very ﬁrm and clear memory, the number will be close to 1. If one has
special reason for doubting the reliability of one’s memory (e.g., one knows that
one has misremembered similar things in the past), this can lower the second
number further.
One of our objections to the foundationalist account was based on the prin-
ciple that the justiﬁcation of a belief can be lowered through its passing into
memory but cannot be raised. The foundationalist could not accommodate this
fact, because for him, the past justiﬁcation of a belief is irrelevant to its present
justiﬁcation. But the generalized dualistic view easily accommodates the
principle—when one multiplies the original degree of justiﬁcation by a number
less than or equal to 1 representing the credibility of the memory, one necessarily
gets something less than or equal to the original degree of justiﬁcation.
The dualistic view also surpasses the straight preservation theory in the treat-
ment of degrees of justiﬁcation. Under the straight preservation view, the justiﬁ-
cation I now have for P when I remember that P is the same as the justiﬁcation I
had for P originally. Given this, the only natural view to take as to the degree of
justiﬁcation I now have for P is that it is identical to the degree of justiﬁcation I
originally had, on the principle that the degree of one’s justiﬁcation for P is a
function of what one’s justiﬁcation for P is. For example, suppose my original
justiﬁcation for P consisted in a conclusive, deductive proof of P, although I have
since forgotten what my justiﬁcation was. On the preservation view, I nevertheless
retain my original justiﬁcation for P. Therefore, my belief that P continues to be
supported by a conclusive proof (the memory can hardly preserve the argument but
turn it into an inconclusive one). Therefore, my degree of justiﬁcation for P is the
degree appropriate to having a conclusive proof, that is, conclusive justiﬁcation.
But this result is wrong—one should not be as conﬁdent that P ten years after
learning it as one was when it was fresh in one’s mind. One should not have
100% conﬁdence in one’s memory. The passage of time introduces new possi-
bilities of error; therefore, it lowers one’s justiﬁcation for believing a proposition.
Here, as elsewhere, the dualistic view succeeds in accommodating our intuitions
about justiﬁcation, escaping the objections that tell against the two main
alternatives.16
The preservation theorist might try arguing that as time passes, one’s justiﬁca-
tion for P typically decreases, not because one’s justiﬁcation acquires a new,
fallible component, but because one acquires new defeaters. For instance, the
proposition that my memory is unreliable, or even the proposition that this par-
ticular memory experience is faint, would be defeaters for P when I seem to recall
that P. In order to explain why one’s justiﬁcation typically (perhaps always)
decreases with time, rather than only decreasing in certain special circumstances,
the preservation theorist would have to maintain that even so weak a proposition
as “my memory is not infallible” or “this memory is not absolutely clear” can be
a defeater.
“THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE”
119

There seems to be something ad hoc about introducing a defeater that is
always or nearly always present and that functions to lower one’s justiﬁcation for
P by just the amount that one’s justiﬁcation would fall short of its original level if
one’s having a memory experience were part of one’s justiﬁcation for P. But be
that as it may, there is a more serious problem. Suppose that I initially learned
that P through sensory observation, and I am now, ten years later, genuinely
remembering that P. According to the preservation theory, my justiﬁcation for
believing P, now, consists in the same sensory experience. If this is the case, then
why would a proposition about the reliability of my memory be a defeater for my
belief? Certainly, at the time I was initially observing that P, “my memory is
unreliable” would not have defeated my justiﬁcation for believing P. “My mem-
ory is unreliable” is not a rebutting defeater for P (it is merely neutral with respect
to the truth of P), and nor is “my memory is unreliable” an undercutting defeater
for a perceptual justiﬁcation of P—only something like “my senses are unreli-
able” would undercut a perceptual justiﬁcation. Therefore, if my present justiﬁ-
cation for P consists in my (earlier) sensory experience, my justiﬁcation should be
unaffected by the discovery that my memory is unreliable.
An analogy here is instructive: suppose that I believe Q on the basis of Jones’
testimony. Now suppose you come along and succeed in convincing me that
Smith is an unreliable witness. Would this defeat my justiﬁcation for believing Q?
Of course not. You would have to show that Jones was unreliable in order to
undermine my justiﬁcation for Q; either that, or my justiﬁcation for believing Q
would have to depend at least in part on Smith’s testimony (perhaps in addition
to Jones’). According to the preservation theory, when I observe that P and later
recall that P, my belief at the later time is based solely on the observation, not on
the memory experience. Therefore, a criticism of my senses would undermine the
belief, but a criticism of my memory should not. On the other hand, the dualistic
view naturally explains the signiﬁcance of a criticism of my memory as affecting
the second factor involved in the justiﬁcation of a memory belief—the factor
neglected by the preservationist.
One of the two main theories of memory knowledge locates the justiﬁcation of
a memory belief solely in the memory impression. The other locates it solely in
the original acquisition of the belief. As a result, one theory implies that memory
can raise a belief’s justiﬁcation, while the other implies that memory cannot
lower a belief’s justiﬁcation. The solution is to locate a belief’s justiﬁcation both
in the circumstances of its initial acquisition and in the nature of the present
memory experience.17
Notes
1 So argues Ginet (1975), pp. 153–6.
2 I am assuming that knowledge is a kind of justiﬁed belief, where justiﬁcation is
understood in terms of epistemic responsibility (see Alston’s (1985) discussion
of “deontological” notions of justiﬁcation for more on this kind of justiﬁcation). If
this is not what knowledge is, then what I am looking for should be described as
“a theory of the justiﬁcation of memory beliefs” rather than “a theory of memory
knowledge.”
3 Pollock (1986), pp. 50–2 appears to defend this view. However, he has since
MICHAEL HUEMER
120

indicated that he is addressing a different sense of “justiﬁcation” than mine
(personal communication).
4 Pollock (1995), pp. 101–2 points out that it need not be the case that the
conjunction of two reasons for believing P provides better justiﬁcation for P than
either reason alone provides. As an example, he considers a case in which S1
and S2 are each generally reliable witnesses, but you know that S1 tends to
corroborate S2’s testimony only when the latter is a fabrication (otherwise, S1
keeps his mouth shut). However, nothing like this is going on in my example (it
isn’t as if you tend to remember that P only when your argument for P was
fallacious), so it’s hard to see why getting a second justiﬁcation for P shouldn’t
increase your degree of justiﬁcation for P. See also the analogy below, in note 5.
5 Pollock’s (1986), p. 54 remarks imply such a response, although it is not clear
that the response works. Consider a similar case: suppose I initially adopt P by
wishful thinking, but later I perceive that P. At this point, my belief becomes
justiﬁed. The fact that I initially adopted P through wishful thinking is merely
irrelevant to the truth of P—it does not count against P in the event that I
discover a new justiﬁcation for P. Since Pollock assimilates the epistemology of
memory to that of perception, it is unclear why the same assessment would not
apply when a memory experience is substituted for a perception—i.e., the mem-
ory experience provides a new justiﬁcation for the initially irrational belief.
6 Annis (1980), pp. 325–6 raises this kind of counter-example to Pollock’s view.
7 Senor (1993), pp. 468–9.
8 Malcolm (1963), pp. 230–1 almost says this, except he does not seem to allow
the possibility of one’s justiﬁcation being lowered.
9 This view is defended by Malcolm (1963), pp. 229–30; Annis (1980); Naylor
(1983); and Owens (2000).
10 See Russell (1971), p. 159.
11 See Malcolm (1963), p. 230: “When someone remembers that p does he have
grounds for being sure that p? The answer is that he has the same grounds, if
any, that he previously had.”
12 Owens (2000), chapter 9 is particularly explicit about this point.
13 Pollock (1986), p. 50 poses a related objection to the preservation theory,
based on ordinary cases in which your memory deceives you: He thinks that in
such cases, provided you have no reason for suspecting that your memory is
deceiving you, you are justiﬁed in believing what you seem to remember; yet the
preservation theory implies that these beliefs are unjustiﬁed. Pollock concludes
that memory must be accepted as a source of justiﬁcation, and hence that the
foundational theory is true.
14 Owens (2000) makes use of this distinction, but he does not take advantage of
the opportunity it provides to avoid the ﬁve-minute-hypothesis objection.
15 The following objection could be pressed: Mike2 is created with a host of disposi-
tional beliefs implanted in him. Having never consciously entertained the
propositions that these beliefs are about, he has not had any (occurrent) experi-
ences of seeming to remember them, so the present theory cannot account for
Mike2’s justiﬁcation for his dispositional beliefs. An obvious response would be
to say that Mike2’s beliefs are justiﬁed by virtue of his dispositional seeming-
memories (quasi-memories). But a more interesting response, and the one I
favor, is that Mike2 does not (cannot) have the same dispositional beliefs that I
“THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE”
121

have. A detailed discussion of this point would take us too far aﬁeld, but brieﬂy:
in order to genuinely believe that P, it is not enough that one would occurrently
believe P if one considered it—“dispositional belief” does not merely mean
“disposition to believe.” To believe P, a person must either (i) occurrently believe
it, (ii) have once believed it, having never changed his mind about it, (iii) believe
something else which presupposes it, or (iv) believe something else which obvi-
ously entails it. So there are three ways of dispositionally believing something,
but each presupposes another belief or belief at an earlier time. For this reason,
Mike2 cannot be created with dispositional beliefs already implanted in him; he
can’t have any dispositional beliefs prior to his ﬁrst occurrent belief.
16 I don’t count the inferential theory as one of the main alternatives, because I do
not know of any philosopher who actually defends it.
17 My thanks are due to David Owens for stimulating my interest in and initial
thoughts on this topic, and to both David Owens and John Pollock for discussion
of various ideas in this paper. Unfortunately, I do not believe either of these
philosophers would agree with more than half of what I have said here.
References
Alston, William P. (1985) “Concepts of Epistemic Justiﬁcation,” The Monist 68, pp.
57–89.
Annis, David B. (1980) “Memory and Justiﬁcation,” Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 40, pp. 324–33.
Ginet, Carl (1975) Knowledge, Perception, and Memory (Boston: D. Reidel).
Malcolm, Norman (1963) Knowledge and Certainty (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice
Hall).
Naylor, Andrew (1983) “Justiﬁcation in Memory Knowledge,” Synthese 55, pp. 269–
86.
Owens, David (2000) Reason without Freedom (London: Routledge), chapter 9.
Pollock, John L. (1986) Contemporary Theories of Knowledge (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman
& Littleﬁeld).
Pollock, John L. (1995) Cognitive Carpentry: A Blueprint for How to Build a Person
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Russell, Bertrand (1971) The Analysis of Mind (London: Allen & Unwin).
Senor, Thomas D. (1993) “Internalistic Foundationalism and the Justiﬁcation of
Memory Belief,” Synthese 94, pp. 453–76.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Huemer, what are the two elements in the justiﬁcation of a memory
belief?
2
Huemer describes a case in which a person adopts a belief irrationally, and later
seems to remember it. (a) According to Huemer, is the later belief justiﬁed?
(b) What theory is this example supposed to refute?
3
Huemer alludes to Russell’s ﬁve-minute hypothesis. (a) According to Huemer, in
MICHAEL HUEMER
122

this example, does the person have justiﬁed beliefs? (b) What theory is this
example supposed to refute?
FURTHER READING ON MEMORY
Annis, David, “Memory and Justiﬁcation,” Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 40 (1980): 324–33.
Burge, Tyler, “Interlocution, Perception, and Memory,” Philosophical Studies 86
(1997): 21–47.
Christensen, David and Hilary Kornblith, “Testimony, Memory and the Limits of the
‘A Priori,’” Philosophical Studies 86 (1997): 1–20.
Ginet, Carl, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory (Boston: D. Reidel, 1975).
Meinong, Alexius, “Toward an Epistemological Assessment of Memory,” trans. Linda
L. McAlister and Margarete Schätte, pp. 253–70 in Empirical Knowledge: Read-
ings from Contemporary Sources, ed. Roderick M. Chisholm and Robert J. Swartz
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1973).
Naylor, Andrew, “Justiﬁcation in Memory Knowledge,” Synthese 55 (1983): 269–86.
Naylor, Andrew, “In Defense of a Nontraditional Theory of Memory,” Monist 62
(1985): 136–50.
Owens, David, Reason Without Freedom (London: Routledge, 2000).
Senor, Thomas, “Internalistic Foundationalism and the Justiﬁcation of Memory
Belief,” Synthese 94 (1993): 453–76.
“THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE”
123


3
REASON AND THE A PRIORI
There has been a longstanding debate in epistemology over the role of reason in
cognition. The empiricists argue, roughly, that all knowledge is derived from observa-
tion (sensory experience and introspection), and that the role of reason is therefore
only to operate on, or make inferences from, the information provided by experience.
In contrast, the rationalists say that we have some substantive knowledge that is
independent of experience, and that the faculty of reason can be a source of new
knowledge.
The rationalist position goes back at least to Plato. Plato believed in a realm of
abstract objects called “Forms,” which existed independent of the mind. The Forms
were supposed to explain what multiple concrete, particular things had in common
and how we could have concepts of perfect things (such as a perfect circle) that did
not exist in the physical world. The Forms included such things as the number 2,
Justice (in the abstract), and the perfect circle.
Plato argues, through the character of Socrates, that people have some sort of
innate understanding of mathematics. This is allegedly demonstrated by a dialogue
between Socrates and a slave boy who, though previously uneducated in geometry,
is able to answer correctly a series of questions that Socrates poses about a
geometrical ﬁgure, culminating in the conclusion that a square built on the diagonal
of another square will have twice the area of the latter square. Since Socrates was
only questioning the slave boy and not telling him the answers, the slave boy must
have already known the answers in some sense (perhaps unconsciously?). This
leads into Plato’s unusual theory that human beings had knowledge of the Forms in
a previous existence, prior to birth, and just need to be reminded of what they
previously knew.
Few philosophers would accept Plato’s argument here. Empiricists would argue
that the episode with the slave boy fails to demonstrate Plato’s conclusion, because
the slave boy was acquiring new experience as Socrates questioned him, by looking
at the ﬁgures Socrates drew. Most modern rationalists, on the other hand, would say,
not that the slave boy had innate knowledge of the facts of geometry, but that his
faculty of reason was supplying him with knowledge of geometrical truths as Socrates
questioned him; that is, he was acquiring the knowledge then, but he was acquiring it
through the exercise of his reason (and not solely through observation).
Immanuel Kant, in the eighteenth century, advanced the debate between rational-
ists and empiricists by drawing two important distinctions: the distinction between
analytic and synthetic judgments, and the distinction between a priori and a posteriori
(or empirical) judgments. Kant deﬁned these terms as follows:
125

•
Analytic judgment: A judgment in which the concept of the subject contains the
concept of the predicate. Example: “All bachelors are unmarried” (because the
concept “bachelor” contains the concept “unmarried”). In more recent times,
the deﬁnition has been modiﬁed as follows: an analytic statement is a statement
that can be derived using just the laws of logic and the substitution of synonym-
ous expressions. Example: The statement “All bachelors are unmarried” is ana-
lytic. Since “bachelors” is synonymous with “unmarried men,” we can substitute
the latter for the former, obtaining the sentence, “All unmarried men are unmar-
ried,” which is a logical truth. Analytic statements are also called “true by deﬁn-
ition” and are commonly thought to contain no real information about the world.
•
Synthetic judgment: A judgment that is not analytic. Example: “All bachelors are
slobs.” Similarly, a synthetic statement is any statement that is not analytic.
•
A priori judgment: A judgment that is not based on experience. Here, “experi-
ence” includes sensory experience and introspection. “Based on” is intended in
the sense of “justiﬁed by” (n.b. not “caused by”). In modern times, we usually
speak of a priori justiﬁcation or knowledge (rather than merely a priori
judgments).
•
A posteriori/empirical judgment: A judgment that is based on experience.
The modern deﬁnitions of empiricism and rationalism, post Kant, are as follows.
Rationalists are people who believe that there is some synthetic, a priori knowledge.
Empiricists deny this; hence, they believe either that there is no a priori knowledge at
all—the extreme empiricist position—or that there is only analytic a priori
knowledge—the moderate empiricist position.
It is important to distinguish a priori knowledge from innate knowledge. All innate
knowledge (if there is any) is a priori, but not all a priori knowledge need be innate.
The slave boy’s knowledge of geometry might be a priori (if it is produced by the
faculty of reason, rather than observation), even if it is not innate (existing at birth).
It is likewise important to distinguish a belief that is caused by experience
(because, for instance, experience stimulated one to form the concepts contained in
the belief, or to consider the proposition) from a belief that is justiﬁed by experience.
There is a famous story about the chemist Kekulé, who discovered the ring structure
of the benzene molecule. It is said that he came up with the idea as a result of a
dream in which he saw a snake turn around and bite its tail. In this case, the dream
caused him to think of the idea that benzene had a ring structure. But obviously, the
dream is not a justiﬁcation for the claim that benzene has a ring structure (if he had
presented the dream as evidence at a scientiﬁc conference, he would have been
laughed at). In light of this distinction, we can say that the rationalist position is that
there is some knowledge which is not justiﬁed by experience; the position is not that
experience plays no role in causing us to think of the propositions that are known.
Besides the above distinctions, there are two important points that the student
should get from the reading selections from Kant. The ﬁrst is Kant’s defense of the
existence of synthetic, a priori knowledge. He gives several putative examples of
such knowledge. The second point is how Kant tries to explain how such knowledge
is possible. Stated very brieﬂy, he thinks that the mind imposes a sort of structure on
the world, which determines certain aspects of how we perceive (and conceive of)
things. Our synthetic, a priori knowledge derives from and reﬂects this imposed
structure. For example, we have a priori knowledge of the laws of Euclidean geometry,
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
126

not because reality is necessarily contained in Euclidean space as other rationalists
have thought (Kant denies that space exists independent of the mind), but because
the human mind is so constituted that we can only perceive things as in Euclidean
space.
Bertrand Russell criticizes Kant’s theory on two main grounds. First, he says,
Kant’s theory cannot explain why the truths of mathematics are necessary (e.g., 2 + 2
must equal 4), since Kant’s theory implies that if the nature of the human mind
were to change, the truths of mathematics would also change. This is a problem,
since Kant had held that all a priori knowledge (including all mathematical know-
ledge) was indeed necessary. Second, it was a consequence of Kant’s theory (as
Kant himself insisted) that the truths of mathematics could only apply to “things as
they appear to us,” and not to “things in themselves.” But Russell argues that
arithmetic should apply to things in themselves, even if we never perceive things-in-
themselves: two things-in-themselves plus two more things-in-themselves make four
things-in-themselves.
Russell’s own theory of a priori knowledge held that we have a priori knowledge
because of our acquaintance with universals. Universals are properties or relation-
ships that can be shared by multiple things. For instance, multiple things can share
the property of redness, so redness is a universal. Similarly, multiple things can be
on top of something else, so the relation being on top of is a universal. Russell held
that we have an intellectual grasp of the natures of at least some of these universals,
and that this grasp enables us to discern the relationships of universals to each
other. All a priori knowledge, then, is knowledge of the relations of universals. For
instance, I know a priori that 1 + 2 = 3: this is knowledge of a relationship holding
among the numbers 1, 2, and 3.
A.J. Ayer is a representative of a school of thought popular early in the twentieth
century known as “logical positivism.” Logical positivism embodied two main theses.
The ﬁrst was empiricism, the view that there is no synthetic, a priori knowledge (but
positivists admit the existence of analytic a priori knowledge). The second thesis was
veriﬁcationism, or the veriﬁcation criterion of meaning, which held that the cognitive
meaning of a statement is determined by the conditions under which it is veriﬁed or
refuted, and that therefore a statement that cannot be veriﬁed or refuted is cogni-
tively meaningless. (“Cognitive meaning,” the kind of meaning a statement has when
it asserts something about reality, is distinguished from “emotive meaning,” the
kind of “meaning” a sentence has when it expresses the speaker’s feelings or
other attitudes.) The positivists used the word “metaphysics” to refer to all state-
ments allegedly expressing synthetic a priori knowledge. Based on their empiri-
cism and veriﬁcationism, they concluded that all metaphysical statements were
cognitively meaningless—hence Ayer’s campaign for “the elimination of metaphys-
ics.” They applied this doctrine not only to the traditional metaphysical systems in
philosophy, of the sort that you ﬁnd in Leibniz and Spinoza for instance, but also
to the ﬁelds of ethics and religion, which the positivists considered equally
unveriﬁable.
Quine, an extreme empiricist, criticizes two “dogmas” that have commonly been
accepted by other empiricists, especially positivists. The ﬁrst “dogma” is the idea
that there is a distinction between analytic and synthetic statements. He considers
several ways of trying to deﬁne the notion of an “analytic” statement and argues that
none of them works, because each requires the use of some other undeﬁned and
REASON AND THE A PRIORI
127

obscure term (e.g., “meaning,” “synonymous,” and “deﬁnition”). The second
“dogma” is what Quine calls “reductionism,” the view that every statement can be
translated into a statement or collection of statements about sensory experiences
(idealists hold this view). He considers the positivist view that each statement can be
associated with a class of possible experiences that would conﬁrm it and another
class that would disconﬁrm it, to be a weakened form of reductionism.
So Quine proposed a radical revision of epistemology, in which (a) there is no such
thing as an analytic statement, and (b) an individual statement cannot be conﬁrmed
or disconﬁrmed. Instead, he thought, one can only conﬁrm or disconﬁrm a system of
statements. To get some idea of what this means, consider only one miniature
example. Is it possible to conﬁrm or disconﬁrm Newton’s theory of gravity, con-
sidered by itself? It is usually thought that the answer is yes: you can try dropping a
rock and observing its motion. If it did not fall, that would disconﬁrm the theory of
gravity. But Quine would say that in fact, the theory of gravity by itself does not predict
anything about the object’s motion and so is not tested by that sort of observation.
For the theory of gravity only says that all massive bodies exert a force on each other
proportional to their masses and inversely proportional to the distance between
them. In order to infer that the rock will fall, you would have to add all of the following
statements, at least:
•
The rock is massive.
•
The Earth is massive.
•
There is a ﬁnite distance between the Earth and the rock.
•
There are no other forces acting on the rock.
•
When a body has a force acting on it, it will tend to move in the direction of the
force.
If the rock fails to fall, then, you will have tested that system of statements; you will
know that the whole system of statements cannot be correct. But you will not have
tested any one statement considered individually. Quine believes that this sort of
lesson applies much more generally, and that our beliefs are all interconnected in
such a way that only our belief system as a whole enables us to make predictions
about what we will observe. Therefore, when our observations fail to go the way we
expect, we have a choice of many beliefs that we could revise. There are some beliefs
that we are just less willing to revise than others—the statements other philosophers
have called “analytic” are the ones that they are least willing to revise. But since
willingness to revise a statement comes in degrees, there really is no principled
distinction between analytic and synthetic statements, for Quine. Quine’s views have
extremely far-reaching implications and have been much discussed among philo-
sophers in several branches of philosophy.
The debate over a priori knowledge was strongly inﬂuenced by the development in
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries of non-Euclidean geometries. Hitherto, it had
been thought (particularly by Kant) that geometry was a paradigmatic example of our
synthetic, a priori knowledge. However, when Einstein, in his general theory of relativ-
ity, adopted a non-Euclidean geometry to describe our space–time, many philo-
sophers and scientists concluded that Kant had been wrong: they concluded that
geometry was in fact an empirical science, and that Euclidean geometry was so far
from being a priori knowledge that it was not even true.
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
128

The reading selections from Carnap explain the basic ideas of non-Euclidean
geometry. Essentially, there are now three kinds of geometry:
1.
Euclidean geometry includes the axiom (known as the axiom of parallels): given a
line and a point not on the line, there exists exactly one line (in a single plane)
that passes through the given point and is parallel to the given line.
2.
Riemannian geometry substitutes the following axiom: given a line and a point
not on the line, there exist no lines (in the plane) that pass through the given
point and are parallel to the given line. (Also called elliptical geometry, since it is
the geometry of the surface of an ellipsoid.)
3.
Lobachevskian geometry instead assumes: given a line and a point not on the
line, there exist many lines (in the plane) that pass through the given point and
are parallel to the given line. (Also called hyperbolic geometry, since it is the
geometry of the surface of a hyperboloid.)
Is it possible, by measurements, to determine what sort of space we are living in?
One might try drawing a triangle and measuring the interior angles. In a Euclidean
space, they must add up to 180°; in other spaces, they will not.
A complication for this proposal is brought out by Carnap’s following chapter,
“Poincaré versus Einstein” (using an example derived from Reichenbach). If we ﬁnd
that the angles of our triangle add up to more than 180°, there will still be at least two
possible explanations of this observation. The ﬁrst explanation would be that we are
living in a non-Euclidean space (this is what Einstein would say).
The second explanation is that we are living in a Euclidean space in which an
unusual sort of force operates. This force causes bodies to expand in certain pre-
dictable ways when they enter certain regions of space (for instance, it might be that
bodies expand as they move closer to other, very massive bodies). This expansion is
not directly measurable because any ruler or other measuring rod that you take into
the region also expands by exactly the same ratio. However, it can be shown that one
effect of this expansion would be that when a “triangle” is drawn in the region, its
sides will be bowed outward, such that the interior angles will add up to more than
180°. (This is compatible with the fact that the space is Euclidean, because it would
not be a true triangle, since its sides would be curved, rather than straight lines.)
It can be shown that the two theories would predict the same observations, so one
cannot distinguish between them by means of observation. Carnap, being a positiv-
ist, concludes that the two theories therefore are really equivalent in meaning
(remember the veriﬁcation criterion of meaning). Most who consider Carnap’s
example ﬁnd this claim to be implausible (for one thing, the two theories contain
statements that are contradictory on their face). Note, however, that Carnap would
not claim that any one statement of the one theory is synonymous with any particular
statement in the other theory; it is only the whole system of statements that consti-
tute the ﬁrst theory which is equivalent to the system that constitutes the second
theory (compare Quine’s holism).
Laurence BonJour gives a different response to the example. BonJour defends a
“moderate rationalism,” which holds that we have some intuitions, or “rational
insights,” which should be accorded some evidential weight in deciding what to
believe. On BonJour’s view, these intuitions are fallible and can sometimes be
overridden by countervailing evidence, just as our sensory experiences are fallible
REASON AND THE A PRIORI
129

(consider cases of illusions and hallucinations) and can sometimes be overridden.
This does not invalidate intuition as a possible source of knowledge, any more than
the possibility of sensory illusions invalidates sense perception as a source of know-
ledge. Thus, even if the Euclidean axiom of parallels were mistaken, this fact would
not threaten BonJour’s form of rationalism. But BonJour goes on to suggest that we
lack strong reasons for thinking the axiom of parallels is mistaken. The second of the
two theories discussed above may be superior to the ﬁrst, on the grounds that the
second theory is more consistent with our intuitions (such as the intuitive sense that
the axiom of parallels is true), while both are equally consistent with our
observations.
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
130

Plato, Meno
Meno Can you tell me, Socrates—does virtue come from teaching? Or does it
come not from teaching but from practice? Or does it come to people neither
from practice nor from being learnt, but by nature or in some other way?
Socrates Well, Meno, in the past it was for horsemanship and wealth that the
Thessalians were famous among the Greeks and admired, but now, I think, it is
for wisdom too, especially your friend Aristippus’ fellow-citizens in Larisa. You
owe all this to Gorgias. When he went to that city, he won over the most eminent
people as lovers for his wisdom—both those within the Aleuad family (including
your own lover Aristippus) and those among the other Thessalians. In particular
he trained you in the habit of answering any questions anyone asks with the
grand conﬁdence that suits people with knowledge, just as he himself too volun-
teers to be asked anything that anyone in the Greek world may wish, and never
leaves anyone unanswered. But here in Athens, my dear Meno, the opposite has
happened. A sort of drought of wisdom has developed, and it seems that wisdom
has left these parts for yours. At any rate, if you want to ask one of the people
here such a question there’s no one who won’t laugh and say: “Well, stranger,
perhaps you think I’m some specially favoured person—I’d certainly need to be,
to know whether virtue comes from teaching or in what way it does come—but
in fact I’m so far from knowing whether it comes from teaching or not, that
actually I don’t even know at all what virtue itself is!”
And that’s the situation I’m in too, Meno. I’m as impoverished as my fellow-
citizens in this respect, and confess to my shame that I don’t know about virtue at
all. And if I don’t know what something is, how could I know what that thing is
like? Or do you think it possible, if someone doesn’t know who Meno is at all,
that this person should know whether he’s beautiful or rich, or whether he’s
well-born, or whether he’s the opposite of all these? Do you think that possible?
Meno No I don’t. But is it really true about you, Socrates, that you don’t even
know what virtue is? Is this the report about you that we’re to take home with us?
Soc. Not just that, my friend, but also that I don’t think I’ve yet met anyone else
who does, either.
Meno What? Didn’t you meet Gorgias when he was here?
Soc. Yes I did.
Plato’s Meno in Focus, trans. and ed. Jane M. Day (London: Routledge, 1994).
131

Meno You mean you didn’t think he knew?
Soc. I don’t remember things very well, Meno, so I can’t now say what I thought
about him then. But perhaps he does know, and perhaps you know what he used
to say, so remind me what that was. Or if you like, you tell me yourself, for I
expect you think the same as he does.
Meno Yes I do.
Soc. Well then, let’s leave him out of it, since after all he isn’t here—and Meno,
by all the gods, what do you yourself say that virtue is? Tell me and don’t keep it
back. Make it a really lucky false statement I’ve uttered, if what comes to light is
that you and Gorgias do know, all the time I’ve been saying I’d never yet met
anyone who did.
Meno But it’s not hard to tell you, Socrates. First, if it’s virtue for a man you wish
to know, that’s easy: virtue for a man is the ability to conduct the city’s affairs
and, in so doing, to help his friends, hurt his foes, and take good care not to get
hurt himself. Or if it’s virtue for a woman you wish for, that’s not hard to
describe: she must run the home well, looking after everything in it and obeying
her husband. And there is another virtue for a child, whether female or male, and
another for an older man, free or slave, whichever you wish. And there are a great
many other virtues, so that there’s no perplexity about saying what virtue is. For
there is virtue for every ﬁeld of practice and time of life, in connection with every
activity, and for every one of us; and vice too in the same way, I think, Socrates.
Soc. I seem to be having a lot of luck, Meno, if in searching for just one virtue
I’ve found a positive swarm of virtues in your possession. But Meno, to follow up
this metaphor of swarms: if I had asked about the nature of a bee and what that
is, and you had said that bees were many and varied, how would you answer me
if I then asked, “Do you say they are many and varied and different from one
another in respect of being bees? Or is it not at all in this respect that they differ,
but in some other respect, such as beauty or size or something else like that?” Tell
me, how would you answer if you were asked that?
Meno I would say that in respect of being bees they are no different from one
another.
Soc. Then if I said next, “Well, tell me then, Meno, what do you say this thing
itself is, in respect of which they are not different but all the same?”, I expect you
would have an answer for me?
Meno Yes I would.
Soc. Then it’s the same with the virtues too: even if they are many and various,
they must still all have one and the same form which makes them virtues.
Presumably it would be right to focus on this in one’s answer and show the
questioner what virtue actually is. Or don’t you understand what I mean?
Meno I think I understand. But I don’t yet grasp the question quite as clearly as
I’d like to.
Soc. Well, is it only about virtue, Meno, that you think as you do—that there is
one for a man, another for a woman, and so on—or do you think the same about
health and size and strength too? Do you think there is one health for a man and
another for a woman? Or is it the same form in every case, if it really is health,
whether in a man or in anything else?
Meno With health, I think it is the same in both man and woman.
Soc. And isn’t it so with size and strength too? If a woman is strong, won’t it be
PLATO
132

the same form, the same strength, that makes her strong? What I mean by “the
same” is that whether strength is in a man or in a woman makes no difference
with respect to its being strength. Or do you think it does make a difference?
Meno No I don’t.
Soc. Well, will whether virtue is in a child, in an old man, in a woman or in a man
make any difference with respect to its being virtue?
Meno I think this is somehow no longer like those other cases, Socrates.
Soc. Well now, didn’t you say that for a man, virtue was running a city well and
for a woman, running a home well?
Meno Yes I did.
Soc. And is it possible to run a city or home or anything else well without
running it temperately and justly?
Meno No indeed.
Soc. And to run it temperately and justly will mean running it with temperance
and justice, won’t it?
Meno It must.
Soc. So they both need the same things if they’re going to be good—both the man
and the woman—justice and temperance?
Meno Apparently they do.
Soc. And what about a child or old man? Surely they could never come to be
good by being undisciplined and unjust?
Meno No indeed.
Soc. But rather, by being temperate and just?
Meno Yes.
Soc. So people are all good in the same way, since they all come to be good by
attaining the same things?
Meno It seems so.
Soc. Now presumably they would not have been good in the same way if the
virtue they’d had were not the same?
Meno No indeed.
Soc. Well then, since virtue is the same for everyone, try to remember and tell me
what Gorgias, and you with him, say it is.
Meno What else but the ability to rule over people, if what you are searching for
is some one thing covering them all.
Soc. That is indeed what I’m searching for. But does a child have the same virtue
too, Meno, or a slave—the ability to rule over his master? Do you think he would
still be a slave, if he were the ruler?
Meno I don’t think so at all, Socrates.
Soc. It’s certainly unlikely, my good chap. For consider this too. You say “ability
to rule.” Won’t we add to this the words “justly, and not unjustly”?
Meno Yes, I think so. For justice is virtue, Socrates.
Soc. Virtue, Meno, or a virtue?
Meno What do you mean by that?
Soc. The same as I would with anything else. For instance, if you like, with
roundness, I’d say that it’s a shape, not simply that it’s shape. The reason I’d say
this is that there are also other shapes.
Meno You’re quite right, since I too say that besides justice there are also other
virtues.
MENO
133

Soc. What are these? Tell me. Just as I’d name some other shapes if you told me
to, so you tell me some other virtues.
Meno Well then, courage is virtue in my opinion, and so are temperance and
wisdom and grandeur, and all the many others.
Soc. The same thing has happened to us as before, Meno. Once again, though in
a different way from last time, we’ve found many virtues while searching for one.
But as for the one virtue which extends through all these, that we can’t discover.
. . .
Meno And how are you going to search for this when you don’t know at all what
it is, Socrates? Which of all the things you don’t know will you set up as target for
your search? And even if you actually come across it, how will you know that it is
that thing which you didn’t know?
Soc. I know what you mean, Meno. Do you see what a disputatious argument
you’re bringing down on us—how it’s impossible for a person to search either for
what he knows or for what he doesn’t? He couldn’t search for what he knows,
for he knows it and no one in that condition needs to search; on the other hand he
couldn’t search for what he doesn’t know, for he won’t even know what to search
for.
Meno And don’t you think that’s a ﬁne argument, Socrates?
Soc. No I don’t.
Meno Can you tell me why?
Soc. Yes I can. I’ve heard men and women wise in matters divine—
Meno Saying what?
Soc. Something both true and beautiful in my opinion.
Meno What is it, and who are the people saying it?
Soc. The people saying it are those priests and priestesses who have made it their
concern to be able to give an account of their practices; Pindar says it too and
many other divinely inspired poets. And as for what they say, it’s this—but
consider if you think what they say is true. They say the soul of man is immortal;
sometimes it comes to an end—which people call dying—while at other times it is
reborn, but it never perishes. So because of this one should live out one’s life in
the holiest possible way, since for those from whom
“Persephone receives
Requital for long grief, their souls she yields
In the ninth year once more to the sun above;
From whom grow noble kings, and men
Swift in strength and great in wisdom;
And to the end of time men call them heroes holy.”
Well, since the soul is immortal, and has been born many times and seen both
what is here, and what is in Hades, and everything, there is nothing it has not
learnt. So no wonder it’s possible that it should recollect both virtue and other
things, as after all it did know them previously. For seeing that the whole of
nature is akin and the soul has learnt everything, there’s nothing to prevent
someone who recollects—which people call learning—just one thing, from dis-
covering everything else, if he’s courageous and doesn’t give up searching;—for
searching and learning are just recollection. So we shouldn’t be persuaded by that
PLATO
134

disputatious argument. That argument would make us lazy, and weak-willed
people love to hear it, but this one makes us industrious and eager to search. It’s
because I’m conﬁdent that this one is true that I’m ready to search with you for
what virtue is.
Meno Yes Socrates—but what do you mean by saying we don’t learn, but what
we call learning is recollection? Can you teach me how that is so?
Soc. Only a minute ago I said you were a rascal, Meno, and now you ask me if I
can teach you—I who say there’s no teaching, only recollecting—obviously all to
show me up as immediately contradicting myself.
Meno No by Zeus, Socrates, I didn’t speak with any such thought, but out of
habit. But if there’s any way you can show me that it is as you say, do show me.
Soc. Well, it’s not easy, but all the same I’m ready to do my best for your sake.
Call me one of these many attendants you have, whichever one you wish, so that I
can demonstrate on him for you.
Meno Yes, certainly. Come here!
Soc. First, is he Greek and does he speak Greek?
Meno Very much so; he was born in our home.
Soc. Observe carefully then which of the two things he shows himself to be
doing, recollecting or learning from me.
Meno I shall, do.
Soc. Tell me now, boy, you know that a square ﬁgure is like this?
Boy Yes I do.
Soc. So a square ﬁgure is one which has all these four lines equal?
Boy Yes indeed.
Soc. And it is one which also has these lines through the middle equal, isn’t it?
[See Figure 1. Throughout his conversation with the slave we must imagine
Socrates drawing ﬁgures as he describes them.]
Boy Yes.
Soc. And there could be both bigger and smaller ﬁgures like this, couldn’t there?
Boy Yes indeed.
Soc. Well, if this side were two feet long and this other side two feet, how many
feet big would the whole be? Think of it like this: if it had been two feet this way
and only one foot that way, wouldn’t the ﬁgure have been two feet times one?
Figure 1
MENO
135

Boy Yes.
Soc. But since it’s two feet that way also, doesn’t it come to two times two?
Boy It does.
Soc. So it comes to two times two feet?
Boy Yes.
Soc. Well, how many are two times two? Work it out and tell me.
Boy Four, Socrates.
Soc. Well, there could be another ﬁgure twice the size of this one but like it,
couldn’t there, having all its lines equal just like this one?
Boy Yes.
Soc. How many feet big will it be, then?
Boy Eight.
Soc. Well now, try to tell me how long each line of that one will be. The line for
this one is two feet long; what about the line for that one which is twice the size?
Boy Clearly it’ll be twice the length, Socrates.
Soc. Do you see, Meno, how I’m not teaching him anything but instead asking
him everything? And at present he supposes he knows what kind of line the eight-
foot ﬁgure will come from—or don’t you think he does?
Meno Yes I do.
Soc. And does he know?
Meno No indeed.
Soc. But he supposes it will come from a line twice the length?
Meno Yes.
Soc. Then watch him recollecting in order, as one has to do.
Now, you tell me. You say that a ﬁgure twice the size comes from a line twice
the length? I mean a ﬁgure like this one, not long one way and short the other, but
it’s to be equal in each direction just like this one, only twice the size, eight feet
big—but see whether you still think it will come from the line twice the length.
Boy I do.
Soc. Well, this line comes to twice the length of this one, doesn’t it, if we add on
another of the same length starting here?
Boy Yes indeed.
Soc. Then this is the line you say the eight-foot ﬁgure will come from, if there
came to be four lines of the same length.
Boy Yes.
Soc. Let’s draw four equal lines starting from it, then. Isn’t this what you say
would be the eight-foot ﬁgure?
Boy Yes indeed.
Soc. And inside it, aren’t there these four ﬁgures, of which each one is equal to
this four-foot ﬁgure? [See Figure 2]
Boy Yes.
Soc. How big is it then? Isn’t it four times the size?
Boy Yes, of course.
Soc. So what’s four times the size is twice the size?
Boy No, by Zeus.
Soc. But how many times the size is it?
Boy Four times.
Soc. So it’s not a ﬁgure twice the size that comes from a line twice the length, my
PLATO
136

boy, but one four times the size.
Boy What you say is true.
Soc. For four times four is sixteen, isn’t it?
Boy Yes.
Soc. But what line does an eight-foot ﬁgure come from? From this line comes a
ﬁgure four times the size, doesn’t it?
Boy I agree.
Soc. And this quarter-size ﬁgure comes from this half-length line, doesn’t it?
Boy Yes.
Soc. Right. The eight-foot ﬁgure is twice the size of this one and half the size of
that one, isn’t it?
Boy Yes.
Soc. Won’t it be from a line bigger than this one but smaller than that? Or not?
Boy I think that is so.
Soc. Fine; always answer what you think. And tell me, wasn’t this line two feet
long and the other one four feet?
Boy Yes.
Soc. So the line for the eight-foot ﬁgure needs to be bigger than this two-foot
line, but smaller than the four-foot one.
Boy It does.
Soc. Then try to tell me how long a line you say it is.
Boy Three feet.
Soc. Well, if it’s to be three feet long, we’ll add on half as much again of this line
and that will be three feet, won’t it?—these two feet here, plus this one more. And
over here in the same way there will be these two feet here plus this one more, and
here comes the ﬁgure you say. [See Figure 3]
Boy Yes.
Figure 2
MENO
137

Soc. Then if it’s three feet this way and three feet this way, doesn’t the whole
ﬁgure come to three times three feet?
Boy Apparently:
Soc. And how many feet are three times three?
Boy Nine.
Soc. And how many feet big did the ﬁgure which is twice the size have to be?
Boy Eight.
Soc. So a three-foot line is still not what an eight-foot ﬁgure comes from, either?
Boy No indeed.
Soc. But what line is? Try to tell us exactly, and if you don’t wish to put a number
to it, show us what it is instead.
Boy But by Zeus, Socrates, I certainly don’t know.
Soc. Are you observing again, Meno, what stage he’s reached now in recollect-
ing? At ﬁrst he didn’t know what the baseline of the eight-foot ﬁgure was, just as
he still doesn’t know it now either, but at that time he supposed he did know, and
answered boldly like someone with knowledge, and didn’t think he was per-
plexed. But now he has begun to think he’s perplexed, and besides not knowing,
he doesn’t suppose he knows either.
Meno What you say is true.
Soc. And isn’t he in a better state now in relation to the thing he doesn’t know?
Meno I think that is so too.
Soc. Well, in making him perplexed and torpifying him like a torpedo ﬁsh does,
we’ve done him no harm, have we?
Meno No, I don’t think so.
Soc. In fact it seems we’ve done him a service towards ﬁnding the real answer, for
now he’d gladly search for what he doesn’t know, whereas then he’d have sup-
posed he could speak well with ease in front of many people and on many
occasions, about how a ﬁgure twice the size has to have its baseline twice the
length.
Meno It seems so.
Soc. Well, do you think he would have attempted to search out or learn what he
Figure 3
PLATO
138

supposed he knew but in fact didn’t, till he fell into perplexity on coming to think
he didn’t know, and began longing for knowledge?
Meno I don’t think so, Socrates.
Soc. So he has beneﬁted from being torpiﬁed?
Meno I think so.
Soc. Now look what he’ll go on from this state of perplexity to discover as he
searches with me, while I do nothing but ask questions, not teach him. Watch out
in case you ever ﬁnd me teaching and instructing him instead of drawing out his
own opinions.
You tell me, this is our four-foot ﬁgure, isn’t it? You understand?
Boy Yes I do.
Soc. And we could add on to it this other equal one here.
Boy Yes.
Soc. And this third one equal to each of the others?
Boy Yes.
Soc. Then we could ﬁll in this one in the corner as well, couldn’t we?
Boy Yes indeed.
Soc. And these would come out four equal ﬁgures, wouldn’t they?
Boy Yes.
Soc. Now then, how many times the size of this one here does this whole thing
here come to?
Boy Four times the size.
Soc. While what we had to get was one twice the size. Or don’t you remember?
Boy I do indeed.
Soc. Then there’s a line here from corner to corner, isn’t there, cutting each of the
ﬁgures in two?
Boy Yes.
Soc. And these four lines come out equal, don’t they, and surround this ﬁgure
here? [See Figure 4]
Boy Yes they do.
Soc. Now consider. How big is this ﬁgure?
Boy I don’t understand.
Soc. Of these four ﬁgures here, hasn’t half of each been cut off and enclosed by
each line? Or is that not so?
Boy Yes.
Soc. Then how many bits of that size are there inside here?
Boy Four.
Soc. And how many inside here?
Boy Two.
Soc. And how much is four as compared to two?
Boy Twice as much.
Soc. Then how big does this ﬁgure come out?
Boy Eight feet big.
Soc. And what line does it come from?
Boy This one.
Soc. The one stretching from corner to corner of the four-foot ﬁgure?
Boy Yes.
Soc. What the experts call that is the diagonal. So if the diagonal is the name of
MENO
139

this line then you, Meno’s boy, say that a ﬁgure of twice the size would come
from the diagonal.
Boy Yes indeed, Socrates.
Soc. What do you think, Meno. Has he answered with any opinions but his
own?
Meno No, only with his own.
Soc. And yet he certainly didn’t know, as we said a little while ago.
Meno What you say is true.
Soc. But he certainly had these opinions in him—or didn’t he?
Meno Yes.
Soc. So someone who doesn’t know something, whatever it may be he doesn’t
know, has true opinions in him about the very thing he doesn’t know?
Meno It appears so.
Soc. And at present it’s as though in a dream that these opinions have just been
aroused in him. But if someone questions him many times and in many ways
about the same things as now, you may be sure he will end up knowing them as
precisely as anyone does.
Meno It seems so.
Soc. And it won’t be through being taught by anyone that he knows, will it, but
through being questioned, recovering the knowledge from within him for
himself?
Meno Yes.
Soc. And recovering knowledge which is within one for oneself is recollecting,
isn’t it?
Meno Yes indeed.
Soc. Well, the knowledge which this boy has now—he either acquired it some-
time or else always had it, didn’t he?
Figure 4
PLATO
140

Meno Yes.
Soc. Then if he always had it, it follows that he was always in a state of know-
ledge. On the other hand, if he acquired it sometime, it could certainly not be in
his present life that he has done so. Or has someone taught him geometry? For he
will do just the same with anything in geometry or any other subject of know-
ledge. Has someone taught him everything, then? Presumably you should know,
especially as he’s been born and brought up in your home.
Meno No, I know that no one ever taught him.
Soc. And does he have these opinions or not?
Meno Apparently he must, Socrates.
Soc. And if that is without acquiring them in his present life, doesn’t it clearly
follow that he had them and had learnt them at some other time?
Meno Apparently.
Soc. And that means the time when he was not a human being, doesn’t it?
Meno Yes.
Soc. Well, if both during the time that he is a human being, and during the time
that he is not, there are going to be true opinions within him which become
knowledge when aroused by questioning, isn’t his soul going to be for all time in
a state of having learnt? For it’s clear that at every time he either is, or is not, a
human being.
Meno Apparently.
Soc. Then if the truth about the things which are is in our souls always, the soul
must be immortal, must it not? So shouldn’t you boldly try to search for and
recollect what you happen not to know—that is, not to remember—at present?
Meno I think that is well said, somehow or other, Socrates.
Soc. Yes, I think so too, Meno. I wouldn’t be absolutely adamant about the rest
of the argument, but that we shall be better people, more manly and less slothful,
by supposing that one should enquire about things one doesn’t know, than if we
suppose that when we don’t know things we can’t ﬁnd them out either and
needn’t search for them—this is something for which I absolutely would ﬁght,
both in word and deed, to the limit of my powers.
QUESTIONS
1
Socrates claims not to teach the slave boy anything. What is he doing instead?
2
When Socrates shows the slave boy his ignorance, why is this supposed to be
good?
MENO
141

Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason
Introduction
I. The distinction between pure and empirical knowledge
There can be no doubt that all our knowledge begins with experience. For how
should our faculty of knowledge be awakened into action did not objects affect-
ing our senses partly of themselves produce representations, partly arouse the
activity of our understanding to compare these representations, and, by combin-
ing or separating them, work up the raw material of the sensible impressions into
that knowledge of objects which is entitled experience? In the order of time,
therefore, we have no knowledge antecedent to experience, and with experience
all our knowledge begins.
But though all our knowledge begins with experience, it does not follow that it
all arises out of experience. For it may well be that even our empirical knowledge
is made up of what we receive through impressions and of what our own faculty
of knowledge (sensible impressions serving merely as the occasion) supplies from
itself. If our faculty of knowledge makes any such addition, it may be that we are
not in a position to distinguish it from the raw material, until with long practice
of attention we have become skilled in separating it.
This, then, is a question which at least calls for closer examination, and does
not allow of any off-hand answer:—whether there is any knowledge that is thus
independent of experience and even of all impressions of the senses. Such know-
ledge is entitled a priori, and distinguished from the empirical, which has its
sources a posteriori, that is, in experience.
The expression “a priori” does not, however, indicate with sufﬁcient precision
the full meaning of our question. For it has been customary to say, even of much
knowledge that is derived from empirical sources, that we have it or are capable
of having it a priori, meaning thereby that we do not derive it immediately from
experience, but from a universal rule—a rule which is itself, however, borrowed
by us from experience. Thus we would say of a man who undermined the founda-
tions of his house, that he might have known a priori that it would fall, that is,
that he need not have waited for the experience of its actual falling. But still
he could not know this completely a priori. For he had ﬁrst to learn through
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith (New York: St
Martin’s Press, 1963).
142

experience that bodies are heavy, and therefore fall when their supports are
withdrawn.
In what follows, therefore, we shall understand by a priori knowledge, not
knowledge independent of this or that experience, but knowledge absolutely
independent of all experience. Opposed to it is empirical knowledge, which is
knowledge possible only a posteriori, that is, through experience. A priori modes
of knowledge are entitled pure when there is no admixture of anything empirical.
Thus, for instance, the proposition, “every alteration has its cause,” while an a
priori proposition, is not a pure proposition, because alteration is a concept
which can be derived only from experience.
II. We are in possession of certain modes of a priori knowledge, and even the
common understanding is never without them
What we here require is a criterion by which to distinguish with certainty
between pure and empirical knowledge. Experience teaches us that a thing is so
and so, but not that it cannot be otherwise. First, then, if we have a proposition
which in being thought is thought as necessary, it is an a priori judgment; and if,
besides, it is not derived from any proposition except one which also has the
validity of a necessary judgment, it is an absolutely a priori judgment. Secondly,
experience never confers on its judgments true or strict, but only assumed and
comparative universality, through induction. We can properly only say, there-
fore, that, so far as we have hitherto observed, there is no exception to this or that
rule. If, then, a judgment is thought with strict universality, that is, in such man-
ner that no exception is allowed as possible, it is not derived from experience, but
is valid absolutely a priori. Empirical universality is only an arbitrary extension
of a validity holding in most cases to one which holds in all, for instance, in the
proposition, “all bodies are heavy.” When, on the other hand, strict universality
is essential to a judgment, this indicates a special source of knowledge, namely,
a faculty of a priori knowledge. Necessity and strict universality are thus sure
criteria of a priori knowledge, and are inseparable from one another. But since in
the employment of these criteria the contingency of judgments is sometimes more
easily shown than their empirical limitation, or, as sometimes also happens, their
unlimited universality can be more convincingly proved than their necessity, it is
advisable to use the two criteria separately, each by itself being infallible.
Now it is easy to show that there actually are in human knowledge judgments
which are necessary and in the strictest sense universal, and which are therefore
pure a priori judgments. If an example from the sciences be desired, we have only
to look to any of the propositions of mathematics; if we seek an example from the
understanding in its quite ordinary employment, the proposition, “every alter-
ation must have a cause,” will serve our purpose. In the latter case, indeed, the
very concept of a cause so manifestly contains the concept of a necessity of
connection with an effect and of the strict universality of the rule, that the con-
cept would be altogether lost if we attempted to derive it, as Hume has done,
from a repeated association of that which happens with that which precedes, and
from a custom of connecting representations, a custom originating in this
repeated association, and constituting therefore a merely subjective necessity.
Even without appealing to such examples, it is possible to show that pure a priori
CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON
143

principles are indispensable for the possibility of experience, and so to prove their
existence a priori. For whence could experience derive its certainty, if all the
rules, according to which it proceeds, were always themselves empirical, and
therefore contingent? Such rules could hardly be regarded as ﬁrst principles. At
present, however, we may be content to have established the fact that our faculty
of knowledge does have a pure employment, and to have shown what are the
criteria of such an employment.
Such a priori origin is manifest in certain concepts, no less than in judgments. If
we remove from our empirical concept of a body, one by one, every feature in it
which is [merely] empirical, the colour, the hardness or softness, the weight, even
the impenetrability, there still remains the space which the body (now entirely
vanished) occupied, and this cannot be removed. Again, if we remove from our
empirical concept of any object, corporeal or incorporeal, all properties which
experience has taught us, we yet cannot take away that property through which
the object is thought as substance or as inhering in a substance (although this
concept of substance is more determinate than that of an object in general).
Owing, therefore, to the necessity with which this concept of substance forces
itself upon us, we have no option save to admit that it has its seat in our faculty of
a priori knowledge.
III. Philosophy stands in need of a science which shall determine the possibility,
the principles, and the extent of all a priori knowledge
But what is still more extraordinary than all the preceding is this, that certain
modes of knowledge leave the ﬁeld of all possible experiences and have the
appearance of extending the scope of our judgments beyond all limits of experi-
ence, and this by means of concepts to which no corresponding object can ever be
given in experience.
It is precisely by means of the latter modes of knowledge, in a realm beyond the
world of the senses, where experience can yield neither guidance nor correction,
that our reason carries on those enquiries which owing to their importance we
consider to be far more excellent, and in their purpose far more lofty, than all that
the understanding can learn in the ﬁeld of appearances. Indeed we prefer to run
every risk of error rather than desist from such urgent enquiries, on the ground of
their dubious character, or from disdain and indifference. These unavoidable
problems set by pure reason itself are God, freedom, and immortality. The sci-
ence which, with all its preparations, is in its ﬁnal intention directed solely to
their solution is metaphysics; and its procedure is at ﬁrst dogmatic, that is, it
conﬁdently sets itself to this task without any previous examination of the cap-
acity or incapacity of reason for so great an undertaking.
Now it does indeed seem natural that, as soon as we have left the ground of
experience, we should, through careful enquiries, assure ourselves as to the foun-
dations of any building that we propose to erect, not making use of any know-
ledge that we possess without ﬁrst determining whence it has come, and not
trusting to principles without knowing their origin. It is natural, that is to say,
that the question should ﬁrst be considered, how the understanding can arrive at
all this knowledge a priori, and what extent, validity, and worth it may have.
Nothing, indeed, could be more natural, if by the term “natural” we signify what
IMMANUEL KANT
144

ﬁttingly and reasonably ought to happen. But if we mean by “natural” what
ordinarily happens, then on the contrary nothing is more natural and more intel-
ligible than the fact that this enquiry has been so long neglected. For one part of
this knowledge, the mathematical, has long been of established reliability, and so
gives rise to a favourable presumption as regards the other part, which may yet be
of quite different nature. Besides, once we are outside the circle of experience, we
can be sure of not being contradicted by experience. The charm of extending our
knowledge is so great that nothing short of encountering a direct contradiction
can sufﬁce to arrest us in our course; and this can be avoided, if we are careful in
our fabrications—which none the less will still remain fabrications. Mathematics
gives us a shining example of how far, independently of experience, we can pro-
gress in a priori knowledge. It does, indeed, occupy itself with objects and with
knowledge solely in so far as they allow of being exhibited in intuition. But this
circumstance is easily overlooked, since this intuition can itself be given a priori,
and is therefore hardly to be distinguished from a bare and pure concept. Misled
by such a proof of the power of reason, the demand for the extension of know-
ledge recognises no limits. The light dove, cleaving the air in her free ﬂight, and
feeling its resistance, might imagine that its ﬂight would be still easier in empty
space. It was thus that Plato left the world of the senses, as setting too narrow
limits to the understanding, and ventured out beyond it on the wings of the ideas,
in the empty space of the pure understanding. He did not observe that with all his
efforts he made no advance—meeting no resistance that might, as it were, serve
as a support upon which he could take a stand, to which he could apply his
powers, and so set his understanding in motion. It is, indeed, the common fate of
human reason to complete its speculative structures as speedily as may be, and
only afterwards to enquire whether the foundations are reliable. All sorts of
excuses will then be appealed to, in order to reassure us of their solidity, or rather
indeed to enable us to dispense altogether with so late and so dangerous an
enquiry. But what keeps us, during the actual building, free from all apprehen-
sion and suspicion, and ﬂatters us with a seeming thoroughness, is this other
circumstance, namely, that a great, perhaps the greatest, part of the business of
our reason consists in analysis of the concepts which we already have of objects.
This analysis supplies us with a considerable body of knowledge, which, while
nothing but explanation or elucidation of what has already been thought in our
concepts, though in a confused manner, is yet prized as being, at least as regards
its form, new insight. But so far as the matter or content is concerned, there has
been no extension of our previously possessed concepts, but only an analysis of
them. Since this procedure yields real knowledge a priori, which progresses in an
assured and useful fashion, reason is so far misled as surreptitiously to introduce,
without itself being aware of so doing, assertions of an entirely different order, in
which it attaches to given concepts others completely foreign to them, and more-
over attaches them a priori. And yet it is not known how reason can be in
position to do this. Such a question is never so much as thought of. I shall
therefore at once proceed to deal with the difference between these two kinds of
knowledge.
CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON
145

IV. The distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments
In all judgments in which the relation of a subject to the predicate is thought (I
take into consideration afﬁrmative judgments only, the subsequent application to
negative judgments being easily made), this relation is possible in two different
ways. Either the predicate B belongs to the subject A, as something which is
(covertly) contained in this concept A; or B lies outside the concept A, although it
does indeed stand in connection with it. In the one case I entitle the judgment
analytic, in the other synthetic. Analytic judgments (afﬁrmative) are therefore
those in which the connection of the predicate with the subject is thought through
identity; those in which this connection is thought without identity should be
entitled synthetic. The former, as adding nothing through the predicate to the
concept of the subject, but merely breaking it up into those constituent concepts
that have all along been thought in it, although confusedly, can also be entitled
explicative. The latter, on the other hand, add to the concept of the subject a
predicate which has not been in any wise thought in it, and which no analysis
could possibly extract from it; and they may therefore be entitled ampliative. If I
say, for instance, “All bodies are extended,” this is an analytic judgment. For I do
not require to go beyond the concept which I connect with “body” in order to
ﬁnd extension as bound up with it. To meet with this predicate, I have merely to
analyse the concept, that is, to become conscious to myself of the manifold which
I always think in that concept. The judgment is therefore analytic. But when I say,
“All bodies are heavy,” the predicate is something quite different from anything
that I think in the mere concept of body in general; and the addition of such a
predicate therefore yields a synthetic judgment.
Judgments of experience, as such, are one and all synthetic. For it would be
absurd to found an analytic judgment on experience. Since, in framing the judg-
ment, I must not go outside my concept, there is no need to appeal to the testi-
mony of experience in its support. That a body is extended is a proposition that
holds a priori and is not empirical. For, before appealing to experience, I have
already in the concept of body all the conditions required for my judgment. I have
only to extract from it, in accordance with the principle of contradiction, the
required predicate, and in so doing can at the same time become conscious of the
necessity of the judgment—and that is what experience could never have taught
me. On the other hand, though I do not include in the concept of a body in
general the predicate “weight,” none the less this concept indicates an object of
experience through one of its parts, and I can add to that part other parts of this
same experience, as in this way belonging together with the concept. From the
start I can apprehend the concept of body analytically through the characters of
extension, impenetrability, ﬁgure, etc., all of which are thought in the concept.
Now, however, looking back on the experience from which I have derived this
concept of body, and ﬁnding weight to be invariably connected with the above
characters, I attach it as a predicate to the concept; and in doing so I attach it
synthetically, and am therefore extending my knowledge. The possibility of the
synthesis of the predicate “weight” with the concept of “body” thus rests upon
experience. While the one concept is not contained in the other, they yet belong
to one another, though only contingently, as parts of a whole, namely, of an
experience which is itself a synthetic combination of intuitions.
IMMANUEL KANT
146

But in a priori synthetic judgments this help is entirely lacking. [I do not
here have the advantage of looking around in the ﬁeld of experience.] Upon
what, then, am I to rely, when I seek to go beyond the concept A, and to
know that another concept B is connected with it? Through what is the syn-
thesis made possible? Let us take the proposition, “Everything which happens
has its cause.” In the concept of “something which happens,” I do indeed
think an existence which is preceded by a time, etc., and from this concept
analytic judgments may be obtained. But the concept of a “cause” lies entirely
outside the other concept, and signiﬁes something different from “that which
happens,” and is not therefore in any way contained in this latter representa-
tion. How come I then to predicate of that which happens something quite
different, and to apprehend that the concept of cause, though not contained in
it, yet belongs, and indeed necessarily belongs, to it? What is here the
unknown = X which gives support to the understanding when it believes that
it can discover outside the concept A a predicate B foreign to this concept,
which it yet at the same time considers to be connected with it? It cannot be
experience, because the suggested principle has connected the second represen-
tation with the ﬁrst, not only with greater universality, but also with the
character of necessity, and therefore completely a priori and on the basis of
mere concepts. Upon such synthetic, that is, ampliative principles, all our a
priori speculative knowledge must ultimately rest; analytic judgments are very
important, and indeed necessary, but only for obtaining that clearness in the
concepts which is requisite for such a sure and wide synthesis as will lead to a
genuinely new addition to all previous knowledge.
V. In all theoretical sciences of reason synthetic a priori judgments are
contained as principles
1. All mathematical judgments, without exception, are synthetic. This fact,
though incontestably certain and in its consequences very important, has hitherto
escaped the notice of those who are engaged in the analysis of human reason, and
is, indeed, directly opposed to all their conjectures. For as it was found that all
mathematical inferences proceed in accordance with the principle of contradic-
tion (which the nature of all apodeictic certainty requires), it was supposed that
the fundamental propositions of the science can themselves be known to be true2
through that principle. This is an erroneous view. For though a synthetic prop-
osition can indeed be discerned in accordance with the principle of contradiction,
this can only be if another synthetic proposition is presupposed, and if it can then
be apprehended as following from this other proposition; it can never be so
discerned in and by itself.
First of all, it has to be noted that mathematical propositions, strictly so
called, are always judgments a priori, not empirical; because they carry with
them necessity, which cannot be derived from experience. If this be demurred to,
I am willing to limit my statement to pure mathematics, the very concept of
which implies that it does not contain empirical, but only pure a priori
knowledge.
We might, indeed, at ﬁrst suppose that the proposition 7 + 5 = 12 is a merely
analytic proposition, and follows by the principle of contradiction from the
CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON
147

concept of a sum of 7 and 5. But if we look more closely we ﬁnd that the concept
of the sum of 7 and 5 contains nothing save the union of the two numbers into
one, and in this no thought is being taken as to what that single number may be
which combines both. The concept of 12 is by no means already thought in
merely thinking this union of 7 and 5; and I may analyse my concept of such a
possible sum as long as I please, still I shall never ﬁnd the 12 in it. We have to go
outside these concepts, and call in the aid of the intuition which corresponds to
one of them, our ﬁve ﬁngers, for instance, or, as Segner does in his Arithmetic, ﬁve
points, adding to the concept of 7, unit by unit, the ﬁve given in intuition. For
starting with the number 7, and for the concept of 5 calling in the aid of the
ﬁngers of my hand as intuition, I now add one by one to the number 7 the units
which I previously took together to form the number 5, and with the aid of that
ﬁgure [the hand] see the number 12 come into being. That 5 should be added to 7,
I have indeed already thought in the concept of a sum = 7 + 5, but not that this
sum is equivalent to the number 12. Arithmetical propositions are therefore
always synthetic. This is still more evident if we take larger numbers. For it is then
obvious that, however we might turn and twist our concepts, we could never, by
the mere analysis of them, and without the aid of intuition, discover what [the
number is that] is the sum.
Just as little is any fundamental proposition of pure geometry analytic. That
the straight line between two points is the shortest, is a synthetic proposition. For
my concept of straight contains nothing of quantity, but only of quality. The
concept of the shortest is wholly an addition, and cannot be derived, through any
process of analysis, from the concept of the straight line. Intuition, therefore,
must here be called in; only by its aid is the synthesis possible. What here causes
us commonly to believe that the predicate of such apodeictic judgments is already
contained in our concept, and that the judgment is therefore analytic, is merely
the ambiguous character of the terms used. We are required to join in thought a
certain predicate to a given concept, and this necessity is inherent in the concepts
themselves. But the question is not what we ought to join in thought to the given
concept, but what we actually think in it, even if only obscurely; and it is then
manifest that, while the predicate is indeed attached necessarily to the concept, it
is so in virtue of an intuition which must be added to the concept, not as thought
in the concept itself.
Some few fundamental propositions, presupposed by the geometrician, are,
indeed, really analytic, and rest on the principle of contradiction. But, as identical
propositions, they serve only as links in the chain of method and not as prin-
ciples; for instance, a = a; the whole is equal to itself; or (a + b)>a, that is, the
whole is greater than its part. And even these propositions, though they are valid
according to pure concepts, are only admitted in mathematics because they can
be exhibited in intuition.
2. Natural science (physics) contains a priori synthetic judgments as prin-
ciples. I need cite only two such judgments: that in all changes of the material
world the quantity of matter remains unchanged; and that in all communication
of motion, action and reaction must always be equal. Both propositions, it is
evident, are not only necessary, and therefore in their origin a priori, but also
synthetic. For in the concept of matter I do not think its permanence, but only its
presence in the space which it occupies. I go outside and beyond the concept of
IMMANUEL KANT
148

matter, joining to it a priori in thought something which I have not thought in it.
The proposition is not, therefore, analytic, but synthetic, and yet is thought a
priori; and so likewise are the other propositions of the pure part of natural
science.
3. Metaphysics, even if we look upon it as having hitherto failed in all its
endeavours, is yet, owing to the nature of human reason, a quite indispensable
science, and ought to contain a priori synthetic knowledge. For its business is not
merely to analyse concepts which we make for ourselves a priori of things, and
thereby to clarify them analytically, but to extend our a priori knowledge. And
for this purpose we must employ principles which add to the given concept
something that was not contained in it, and through a priori synthetic judgments
venture out so far that experience is quite unable to follow us, as, for instance, in
the proposition, that the world must have a ﬁrst beginning, and such like. Thus
metaphysics consists, at least in intention, entirely of a priori synthetic
propositions. . . .
Space
. . .
§3 The transcendental exposition of the concept of space
I understand by a transcendental exposition the explanation of a concept, as a
principle from which the possibility of other a priori synthetic knowledge can be
understood. For this purpose it is required (1) that such knowledge does really
ﬂow from the given concept, (2) that this knowledge is possible only on the
assumption of a given mode of explaining the concept.
Geometry is a science which determines the properties of space synthetically,
and yet a priori. What, then, must be our representation of space, in order that
such knowledge of it may be possible? It must in its origin be intuition; for from a
mere concept no propositions can be obtained which go beyond the concept—as
happens in geometry (Introduction, V). Further, this intuition must be a priori,
that is, it must be found in us prior to any perception of an object, and must
therefore be pure, not empirical, intuition. For geometrical propositions are one
and all apodeictic, that is, are bound up with the consciousness of their necessity;
for instance, that space has only three dimensions. Such propositions cannot be
empirical or, in other words, judgments of experience, nor can they be derived
from any such judgments (Introduction, II).
How, then, can there exist in the mind an outer intuition which precedes the
objects themselves, and in which the concept of these objects can be determined a
priori? Manifestly, not otherwise than in so far as the intuition has its seat in the
subject only, as the formal character of the subject, in virtue of which, in being
affected by objects, it obtains immediate representation, that is, intuition, of
them; and only in so far, therefore, as it is merely the form of outer sense in
general.
Our explanation is thus the only explanation that makes intelligible the
possibility of geometry, as a body of a priori synthetic knowledge. Any mode
of explanation which fails to do this, although it may otherwise seem to be
CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON
149

somewhat similar, can by this criterion1 be distinguished from it with the greatest
certainty.
Conclusions from the above concepts
(a) Space does not represent any property of things in themselves, nor does it
represent them in their relation to one another. That is to say, space does not
represent any determination that attaches to the objects themselves, and which
remains even when abstraction has been made of all the subjective conditions of
intuition. For no determinations, whether absolute or relative, can be intuited
prior to the existence of the things to which they belong, and none, therefore, can
be intuited a priori.
(b) Space is nothing but the form of all appearances of outer sense. It is the
subjective condition of sensibility, under which alone outer intuition is possible
for us. Since, then, the receptivity of the subject, its capacity to be affected by
objects, must necessarily precede all intuitions of these objects, it can readily be
understood how the form of all appearances can be given prior to all actual
perceptions, and so exist in the mind a priori, and how, as a pure intuition, in
which all objects must be determined, it can contain, prior to all experience,
principles which determine the relations of these objects.
It is, therefore, solely from the human standpoint that we can speak of space,
of extended things, etc. If we depart from the subjective condition under which
alone we can have outer intuition, namely, liability to be affected by objects, the
representation of space stands for nothing whatsoever. This predicate can be
ascribed to things only in so far as they appear to us, that is, only to objects of
sensibility. The constant form of this receptivity, which we term sensibility, is a
necessary condition of all the relations in which objects can be intuited as outside
us; and if we abstract from these objects, it is a pure intuition, and bears the name
of space. Since we cannot treat the special conditions of sensibility as conditions
of the possibility of things, but only of their appearances, we can indeed say that
space comprehends all things that appear to us as external, but not all things in
themselves, by whatever subject they are intuited, or whether they be intuited or
not. For we cannot judge in regard to the intuitions of other thinking beings,
whether they are bound by the same conditions as those which limit our intuition
and which for us are universally valid. If we add to the concept of the subject of a
judgment the limitation under which the judgment is made, the judgment is then
unconditionally valid. The proposition, that all things are side by side in space, is
valid under the limitation that these things are viewed as objects of our sensible
intuition. If, now, I add the condition to the concept, and say that all things, as
outer appearances, are side by side in space, the rule is valid universally and
without limitation. Our exposition therefore establishes the reality, that is, the
objective validity, of space in respect of whatever can be presented to us out-
wardly as object, but also at the same time the ideality of space in respect of
things when they are considered in themselves through reason, that is, without
regard to the constitution of our sensibility. We assert, then, the empirical real-
ity of space, as regards all possible outer experience; and yet at the same time
we assert its transcendental ideality—in other words, that it is nothing at all,
immediately we withdraw the above condition, namely, its limitation to
IMMANUEL KANT
150

possible experience, and so look upon it as something that underlies things in
themselves.
With the sole exception of space there is no subjective representation, referring
to something outer, which could be entitled [at once] objective [and] a priori. For
there is no other subjective representation from which we can derive a priori
synthetic propositions, as we can from intuition in space (§ 3). Strictly speaking,
therefore, these other representations have no ideality, although they agree with
the representation of space in this respect, that they belong merely to the subject-
ive constitution of our manner of sensibility, for instance, of sight, hearing,
touch, as in the case of the sensations of colours, sounds, and heat, which, since
they are mere sensations and not intuitions, do not of themselves yield knowledge
of any object, least of all any a priori knowledge.
The above remark is intended only to guard anyone from supposing that the
ideality of space as here asserted can be illustrated by examples so altogether
insufﬁcient as colours, taste, etc. For these cannot rightly be regarded as proper-
ties of things, but only as changes in the subject, changes which may, indeed, be
different for different men. In such examples as these, that which originally is
itself only appearance, for instance, a rose, is being treated by the empirical
understanding as a thing in itself, which, nevertheless, in respect of its colour, can
appear differently to every observer. The transcendental concept of appearances
in space, on the other hand, is a critical reminder that nothing intuited in space is
a thing in itself, that space is not a form inhering in things in themselves as their
intrinsic property, that objects in themselves are quite unknown to us, and that
what we call outer objects are nothing but mere representations of our sensibility,
the form of which is space. The true correlate of sensibility, the thing in itself,
is not known, and cannot be known, through these representations; and in
experience no question is ever asked in regard to it.
QUESTIONS
1
What is meant by an “analytic” truth?
2
What is “a priori” knowledge?
3
Give three examples of what Kant would consider to be synthetic, a priori
knowledge.
4
According to Kant, what is space?
5
According to Kant, about what sorts of things can we know that they are all side
by side in space?
CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON
151

Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy
Chapter VIII How a priori knowledge is possible
Immanuel Kant is generally regarded as the greatest of the modern philosophers.
Though he lived through the Seven Years War and the French Revolution, he
never interrupted his teaching of philosophy at Königsberg in East Prussia. His
most distinctive contribution was the invention of what he called the “critical”
philosophy, which, assuming as a datum that there is knowledge of various
kinds, inquired how such knowledge comes to be possible, and deduced, from the
answer to this inquiry, many metaphysical results as to the nature of the world.
Whether these results were valid may well be doubted. But Kant undoubtedly
deserves credit for two things: ﬁrst, for having perceived that we have a priori
knowledge which is not purely “analytic,” i.e. such that the opposite would be
self-contradictory; and secondly, for having made evident the philosophical
importance of the theory of knowledge.
Before the time of Kant, it was generally held that whatever knowledge was a
priori must be “analytic.” What this word means will be best illustrated by
examples. If I say, “A bald man is a man,” “A plane ﬁgure is a ﬁgure,” “A bad
poet is a poet,” I make a purely analytic judgement: the subject spoken about is
given as having at least two properties, of which one is singled out to be asserted
of it. Such propositions as the above are trivial, and would never be enunciated in
real life except by an orator preparing the way for a piece of sophistry. They are
called “analytic” because the predicate is obtained by merely analysing the sub-
ject. Before the time of Kant it was thought that all judgements of which we could
be certain a priori were of this kind: that in all of them there was a predicate
which was only part of the subject of which it was asserted. If this were so, we
should be involved in a deﬁnite contradiction if we attempted to deny anything
that could be known a priori. “A bald man is not bald” would assert and deny
baldness of the same man, and would therefore contradict itself. Thus according
to the philosophers before Kant, the law of contradiction, which asserts that
nothing can at the same time have and not have a certain property, sufﬁced to
establish the truth of all a priori knowledge.
Hume (1711–76), who preceded Kant, accepting the usual view as to what
makes knowledge a priori, discovered that, in many cases which had previously
Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1959).
152

been supposed analytic, and notably in the case of cause and effect, the con-
nexion was really synthetic. Before Hume, rationalists at least had supposed that
the effect could be logically deduced from the cause, if only we had sufﬁcient
knowledge. Hume argued—correctly, as would now be generally admitted—that
this could not be done. Hence he inferred the far more doubtful proposition that
nothing could be known a priori about the connexion of cause and effect. Kant,
who had been educated in the rationalist tradition, was much perturbed by
Hume’s scepticism, and endeavoured to ﬁnd an answer to it. He perceived that
not only the connexion of cause and effect, but all the propositions of arithmetic
and geometry, are “synthetic,” i.e. not analytic: in all these propositions, no
analysis of the subject will reveal the predicate. His stock instance was the prop-
osition 7 + 5 = 12. He pointed out, quite truly, that 7 and 5 have to be put
together to give 12: the idea of 12 is not contained in them, nor even in the idea of
adding them together. Thus he was led to the conclusion that all pure mathemat-
ics, though a priori, is synthetic; and this conclusion raised a new problem of
which he endeavoured to ﬁnd the solution.
The question which Kant put at the beginning of his philosophy, namely
“How is pure mathematics possible?” is an interesting and difﬁcult one, to which
every philosophy which is not purely sceptical must ﬁnd some answer. The
answer of the pure empiricists, that our mathematical knowledge is derived by
induction from particular instances, we have already seen to be inadequate, for
two reasons: ﬁrst, that the validity of the inductive principle itself cannot be
proved by induction; secondly, that the general propositions of mathematics,
such as “two and two always make four,” can obviously be known with certainty
by consideration of a single instance, and gain nothing by enumeration of other
cases in which they have been found to be true. Thus our knowledge of the
general propositions of mathematics (and the same applies to logic) must be
accounted for otherwise than our (merely probable) knowledge of empirical
generalizations such as “all men are mortal.”
The problem arises through the fact that such knowledge is general, whereas
all experience is particular. It seems strange that we should apparently be able to
know some truths in advance about particular things of which we have as yet no
experience; but it cannot easily be doubted that logic and arithmetic will apply to
such things. We do not know who will be the inhabitants of London a hundred
years hence; but we know that any two of them and any other two of them will
make four of them. This apparent power of anticipating facts about things of
which we have no experience is certainly surprising. Kant’s solution of the prob-
lem, though not valid in my opinion, is interesting. It is, however, very difﬁcult,
and is differently understood by different philosophers. We can, therefore, only
give the merest outline of it, and even that will be thought misleading by many
exponents of Kant’s system.
What Kant maintained was that in all our experience there are two elements to
be distinguished, the one due to the object (i.e. to what we have called the “phys-
ical object”), the other due to our own nature. We saw, in discussing matter and
sense-data, that the physical object is different from the associated sense-data,
and that the sense-data are to be regarded as resulting from an interaction
between the physical object and ourselves. So far, we are in agreement with Kant.
But what is distinctive of Kant is the way in which he apportions the shares of
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
153

ourselves and the physical object respectively. He considers that the crude
material given in sensation—the colour, hardness, etc.—is due to the object, and
that what we supply is the arrangement in space and time, and all the relations
between sense-data which result from comparison or from considering one as the
cause of the other or in any other way. His chief reason in favour of this view is
that we seem to have a priori knowledge as to space and time and causality and
comparison, but not as to the actual crude material of sensation. We can be sure,
he says, that anything we shall ever experience must show the characteristics
afﬁrmed of it in our a priori knowledge, because these characteristics are due to
our own nature, and therefore nothing can ever come into our experience
without acquiring these characteristics.
The physical object, which he calls the “thing in itself,”1 he regards as essen-
tially unknowable; what can be known is the object as we have it in experience,
which he calls the “phenomenon.” The phenomenon, being a joint product of us
and the thing in itself, is sure to have those characteristics which are due to us,
and is therefore sure to conform to our a priori knowledge. Hence this know-
ledge, though true of all actual and possible experience, must not be supposed to
apply outside experience. Thus in spite of the existence of a priori knowledge, we
cannot know anything about the thing in itself or about what is not an actual or
possible object of experience. In this way he tries to reconcile and harmonize the
contentions of the rationalists with the arguments of the empiricists.
Apart from minor grounds on which Kant’s philosophy may be criticized,
there is one main objection which seems fatal to any attempt to deal with the
problem of a priori knowledge by his method. The thing to be accounted for is
our certainty that the facts must always conform to logic and arithmetic. To say
that logic and arithmetic are contributed by us does not account for this. Our
nature is as much a fact of the existing world as anything, and there can be no
certainty that it will remain constant. It might happen, if Kant is right, that to-
morrow our nature would so change as to make two and two become ﬁve. This
possibility seems never to have occurred to him, yet it is one which utterly
destroys the certainty and universality which he is anxious to vindicate for
arithmetical propositions. It is true that this possibility, formally, is inconsistent
with the Kantian view that time itself is a form imposed by the subject upon
phenomena, so that our real Self is not in time and has no to-morrow. But he will
still have to suppose that the time-order of phenomena is determined by charac-
teristics of what is behind phenomena, and this sufﬁces for the substance of our
argument.
Reﬂection, moreover, seems to make it clear that, if there is any truth in our
arithmetical beliefs, they must apply to things equally whether we think of them
or not. Two physical objects and two other physical objects must make four
physical objects, even if physical objects cannot be experienced. To assert this is
certainly within the scope of what we mean when we state that two and two are
four. Its truth is just as indubitable as the truth of the assertion that two phenom-
ena and two other phenomena make four phenomena. Thus Kant’s solution
unduly limits the scope of a priori propositions, in addition to failing in the
attempt at explaining their certainty.
Apart from the special doctrines advocated by Kant, it is very common among
philosophers to regard what is a priori as in some sense mental, as concerned
BERTRAND RUSSELL
154

rather with the way we must think than with any fact of the outer world. We
noted in the preceding chapter the three principles commonly called “laws of
thought.” The view which led to their being so named is a natural one, but there
are strong reasons for thinking that it is erroneous. Let us take as an illustration
the law of contradiction. This is commonly stated in the form “Nothing can both
be and not be,” which is intended to express the fact that nothing can at once
have and not have a given quality. Thus, for example, if a tree is a beech it cannot
also be not a beech; if my table is rectangular it cannot also be not rectangular,
and so on.
Now what makes it natural to call this principle a law of thought is that it is by
thought rather than by outward observation that we persuade ourselves of its
necessary truth. When we have seen that a tree is a beech, we do not need to look
again in order to ascertain whether it is also not a beech; thought alone makes us
know that this is impossible. But the conclusion that the law of contradiction is a
law of thought is nevertheless erroneous. What we believe, when we believe the
law of contradiction, is not that the mind is so made that it must believe the law
of contradiction. This belief is a subsequent result of psychological reﬂection,
which presupposes the belief in the law of contradiction. The belief in the law of
contradiction is a belief about things, not only about thoughts. It is not, e.g., the
belief that if we think a certain tree is a beech, we cannot at the same time think
that it is not a beech; it is the belief that if the tree is a beech, it cannot at the same
time be not a beech. Thus the law of contradiction is about things, and not merely
about thoughts; and although belief in the law of contradiction is a thought, the
law of contradiction itself is not a thought, but a fact concerning the things in the
world. If this, which we believe when we believe the law of contradiction, were
not true of the things in the world, the fact that we were compelled to think it true
would not save the law of contradiction from being false; and this shows that the
law is not a law of thought.
A similar argument applies to any other a priori judgement. When we judge
that two and two are four, we are not making a judgement about our thoughts,
but about all actual or possible couples. The fact that our minds are so consti-
tuted as to believe that two and two are four, though it is true, is emphatically not
what we assert when we assert that two and two are four. And no fact about the
constitution of our minds could make it true that two and two are four. Thus our
a priori knowledge, if it is not erroneous, is not merely knowledge about the
constitution of our minds, but is applicable to whatever the world may contain,
both what is mental and what is non-mental.
The fact seems to be that all our a priori knowledge is concerned with entities
which do not, properly speaking, exist, either in the mental or in the physical
world. These entities are such as can be named by parts of speech which are not
substantives; they are such entities as qualities and relations. Suppose, for
instance, that I am in my room. I exist, and my room exists; but does “in” exist?
Yet obviously the word ‘in’ has a meaning; it denotes a relation which holds
between me and my room. This relation is something, although we cannot say
that it exists in the same sense in which I and my room exist. The relation “in” is
something which we can think about and understand, for, if we could not under-
stand it, we could not understand the sentence “I am in my room.” Many philo-
sophers, following Kant, have maintained that relations are the work of the
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
155

mind, that things in themselves have no relations, but that the mind brings them
together in one act of thought and thus produces the relations which it judges
them to have.
This view, however, seems open to objections similar to those which we urged
before against Kant. It seems plain that it is not thought which produces the truth
of the proposition “I am in my room.” It may be true that an earwig is in my
room, even if neither I nor the earwig nor any one else is aware of this truth; for
this truth concerns only the earwig and the room, and does not depend upon
anything else. Thus relations, as we shall see more fully in the next chapter, must
be placed in a world which is neither mental nor physical. This world is of great
importance to philosophy, and in particular to the problems of a priori know-
ledge. In the next chapter we shall proceed to develop its nature and its bearing
upon the questions with which we have been dealing.
Chapter IX The world of universals
At the end of the preceding chapter we saw that such entities as relations appear
to have a being which is in some way different from that of physical objects, and
also different from that of minds and from that of sense-data. In the present
chapter we have to consider what is the nature of this kind of being, and also
what objects there are that have this kind of being. We will begin with the latter
question.
The problem with which we are now concerned is a very old one, since it was
brought into philosophy by Plato. Plato’s “theory of ideas” is an attempt to solve
this very problem, and in my opinion it is one of the most successful attempts
hitherto made. The theory to be advocated in what follows is largely Plato’s, with
merely such modiﬁcations as time has shown to be necessary.
The way the problem arose for Plato was more or less as follows. Let us
consider, say, such a notion as justice. If we ask ourselves what justice is, it is
natural to proceed by considering this, that, and the other just act, with a view to
discovering what they have in common. They must all, in some sense, partake of
a common nature, which will be found in whatever is just and in nothing else.
This common nature, in virtue of which they are all just, will be justice itself, the
pure essence the admixture of which with facts of ordinary life produces the
multiplicity of just acts. Similarly with any other word which may be applicable
to common facts, such as ‘whiteness’ for example. The word will be applicable to
a number of particular things because they all participate in a common nature or
essence. This pure essence is what Plato calls an “idea” or “form.” (It must not be
supposed that “ideas,” in his sense, exist in minds, though they may be appre-
hended by minds.) The “idea” justice is not identical with anything that is just: it
is something other than particular things, which particular things partake of. Not
being particular, it cannot itself exist in the world of sense. Moreover it is not
ﬂeeting or changeable like the things of sense: it is eternally itself, immutable and
indestructible.
Thus Plato is led to a supra-sensible world, more real than the common world
of sense, the unchangeable world of ideas, which alone gives to the world of sense
whatever pale reﬂection of reality may belong to it. The truly real world, for
Plato, is the world of ideas; for whatever we may attempt to say about things in
BERTRAND RUSSELL
156

the world of sense, we can only succeed in saying that they participate in such and
such ideas, which, therefore, constitute all their character. Hence it is easy to pass
on into a mysticism. We may hope, in a mystic illumination, to see the ideas as we
see objects of sense; and we may imagine that the ideas exist in heaven. These
mystical developments are very natural, but the basis of the theory is in logic, and
it is as based in logic that we have to consider it.
The word “idea” has acquired, in the course of time, many associations which
are quite misleading when applied to Plato’s “ideas.” We shall therefore use the
word “universal” instead of the word “idea,” to describe what Plato meant. The
essence of the sort of entity that Plato meant is that it is opposed to the particular
things that are given in sensation. We speak of whatever is given in sensation, or
is of the same nature as things given in sensation, as a particular; by opposition to
this, a universal will be anything which may be shared by many particulars, and
has those characteristics which, as we saw, distinguish justice and whiteness from
just acts and white things.
When we examine common words, we ﬁnd that, broadly speaking, proper
names stand for particulars, while other substantives, adjectives, prepositions,
and verbs stand for universals. Pronouns stand for particulars, but are ambigu-
ous: it is only by the context or the circumstances that we know what particulars
they stand for. The word “now” stands for a particular, namely the present
moment; but like pronouns, it stands for an ambiguous particular, because the
present is always changing.
It will be seen that no sentence can be made up without at least one word
which denotes a universal. The nearest approach would be some such statement
as “I like this.” But even here the word “like” denotes a universal, for I may like
other things, and other people may like things. Thus all truths involve universals,
and all knowledge of truths involves acquaintance with universals.
Seeing that nearly all the words to be found in the dictionary stand for univer-
sals, it is strange that hardly anybody except students of philosophy ever realizes
that there are such entities as universals. We do not naturally dwell upon those
words in a sentence which do not stand for particulars; and if we are forced to
dwell upon a word which stands for a universal, we naturally think of it as
standing for some one of the particulars that come under the universal. When, for
example, we hear the sentence, “Charles I’s head was cut off,” we may naturally
enough think of Charles I, of Charles I’s head, and of the operation of cutting off
his head, which are all particulars; but we do not naturally dwell upon what is
meant by the word “head” or the word “cut,” which is a universal. We feel such
words to be incomplete and insubstantial; they seem to demand a context before
anything can be done with them. Hence we succeed in avoiding all notice of
universals as such, until the study of philosophy forces them upon our attention.
Even among philosophers, we may say, broadly, that only those universals
which are named by adjectives or substantives have been much or often recog-
nized, while those named by verbs and prepositions have been usually over-
looked. This omission has had a very great effect upon philosophy; it is hardly
too much to say that most metaphysics, since Spinoza, has been largely deter-
mined by it. The way this has occurred is, in outline, as follows: Speaking gener-
ally, adjectives and common nouns express qualities or properties of single
things, whereas prepositions and verbs tend to express relations between two or
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
157

more things. Thus the neglect of prepositions and verbs led to the belief that every
proposition can be regarded as attributing a property to a single thing, rather
than as expressing a relation between two or more things. Hence it was supposed
that, ultimately, there can be no such entities as relations between things. Hence
either there can be only one thing in the universe, or, if there are many things, they
cannot possibly interact in any way, since any interaction would be a relation,
and relations are impossible.
The ﬁrst of these views, advocated by Spinoza and held in our own day by
Bradley and many other philosophers, is called monism; the second, advocated
by Leibniz but not very common nowadays, is called monadism, because each of
the isolated things is called a monad. Both these opposing philosophies, interest-
ing as they are, result, in my opinion, from an undue attention to one sort of
universals, namely the sort represented by adjectives and substantives rather than
by verbs and prepositions.
As a matter of fact, if any one were anxious to deny altogether that there are
such things as universals, we should ﬁnd that we cannot strictly prove that there
are such entities as qualities, i.e. the universals represented by adjectives and
substantives, whereas we can prove that there must be relations, i.e. the sort of
universals generally represented by verbs and prepositions. Let us take in illustra-
tion the universal whiteness. If we believe that there is such a universal, we shall
say that things are white because they have the quality of whiteness. This view,
however, was strenuously denied by Berkeley and Hume, who have been fol-
lowed in this by later empiricists. The form which their denial took was to deny
that there are such things as “abstract ideas.” When we want to think of white-
ness, they said, we form an image of some particular white thing, and reason
concerning this particular, taking care not to deduce anything concerning it
which we cannot see to be equally true of any other white thing. As an account of
our actual mental processes, this is no doubt largely true. In geometry, for
example, when we wish to prove something about all triangles, we draw a par-
ticular triangle and reason about it, taking care not to use any characteristic
which it does not share with other triangles. The beginner, in order to avoid error,
often ﬁnds it useful to draw several triangles, as unlike each other as possible, in
order to make sure that his reasoning is equally applicable to all of them. But a
difﬁculty emerges as soon as we ask ourselves how we know that a thing is white
or a triangle. If we wish to avoid the universals whiteness and triangularity, we
shall choose some particular patch of white or some particular triangle, and say
that anything is white or a triangle if it has the right sort of resemblance to our
chosen particular. But then the resemblance required will have to be a universal.
Since there are many white things, the resemblance must hold between many
pairs of particular white things; and this is the characteristic of a universal. It will
be useless to say that there is a different resemblance for each pair, for then we
shall have to say that these resemblances resemble each other, and thus at last we
shall be forced to admit resemblance as a universal. The relation of resemblance,
therefore, must be a true universal. And having been forced to admit this uni-
versal, we ﬁnd that it is no longer worth while to invent difﬁcult and unplausible
theories to avoid the admission of such universals as whiteness and triangularity.
Berkeley and Hume failed to perceive this refutation of their rejection of
“abstract ideas,” because, like their adversaries, they only thought of qualities,
BERTRAND RUSSELL
158

and altogether ignored relations as universals. We have therefore here another
respect in which the rationalists appear to have been in the right as against the
empiricists, although, owing to the neglect or denial of relations, the deductions
made by rationalists were, if anything, more apt to be mistaken than those made
by empiricists.
Having now seen that there must be such entities as universals, the next point
to be proved is that their being is not merely mental. By this is meant that what-
ever being belongs to them is independent of their being thought of or in any way
apprehended by minds. We have already touched on this subject at the end of the
preceding chapter, but we must now consider more fully what sort of being it is
that belongs to universals.
Consider such a proposition as “Edinburgh is north of London.” Here we have
a relation between two places, and it seems plain that the relation subsists
independently of our knowledge of it. When we come to know that Edinburgh is
north of London, we come to know something which has to do only with Edin-
burgh and London: we do not cause the truth of the proposition by coming to
know it, on the contrary we merely apprehend a fact which was there before we
knew it. The part of the earth’s surface where Edinburgh stands would be north
of the part where London stands, even if there were no human being to know
about north and south, and even if there were no minds at all in the universe. This
is, of course, denied by many philosophers, either for Berkeley’s reasons or for
Kant’s. But we have already considered these reasons, and decided that they are
inadequate. We may therefore now assume it to be true that nothing mental is
presupposed in the fact that Edinburgh is north of London. But this fact involves
the relation “north of,” which is a universal; and it would be impossible for the
whole fact to involve nothing mental if the relation “north of,” which is a con-
stituent part of the fact, did involve anything mental. Hence we must admit that
the relation, like the terms it relates, is not dependent upon thought, but belongs
to the independent world which thought apprehends but does not create.
This conclusion, however, is met by the difﬁculty that the relation “north of”
does not seem to exist in the same sense in which Edinburgh and London exist. If
we ask “Where and when does this relation exist?” the answer must be
“Nowhere and nowhen.” There is no place or time where we can ﬁnd the relation
“north of.” It does not exist in Edinburgh any more than in London, for it relates
the two and is neutral as between them. Nor can we say that it exists at any
particular time. Now everything that can be apprehended by the senses or by
introspection exists at some particular time. Hence the relation “north of” is
radically different from such things. It is neither in space nor in time, neither
material nor mental; yet it is something.
It is largely the very peculiar kind of being that belongs to universals which has
led many people to suppose that they are really mental. We can think of a uni-
versal, and our thinking then exists in a perfectly ordinary sense, like any other
mental act. Suppose, for example, that we are thinking of whiteness. Then in one
sense it may be said that whiteness is “in our mind.” We have here the same
ambiguity as we noted in discussing Berkeley in Chapter IV. In the strict sense, it
is not whiteness that is in our mind, but the act of thinking of whiteness. The
connected ambiguity in the word “idea,” which we noted at the same time, also
causes confusion here. In one sense of this word, namely the sense in which it
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
159

denotes the object of an act of thought, whiteness is an “idea.” Hence, if the
ambiguity is not guarded against, we may come to think that whiteness is an
“idea” in the other sense, i.e. an act of thought; and thus we come to think that
whiteness is mental. But in so thinking, we rob it of its essential quality of univer-
sality. One man’s act of thought is necessarily a different thing from another
man’s; one man’s act of thought at one time is necessarily a different thing from
the same man’s act of thought at another time. Hence, if whiteness were the
thought as opposed to its object, no two different men could think of it, and no
one man could think of it twice. That which many different thoughts of whiteness
have in common is their object, and this object is different from all of them. Thus
universals are not thoughts, though when known they are the objects of thoughts.
We shall ﬁnd it convenient only to speak of things existing when they are in
time, that is to say, when we can point to some time at which they exist (not
excluding the possibility of their existing at all times). Thus thoughts and feelings,
minds and physical objects exist. But universals do not exist in this sense; we shall
say that they subsist or have being, where “being” is opposed to “existence” as
being timeless. The world of universals, therefore, may also be described as the
world of being. The world of being is unchangeable, rigid, exact, delightful to the
mathematician, the logician, the builder of metaphysical systems, and all who
love perfection more than life. The world of existence is ﬂeeting, vague, without
sharp boundaries, without any clear plan or arrangement, but it contains all
thoughts and feelings, all the data of sense, and all physical objects, everything
that can do either good or harm, everything that makes any difference to the
value of life and the world. According to our temperaments, we shall prefer
the contemplation of the one or of the other. The one we do not prefer will
probably seem to us a pale shadow of the one we prefer, and hardly worthy to be
regarded as in any sense real. But the truth is that both have the same claim on
our impartial attention, both are real, and both are important to the metaphys-
ician. Indeed no sooner have we distinguished the two worlds than it becomes
necessary to consider their relations.
But ﬁrst of all we must examine our knowledge of universals. This consider-
ation will occupy us in the following chapter, where we shall ﬁnd that it solves the
problem of a priori knowledge, from which we were ﬁrst led to consider
universals.
Chapter X On our knowledge of universals
In regard to one man’s knowledge at a given time, universals, like particulars,
may be divided into those known by acquaintance, those known only by descrip-
tion, and those not known either by acquaintance or by description.
Let us consider ﬁrst the knowledge of universals by acquaintance. It is obvious,
to begin with, that we are acquainted with such universals as white, red, black,
sweet, sour, loud, hard, etc., i.e. with qualities which are exempliﬁed in sense-
data. When we see a white patch, we are acquainted, in the ﬁrst instance, with the
particular patch; but by seeing many white patches, we easily learn to abstract the
whiteness which they all have in common, and in learning to do this we are
learning to be acquainted with whiteness. A similar process will make us
acquainted with any other universal of the same sort. Universals of this sort may
BERTRAND RUSSELL
160

be called “sensible qualities.” They can be apprehended with less effort of
abstraction than any others, and they seem less removed from particulars than
other universals are.
We come next to relations. The easiest relations to apprehend are those which
hold between the different parts of a single complex sense-datum. For example, I
can see at a glance the whole of the page on which I am writing; thus the whole
page is included in one sense-datum. But I perceive that some parts of the page are
to the left of other parts, and some parts are above other parts. The process of
abstraction in this case seems to proceed somewhat as follows: I see successively a
number of sense-data in which one part is to the left of another; I perceive, as in
the case of different white patches, that all these sense-data have something in
common, and by abstraction I ﬁnd that what they have in common is a certain
relation between their parts, namely the relation which I call “being to the left
of.” In this way I become acquainted with the universal relation.
In like manner I become aware of the relation of before and after in time.
Suppose I hear a chime of bells: when the last bell of the chime sounds, I can
retain the whole chime before my mind, and I can perceive that the earlier bells
came before the later ones. Also in memory I perceive that what I am remember-
ing came before the present time. From either of these sources I can abstract the
universal relation of before and after, just as I abstracted the universal relation
“being to the left off.” Thus time-relations, like space-relations, are among those
with which we are acquainted.
Another relation with which we become acquainted in much the same way is
resemblance. If I see simultaneously two shades of green, I can see that they
resemble each other; if I also see a shade of red at the same time, I can see that the
two greens have more resemblance to each other than either has to the red. In this
way I become acquainted with the universal resemblance or similarity.
Between universals, as between particulars, there are relations of which we
may be immediately aware. We have just seen that we can perceive that the
resemblance between two shades of green is greater than the resemblance
between a shade of red and a shade of green. Here we are dealing with a relation,
namely “greater than,” between two relations. Our knowledge of such relations,
though it requires more power of abstraction than is required for perceiving the
qualities of sense-data, appears to be equally immediate, and (at least in some
cases) equally indubitable. Thus there is immediate knowledge concerning uni-
versals as well as concerning sense-data.
Returning now to the problem of a priori knowledge, which we left unsolved
when we began the consideration of universals, we ﬁnd ourselves in a position to
deal with it in a much more satisfactory manner than was possible before. Let us
revert to the proposition “two and two are four.” It is fairly obvious, in view of
what has been said, that this proposition states a relation between the universal
“two” and the universal “four.” This suggests a proposition which we shall now
endeavour to establish: namely, All a priori knowledge deals exclusively with the
relations of universals. This proposition is of great importance, and goes a long
way towards solving our previous difﬁculties concerning a priori knowledge.
The only case in which it might seem, at ﬁrst sight, as if our proposition were
untrue, is the case in which an a priori proposition states that all of one class of
particulars belong to some other class, or (what comes to the same thing) that all
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
161

particulars having some one property also have some other. In this case it might
seem as though we were dealing with the particulars that have the property rather
than with the property. The proposition “two and two are four” is really a case in
point, for this may be stated in the form “any two and any other two are four,” or
“any collection formed of two twos is a collection of four.” If we can show that
such statements as this really deal only with universals, our proposition may be
regarded as proved.
One way of discovering what a proposition deals with is to ask ourselves what
words we must understand—in other words, what objects we must be acquainted
with—in order to see what the proposition means. As soon as we see what the
proposition means, even if we do not yet know whether it is true or false, it is
evident that we must have acquaintance with whatever is really dealt with by the
proposition. By applying this test, it appears that many propositions which might
seem to be concerned with particulars are really concerned only with universals.
In the special case of “two and two are four,” even when we interpret it as
meaning “any collection formed of two twos is a collection of four,” it is plain
that we can understand the proposition, i.e. we can see what it is that it asserts, as
soon as we know what is meant by “collection” and “two” and “four.” It is quite
unnecessary to know all the couples in the world: if it were necessary, obviously
we could never understand the proposition, since the couples are inﬁnitely
numerous and therefore cannot all be known to us. Thus although our general
statement implies statements about particular couples, as soon as we know that
there are such particular couples, yet it does not itself assert or imply that there
are such particular couples, and thus fails to make any statement whatever about
any actual particular couple. The statement made is about “couple,” the
universal, and not about this or that couple.
Thus the statement “two and two are four” deals exclusively with universals,
and therefore may be known by anybody who is acquainted with the universals
concerned and can perceive the relation between them which the statement
asserts. It must be taken as a fact, discovered by reﬂecting upon our knowledge,
that we have the power of sometimes perceiving such relations between univer-
sals, and therefore of sometimes knowing general a priori propositions such as
those of arithmetic and logic. The thing that seemed mysterious, when we for-
merly considered such knowledge, was that it seemed to anticipate and control
experience. This, however, we can now see to have been an error. No fact con-
cerning anything capable of being experienced can be known independently of
experience. We know a priori that two things and two other things together make
four things, but we do not know a priori that if Brown and Jones are two, and
Robinson and Smith are two, then Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith are
four. The reason is that this proposition cannot be understood at all unless we
know that there are such people as Brown and Jones and Robinson and Smith,
and this we can only know by experience. Hence, although our general prop-
osition is a priori, all its applications to actual particulars involve experience and
therefore contain an empirical element. In this way what seemed mysterious in
our a priori knowledge is seen to have been based upon an error.
It will serve to make the point clearer if we contrast our genuine a priori
judgement with an empirical generalization, such as “all men are mortals.”
Here as before, we can understand what the proposition means as soon as we
BERTRAND RUSSELL
162

understand the universals involved, namely man and mortal. It is obviously
unnecessary to have an individual acquaintance with the whole human race in
order to understand what our proposition means. Thus the difference between an
a priori general proposition and an empirical generalization does not come in the
meaning of the proposition; it comes in the nature of the evidence for it. In the
empirical case, the evidence consists in the particular instances. We believe that
all men are mortal because we know that there are innumerable instances of men
dying, and no instances of their living beyond a certain age. We do not believe it
because we see a connexion between the universal man and the universal mortal.
It is true that if physiology can prove, assuming the general laws that govern
living bodies, that no living organism can last for ever, that gives a connexion
between man and mortality which would enable us to assert our proposition
without appealing to the special evidence of men dying. But that only means that
our generalization has been subsumed under a wider generalization, for which
the evidence is still of the same kind, though more extensive. The progress of
science is constantly producing such subsumptions, and therefore giving a con-
stantly wider inductive basis for scientiﬁc generalizations. But although this gives
a greater degree of certainty, it does not give a different kind: the ultimate ground
remains inductive, i.e. derived from instances, and not an a priori connexion of
universals such as we have in logic and arithmetic.
Two opposite points are to be observed concerning a priori general proposi-
tions. The ﬁrst is that, if many particular instances are known, our general prop-
osition may be arrived at in the ﬁrst instance by induction, and the connexion of
universals may be only subsequently perceived. For example, it is known that if
we draw perpendiculars to the sides of a triangle from the opposite angles, all
three perpendiculars meet in a point. It would be quite possible to be ﬁrst led to
this proposition by actually drawing perpendiculars in many cases, and ﬁnding
that they always met in a point; this experience might lead us to look for the
general proof and ﬁnd it. Such cases are common in the experience of every
mathematician.
The other point is more interesting, and of more philosophical importance. It
is, that we may sometimes know a general proposition in cases where we do not
know a single instance of it. Take such a case as the following: We know that any
two numbers can be multiplied together, and will give a third called their product.
We know that all pairs of integers the product of which is less than 100 have been
actually multiplied together, and the value of the product recorded in the multi-
plication table. But we also know that the number of integers is inﬁnite, and that
only a ﬁnite number of pairs of integers ever have been or ever will be thought of
by human beings. Hence it follows that there are pairs of integers which never
have been and never will be thought of by human beings, and that all of them deal
with integers the product of which is over 100. Hence we arrive at the prop-
osition: “All products of two integers, which never have been and never will be
thought of by any human being, are over 100.” Here is a general proposition of
which the truth is undeniable, and yet, from the very nature of the case, we can
never give an instance; because any two numbers we may think of are excluded
by the terms of the proposition.
This possibility, of knowledge of general propositions of which no instance
can be given, is often denied, because it is not perceived that the knowledge of
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
163

such propositions only requires a knowledge of the relations of universals, and
does not require any knowledge of instances of the universals in question. Yet the
knowledge of such general propositions is quite vital to a great deal of what is
generally admitted to be known. For example, we saw, in our early chapters, that
knowledge of physical objects, as opposed to sense-data, is only obtained by an
inference, and that they are not things with which we are acquainted. Hence we
can never know any proposition of the form “this is a physical object,” where
“this” is something immediately known. It follows that all our knowledge con-
cerning physical objects is such that no actual instance can be given. We can give
instances of the associated sense-data, but we cannot give instances of the actual
physical objects. Hence our knowledge as to physical objects depends throughout
upon this possibility of general knowledge where no instance can be given. And
the same applies to our knowledge of other people’s minds, or of any other class
of things of which no instance is known to us by acquaintance.
We may now take a survey of the sources of our knowledge, as they have
appeared in the course of our analysis. We have ﬁrst to distinguish knowledge of
things and knowledge of truths. In each there are two kinds, one immediate and
one derivative. Our immediate knowledge of things, which we called acquaint-
ance, consists of two sorts, according as the things known are particulars or
universals. Among particulars, we have acquaintance with sense-data and (prob-
ably) with ourselves. Among universals, there seems to be no principle by which
we can decide which can be known by acquaintance, but it is clear that among
those that can be so known are sensible qualities, relations of space and time,
similarity, and certain abstract logical universals. Our derivative knowledge of
things, which we call knowledge by description, always involves both acquaint-
ance with something and knowledge of truths. Our immediate knowledge of
truths may be called intuitive knowledge, and the truths so known may be called
self-evident truths. Among such truths are included those which merely state
what is given in sense, and also certain abstract logical and arithmetical prin-
ciples, and (though with less certainty) some ethical propositions. Our derivative
knowledge of truths consists of everything that we can deduce from self-evident
truths by the use of self-evident principles of deduction.
If the above account is correct, all our knowledge of truths depends upon our
intuitive knowledge. It therefore becomes important to consider the nature and
scope of intuitive knowledge, in much the same way as, at an earlier stage, we
considered the nature and scope of knowledge by acquaintance. But knowledge
of truths raises a further problem, which does not arise in regard to knowledge of
things, namely the problem of error. Some of our beliefs turn out to be erroneous,
and therefore it becomes necessary to consider how, if at all, we can distinguish
knowledge from error. This problem does not arise with regard to knowledge by
acquaintance, for, whatever may be the object of acquaintance, even in dreams
and hallucinations, there is no error involved so long as we do not go beyond the
immediate object: error can only arise when we regard the immediate object, i.e.
the sense-datum, as the mark of some physical object. Thus the problems con-
nected with knowledge of truths are more difﬁcult than those connected with
knowledge of things. As the ﬁrst of the problems connected with knowledge of
truths, let us examine the nature and scope of our intuitive judgements.
BERTRAND RUSSELL
164

Note
1
Kant’s “thing in itself” is identical in deﬁnition with the physical object, namely, it
is the cause of sensations. In the properties deduced from the deﬁnition it is not
identical, since Kant held (in spite of some inconsistency as regards cause) that
we can know that none of the categories are applicable to the “thing in itself.”
QUESTIONS
1
Russell says that Kant’s theory fails to account for the certainty and universality
of arithmetic. Why is this?
2
According to Russell, is the law of non-contradiction a law of thought?
3
According to Russell, what sort of things do we have a priori knowledge of?
4
What is the difference between “existence” and “subsistence”? Which one do
universals do?
5
What sorts of things does Russell think we have “acquaintance” with?
THE PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY
165

A.J. Ayer, “The Elimination of Metaphysics”
The traditional disputes of philosophers are, for the most part, as unwarranted as
they are unfruitful. The surest way to end them is to establish beyond question
what should be the purpose and method of a philosophical enquiry. And this is
by no means so difﬁcult a task as the history of philosophy would lead one to
suppose. For if there are any questions which science leaves it to philosophy to
answer, a straightforward process of elimination must lead to their discovery.
We may begin by criticising the metaphysical thesis that philosophy affords us
knowledge of a reality transcending the world of science and common sense.
Later on, when we come to deﬁne metaphysics and account for its existence, we
shall ﬁnd that it is possible to be a metaphysician without believing in a tran-
scendent reality; for we shall see that many metaphysical utterances are due to the
commission of logical errors, rather than to a conscious desire on the part of their
authors to go beyond the limits of experience. But it is convenient for us to take
the case of those who believe that it is possible to have knowledge of a transcend-
ent reality as a starting-point for our discussion. The arguments which we use to
refute them will subsequently be found to apply to the whole of metaphysics.
One way of attacking a metaphysician who claimed to have knowledge of a
reality which transcended the phenomenal world would be to enquire from what
premises his propositions were deduced. Must he not begin, as other men do,
with the evidence of his senses? And if so, what valid process of reasoning can
possibly lead him to the conception of a transcendent reality? Surely from empir-
ical premises nothing whatsoever concerning the properties, or even the exist-
ence, of anything super-empirical can legitimately be inferred. But this objection
would be met by a denial on the part of the metaphysician that his assertions were
ultimately based on the evidence of his senses. He would say that he was
endowed with a faculty of intellectual intuition which enabled him to know facts
that could not be known through sense-experience. And even if it could be shown
that he was relying on empirical premises, and that his venture into a non-
empirical world was therefore logically unjustiﬁed, it would not follow that the
assertions which he made concerning this non-empirical world could not be true.
For the fact that a conclusion does not follow from its putative premise is not
sufﬁcient to show that it is false. Consequently one cannot overthrow a system of
transcendent metaphysics merely by criticising the way in which it comes into
A.J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic (New York: Dover Publications, 1952), pp.
33–45.
166

being. What is required is rather a criticism of the nature of the actual statements
which comprise it. And this is the line of argument which we shall, in fact, pursue.
For we shall maintain that no statement which refers to a “reality” transcending
the limits of all possible sense-experience can possibly have any literal signiﬁ-
cance; from which it must follow that the labours of those who have striven to
describe such a reality have all been devoted to the production of nonsense.
It may be suggested that this is a proposition which has already been proved by
Kant. But although Kant also condemned transcendent metaphysics, he did so on
different grounds. For he said that the human understanding was so constituted
that it lost itself in contradictions when it ventured out beyond the limits of
possible experience and attempted to deal with things in themselves. And thus he
made the impossibility of a transcendent metaphysic not, as we do, a matter of
logic, but a matter of fact. He asserted, not that our minds could not conceivably
have had the power of penetrating beyond the phenomenal world, but merely
that they were in fact devoid of it. And this leads the critic to ask how, if it is
possible to know only what lies within the bounds of sense-experience, the
author can be justiﬁed in asserting that real things do exist beyond, and how he
can tell what are the boundaries beyond which the human understanding may
not venture, unless he succeeds in passing them himself. As Wittgenstein says, “in
order to draw a limit to thinking, we should have to think both sides of this
limit,”1 a truth to which Bradley gives a special twist in maintaining that the man
who is ready to prove that metaphysics is impossible is a brother metaphysician
with a rival theory of his own.2
Whatever force these objections may have against the Kantian doctrine, they
have none whatsoever against the thesis that I am about to set forth. It cannot
here be said that the author is himself overstepping the barrier he maintains to be
impassable. For the fruitlessness of attempting to transcend the limits of possible
sense-experience will be deduced, not from a psychological hypothesis concern-
ing the actual constitution of the human mind, but from the rule which deter-
mines the literal signiﬁcance of language. Our charge against the metaphysician is
not that he attempts to employ the understanding in a ﬁeld where it cannot
proﬁtably venture, but that he produces sentences which fail to conform to the
conditions under which alone a sentence can be literally signiﬁcant. Nor are we
ourselves obliged to talk nonsense in order to show that all sentences of a certain
type are necessarily devoid of literal signiﬁcance. We need only formulate the
criterion which enables us to test whether a sentence expresses a genuine
proposition about a matter of fact, and then point out that the sentences under
consideration fail to satisfy it. And this we shall now proceed to do. We shall
ﬁrst of all formulate the criterion in somewhat vague terms, and then give the
explanations which are necessary to render it precise.
The criterion which we use to test the genuineness of apparent statements of
fact is the criterion of veriﬁability. We say that a sentence is factually signiﬁcant
to any given person, if, and only if, he knows how to verify the proposition which
it purports to express—that is, if he knows what observations would lead him,
under certain conditions, to accept the proposition as being true, or reject it as
being false. If, on the other hand, the putative proposition is of such a character
that the assumption of its truth, or falsehood, is consistent with any assumption
whatsoever concerning the nature of his future experience, then, as far as he is
“THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS”
167

concerned, it is, if not a tautology, a mere pseudo-proposition. The sentence
expressing it may be emotionally signiﬁcant to him; but it is not literally signiﬁ-
cant. And with regard to questions the procedure is the same. We enquire in every
case what observations would lead us to answer the question, one way or the
other; and, if none can be discovered, we must conclude that the sentence under
consideration does not, as far as we are concerned, express a genuine question,
however strongly its grammatical appearance may suggest that it does.
As the adoption of this procedure is an essential factor in the argument of this
book, it needs to be examined in detail.
In the ﬁrst place, it is necessary to draw a distinction between practical veriﬁ-
ability, and veriﬁability in principle. Plainly we all understand, in many cases
believe, propositions which we have not in fact taken steps to verify. Many of
these are propositions which we could verify if we took enough trouble. But there
remain a number of signiﬁcant propositions, concerning matters of fact, which
we could not verify even if we chose; simply because we lack the practical means
of placing ourselves in the situation where the relevant observations could be
made. A simple and familiar example of such a proposition is the proposition
that there are mountains on the farther side of the moon.3 No rocket has yet been
invented which would enable me to go and look at the farther side of the moon,
so that I am unable to decide the matter by actual observation. But I do know
what observations would decide it for me, if, as is theoretically conceivable, I
were once in a position to make them. And therefore I say that the proposition is
veriﬁable in principle, if not in practice, and is accordingly signiﬁcant. On the
other hand, such a metaphysical pseudo-proposition as “the Absolute enters into,
but is itself incapable of, evolution and progress,”4 is not even in principle veriﬁ-
able. For one cannot conceive of an observation which would enable one to
determine whether the Absolute did, or did not, enter into evolution and pro-
gress. Of course it is possible that the author of such a remark is using English
words in a way in which they are not commonly used by English-speaking
people, and that he does, in fact, intend to assert something which could be
empirically veriﬁed. But until he makes us understand how the proposition that
he wishes to express would be veriﬁed, he fails to communicate anything to us.
And if he admits, as I think the author of the remark in question would have
admitted, that his words were not intended to express either a tautology or a
proposition which was capable, at least in principle, of being veriﬁed, then it
follows that he has made an utterance which has no literal signiﬁcance even for
himself.
A further distinction which we must make is the distinction between the
“strong” and the “weak” sense of the term “veriﬁable.” A proposition is said to
be veriﬁable, in the strong sense of the term, if, and only if, its truth could be
conclusively established in experience. But it is veriﬁable, in the weak sense, if it is
possible for experience to render it probable. In which sense are we using the
term when we say that a putative proposition is genuine only if it is veriﬁable?
It seems to me that if we adopt conclusive veriﬁability as our criterion of
signiﬁcance, as some positivists have proposed,5 our argument will prove too
much. Consider, for example, the case of general propositions of law—such pro-
positions, namely, as “arsenic is poisonous”; “all men are mortal”; “a body tends
to expand when it is heated.” It is of the very nature of these propositions that
A.J. AYER
168

their truth cannot be established with certainty by any ﬁnite series of observa-
tions. But if it is recognised that such general propositions of law are designed to
cover an inﬁnite number of cases, then it must be admitted that they cannot, even
in principle, be veriﬁed conclusively. And then, if we adopt conclusive veriﬁ-
ability as our criterion of signiﬁcance, we are logically obliged to treat these
general propositions of law in the same fashion as we treat the statements of the
metaphysician.
In face of this difﬁculty, some positivists6 have adopted the heroic course of
saying that these general propositions are indeed pieces of nonsense, albeit an
essentially important type of nonsense. But here the introduction of the term
“important” is simply an attempt to hedge. It serves only to mark the authors’
recognition that their view is somewhat too paradoxical, without in any way
removing the paradox. Besides, the difﬁculty is not conﬁned to the case of general
propositions of law, though it is there revealed most plainly. It is hardly less
obvious in the case of propositions about the remote past. For it must surely be
admitted that, however strong the evidence in favour of historical statements may
be, their truth can never become more than highly probable. And to maintain
that they also constituted an important, or unimportant, type of nonsense would
be unplausible, to say the very least. Indeed, it will be our contention that no
proposition, other than a tautology, can possibly be anything more than a prob-
able hypothesis. And if this is correct, the principle that a sentence can be fact-
ually signiﬁcant only if it expresses what is conclusively veriﬁable is self-
stultifying as a criterion of signiﬁcance. For it leads to the conclusion that it is
impossible to make a signiﬁcant statement of fact at all.
Nor can we accept the suggestion that a sentence should be allowed to be
factually signiﬁcant if, and only if, it expresses something which is deﬁnitely
confutable by experience.7 Those who adopt this course assume that, although
no ﬁnite series of observations is ever sufﬁcient to establish the truth of a hypoth-
esis beyond all possibility of doubt, there are crucial cases in which a single
observation, or series of observations, can deﬁnitely confute it. But, as we shall
show later on, this assumption is false. A hypothesis cannot be conclusively
confuted any more than it can be conclusively veriﬁed. For when we take the
occurrence of certain observations as proof that a given hypothesis is false, we
presuppose the existence of certain conditions. And though, in any given case, it
may be extremely improbable that this assumption is false, it is not logically
impossible. We shall see that there need be no self-contradiction in holding that
some of the relevant circumstances are other than we have taken them to be, and
consequently that the hypothesis has not really broken down. And if it is not the
case that any hypothesis can be deﬁnitely confuted, we cannot hold that the
genuineness of a proposition depends on the possibility of its deﬁnite
confutation.
Accordingly, we fall back on the weaker sense of veriﬁcation. We say that the
question that must be asked about any putative statement of fact is not, Would
any observations make its truth or falsehood logically certain? but simply,
Would any observations be relevant to the determination of its truth or false-
hood? And it is only if a negative answer is given to this second question that we
conclude that the statement under consideration is nonsensical.
To make our position clearer, we may formulate it in another way. Let us call a
“THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS”
169

proposition which records an actual or possible observation an experiential
proposition. Then we may say that it is the mark of a genuine factual proposition,
not that it should be equivalent to an experiential proposition, or any ﬁnite
number of experiential propositions, but simply that some experiential proposi-
tions can be deduced from it in conjunction with certain other premises without
being deducible from those other premises alone.8
This criterion seems liberal enough. In contrast to the principle of conclusive
veriﬁability, it clearly does not deny signiﬁcance to general propositions or to
propositions about the past. Let us see what kinds of assertion it rules out.
A good example of the kind of utterance that is condemned by our criterion as
being not even false but nonsensical would be the assertion that the world of
sense-experience was altogether unreal. It must, of course, be admitted that our
senses do sometimes deceive us. We may, as the result of having certain sensa-
tions, expect certain other sensations to be obtainable which are, in fact, not
obtainable. But, in all such cases, it is further sense-experience that informs us of
the mistakes that arise out of sense-experience. We say that the senses sometimes
deceive us, just because the expectations to which our sense-experiences give rise
do not always accord with what we subsequently experience. That is, we rely on
our senses to substantiate or confute the judgements which are based on our
sensations. And therefore the fact that our perceptual judgements are sometimes
found to be erroneous has not the slightest tendency to show that the world of
sense-experience is unreal. And, indeed, it is plain that no conceivable observa-
tion, or series of observations, could have any tendency to show that the world
revealed to us by sense-experience was unreal. Consequently, anyone who con-
demns the sensible world as a world of mere appearance, as opposed to reality, is
saying something which, according to our criterion of signiﬁcance, is literally
nonsensical.
An example of a controversy which the application of our criterion obliges us
to condemn as ﬁctitious is provided by those who dispute concerning the number
of substances that there are in the world. For it is admitted both by monists, who
maintain that reality is one substance, and by pluralists, who maintain that real-
ity is many, that it is impossible to imagine any empirical situation which would
be relevant to the solution of their dispute. But if we are told that no possible
observation could give any probability either to the assertion that reality was one
substance or to the assertion that it was many, then we must conclude that
neither assertion is signiﬁcant. We shall see later on9 that there are genuine logical
and empirical questions involved in the dispute between monists and pluralists.
But the metaphysical question concerning “substance” is ruled out by our criterion
as spurious.
A similar treatment must be accorded to the controversy between realists and
idealists, in its metaphysical aspect. A simple illustration, which I have made use
of in a similar argument elsewhere,10 will help to demonstrate this. Let us suppose
that a picture is discovered and the suggestion made that it was painted by Goya.
There is a deﬁnite procedure for dealing with such a question. The experts exam-
ine the picture to see in what way it resembles the accredited works of Goya, and
to see if it bears any marks which are characteristic of a forgery; they look up
contemporary records for evidence of the existence of such a picture, and so on.
In the end, they may still disagree, but each one knows what empirical evidence
A.J. AYER
170

would go to conﬁrm or discredit his opinion. Suppose, now, that these men have
studied philosophy, and some of them proceed to maintain that this picture is a
set of ideas in the perceiver’s mind, or in God’s mind, others that it is objectively
real. What possible experience could any of them have which would be relevant
to the solution of this dispute one way or the other? In the ordinary sense of the
term “real,” in which it is opposed to “illusory,” the reality of the picture is not in
doubt. The disputants have satisﬁed themselves that the picture is real, in this
sense, by obtaining a correlated series of sensations of sight and sensations of
touch. Is there any similar process by which they could discover whether the
picture was real, in the sense in which the term “real” is opposed to “ideal”?
Clearly there is none. But, if that is so, the problem is ﬁctitious according to our
criterion. This does not mean that the realist-idealist controversy may be dis-
missed without further ado. For it can legitimately be regarded as a dispute
concerning the analysis of existential propositions, and so as involving a logical
problem which, as we shall see, can be deﬁnitively solved.11 What we have
just shown is that the question at issue between idealists and realists becomes
ﬁctitious when, as is often the case, it is given a metaphysical interpretation.
There is no need for us to give further examples of the operation of our cri-
terion of signiﬁcance. For our object is merely to show that philosophy, as a
genuine branch of knowledge, must be distinguished from metaphysics. We are
not now concerned with the historical question how much of what has tradition-
ally passed for philosophy is actually metaphysical. We shall, however, point out
later on that the majority of the “great philosophers” of the past were not essen-
tially metaphysicians, and thus reassure those who would otherwise be prevented
from adopting our criterion by considerations of piety.
As to the validity of the veriﬁcation principle, in the form in which we have
stated it, a demonstration will be given in the course of this book. For it will be
shown that all propositions which have factual content are empirical hypotheses;
and that the function of an empirical hypothesis is to provide a rule for the
anticipation of experience.12 And this means that every empirical hypothesis must
be relevant to some actual, or possible, experience, so that a statement which is
not relevant to any experience is not an empirical hypothesis, and accordingly has
no factual content. But this is precisely what the principle of veriﬁability asserts.
It should be mentioned here that the fact that the utterances of the metaphys-
ician are nonsensical does not follow simply from the fact that they are devoid of
factual content. It follows from that fact, together with the fact that they are not a
priori propositions. And in assuming that they are not a priori propositions, we
are once again anticipating the conclusions of a later chapter in this book.13 For it
will be shown there that a priori propositions, which have always been attractive
to philosophers on account of their certainty, owe this certainty to the fact that
they are tautologies. We may accordingly deﬁne a metaphysical sentence as a
sentence which purports to express a genuine proposition, but does, in fact,
express neither a tautology nor an empirical hypothesis. And as tautologies and
empirical hypotheses form the entire class of signiﬁcant propositions, we are
justiﬁed in concluding that all metaphysical assertions are nonsensical. Our next
task is to show how they come to be made.
The use of the term “substance,” to which we have already referred, provides
us with a good example of the way in which metaphysics mostly comes to be
“THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS”
171

written. It happens to be the case that we cannot, in our language, refer to the
sensible properties of a thing without introducing a word or phrase which
appears to stand for the thing itself as opposed to anything which may be said
about it. And, as a result of this, those who are infected by the primitive supersti-
tion that to every name a single real entity must correspond assume that it is
necessary to distinguish logically between the thing itself and any, or all, of its
sensible properties. And so they employ the term “substance” to refer to the thing
itself. But from the fact that we happen to employ a single word to refer to a
thing, and make that word the grammatical subject of the sentences in which we
refer to the sensible appearances of the thing, it does not by any means follow
that the thing itself is a “simple entity,” or that it cannot be deﬁned in terms of the
totality of its appearances. It is true that in talking of “its” appearances we
appear to distinguish the thing from the appearances, but that is simply an acci-
dent of linguistic usage. Logical analysis shows that what makes these “appear-
ances” the “appearances of” the same thing is not their relationship to an entity
other than themselves, but their relationship to one another. The metaphysician
fails to see this because he is misled by a superﬁcial grammatical feature of his
language.
A simpler and clearer instance of the way in which a consideration of grammar
leads to metaphysics is the case of the metaphysical concept of Being. The origin
of our temptation to raise questions about Being, which no conceivable experi-
ence would enable us to answer, lies in the fact that, in our language, sentences
which express existential propositions and sentences which express attributive
propositions may be of the same grammatical form. For instance, the sentences
“Martyrs exist” and “Martyrs suffer” both consist of a noun followed by an
intransitive verb, and the fact that they have grammatically the same appearance
leads one to assume that they are of the same logical type. It is seen that in the
proposition “Martyrs suffer,” the members of a certain species are credited with a
certain attribute, and it is sometimes assumed that the same thing is true of such a
proposition as “Martyrs exist.” If this were actually the case, it would, indeed, be
as legitimate to speculate about the Being of martyrs as it is to speculate about
their suffering. But, as Kant pointed out,14 existence is not an attribute. For, when
we ascribe an attribute to a thing, we covertly assert that it exists: so that if
existence were itself an attribute, it would follow that all positive existential
propositions were tautologies, and all negative existential propositions self-
contradictory; and this is not the case.15 So that those who raise questions about
Being which are based on the assumption that existence is an attribute are guilty
of following grammar beyond the boundaries of sense.
A similar mistake has been made in connection with such propositions as
“Unicorns are ﬁctitious.” Here again the fact that there is a superﬁcial gram-
matical resemblance between the English sentences “Dogs are faithful” and
“Unicorns are ﬁctitious,” and between the corresponding sentences in other lan-
guages, creates the assumption that they are of the same logical type. Dogs must
exist in order to have the property of being faithful, and so it is held that unless
unicorns in some way existed they could not have the property of being ﬁctitious.
But, as it is plainly self-contradictory to say that ﬁctitious objects exist, the device
is adopted of saying that they are real in some non-empirical sense—that they
have a mode of real being which is different from the mode of being of existent
A.J. AYER
172

things. But since there is no way of testing whether an object is real in this sense,
as there is for testing whether it is real in the ordinary sense, the assertion that
ﬁctitious objects have a special non-empirical mode of real being is devoid of all
literal signiﬁcance. It comes to be made as a result of the assumption that being
ﬁctitious is an attribute. And this is a fallacy of the same order as the fallacy of
supposing that existence is an attribute, and it can be exposed in the same way.
In general, the postulation of real non-existent entities results from the
superstition, just now referred to, that, to every word or phrase that can be the
grammatical subject of a sentence, there must somewhere be a real entity corres-
ponding. For as there is no place in the empirical world for many of these
“entities,” a special non-empirical world is invoked to house them. To this error
must be attributed, not only the utterances of a Heidegger, who bases his meta-
physics on the assumption that “Nothing” is a name which is used to denote
something peculiarly mysterious,16 but also the prevalence of such problems as
those concerning the reality of propositions and universals whose senselessness,
though less obvious, is no less complete.
These few examples afford a sufﬁcient indication of the way in which most
metaphysical assertions come to be formulated. They show how easy it is to write
sentences which are literally nonsensical without seeing that they are nonsensical.
And thus we see that the view that a number of the traditional “problems of
philosophy” are metaphysical, and consequently ﬁctitious, does not involve any
incredible assumptions about the psychology of philosophers.
Among those who recognise that if philosophy is to be accounted a genuine
branch of knowledge it must be deﬁned in such a way as to distinguish it from
metaphysics, it is fashionable to speak of the metaphysician as a kind of mis-
placed poet. As his statements have no literal meaning, they are not subject to any
criteria of truth or falsehood: but they may still serve to express, or arouse,
emotion, and thus be subject to ethical or æsthetic standards. And it is suggested
that they may have considerable value, as means of moral inspiration, or even as
works of art. In this way, an attempt is made to compensate the metaphysician
for his extrusion from philosophy.17
I am afraid that this compensation is hardly in accordance with his deserts.
The view that the metaphysician is to be reckoned among the poets appears to
rest on the assumption that both talk nonsense. But this assumption is false. In
the vast majority of cases the sentences which are produced by poets do have
literal meaning. The difference between the man who uses language scientiﬁcally
and the man who uses it emotively is not that the one produces sentences which
are incapable of arousing emotion, and the other sentences which have no sense,
but that the one is primarily concerned with the expression of true propositions,
the other with the creation of a work of art. Thus, if a work of science contains
true and important propositions, its value as a work of science will hardly be
diminished by the fact that they are inelegantly expressed. And similarly, a work
of art is not necessarily the worse for the fact that all the propositions comprising
it are literally false. But to say that many literary works are largely composed of
falsehoods, is not to say that they are composed of pseudo-propositions. It is, in
fact, very rare for a literary artist to produce sentences which have no literal
meaning. And where this does occur, the sentences are carefully chosen for their
“THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS”
173

rhythm and balance. If the author writes nonsense, it is because he considers it
most suitable for bringing about the effects for which his writing is designed.
The metaphysician, on the other hand, does not intend to write nonsense. He
lapses into it through being deceived by grammar, or through committing errors
of reasoning, such as that which leads to the view that the sensible world is
unreal. But it is not the mark of a poet simply to make mistakes of this sort. There
are some, indeed, who would see in the fact that the metaphysician’s utterances
are senseless a reason against the view that they have æsthetic value. And, without
going so far as this, we may safely say that it does not constitute a reason for it.
It is true, however, that although the greater part of metaphysics is merely the
embodiment of humdrum errors, there remain a number of metaphysical pas-
sages which are the work of genuine mystical feeling; and they may more plaus-
ibly be held to have moral or æsthetic value. But, as far as we are concerned, the
distinction between the kind of metaphysics that is produced by a philosopher
who has been duped by grammar, and the kind that is produced by a mystic who
is trying to express the inexpressible, is of no great importance: what is important
to us is to realise that even the utterances of the metaphysician who is attempting
to expound a vision are literally senseless; so that henceforth we may pursue our
philosophical researches with as little regard for them as for the more inglorious
kind of metaphysics which comes from a failure to understand the workings of
our language.
Notes
1 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1922), preface.
2 F.H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962), 2nd ed.,
p. 1.
3 This example has been used by Professor Schlick to illustrate the same point.
4 A remark taken at random from Appearance and Reality, by F.H. Bradley.
5 E.g. M. Schlick, “Positivismus und Realismus,”
Erkenntnis 1 (1930);
F. Waisman, “Logische Analyse des Warscheinlichkeitsbegriffs,” Erkenntnis 1
(1930).
6 E.g. M. Schlick, “Die Kausalität in der gegenwärtigen Physik,” Naturwissenschaft
19 (1931).
7 This has been proposed by Karl Popper in his Logik der Forschung. [English
translation: The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (New York: Harper and Row, 1965).]
8 This is an over-simpliﬁed statement, which is not literally correct. I give what I
believe to be the correct formulation in the Introduction (Language, Truth and
Logic), p. 13.
9 In Chapter VIII (Language, Truth and Logic).
10 Vide Ayer, “Demonstration of the Impossibility of Metaphysics,” Mind 43 (1934):
334–45, p. 339.
11 Vide Chapter VIII (Language, Truth and Logic).
12 Vide Chapter V (Language, Truth and Logic).
13 Chapter IV (Language, Truth and Logic).
14 Vide Critique of Pure Reason (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1965), “Transcen-
dental Dialectic,” Book II, Chapter iii, section 4.
A.J. AYER
174

15 This argument is well stated by John Wisdom, Interpretation and Analysis
(London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., 1931), pp. 62, 63.
16 Vide Was ist Metaphysik? by Martin Heidegger (Bonn: F. Cohen, 1931): criticized
by Rudolf Carnap in his “Überwindung der Metaphysik durch logische Analyse
der Sprache,” Erkenntnis 2 (1932) [English translation: “The Elimination of
Metaphysics through Logical Analysis of Language,” tr. by Arthur Pap, in Logical
Positivism, ed. A.J. Ayer (New York: Free Press, 1959)].
17 For a discussion of this point, see also C.A. Mace, “Representation and Expres-
sion,” Analysis 1 (1934): 33–8; and “Metaphysics and Emotive Language,”
Analysis 2 (1934): 6–10.
QUESTIONS
1
What is the criterion of veriﬁability, and what is it a criterion of?
2
What are the “strong” and “weak” senses of “veriﬁable”?
3
How does Ayer deﬁne a “metaphysical sentence”?
4
Would Ayer say that all systems of metaphysics are false?
“THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS”
175

W.V. Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism1”
Modern empiricism has been conditioned in large part by two dogmas. One is a
belief in some fundamental cleavage between truths which are analytic, or
grounded in meanings independently of matters of fact, and truths which are
synthetic, or grounded in fact. The other dogma is reductionism: the belief that
each meaningful statement is equivalent to some logical construct upon terms
which refer to immediate experience. Both dogmas, I shall argue, are ill founded.
One effect of abandoning them is, as we shall see, a blurring of the supposed
boundary between speculative metaphysics and natural science. Another effect is
a shift toward pragmatism.
I. Background for analyticity
Kant’s cleavage between analytic and synthetic truths was foreshadowed in
Hume’s distinction between relations of ideas and matters of fact, and in Leib-
niz’s distinction between truths of reason and truths of fact. Leibniz spoke of the
truths of reason as true in all possible worlds. Picturesqueness aside, this is to say
that the truths of reason are those which could not possibly be false. In the same
vein we hear analytic statements deﬁned as statements whose denials are self-
contradictory. But this deﬁnition has small explanatory value; for the notion
of self-contradictoriness, in the quite broad sense needed for this deﬁnition of
analyticity, stands in exactly the same need of clariﬁcation as does the notion of
analyticity itself.2 The two notions are the two sides of a single dubious coin.
Kant conceived of an analytic statement as one that attributes to its subject no
more than is already conceptually contained in the subject. This formulation has
two shortcomings: it limits itself to statements of subject-predicate form, and it
appeals to a notion of containment which is left at a metaphorical level. But
Kant’s intent, evident more from the use he makes of the notion of analyticity
than from his deﬁnition of it, can be restated thus: a statement is analytic when it
is true by virtue of meanings and independently of fact. Pursuing this line, let us
examine the concept of meaning which is presupposed.
We must observe to begin with that meaning is not to be identiﬁed with nam-
ing, or reference. Consider Frege’s example of “Evening Star” and “Morning
Star.” Understood not merely as a recurrent evening apparition but as a body, the
Evening Star is the planet Venus, and the Morning Star is the same. The two
W.V. Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” Philosophical Review 60 (1951): 20–43.
176

singular terms name the same thing. But the meanings must be treated as distinct,
since the identity “Evening Star = Morning Star” is a statement of fact established
by astronomical observation. If “Evening Star” and “Morning Star” were alike
in meaning, the identity “Evening Star = Morning Star” would be analytic.
Again there is Russell’s example of “Scott” and “the author of Waverley.”
Analysis of the meanings of words was by no means sufﬁcient to reveal to George
IV that the person named by these two singular terms was one and the same.
The distinction between meaning and naming is no less important at the level
of abstract terms. The terms “9” and “the number of planets” name one and the
same abstract entity but presumably must be regarded as unlike in meaning; for
astronomical observation was needed, and not mere reﬂection on meanings, to
determine the sameness of the entity in question.
Thus far we have been considering singular terms. With general terms, or
predicates, the situation is somewhat different but parallel. Whereas a singular
term purports to name an entity, abstract or concrete, a general term does not;
but a general term is true of an entity, or of each of many, or of none. The class of
all entities of which a general term is true is called the extension of the term. Now
paralleling the contrast between the meaning of a singular term and the entity
named, we must distinguish equally between the meaning of a general term and
its extension. The general terms “creature with a heart” and “creature with a
kidney,” e.g., are perhaps alike in extension but unlike in meaning.
Confusion of meaning with extension, in the case of general terms, is less
common than confusion of meaning with naming in the case of singular terms. It
is indeed a commonplace in philosophy to oppose intension (or meaning) to
extension, or, in a variant vocabulary, connotation to denotation.
The Aristotelian notion of essence was the forerunner, no doubt, of the modern
notion of intension or meaning. For Aristotle it was essential in men to be
rational, accidental to be two-legged. But there is an important difference
between this attitude and the doctrine of meaning. From the latter point of view it
may indeed be conceded (if only for the sake of argument) that rationality is
involved in the meaning of the word “man” while two-leggedness is not; but two-
leggedness may at the same time be viewed as involved in the meaning of “biped”
while rationality is not. Thus from the point of view of the doctrine of meaning it
makes no sense to say of the actual individual; who is at once a man and a biped,
that his rationality is essential and his two-leggedness accidental or vice versa.
Things had essences, for Aristotle, but only linguistic forms have meanings.
Meaning is what essence becomes when it is divorced from the object of reference
and wedded to the word.
For the theory of meaning the most conspicuous question is as to the nature of
its objects: what sort of things are meanings? They are evidently intended to be
ideas, somehow—mental ideas for some semanticists, Platonic ideas for others.
Objects of either sort are so elusive, not to say debatable, that there seems little
hope of erecting a fruitful science about them. It is not even clear, granted mean-
ings, when we have two and when we have one; it is not clear when linguistic
forms should be regarded as synonymous, or alike in meaning, and when they
should not. If a standard of synonymy should be arrived at, we may reasonably
expect that the appeal to meanings as entities will not have played a very useful
part in the enterprise.
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
177

A felt need for meant entities may derive from an earlier failure to appreciate
that meaning and reference are distinct. Once the theory of meaning is sharply
separated from the theory of reference, it is a short step to recognizing as the
business of the theory of meaning simply the synonymy of linguistic forms and
the analyticity of statements; meanings themselves, as obscure intermediary
entities, may well be abandoned.
The description of analyticity as truth by virtue of meanings started us off in
pursuit of a concept of meaning. But now we have abandoned the thought of any
special realm of entities called meanings. So the problem of analyticity confronts
us anew.
Statements which are analytic by general philosophical acclaim are not,
indeed, far to seek. They fall into two classes. Those of the ﬁrst class, which may
be called logically true, are typiﬁed by:
(1) No unmarried man is married.
The relevant feature of this example is that it is not merely true as it stands, but
remains true under any and all reinterpretations of “man” and “married.” If we
suppose a prior inventory of logical particles, comprising “no,” “un-,” “not,”
“if,” “then,” “and,” etc., then in general a logical truth is a statement which is
true and remains true under all reinterpretations of its components other than the
logical particles.
But there is also a second class of analytic statements, typiﬁed by:
(2) No bachelor is married.
The characteristic of such a statement is that it can be turned into a logical truth
by putting synonyms for synonyms; thus (2) can be turned into (1) by putting
“unmarried man” for its synonym “bachelor.” We still lack a proper character-
ization of this second class of analytic statements, and therewith of analyticity
generally, inasmuch as we have had in the above description to lean on a notion
of “synonymy” which is no less in need of clariﬁcation than analyticity itself.
In recent years Carnap has tended to explain analyticity by appeal to what he
calls state-descriptions.3 A state-description is any exhaustive assignment of truth
values to the atomic, or noncompound, statements of the language. All other
statements of the language are, Carnap assumes, built up of their component
clauses by means of the familiar logical devices, in such a way that the truth value
of any complex statement is ﬁxed for each state-description by speciﬁable logical
laws. A statement is then explained as analytic when it comes out true under
every state-description. This account is an adaptation of Leibniz’s “true in all
possible worlds.” But note that this version of analyticity serves its purpose only
if the atomic statements of the language are, unlike “John is a bachelor” and
“John is married,” mutually independent. Otherwise there would be a state-
description which assigned truth to “John is a bachelor” and falsity to “John is
married”, and consequently “All bachelors are married” would turn out syn-
thetic rather than analytic under the proposed criterion. Thus the criterion of
analyticity in terms of state-descriptions serves only for languages devoid of
extralogical synonym-pairs, such as “bachelor” and “unmarried man”:
W.V. QUINE
178

synonym-pairs of the type which give rise to the “second class” of analytic state-
ments. The criterion in terms of state-descriptions is a reconstruction at best of
logical truth.
I do not mean to suggest that Carnap is under any illusions on this point. His
simpliﬁed model language with its state-descriptions is aimed primarily not at the
general problem of analyticity but at another purpose, the clariﬁcation of prob-
ability and induction. Our problem, however, is analyticity; and here the major
difﬁculty lies not in the ﬁrst class of analytic statements, the logical truths, but
rather in the second class, which depends on the notion of synonymy.
II. Deﬁnition
There are those who ﬁnd it soothing to say that the analytic statements of the
second class reduce to those of the ﬁrst class, the logical truths, by deﬁnition;
“bachelor,” e.g., is deﬁned as “unmarried man.” But how do we ﬁnd that “bach-
elor” is deﬁned as “unmarried man”? Who deﬁned it thus, and when? Are we to
appeal to the nearest dictionary, and accept the lexicographer’s formulation as
law? Clearly this would be to put the cart before the horse. The lexicographer is
an empirical scientist, whose business is the recording of antecedent facts; and if
he glosses “bachelor” as “unmarried man” it is because of his belief that there is a
relation of synonymy between these forms, implicit in general or preferred usage
prior to his own work. The notion of synonymy presupposed here has still to be
clariﬁed, presumably in terms relating to linguistic behavior. Certainly the “deﬁn-
ition” which is the lexicographer’s report of an observed synonymy cannot be
taken as the ground of the synonymy.
Deﬁnition is not, indeed, an activity exclusively of philologists. Philosophers
and scientists frequently have occasion to “deﬁne” a recondite term by
paraphrasing it into terms of a more familiar vocabulary. But ordinarily such a
deﬁnition, like the philologist’s, is pure lexicography, afﬁrming a relationship of
synonymy antecedent to the exposition in hand.
Just what it means to afﬁrm synonymy, just what the interconnections may be
which are necessary and sufﬁcient in order that two linguistic forms be properly
describable as synonymous, is far from clear; but, whatever these interconnec-
tions may be, ordinarily they are grounded in usage. Deﬁnitions reporting
selected instances of synonymy come then as reports upon usage.
There is also, however, a variant type of deﬁnitional activity which does not
limit itself to the reporting of pre-existing synonymies. I have in mind what
Carnap calls explication—an activity to which philosophers are given, and scien-
tists also in their more philosophical moments. In explication the purpose is not
merely to paraphrase the deﬁniendum into an outright synonym, but actually to
improve upon the deﬁniendum by reﬁning or supplementing its meaning. But
even explication, though not merely reporting a pre-existing synonymy between
deﬁniendum and deﬁniens, does rest nevertheless on other pre-existing syn-
onymies. The matter may be viewed as follows. Any word worth explicating has
some contexts which, as wholes, are clear and precise enough to be useful; and
the purpose of explication is to preserve the usage of these favored contexts
while sharpening the usage of other contexts. In order that a given deﬁnition be
suitable for purposes of explication, therefore, what is required is not that the
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
179

deﬁniendum in its antecedent usage be synonymous with the deﬁniens, but just
that each of these favored contexts of the deﬁniendum, taken as a whole in its
antecedent usage, be synonymous with the corresponding context of the
deﬁniens.
Two alternative deﬁnientia may be equally appropriate for the purposes of a
given task of explication and yet not be synonymous with each other; for they
may serve interchangeably within the favored contexts but diverge elsewhere. By
cleaving to one of these deﬁnientia rather than the other, a deﬁnition of explica-
tive kind generates, by ﬁat, a relationship of synonymy between deﬁniendum and
deﬁniens which did not hold before. But such a deﬁnition still owes its explicative
function, as seen, to pre-existing synonymies.
There does, however, remain still an extreme sort of deﬁnition which does not
hark back to prior synonymies at all; viz., the explicitly conventional introduc-
tion of novel notations for purposes of sheer abbreviation. Here the deﬁniendum
becomes synonymous with the deﬁniens simply because it has been created
expressly for the purpose of being synonymous with the deﬁniens. Here we have
a really transparent case of synonymy created by deﬁnition; would that all species
of synonymy were as intelligible. For the rest, deﬁnition rests on synonymy rather
than explaining it.
The word “deﬁnition” has come to have a dangerously reassuring sound, due
no doubt to its frequent occurrence in logical and mathematical writings. We
shall do well to digress now into a brief appraisal of the role of deﬁnition in
formal work.
In logical and mathematical systems either of two mutually antagonistic types
of economy may be striven for, and each has its peculiar practical utility. On the
one hand we may seek economy of practical expression: ease and brevity in the
statement of multifarious relationships. This sort of economy calls usually for
distinctive concise notations for a wealth of concepts. Second, however, and
oppositely, we may seek economy in grammar and vocabulary; we may try to
ﬁnd a minimum of basic concepts such that, once a distinctive notation has been
appropriated to each of them, it becomes possible to express any desired further
concept by mere combination and iteration of our basic notations. This second
sort of economy is impractical in one way, since a poverty in basic idioms tends to
a necessary lengthening of discourse. But it is practical in another way: it greatly
simpliﬁes theoretical discourse about the language, through minimizing the terms
and the forms of construction wherein the language consists.
Both sorts of economy, though prima facie incompatible, are valuable in their
separate ways. The custom has consequently arisen of combining both sorts of
economy by forging in effect two languages, the one a part of the other. The
inclusive language, though redundant in grammar and vocabulary, is economical
in message lengths, while the part, called primitive notation, is economical in
grammar and vocabulary. Whole and part are correlated by rules of translation
whereby each idiom not in primitive notation is equated to some complex built
up of primitive notation. These rules of translation are the so-called deﬁnitions
which appear in formalized systems. They are best viewed not as adjuncts to one
language but as correlations between two languages, the one a part of the other.
But these correlations are not arbitrary. They are supposed to show how the
primitive notations can accomplish all purposes, save brevity and convenience, of
W.V. QUINE
180

the redundant language. Hence the deﬁniendum and its deﬁniens may be
expected, in each case, to be related in one or another of the three ways lately
noted. The deﬁniens may be a faithful paraphrase of the deﬁniendum into the
narrower notation, preserving a direct synonymy as of antecedent usage; or the
deﬁniens may, in the spirit of explication, improve upon the antecedent usage of
the deﬁniendum; or ﬁnally, the deﬁniendum may be a newly created notation,
newly endowed with meaning here and now.
In formal and informal work alike, thus, we ﬁnd that deﬁnition—except in the
extreme case of the explicitly conventional introduction of new notations—
hinges on prior relationships of synonymy. Recognizing then that the notion of
deﬁnition does not hold the key to synonymy and analyticity, let us look further
into synonymy and say no more of deﬁnition.
III. Interchangeability
A natural suggestion, deserving close examination, is that the synonymy of two
linguistic forms consists simply in their interchangeability in all contexts without
change of truth value; interchangeability, in Leibniz’s phrase, salva veritate. Note
that synonyms so conceived need not even be free from vagueness, as long as the
vaguenesses match.
But it is not quite true that the synonyms “bachelor” and “unmarried man”
are everywhere interchangeable salva veritate. Truths which become false under
substitution of “unmarried man” for “bachelor” are easily constructed with help
of “bachelor of arts” or “bachelor’s buttons.” Also with help of quotation, thus:
‘Bachelor’ has less than ten letters.
Such counterinstances can, however, perhaps be set aside by treating the phrases
“bachelor of arts” and “bachelor’s buttons” and the quotation “‘bachelor’”
each as a single indivisible word and then stipulating that the interchangeability
salva veritate which is to be the touchstone of synonymy is not supposed to apply
to fragmentary occurrences inside of a word. This account of synonymy, suppos-
ing it acceptable on other counts, has indeed the drawback of appealing to a prior
conception of “word” which can be counted on to present difﬁculties of formula-
tion in its turn. Nevertheless some progress might be claimed in having reduced
the problem of synonymy to a problem of wordhood. Let us pursue this line a bit,
taking “word” for granted.
The question remains whether interchangeability salva veritate (apart from
occurrences within words) is a strong enough condition for synonymy, or
whether, on the contrary, some nonsynonymous expressions might be thus inter-
changeable. Now let us be clear that we are not concerned here with synonymy in
the sense of complete identity in psychological associations or poetic quality;
indeed no two expressions are synonymous in such a sense. We are concerned
only with what may be called cognitive synonymy. Just what this is cannot be
said without successfully ﬁnishing the present study; but we know something
about it from the need which arose for it in connection with analyticity in Section
I. The sort of synonymy needed there was merely such that any analytic statement
could be turned into a logical truth by putting synonyms for synonyms. Turning
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
181

the tables and assuming analyticity, indeed, we could explain cognitive
synonymy of terms as follows (keeping to the familiar example): to say that
“bachelor” and “unmarried man” are cognitively synonymous is to say no more
nor less than that the statement:
(3) All and only bachelors are unmarried men
is analytic.4
What we need is an account of cognitive synonymy not presupposing
analyticity—if we are to explain analyticity conversely with help of cognitive
synonymy as undertaken in Section I. And indeed such an independent account of
cognitive synonymy is at present up for consideration, viz., interchangeability
salva veritate everywhere except within words. The question before us, to resume
the thread at last, is whether such interchangeability is a sufﬁcient condition for
cognitive synonymy. We can quickly assure ourselves that it is, by examples of
the following sort. The statement:
(4) Necessarily all and only bachelors are bachelors
is evidently true, even supposing “necessarily” so narrowly construed as to be
truly applicable only to analytic statements. Then, if “bachelor” and “unmarried
man” are interchangeable salva veritate, the result
(5) Necessarily, all and only bachelors are unmarried men
of putting “unmarried man” for an occurrence of “bachelor” in (4) must, like (4),
be true. But to say that (5) is true is to say that (3) is analytic, and hence that
“bachelor” and “unmarried men” are cognitively synonymous.
Let us see what there is about the above argument that gives it its air of hocus-
pocus. The condition of interchangeability salva veritate varies in its force with
variations in the richness of the language at hand. The above argument supposes
we are working with a language rich enough to contain the adverb “necessarily,”
this adverb being so construed as to yield truth when and only when applied to an
analytic statement. But can we condone a language which contains such an
adverb? Does the adverb really make sense? To suppose that it does is to suppose
that we have already made satisfactory sense of “analytic.” Then what are we so
hard at work on right now?
Our argument is not ﬂatly circular, but something like it. It has the form,
ﬁguratively speaking, of a closed curve in space.
Interchangeability salva veritate is meaningless until relativized to a language
whose extent is speciﬁed in relevant respects. Suppose now we consider a lan-
guage containing just the following materials. There is an indeﬁnitely large stock
of one- and many-place predicates, mostly having to do with extralogical subject
matter. The rest of the language is logical. The atomic sentences consist each of a
predicate followed by one or more variables; and the complex sentences are built
up of atomic ones by truth functions and quantiﬁcation. In effect such a language
enjoys the beneﬁts also of descriptions and class names and indeed singular terms
generally, these being contextually deﬁnable in known ways.5 Such a language
W.V. QUINE
182

can be adequate to classical mathematics and indeed to scientiﬁc discourse gener-
ally, except in so far as the latter involves debatable devices such as modal
adverbs and contrary-to-fact conditionals. Now a language of this type is exten-
sional, in this sense: any two predicates which agree extensionally (i.e., are true of
the same objects) are interchangeable salva veritate.
In an extensional language, therefore, interchangeability salva veritate is no
assurance of cognitive synonymy of the desired type. That “bachelor” and
“unmarried man” are interchangeable salva veritate in an extensional language
assures us of no more than that (3) is true. There is no assurance here that the
extensional agreement of ‘bachelor’ and “unmarried man” rests on meaning
rather than merely on accidental matters of fact, as does extensional agreement of
“creature with a heart” and “creature with a kidney.”
For most purposes extensional agreement is the nearest approximation to syn-
onymy we need care about. But the fact remains that extensional agreement falls
far short of cognitive synonymy of the type required for explaining analyticity in
the manner of Section I. The type of cognitive synonymy required there is such as
to equate the synonymy of “bachelor” and “unmarried man” with the analyticity
of (3), not merely with the truth of (3).
So we must recognize that interchangeability salva veritate, if construed in
relation to an extensional language, is not a sufﬁcient condition of cognitive
synonymy in the sense needed for deriving analyticity in the manner of Section I.
If a language contains an intensional adverb “necessarily” in the sense lately
noted, or other particles to the same effect, then interchangeability salva veritate
in such a language does afford a sufﬁcient condition of cognitive synonymy; but
such a language is intelligible only if the notion of analyticity is already clearly
understood in advance.
The effort to explain cognitive synonymy ﬁrst, for the sake of deriving analy-
ticity from it afterward as in Section I, is perhaps the wrong approach. Instead we
might try explaining analyticity somehow without appeal to cognitive synonymy.
Afterward we could doubtless derive cognitive synonymy from analyticity satis-
factorily enough if desired. We have seen that cognitive synonymy of “bachelor”
and “unmarried man” can be explained as analyticity of (3). The same explan-
ation works for any pair of one-place predicates, of course, and it can be
extended in obvious fashion to many-place predicates. Other syntactical categor-
ies can also be accommodated in fairly parallel fashion. Singular terms may be
said to be cognitively synonymous when the statement of identity formed by
putting “=” between them is analytic. Statements may be said simply to be cogni-
tively synonymous when their biconditional (the result of joining them by “if and
only if”) is analytic.6 If we care to lump all categories into a single formulation, at
the expense of assuming again the notion of “word” which was appealed to early
in this section, we can describe any two linguistic forms as cognitively synonym-
ous when the two forms are interchangeable (apart from occurrences within
“words”) salva (no longer veritate but) analyticitate. Certain technical questions
arise, indeed, over cases of ambiguity or homonymy; let us not pause for them,
however, for we are already digressing. Let us rather turn our backs on the
problem of synonymy and address ourselves anew to that of analyticity.
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
183

IV. Semantical rules
Analyticity at ﬁrst seemed most naturally deﬁnable by appeal to a realm of mean-
ings. On reﬁnement, the appeal to meanings gave way to an appeal to synonymy
or deﬁnition. But deﬁnition turned out to be a will-o’-the-wisp, and synonymy
turned out to be best understood only by dint of a prior appeal to analyticity
itself. So we are back at the problem of analyticity.
I do not know whether the statement “Everything green is extended” is ana-
lytic. Now does my indecision over this example really betray an incomplete
understanding, an incomplete grasp of the “meanings”, of “green” and
“extended”? I think not. The trouble is not with “green” or “extended,” but with
“analytic.”
It is often hinted that the difﬁculty in separating analytic statements from
synthetic ones in ordinary language is due to the vagueness of ordinary language
and that the distinction is clear when we have a precise artiﬁcial language with
explicit “semantical rules.” This, however, as I shall now attempt to show, is a
confusion.
The notion of analyticity about which we are worrying is a purported relation
between statements and languages: a statement S is said to be analytic for a
language L, and the problem is to make sense of this relation generally, i.e., for
variable “S” and “L.” The point that I want to make is that the gravity of this
problem is not perceptibly less for artiﬁcial languages than for natural ones. The
problem of making sense of the idiom “S is analytic for L,” with variable “S” and
“L,” retains its stubbornness even if we limit the range of the variable “L” to
artiﬁcial languages. Let me now try to make this point evident.
For artiﬁcial languages and semantical rules we look naturally to the writings
of Carnap. His semantical rules take various forms, and to make my point I shall
have to distinguish certain of the forms. Let us suppose, to begin with, an arti-
ﬁcial language Lo whose semantical rules have the form explicitly of a speciﬁca-
tion, by recursion or otherwise, of all the analytic statements of Lo. The rules tell
us that such and such statements, and only those, are the analytic statements of
Lo. Now here the difﬁculty is simply that the rules contain the word “analytic,”
which we do not understand! We understand what expressions the rules attribute
analyticity to, but we do not understand what the rules attribute to those expres-
sions. In short, before we can understand a rule which begins “A statement S is
analytic for language Lo if and only if . . . ,” we must understand the general
relative term “analytic for”; we must understand “S is analytic for L” where “S”
and “L” are variables.
Alternatively we may, indeed, view the so-called rule as a conventional deﬁn-
ition of a new simple symbol “analytic-for-Lo,” which might better be written
untendentiously as “K” so as not to seem to throw light on the interesting word
“analytic.” Obviously any number of classes K, M, N, etc. of statements of Lo can
be speciﬁed for various purposes or for no purpose; what does it mean to say that
K, as against M, N, etc., is the class of the “analytic” statements of Lo?
By saying what statements are analytic for Lo we explain “analytic-for-Lo” but
not “analytic,” not “analytic for.” We do not begin to explain the idiom “S is
analytic for L” with variable “S” and “L,” even though we be content to limit the
range of “L” to the realm of artiﬁcial languages.
W.V. QUINE
184

Actually we do know enough about the intended signiﬁcance of “analytic” to
know that analytic statements are supposed to be true. Let us then turn to a
second form of semantical rule, which says not that such and such statements are
analytic but simply that such and such statements are included among the
truths. Such a rule is not subject to the criticism of containing the un-understood
word “analytic”; and we may grant for the sake of argument that there is no
difﬁculty over the broader term “true.” A semantical rule of this second type, a
rule of truth, is not supposed to specify all the truths of the language; it merely
stipulates, recursively or otherwise, a certain multitude of statements which,
along with others unspeciﬁed, are to count as true. Such a rule may be conceded
to be quite clear. Derivatively, afterward, analyticity can be demarcated thus: a
statement is analytic if it is (not merely true but) true according to the semanti-
cal rule.
Still there is really no progress. Instead of appealing to an unexplained word
“analytic,” we are now appealing to an unexplained phrase “semantical rule.”
Not every true statement which says that the statements of some class are true
can count as a semantical rule—otherwise all truths would be “analytic” in the
sense of being true according to semantical rules. Semantical rules are dis-
tinguishable, apparently, only by the fact of appearing on a page under the head-
ing “Semantical Rules”; and this heading is itself then meaningless.
We can say indeed that a statement is analytic-for-Lo if and only if it is true
according to such and such speciﬁcally appended “semantical rules,” but then we
ﬁnd ourselves back at essentially the same case which was originally discussed: “S
is analytic-for-Lo if and only if . . .“ Once we seek to explain “S is analytic for L”
generally for variable “L” (even allowing limitation of “L” to artiﬁcial lan-
guages), the explanation “true according to the semantical rules of L” is unavail-
ing; for the relative term ‘semantical rule of’ is as much in need of clariﬁcation, at
least, as “analytic for.”
It might conceivably be protested that an artiﬁcial language L (unlike a natural
one) is a language in the ordinary sense plus a set of explicit semantical rules—the
whole constituting, let us say, an ordered pair; and that the semantical rules of L
then are speciﬁable simply as the second component of the pair L. But, by the
same token and more simply, we might construe an artiﬁcial language L outright
as an ordered pair whose second component is the class of its analytic statements;
and then the analytic statements of L become speciﬁable simply as the statements
in the second component of L. Or better still, we might just stop tugging at our
bootstraps altogether.
Not all the explanations of analyticity known to Carnap and his readers have
been covered explicitly in the above considerations, but the extension to other
forms is not hard to see. Just one additional factor should be mentioned which
sometimes enters: sometimes the semantical rules are in effect rules of translation
into ordinary language, in which case the analytic statements of the artiﬁcial
language are in effect recognized as such from the analyticity of their speciﬁed
translations in ordinary language. Here certainly there can be no thought of an
illumination of the problem of analyticity from the side of the artiﬁcial language.
From the point of view of the problem of analyticity the notion of an artiﬁcial
language with semantical rules is a feu follet par excellence. Semantical rules
determining the analytic statements of an artiﬁcial language are of interest only in
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
185

so far as we already understand the notion of analyticity; they are of no help in
gaining this understanding.
Appeal to hypothetical languages of an artiﬁcially simple kind could conceiv-
ably be useful in clarifying analyticity, if the mental or behavioral or cultural
factors relevant to analyticity—whatever they may be—were somehow sketched
into the simpliﬁed model. But a model which takes analyticity merely as in irredu-
cible character is unlikely to throw light on the problem of explicating analyticity.
It is obvious that truth in general depends on both language and extralinguistic
fact. The statement “Brutus killed Caesar” would be false if the world had been
different in certain ways, but it would also be false if the word “killed” happened
rather to have the sense of “begat.” Hence the temptation to suppose in general
that the truth of a statement is somehow analyzable into a linguistic component
and a factual component. Given this supposition, it next seems reasonable that in
some statements the factual component should be null; and these are the analytic
statements. But, for all its a priori reasonableness, a boundary between analytic
and synthetic statements simply has not been drawn. That there is such a distinc-
tion to be drawn at all is an unempirical dogma of empiricists, a metaphysical
article of faith.
V. The veriﬁcation theory and reductionism
In the course of these somber reﬂections we have taken a dim view ﬁrst of the
notion of meaning, then of the notion of cognitive synonymy, and ﬁnally of the
notion of analyticity. But what, it may be asked, of the veriﬁcation theory of
meaning? This phrase has established itself so ﬁrmly as a catchword of empiri-
cism that we should be very unscientiﬁc indeed not to look beneath it for a
possible key to the problem of meaning and the associated problems.
The veriﬁcation theory of meaning, which has been conspicuous in the litera-
ture from Peirce onward, is that the meaning of a statement is the method of
empirically conﬁrming or inﬁrming it. An analytic statement is that limiting case
which is conﬁrmed no matter what.
As urged in Section I, we can as well pass over the question of meanings as
entities and move straight to sameness of meaning, or synonymy. Then what the
veriﬁcation theory says is that statements are synonymous if and only if they are
alike in point of method of empirical conﬁrmation or inﬁrmation.
This is an account of cognitive synonymy not of linguistic forms generally, but
of statements.7 However, from the concept of synonymy of statements we could
derive the concept of synonymy for other linguistic forms, by considerations
somewhat similar to those at the end of Section III. Assuming the notion of
“word,” indeed, we could explain any two forms as synonymous when the putt-
ing of the one form for an occurrence of the other in any statement (apart from
occurrences within “words”) yields a synonymous statement. Finally, given the
concept of synonymy thus for linguistic forms generally, we could deﬁne analytic-
ity in terms of synonymy and logical truth as in Section I. For that matter, we
could deﬁne analyticity more simply in terms of just synonymy of statements
together with logical truth; it is not necessary to appeal to synonymy of linguistic
forms other than statements. For a statement may be described as analytic simply
when it is synonymous with a logically true statement.
W.V. QUINE
186

So, if the veriﬁcation theory can be accepted as an adequate account of state-
ment synonymy, the notion of analyticity is saved after all. However, let us
reﬂect. Statement synonymy is said to be likeness of method of empirical con-
ﬁrmation or inﬁrmation. Just what are these methods which are to be compared
for likeness? What, in other words, is the nature of the relationship between a
statement and the experiences which contribute to or detract from its
conﬁrmation?
The most naive view of the relationship is that it is one of direct report. This is
radical reductionism. Every meaningful statement is held to be translatable into a
statement (true or false) about immediate experience. Radical reductionism, in
one form or another, well antedates the veriﬁcation theory of meaning explicitly
so-called. Thus Locke and Hume held that every idea must either originate dir-
ectly in sense experience or else be compounded of ideas thus originating; and
taking a hint from Tooke8 we might rephrase this doctrine in semantical jargon
by saying that a term, to be signiﬁcant at all, must be either a name of a sense
datum or a compound of such names or an abbreviation of such a compound. So
stated, the doctrine remains ambiguous as between sense data as sensory events
and sense data as sensory qualities; and it remains vague as to the admissible
ways of compounding. Moreover, the doctrine is unnecessarily and intolerably
restrictive in the term-by-term critique which it imposes. More reasonably, and
without yet exceeding the limits of what I have called radical reductionism, we
may take full statements as our signiﬁcant units—thus demanding that our
statements as wholes be translatable into sense-datum language, but not that they
be translatable term by term.
This emendation would unquestionably have been welcome to Locke and
Hume and Tooke, but historically it had to await two intermediate develop-
ments. One of these developments was the increasing emphasis on veriﬁcation or
conﬁrmation, which came with the explicitly so-called veriﬁcation theory of
meaning. The objects of veriﬁcation or conﬁrmation being statements, this
emphasis gave the statement an ascendancy over the word or term as unit of
signiﬁcant discourse. The other development, consequent upon the ﬁrst, was
Russell’s discovery of the concept of incomplete symbols deﬁned in use.
Radical reductionism, conceived now with statements as units, sets itself the
task of specifying a sense-datum language and showing how to translate the rest
of signiﬁcant discourse, statement by statement, into it. Carnap embarked on this
project in the Aufbau.9
The language which Carnap adopted as his starting point was not a sense-
datum language in the narrowest conceivable sense, for it included also the nota-
tions of logic, up through higher set theory. In effect in included the whole
language of pure mathematics. The ontology implicit in it (i.e., the range of
values of its variables) embraced not only sensory events but classes, classes of
classes, and so on. Empiricists there are who would boggle at such prodigality.
Carnap’s starting point is very parsimonious, however, in its extralogical or
sensory part. In a series of constructions in which he exploits the resources of
modern logic with much ingenuity, he succeeds in deﬁning a wide array
of important additional sensory concepts which, but for his constructions, one
would not have dreamed were deﬁnable on so slender a basis. Carnap was the
ﬁrst empiricist who, not content with asserting the reducibility of science to
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
187

terms of immediate experience, took serious steps toward carrying out the
reduction.
Even supposing Carnap’s starting point satisfactory, his constructions were, as
he himself stressed, only a fragment of the full program. The construction of even
the simplest statements about the physical world was left in a sketchy state.
Carnap’s suggestions on this subject were, despite their sketchiness, very suggest-
ive. He explained spatio-temporal point-instants as quadruples of real numbers
and envisaged assignment of sense qualities to point-instants according to certain
canons. Roughly summarized, the plan was that qualities should be assigned to
point-instants in such a way as to achieve the laziest world compatible with our
experience. The principle of least action was to be our guide in constructing a
world from experience.
Carnap did not seem to recognize, however, that his treatment of physical
objects fell short of reduction not merely through sketchiness, but in principle.
Statements of the form “Quality q is at point-instant x; y; z; t” were, according to
his canons, to be apportioned truth values in such a way as to maximize and
minimize certain over-all features, and with growth of experience the truth values
were to be progressively revised in the same spirit. I think this is a good schema-
tization (deliberately oversimpliﬁed, to be sure) of what science really does; but it
provides no indication, not even the sketchiest, of how a statement of the form
“Quality q is at x; y; z; t” could ever be translated into Carnap’s initial language
of sense data and logic. The connective “is at” remains an added undeﬁned
connective; the canons counsel us in its use but not in its elimination.
Carnap seems to have appreciated this point afterward; for in his later writings
he abandoned all notion of the translatability of statements about the physical
world into statements about immediate experience. Reductionism in its radical
form has long since ceased to ﬁgure in Carnap’s philosophy.
But the dogma of reductionism has, in a subtler and more tenuous form,
continued to inﬂuence the thought of empiricists. The notion lingers that to each
statement, or each synthetic statement, there is associated a unique range of
possible sensory events such that the occurrence of any of them would add to the
likelihood of truth of the statement, and that there is associated also another
unique range of possible sensory events whose occurrence would detract from
that likelihood. This notion is of course implicit in the veriﬁcation theory of
meaning.
The dogma of reductionism survives in the supposition that each statement,
taken-in isolation from its fellows, can admit of conﬁrmation or information at
all. My countersuggestion, issuing essentially from Carnap’s doctrine of the phy-
sical world in the Aufbau, is that our statements about the external world face the
tribunal of sense experience not individually but only as a corporate body.
The dogma of reductionism, even in its attenuated form, is intimately con-
nected with the other dogma: that there is a cleavage between the analytic and the
synthetic. We have found ourselves led, indeed, from the latter problem to the
former through the veriﬁcation theory of meaning. More directly, the one dogma
clearly supports the other in this way: as long as it is taken to be signiﬁcant in
general to speak of the conﬁrmation and information of a statement, it seems
signiﬁcant to speak also of a limiting kind of statement which is vacuously
conﬁrmed, ipso facto, come what may; and such a statement is analytic.
W.V. QUINE
188

The two dogmas are, indeed, at root identical. We lately reﬂected that in
general the truth of statements does obviously depend both upon language and
upon extralinguistic fact; and we noted that this obvious circumstance carries in
its train, not logically but all too naturally, a feeling that the truth of a statement
is somehow analyzable into a linguistic component and a factual component. The
factual component must, if we are empiricists, boil down to a range of conﬁrma-
tory experiences. In the extreme case where the linguistic component is all that
matters, a true statement is analytic. But I hope we are now impressed with how
stubbornly the distinction between analytic and synthetic has resisted any
straightforward drawing. I am impressed also, apart from prefabricated
examples of black and white balls in an urn, with how bafﬂing the problem has
always been of arriving at any explicit theory of the empirical conﬁrmation of a
synthetic statement. My present suggestion is that it is nonsense, and the root of
much nonsense, to speak of a linguistic component and a factual component in
the truth of any individual statement. Taken collectively, science has its double
dependence upon language and experience; but this duality is not signiﬁcantly
traceable into the statements of science taken one by one.
Russell’s concept of deﬁnition in use was, as remarked, an advance over the
impossible term-by-term empiricism of Locke and Hume. The statement, rather
than the term, came with Russell to be recognized as the unit accountable to an
empiricist critique. But what I am now urging is that even in taking the statement
as unit we have drawn our grid too ﬁnely. The unit of empirical signiﬁcance is the
whole of science.
VI. Empiricism without the dogmas
The totality of our so-called knowledge or beliefs, from the most casual matters
of geography and history to the profoundest laws of atomic physics or even of
pure mathematics and logic, is a man-made fabric which impinges on experience
only along the edges. Or, to change the ﬁgure, total science is like a ﬁeld of force
whose boundary conditions are experience. A conﬂict with experience at the
periphery occasions readjustments in the interior of the ﬁeld. Truth values have to
be redistributed over some of our statements. Re-evaluation of some statements
entails re-evaluation of others, because of their logical interconnections—the
logical laws being in turn simply certain further statements of the system, certain
further elements of the ﬁeld. Having re-evaluated one statement we must re-
evaluate some others, whether they be statements logically connected with the
ﬁrst or whether they be the statements of logical connections themselves. But the
total ﬁeld is so undetermined by its boundary conditions, experience, that there is
much latitude of choice as to what statements to re-evaluate in the light of any
single contrary experience. No particular experiences are linked with any particu-
lar statements in the interior of the ﬁeld, except indirectly through considerations
of equilibrium affecting the ﬁeld as a whole.
If this view is right, it is misleading to speak of the empirical content of an
individual statement—especially if it be a statement at all remote from the
experiential periphery of the ﬁeld. Furthermore it becomes folly to seek a
boundary between synthetic statements, which hold contingently on experi-
ence, and analytic statements which hold come what may. Any statement can
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
189

be held true come what may, if we make drastic enough adjustments elsewhere
in the system. Even a statement very close to the periphery can be held true in
the face of recalcitrant experience by pleading hallucination or by amending
certain statements of the kind called logical laws. Conversely, by the same
token, no statement is immune to revision. Revision even of the logical law of
the excluded middle has been proposed as a means of simplifying quantum
mechanics; and what difference is there in principle between such a shift and
the shift whereby Kepler superseded Ptolemy, or Einstein Newton, or Darwin
Aristotle?
For vividness I have been speaking in terms of varying distances from a sensory
periphery. Let me try now to clarify this notion without metaphor. Certain state-
ments, though about physical objects and not sense experience, seem peculiarly
germane to sense experience—and in a selective way: some statements to some
experiences, others to others. Such statements, especially germane to particular
experiences, I picture as near the periphery. But in this relation of “germaneness”
I envisage nothing more than a loose association reﬂecting the relative likelihood,
in practice, of our choosing one statement rather than another for revision in the
event of recalcitrant experience. For example, we can imagine recalcitrant
experiences to which we would surely be inclined to accommodate our system by
re-evaluating just the statement that there are brick houses on Elm Street,
together with related statements on the same topic. We can imagine other recalci-
trant experiences to which we would be inclined to accommodate our system by
re-evaluating just the statement that there are no centaurs, along with kindred
statements. A recalcitrant experience can, I have already urged, be accom-
modated by any of various alternative re-evaluations in various alternative quar-
ters of the total system; but, in the cases which we are now imagining, our natural
tendency to disturb the total system as little as possible would lead us to focus our
revisions upon these speciﬁc statements concerning brick houses or centaurs.
These statements are felt, therefore, to have a sharper empirical reference than
highly theoretical statements of physics or logic or ontology. The latter state-
ments may be thought of as relatively centrally located within the total network,
meaning merely that little preferential connection with any particular sense data
obtrudes itself.
As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a
tool, ultimately, for predicting future experience in the light of past experience.
Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient
intermediaries—not by deﬁnition in terms of experience, but simply as irredu-
cible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer. Let me interject
that for my part I do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in
Homer’s gods; and I consider it a scientiﬁc error to believe otherwise. But in point
of epistemological footing the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree
and not in kind. Both sorts of entities enter our conception only as cultural posits.
The myth of physical objects is epistemologically superior to most in that it has
proved more efﬁcacious than other myths as a device for working a manageable
structure into the ﬂux of experience.
Imagine, for the sake of analogy, that we are given the rational numbers. We
develop an algebraic theory for reasoning about them, but we ﬁnd it inconveni-
ently complex, because certain functions such as square root lack values for some
W.V. QUINE
190

arguments. Then it is discovered that the rules of our algebra can be much
simpliﬁed by conceptually augmenting our ontology with some mythical entities,
to be called irrational numbers. All we continue to be really interested in, ﬁrst and
last, are rational numbers; but we ﬁnd that we can commonly get from one law
about rational numbers to another much more quickly and simply by pretending
that the irrational numbers are there too.
I think this a fair account of the introduction of irrational numbers and other
extensions of the number system. The fact that the mythical status of irrational
numbers eventually gave way to the Dedekind–Russell version of them as certain
inﬁnite classes of ratios is irrelevant to my analogy. That version is impossible
anyway as long as reality is limited to the rational numbers and not extended to
classes of them.
Now I suggest that experience is analogous to the rational numbers and that
the physical objects, in analogy to the irrational numbers, are posits which serve
merely to simplify our treatment of experience. The physical objects are no more
reducible to experience than the irrational numbers to rational numbers, but
their incorporation into the theory enables us to get more easily from one
statement about experience to another.
The salient differences between the positing of physical objects and the posit-
ing of irrational numbers are, I think, just two. First, the factor of simpliﬁcation is
more overwhelming in the case of physical objects than in the numerical case.
Second, the positing of physical objects is far more archaic, being indeed coeval, I
expect, with language itself. For language is social and so depends for its devel-
opment upon intersubjective reference.
Positing does not stop with macroscopic physical objects. Objects at the
atomic level and beyond are posited to make the laws of macroscopic objects,
and ultimately the laws of experience, simpler and more manageable; and we
need not expect or demand full deﬁnition of atomic and subatomic entities in
terms of macroscopic ones, any more than deﬁnition of macroscopic things in
terms of sense data. Science is a continuation of common sense; and it continues
the common-sense expedient of swelling ontology to simplify theory.
Physical objects, small and large, are not the only posits. Forces are another
example; and indeed we are told nowadays that the boundary between energy
and matter is obsolete. Moreover, the abstract entities which are the substance of
mathematics—ultimately classes and classes of classes and so on up—are another
posit in the same spirit. Epistemologically these are myths on the same footing
with physical objects and gods, neither better nor worse except for differences in
the degree to which they expedite our dealings with sense experiences.
The over-all algebra of rational and irrational numbers is underdetermined by
the algebra of rational numbers, but is smoother and more convenient; and it
includes the algebra of rational numbers as a jagged or gerrymandered part. Total
science, mathematical and natural and human, is similarly but more extremely
underdetermined by experience. The edge of the system must be kept squared
with experience; the rest, with all its elaborate myths or ﬁctions, has as its
objective the simplicity of laws.
Ontological questions, under this view, are on a par with questions of natural
science. Consider the question whether to countenance classes as entities. This, as
I have argued elsewhere,10 is the question whether to quantify with respect to
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
191

variables which take classes as values. Now Carnap has maintained11 that this is a
question not of matters of fact but of choosing a convenient language form, a
convenient conceptual scheme or framework for science. With this I agree; but
only on the proviso that the same be conceded regarding scientiﬁc hypotheses
generally. Carnap has recognized12 that he is able to preserve a double standard
for ontological questions and scientiﬁc hypotheses only by assuming an absolute
distinction between the analytic and the synthetic; and I need not say again that
this is a distinction which I reject.
Some issues do, I grant, seem more a question of convenient conceptual
scheme and others more a question of brute fact. The issue over there being
classes seems more a question of convenient conceptual scheme; the issue over
there being centaurs, or brick houses on Elm Street, seems more a question of
fact. But I have been urging that this difference is only one of degree, and that it
turns upon our vaguely pragmatic inclination to adjust one strand of the fabric of
science rather than another in accommodating some particular recalcitrant
experience. Conservatism ﬁgures in such choices, and so does the quest for
simplicity.
Carnap, Lewis, and others take a pragmatic stand on the question of choosing
between language forms, scientiﬁc frameworks; but their pragmatism leaves off
at the imagined boundary between the analytic and the synthetic. In repudiating
such a boundary I espouse a more thorough pragmatism. Each man is given a
scientiﬁc heritage plus a continuing barrage of sensory stimulation; and the con-
siderations which guide him in warping his scientiﬁc heritage to ﬁt his continuing
sensory promptings are, where rational, pragmatic.
Notes
1 Much of this paper is devoted to a critique of analyticity which I have been urging
orally and in correspondence for years past. My debt to the other participants in
those discussions, notably Carnap, Church, Goodman, Tarski, and White, is large
and indeterminate. White’s excellent essay “The Analytic and the Synthetic: An
Untenable Dualism,” in John Dewey: Philosopher of Science and Freedom (New
York: Dial Press, 1950), says much of what needed to be said on the topic; but in
the present paper I touch on some further aspects of the problem. I am grateful
to Dr. Donald L. Davidson for valuable criticism of the ﬁrst draft.
2 See White, op. cit., p. 324.
3 R. Carnap, Meaning and Necessity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947),
pp. 9ff.; Logical Foundations of Probability (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1950), pp. 70ff.
4 This is cognitive synonymy in a primary, broad sense. Carnap (Meaning and
Necessity, pp. 56ff.) and Lewis (Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation [La Salle,
III.: Open Court, 1946], pp. 83ff.) have suggested how, once this notion is at
hand, a narrower sense of cognitive synonymy which is preferable for some
purposes can in turn be derived. But this special ramiﬁcation of concept-building
lies aside from the present purposes and must not be confused with the broad
sort of cognitive synonymy here concerned.
5 See, e.g., my Mathematical Logic (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1940),
sec. 24, 26, 27; or Methods of Logic (New York: Holt, 1950), sec. 37ff.
W.V. QUINE
192

6 The “if and only if” itself is intended in the truth functional sense. See Carnap,
Meaning and Necessity, p. 14.
7 The doctrine can indeed be formulated with terms rather than statements as the
units. Thus C.I. Lewis describes the meaning of a term as “a criterion in mind, by
reference to which one is able to apply or refuse to apply the expression in
question in the case of presented, or imagined, things or situations” (op. cit.,
p. 133).
8 John Horne Tooke, The Diversions of Purley (London, 1776; Boston, 1806), I, ch.
ii.
9 R. Carnap, Der logische Aufbau der Welt (Berlin, 1928) [English translation: The
Logical Structure of the World (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press,
1967)].
10 E.g., in “Notes on Existence and Necessity,” Journal of Philosophy 40 (1943):
113–127.
11 Carnap, “Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology,” Revue internationale de
philosophie 4 (1950): 20–40.
12 Op. cit., p. 32, footnote.
QUESTIONS
1
What are the two “dogmas” Quine alludes to?
2
What sorts of statements does Quine think are subject to revision?
3
In Quine’s terminology, what does it mean to say a statement is “close to the
periphery” of our beliefs?
“TWO DOGMAS OF EMPIRICISM”
193

Rudolf Carnap, Philosophical Foundations
of Physics
Non-Euclidean Geometries
In searching for an axiom to put in place of Euclid’s parallel axiom, there are two
opposite directions in which we can move:
(1) We can say that on a plane, through a point outside a line, there is no
parallel. (Euclid had said there is exactly one.)
(2) We can say that there are more than one parallels. (It turns out that, if there
are more than one, there will be an inﬁnite number.)
The ﬁrst of these deviations from Euclid was explored by the Russian mathem-
atician Nikolai Lobachevski, the second by the German mathematician Georg
Friedrich Riemann. In the chart in Table 1, I have placed the two non-Euclidean
geometries on opposite sides of the Euclidean to emphasize how they deviate
from the Euclidean structure in opposite directions.
Lobachevski’s geometry was discovered independently and almost simul-
taneously by Lobachevski, who published his work in 1835, and by the Hungar-
ian mathematician Johann Bolyai, who published his results three years earlier.
Riemann’s geometry was not discovered until about twenty years later. If you
would like to look further into the subject of non-Euclidean geometries, there are
several good books available in English. One is Non-Euclidean Geometry by the
Table 1
Rudolf Carnap, Philosophical Foundations of Physics: An Introduction to the Phil-
osophy of Science, ed. Martin Gardner (New York: Basic Books, 1966).
194

Italian mathematician Roberto Bonola. It contains the two articles by Bolyai and
Lobachevski, and it is interesting to read them in their original form. I think the
best book that discusses non-Euclidean geometry from the point of view adopted
here, namely, its relevance to the philosophy of geometry and space, is Hans
Reichenbach’s Philosophie der Raum-Zeit-Lehre, ﬁrst published in 1928 but
now available in English translation as The Philosophy of Space and Time. If you
are interested in the historical point of view, there is Max Jammer’s book, Con-
cepts of Space: The History of Theories of Space in Physics. Sometimes Jammer’s
discussions are a bit metaphysical. I am not sure whether this is due to his own
views or to those of the men he is discussing; in any case, it is one of the few books
that takes up in detail the historical development of the philosophy of space.
Let us look more closely at the two non-Euclidean geometries. In the
Lobachevski geometry, technically called hyperbolic geometry, there are an inﬁn-
ite number of parallels. In the Riemann geometry, known as elliptic geometry,
there are no parallels. How is a geometry that does not contain parallel lines
possible? We can understand this by turning to a model that is not exactly the
model of an elliptic geometry, but one closely related to it—a model of spherical
geometry. The model is simply the surface of a sphere. We view this surface as
analogous to a plane. Straight lines on a plane are here represented by the great
circles of the sphere. In more general terms, we say that in any non-Euclidean
geometry the lines that correspond to straight lines in Euclidean geometry are
“geodesic lines”. They share with straight lines the property of being the shortest
distance between two given points. On our model, the surface of the sphere, the
shortest distance between two points, the geodesic, is a portion of a great circle.
Great circles are the curves obtained by cutting the sphere with a plane through
the sphere’s center. The equator and the meridians of the earth are familiar
examples.
In Figure 1 two meridians have been drawn perpendicular to the equator. In
Euclidean geometry, we expect two lines perpendicular to a given line to be
parallel, but on the sphere these lines meet at the North Pole and also at the South
Pole. On the sphere there are no two straight lines, or, rather, quasistraight lines,
i.e., great circles, that do not meet. We have here, then, an easily imaginable
model of a geometry in which there are no parallel lines.
The two non-Euclidean geometries can also be distinguished by the sum of the
angles of a triangle. This distinction is important from the standpoint of empir-
ical investigations of the structure of space. Gauss was the ﬁrst to see clearly that
only an empirical investigation of space can disclose the nature of the geometry
that best describes it. Once we realize that non-Euclidean geometries can be
logically consistent, we can no longer say, without making empirical tests, which
geometry holds in nature. In spite of the Kantian prejudice prevailing in his time,
Gauss may actually have undertaken an experiment of this sort.
It is easy to see that testing triangles is much easier than testing parallel lines.
Lines thought to be parallel might not meet until they had been prolonged for
many billions of miles, but measuring the angles of a triangle can be undertaken
in a small region of space. In Euclidean geometry the sum of the angles of any
triangle is equal to two right angles, or 180 degrees. In Lobachevski’s hyperbolic
geometry, the sum of the angles of any triangle is less than 180 degrees. In the
Riemannian elliptic geometry the sum is greater than 180 degrees.
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
195

The deviation from 180 degrees, in elliptic geometry, is easily understood with
the aid of our model, the surface of a sphere. Consider the triangle NAB in Figure
1; it is formed by segments of two meridians and the equator. The two angles at
the equator are 90 degrees, so we already have a total of 180 degrees. Adding the
angle at the North Pole will bring the sum to more than 180. If we move the
meridians until they cross each other at right angles, each angle of the triangle
will be a right angle, and the sum of all three will be 270 degrees.
We know that Gauss thought of making a test of the sum of the angles of an
enormous stellar triangle, and there are reports that he actually carried out a
similar test, on a terrestrial scale, by triangulating three mountain tops in Ger-
many. He was a professor at Göttingen, so it is said that he chose a hill near the
city and two mountain tops that could be seen from the top of this hill. He had
already done important work in applying the theory of probability to errors of
measurement, and this would have provided an opportunity to make use of such
procedures. The ﬁrst step would have been to measure the angles optically from
each summit, repeating the measurement many times. By taking the mean of
these observational results, under certain constraints, he could determine the
most probable size of each angle and, therefore, the most probable value for their
sum. From the dispersion of the results, he could then calculate the probable
error; that is, a certain interval around the mean, such that the probability of the
true value lying within the interval was equal to the probability of it lying outside
the interval. It is said that Gauss did this and that he found the sum of the three
angles to be not exactly 180 degrees, but deviating by such a small amount that it
was within the interval of probable error. Such a result would indicate either that
space is Euclidean or, if non-Euclidean, that its deviation is extremely small—less
than the probable error of the measurements.
Figure 1
RUDOLF CARNAP
196

Even if Gauss did not actually make such a test, as recent scholarship has
indicated, the legend itself is an important milestone in the history of scientiﬁc
methodology. Gauss was certainly the ﬁrst to ask the revolutionary question,
what shall we ﬁnd if we make an empirical investigation of the geometrical
structure of space? No one else had thought of making such an investigation.
Indeed, it was considered preposterous, like trying to ﬁnd by empirical means the
product of seven and eight. Imagine that we have here seven baskets, each con-
taining eight balls. We count all the balls many times. Most of the time we get 56,
but occasionally we get 57 or 55. We take the mean of these results to discover
the true value of seven times eight. The French mathematician P.E.B. Jourdain
once jokingly suggested that the best way to do this would be not to do the
counting yourself, because you are not an expert in counting. The experts are the
headwaiters, who are constantly adding and multiplying numbers. The most
experienced head-waiters should be brought together and asked how much seven
times eight is. One would not expect much deviation in their answers, but if you
use larger numbers, say, 23 times 27, there would be some dispersion. We take
the mean of all their answers, weighted according to the number of waiters who
gave each answer, and, on this basis, we obtain a scientiﬁc estimate of the product
of 23 and 27.
Any attempt to investigate empirically a geometrical theorem seemed just as
preposterous as this to Gauss’s contemporaries. They viewed geometry in the
same way they viewed arithmetic. They believed, with Kant, that our intuition
does not make geometrical mistakes. When we “see” something in our imagin-
ation, it cannot be otherwise. That someone should measure the angles of a
triangle—not just for fun or to test the quality of optical instruments, but to ﬁnd
the true value of their sum—seemed entirely absurd. Everyone could see, after a
little training in Euclidean geometry, that the sum must be 180 degrees. For this
reason, it is said, Gauss did not publish the fact that he made such an experiment,
nor even that he regarded such an experiment as worth doing. Nevertheless, as a
result of continued speculation about non-Euclidean geometries, many math-
ematicians began to realize that these strange new geometries posed a genuine
empirical problem. Gauss himself did not ﬁnd a conclusive answer; but he pro-
vided a strong stimulation for thinking in a non-Kantian way about the whole
problem of the structure of space in nature.
To see more clearly how the various non-Euclidean geometries differ from one
another, let us again consider the surface of a sphere. As we have seen, this is a
convenient model that helps us understand intuitively the geometrical structure
of a plane in Riemannian space. (Riemannian space here means what is called
elliptical space. The term “Riemannian space” also has a more general meaning
that will be clariﬁed later.)
We must be careful not to overextend the analogy between the Riemannian
plane and the sphere’s surface, because any two straight lines on a plane in
Riemannian space have only one point in common, whereas the lines on a sphere
that correspond to straight lines—the great circles—always meet at two points.
Consider, for example, two meridians. They meet at both the North Pole and the
South Pole. Strictly speaking, our model corresponds to the Riemannian plane
only if we restrict ourselves to a portion of the sphere’s surface that does not
contain opposite points, like the North and South poles. If the entire sphere is our
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
197

model, we must assume that each point on the Riemannian plane is represented
on the surface of the sphere by a pair of opposite points. Starting from the North
Pole and traveling to the South Pole on the earth would correspond to starting
from one point on the Riemannian plane, traveling in a straight line on the plane,
and returning to that same point. All geodesic lines in Riemannian space have the
same ﬁnite length and are closed, like the circumference of a circle. The extreme
deviation of this fact from our intuition is probably the reason this kind of
geometry was discovered later than Lobachevski’s geometry.
With the aid of our spherical model, we easily see that, in Riemannian space,
the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter is always less than pi. Figure 2
shows a circle on the earth that has the North Pole for its center. This corresponds
to a circle in the Riemannian plane. Its radius is not the line CB, because that does
not lie on the sphere’s surface, which is our model. The radius is the arc NB, and
the diameter is the arc ANB. We know that the circumference of this circle has the
ratio of pi to the line segment ACB. Since the arc ANB is longer than the segment
ACB, it is clear that the ratio of the circle’s perimeter to ANB (the circle’s
diameter in the Riemannian plane) must be less than pi.
It is not so easy to see that in the Lobachevski space it is just the other way: the
ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter must be greater than pi. Perhaps
we can visualize it with the aid of another model. This model (shown in Figure 3)
cannot be used for the entire Lobachevski plane—certainly not for three-
dimensional Lobachevski space—but it can be used for a limited portion of the
Lobachevski plane. The model is a saddle-shaped surface resembling a pass
between two mountains. A is one mountain top, C is the pass, B is the other
mountain top. Try to visualize this surface. There is a curve, perhaps a path,
Figure 2
Figure 3
RUDOLF CARNAP
198

passing through point F on the far side of the pass, rising over the pass through
point C, then going down on the near side of the pass through point D. The
saddle-shaped portion of this surface, including points C, D, E, F, G, can be
regarded as a model of the structure in a Lobachevski plane.
What form does a circle have on this model? Assume that the center of a circle
is at C. The curved line DEFGD represents the circumference of a circle that is at
all points the same distance from the center C. If you stand at point D, you ﬁnd
yourself lower than the circle’s center; if you walk along the circle to E, you
ﬁnd yourself higher than the center. It is not hard to see that this wavy line, which
corresponds to a circle in the Lobachevski plane, must be longer than an ordinary
circle on a Euclidean plane that has CD for its radius. Because it is longer, the
ratio of the circumference of this circle to its diameter (arc FCD or arc GCE)
must be greater than pi.
A more exact model, corresponding accurately in all measurements to a part of
a Lobachevski plane, can be constructed by taking a certain curve, called a trac-
trix (arc AB in Figure 4), and rotating it around the axis CD. The surface gener-
ated by this rotation is called a pseudosphere. Perhaps you have seen a plaster of
Paris model of this surface. If you study such a model, you can see that triangles
on its surface have three angles totaling less than 180 degrees and that circles
have a ratio of circumference to diameter that exceeds pi. The larger the circle on
such a surface, the greater will be the ratio’s deviation from pi. We must not think
of this as meaning that pi is not a constant. Pi is the ratio of the circumference of a
circle in a Euclidean plane to its diameter. This fact is not altered by the existence
of non-Euclidean geometries in which the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its
diameter is a variable that may be greater or less than pi.
All surfaces, both Euclidean and non-Euclidean, have at any of their points a
measure called the “measure of curvature” of that surface at that point. The
Lobachevski geometry is characterized by the fact that, in any plane, at any point,
the plane’s measure of curvature is negative and constant. There is an inﬁnite
number of different Lobachevski geometries. Each is characterized by a certain
ﬁxed parameter—a negative number—that is the measure of curvature of a plane
in that geometry.
You might object that, if it is a plane, then it cannot have a curvature. But
“curvature” is a technical term and is not to be understood here in the ordinary
sense. In Euclidean geometry we measure the curvature of a line at any point by
taking the reciprocal of its “radius of curvature”. “Radius of curvature” means
the radius of a certain circle that coincides, so to speak, with an inﬁnitesimal part
of the line at the point in question. If a curved line is almost straight, the radius of
curvature is long. If the line is strongly curved, the radius is short.
Figure 4
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
199

How do we measure the curvature of a surface at a given point? We ﬁrst
measure the curvature of two geodesics that intersect at that point and extend in
two directions, called the “principal directions” of the surface at that point. One
direction gives the maximum curvature of a geodesic at that point, and the other
gives the minimum curvature. We then deﬁne the curvature of the surface at that
point as the product of the two reciprocals of the two radii of curvature of the
two geodesics. For example, consider the mountain pass shown in Figure 3. How
do we measure the curvature of this surface at point C? We see that one geodesic,
the arc GCE, curves in a concave manner (looking down on the surface), whereas
the geodesic at right angles to it, arc FCD, curves in a convex manner. These two
geodesics give the maximum and minimum curvatures of the surface at point C.
Of course, if we look up at this surface from the underside, arc GCE appears
convex, and arc FCD appears concave. It does not matter at all from which side
we view the surface, which curve we wish to consider convex and which concave.
By convention, we call one side positive and the other negative. The product of
the reciprocals of these two radii, 
1
R1 R2
, gives us the measure of curvature of the
saddle surface at point C. At any point on the saddle surface, one radius of
curvature will be positive, the other negative. The product of the two reciprocals
of those radii and, consequently, the measure of curvature of the surface, must
therefore always be negative.
This is not the case with respect to a surface that is completely convex, such as
that of a sphere or an egg. On such a surface, the two geodesics, in the two
principal directions, both curve the same way. One geodesic may curve more
strongly than the other, but both curve in the same manner. Again, it does not
matter whether we view such a surface from one side and call the two radii of
curvature positive or from the other and call them negative. The product of their
reciprocals will always be positive. Therefore, on any convex surface such as that
of a sphere, the measure of curvature at any point will be positive.
The Lobachevski geometry, represented by the saddle-surface model, can be
characterized in this way: for any Lobachevski space, there is a certain negative
value that is the measure of curvature for any point in any plane in that space.
The Riemannian geometry, represented by the spherical surface, can be charac-
terized in a similar way: for any Riemannian space, there is a certain positive
value that is the measure of curvature for any point on any plane in that space.
Both are spaces of constant curvature. This means that, for any one such space,
the measure of curvature at any point, in any plane, is the same.
Let k be the measure of curvature. In Euclidean space, which also has a con-
stant curvature, k = 0. In Lobachevski space, k < 0. In Riemannian space, k > 0.
These numerical values are not determined by the axioms of the geometry. Dif-
ferent Riemannian spaces are obtained by choosing different positive value for k
and different Lobachevski spaces are obtained by choosing different negative
values for k. Aside from the value of the parameter k, all the theorems are entirely
alike in all Lobachevski spaces and are entirely alike in all Riemannian spaces. Of
course, the theorems of each geometry are quite different from those of the other.
It is important to realize that “curvature,” in its original and literal sense,
applies only to surfaces of a Euclidean model of a non-Euclidean plane. The
RUDOLF CARNAP
200

sphere and the pseudosphere are curved surfaces in this sense. But the term
“measure of curvature,” as applied to non-Euclidean planes, does not mean that
these planes “curve” in the ordinary sense. Generalizing the term “curvature,” so
that it applies to non-Euclidean planes, is justiﬁed, because the internal geo-
metrical structure of a Riemannian plane is the same as the structure of the
surface of a Euclidean sphere; the same is true of the structure of the plane in
Lobachevski space and the surface of a Euclidean pseudosphere. Scientists often
take an old term and give it a more general meaning. This caused no difﬁculty at
all during the nineteenth century, because non-Euclidean geometries were studied
only by mathematicians. The trouble began when Einstein made use of non-
Euclidean geometry in his general theory of relativity. This took the subject out of
the ﬁeld of pure mathematics and into the ﬁeld of physics, where it became a
description of the actual world. People wanted to understand what Einstein was
doing, so books were written explaining these things to the layman. In those
books, the authors sometimes discussed “curved planes” and “curved space.”
That was an extremely unfortunate, misleading way of speaking. They should
have said: “There is a certain measure k—mathematicians call it ‘measure of
curvature’, but don’t pay any attention to that phrase—and this k is positive
inside the sun but negative in the sun’s gravitational ﬁeld. As we go farther away
from the sun, the negative value of k approaches zero.”
Instead of putting it this way, popular writers said that Einstein had discovered
that the planes in our space are curved. That could only confuse the layman.
Readers asked what it means to say that planes are curved. If they are curved,
they thought, they should not be called planes! Such talk of curved space led
people to believe that everything in space is distorted, or bent. Sometimes the
writers of books on relativity even talked about how the force of gravitation
bends the planes. They described it with real feeling, as if it were analogous to
someone bending a metal sheet. This type of thinking led to strange con-
sequences, and some writers objected to Einstein’s theory on those grounds. All
this could have been avoided if the term “curvature” had been avoided.
On the other hand, to introduce a term entirely different from one already in
customary use in mathematics is not easy to do. The best procedure, therefore, is
to accept the term “curvature” as a technical term but clearly understand that
this term should not be connected with the old associations. Do not think of a
non-Euclidean plane as being “bent” into a shape that is no longer a plane. It
does not have the internal structure of a Euclidean plane, but it is a plane in the
sense that the structure on one side of it is exactly like the structure on the other
side. Here we see the danger in saying that the Euclidean sphere is a model of the
Riemannian plane, because, if you think of a sphere, you think of the inside as
quite different from the outside. From the inside, the surface looks concave; from
the outside, it is convex. This is not true of the plane in either the Lobachevski or
Riemannian space. In both spaces the two sides of the plane are identical. If we
leave the plane on one side, we observe nothing different from what we observe if
we leave the plane on the other side. But the inner structure of the plane is such
that we can, with the help of the parameter k, measure its degree of “curvature.”
We must remember that this is curvature in a technical sense, and is not quite the
same as our intuitive understanding of curvature in Euclidean space.
Another terminological confusion, easily cleared up, concerns the two
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
201

meanings (we alluded to them earlier in this chapter) of “Riemannian geometry.”
When Riemann ﬁrst devised his geometry of constant positive curvature, it was
called Riemannian to distinguish it from the earlier space of Lobachevski, in
which the constant curvature is negative. Later, Riemann developed a generalized
theory of spaces with variable curvature, spaces that have not been dealt with
axiomatically. (The axiomatic forms of non-Euclidean geometry, in which all of
Euclid’s axioms are retained except that the parallel axiom has been replaced by a
new axiom, are conﬁned to spaces of constant curvature.) In Riemann’s general
theory, any number of dimensions can be considered, and, in all cases, the
curvature may vary continuously from point to point.
When physicists speak of “Riemannian geometry”, they mean the generalized
geometry in which the old Riemannian and Lobachevski geometries (today called
elliptic and hyperbolic geometries), together with Euclidean geometry, are the
simplest special cases. In addition to those special cases, generalized Riemannian
geometry contains a great variety of spaces of varying curvature. Among these
spaces is the space Einstein adopted for his general theory of relativity.
Chapter 15 Poincaré versus Einstein
Henri Poincaré, a famous French mathematician and physicist and the author of
many books on the philosophy of science, most of them before the time of Ein-
stein, devoted much attention to the problem of the geometrical structure of
space. One of his important insights is so essential for an understanding of mod-
ern physics that it will be worthwhile to discuss it in some detail.1
Suppose, Poincaré wrote, that physicists should discover that the structure of
actual space deviated from Euclidean geometry. Physicists would then have to
choose between two alternatives. They could either accept non-Euclidean geom-
etry as a description of physical space, or they could preserve Euclidean geometry
by adopting new laws stating that all solid bodies undergo certain contractions
and expansions. As we have seen in earlier chapters, in order to measure accur-
ately with a steel rod, we must make corrections that account for the thermal
expansions or contractions of the rod. In a similar way, said Poincaré, if observa-
tions suggested that space was non-Euclidean, physicists could retain Euclidean
space by introducing into their theories new forces—forces that would, under
speciﬁed conditions, expand or contract solid bodies.
New laws would also have to be introduced in the ﬁeld of optics, because we
can also study physical geometry by means of light rays. Such rays are assumed to
be straight lines. The reader will recall that the three sides of Gauss’s triangle,
which had mountains for vertices, did not consist of solid rods—the distances
were much too great—but of light rays. Suppose, Poincaré said, that the sum of
the angles of a large triangle of this sort were found to deviate from 180 degrees.
Instead of abandoning Euclidean geometry, we could say that the deviation is due
to a bending of light rays. If we introduce new laws for the deﬂection of light rays,
we can always do it in such a way that we keep Euclidean geometry.
This was an extremely important insight. Later, I shall try to explain just how
Poincaré meant it and how it can be justiﬁed. In addition to this far-reaching
insight, Poincaré predicted that physicists would always choose the second way.
They will prefer, he said, to keep Euclidean geometry, because it is much simpler
RUDOLF CARNAP
202

than non-Euclidean. He did not know, of course, of the complex non-Euclidean
space that Einstein would soon propose. He probably thought only of the simpler
non-Euclidean spaces of constant curvature; otherwise, he would no doubt have
thought it even less likely that physicists would abandon Euclid. To make a few
alterations in the laws that concern solid bodies and light rays seemed, to Poin-
caré, justiﬁed on the ground that it would retain the simpler system of Euclid.
Ironically, it was just a few years later, in 1915, that Einstein developed his
general theory of relativity, in which non-Euclidean geometry was adopted.
It is important to understand Poincaré’s point of view; it helps us to under-
stand Einstein’s reasons for abandoning it. We will try to make it clear in an
intuitive way, rather than by calculations and formulas, so that we can visualize
it. To do this, we will use a device employed by Hermann von Helmholtz, the
great German physicist, many decades before Poincaré wrote on the topic. Helm-
holtz wanted to show that Gauss had been right in regarding the geometrical
structure of space as an empirical problem. Let us imagine, he said, a two-
dimensional world in which two-dimensional beings walk about and push
around objects. These beings and all the objects in their world are completely ﬂat,
like the two-dimensional creatures in Edwin A. Abbott’s amusing fantasy, Flat-
land. They live, not on a plane, but on the surface of a sphere. The sphere is
gigantic in relation to their own size; they are the size of ants, and the sphere is as
large as the earth. It is so large that they never travel all the way around it. In
other words, their movements are conﬁned to a limited domain on the surface of
the sphere. The question is, can these creatures, by making internal measure-
ments on their two-dimensional surface, ever discover whether they are on a
plane or a sphere or some other kind of surface?
Helmholtz answered that they can. They could make a very large triangle and
measure the angles. If the sum of the angles were greater than 180 degrees, they
would know they were on a surface with positive curvature; if they found the
same positive curvature at every point on their continent, they would know they
were on the surface of a sphere or of part of a sphere. (Whether the sphere is
complete or not is another question.) The hypothesis that their whole universe
was a spherical surface would be reasonable. We, of course, can see at a glance
that it is such a surface because we are three-dimensional creatures who stand
outside it. But Helmholtz made it clear that the two-dimensional creatures them-
selves, by measuring the angles of a triangle or the ratio of the circle to its
diameter (or various other quantities), could calculate the measure of curvature
at each spot on their surface. Gauss was right, therefore, to think he could deter-
mine whether our three-dimensional space has a positive or negative curvature by
making measurements. If we imagine our space imbedded in a higher-
dimensional universe, we can speak of a real bend or curvature of our space, for it
would appear curved to four-dimensional creatures.
We must examine this a little more closely. Suppose that the two-dimensional
creatures discover that, when they measure triangles with their measuring rods,
at every point on their continent there is the same positive curvature for triangles
of the same size. Among these creatures are two physicists, P1 and P2. Physicist P1
maintains theory T1, which says that the region on which he and his fellow-
creatures live is part of a spherical surface S1. His colleague, physicist P2, main-
tains theory T2, which says that the region is a ﬂat surface S2. In Figure 5 these
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
203

two surfaces are drawn in proﬁle. Let us assume that in S1 there are rigid two-
dimensional bodies, such as creatures and measuring rods, that move about
without change of size or shape. For every body in S1 there is a corresponding ﬂat
body in S2, which is its projection, a projection made by, say, parallel lines per-
pendicular to the plane S2 (in the illustration these parallel lines are shown as
broken lines). If a body in S1 moves from position A1 to A1′, its shadow body in S2
moves from A2 to A2′. We assume that bodies in S1 are rigid; therefore, the length
A1 is equal to that of A1′. But this means that A2′ must be shorter than A2.
Helmholtz pointed out that, when we measure something with a measuring
rod, what we actually observe is nothing more than a series of point coincidences.
This can easily be seen from our earlier description of the measurement of the
edge of a fence, at the beginning of Chapter 9.
Look once more at Figure 1. The projection from S1 to S2 is called a one-to-one
mapping. (This could not be done if S1 were an entire sphere, but we have
assumed that S1 is only a limited region on a sphere.) For every point on S1, there
is exactly one corresponding point on S2. Therefore, as beings move about on S1,
observing point coincidences between their measuring rods and what they are
measuring, their shadow beings on S2 make exactly the same observations on the
corresponding shadow bodies. Since the bodies in S1 are assumed to be rigid, the
corresponding bodies in S2 cannot be rigid. They must suffer certain contractions
and expansions such as we have indicated in the illustration.
Let us return to the two physicists, P1 and P2 who hold different theories about
the nature of their ﬂat world. P1 says that this world must be part of a sphere. P2
insists that it is a plane but that bodies expand and contract in certain predictable
ways as they move around. For example, they get longer as they move toward the
central part of S2, shorter as they move away from the center. P1 maintains that
light rays are geodesics on the curved surface S1; that is, they follow the arcs of
great circles. These arcs will project to S2 as the arcs of ellipses. P2, in order to
defend his theory that the world is a plane, must, therefore, devise optical theor-
ies in which light rays move in elliptical paths.
How can the two physicists decide which of them is right? The answer is that
there is no way of deciding. Physicist P1 contends that their world is part of the
surface of a sphere and that bodies do not suffer contractions and expansions
except, of course, for such familiar phenomena (or, rather, the two-dimensional
analogs of such phenomena) as thermal expansion, elastic expansion, and so on.
Physicist P2 describes the same world in a different way. He thinks it is a plane
but that bodies expand and contract in certain ways as they move over the sur-
face. We, who are in a three-dimensional space, can observe this two-dimensional
Figure 5
RUDOLF CARNAP
204

world and see whether it is a sphere or plane, but the two physicists are restricted
to their world. They cannot in principle decide which theory is correct. For this
reason, Poincaré said, we should not even raise the question of who is right. The
two theories are no more than two different methods of describing the same
world.
There is an inﬁnity of different ways that physicists on the sphere could
describe their world, and, according to Poincaré, it is entirely a matter of conven-
tion which way they choose. A third physicist might hold the fantastic theory that
the world had this shape:
He could defend such a theory by introducing still more complicated laws of
mechanics and optics, laws that would make all observations compatible with the
theory. For practical reasons, no physicist on the sphere would wish to propose
such a theory. But, Poincaré insisted, there is no logical reason why he could not
do so.
We can imagine a two-dimensional analog of Poincaré saying to the rival
physicists: “There is no need to quarrel. You are simply giving different descrip-
tions of the same totality of facts.” Leibniz, the reader may recall, had earlier
defended a similar point of view. If there is in principle no way of deciding
between two statements, Leibniz declared, we should not say they have different
meanings. If all bodies in the universe doubled in size overnight, would the world
seem strange to us next morning? Leibniz said it would not. The size of our own
bodies would double, so there would be no means by which we could detect a
change. Similarly, if the entire universe moved to one side by a distance of ten
miles, we could not detect it. To assert that such a change had occurred would,
therefore, be meaningless. Poincaré adopted this view of Leibniz’s and applied it
to the geometrical structure of space. We may ﬁnd experimental evidence suggest-
ing that physical space is non-Euclidean, but we can always keep the simpler
Euclidean space if we are willing to pay a price for it. As we have seen, Poincaré
did not think that this price would ever be too high.
There are two basic points that our consideration of the ﬂat world was
intended to make clear and that we shall apply to our actual world. First, by
making use of ordinary measuring procedures to which we are accustomed, we
might arrive at the result that space has a non-Euclidean structure. Some recent
philosophers (Hugo Dingler, for example) have not been able to see this. They
hold that our measuring procedures employ instruments that have been manu-
factured under the assumption that geometry is Euclidean; therefore, these
instruments could not possibly give us anything but Euclidean results. This con-
tention is certainly wrong. Our instruments occupy such tiny parts of space that
the question of how our space deviates from Euclidean geometry does not enter
into their construction. Consider, for example, a surveyor’s instrument for
measuring angles. It contains a circle divided into 360 equal parts, but it is such a
small circle that, even if space deviated from the Euclidean to a degree that
Gauss hoped he could measure (a much greater degree than the deviation in
relativity theory), it would still have no effect on the construction of this circle. In
small regions of space, Euclidean geometry would still hold with very high
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
205

approximation. This is sometimes expressed by saying that non-Euclidean space
has a Euclidean structure in small environments. From a strict mathematical
standpoint, it is a matter of a limit. The smaller the region of space, the closer its
structure gets to the Euclidean. But our laboratory instruments occupy such min-
ute portions of space that we can completely disregard any inﬂuence
non-Euclidean space might have on their construction.
Even if the deviation from Euclidean geometry were so strong that the sum of
the angles in a small triangle (say, one drawn on a designer’s board) would differ
considerably from 180 degrees, that fact could certainly be determined with the
help of instruments made in the customary way. Suppose that the beings on the
spherical surface S1 (see Figure 1) construct a protractor by cutting a circular disk
and dividing its circumference into 360 equal parts. If this protractor were used
for measuring the angles of a triangle formed (as in an earlier example) by two
half meridians and a quarter of the equator, it would show each angle to be 90
degrees and, therefore, the sum of the three angles to be 270 degrees.
The second basic point brought out by our consideration of the two-
dimensional world is that, if we ﬁnd empirical evidence of a non-Euclidean space,
we can preserve Euclidean geometry provided we are willing to introduce com-
plications into the laws that govern solid bodies and the laws of light rays. When
we look at surfaces within our space, such as a surface on which we see an ant
crawling, it is meaningful to ask whether the surface is a plane, or part of a
sphere, or some other type of surface. On the other hand, if we are dealing with
the space of our universe, a space we cannot observe as something imbedded in a
universe of higher dimensions, then it is meaningless to ask whether space is non-
Euclidean or whether our laws must be modiﬁed to preserve Euclidean geometry.
The two theories are merely two descriptions of the same facts. We can call them
equivalent descriptions because we make exactly the same predictions about
observable events in both theories. Perhaps “observationally equivalent” would
be a more appropriate phrase. The theories may differ considerably in their
logical structure, but if their formulas and laws always lead to the same
predictions about observable events, we can say that they are equivalent theories.
At this point, it is well to distinguish clearly between what we mean here by
equivalent theories and what is sometimes meant by this phrase. Occasionally
two physicists will propose two different theories to account for the same set of
facts. Both theories may successfully explain this set of facts, but the theories may
not be the same with respect to observations not yet made. That is, they may
contain different predictions about what may be observed at some future time.
Even though two such theories account completely for known observations, they
should be regarded as essentially different physical theories.
Sometimes it is not easy to devise experiments that will distinguish between
two rival theories that are not equivalent. A classic example is provided by New-
ton’s theory of gravitation and Einstein’s theory of gravitation. Differences in the
predictions of these two theories are so small that clever experiments had to be
devised and precise measurements made before it could be decided which theory
made the best predictions. When Einstein later proposed his uniﬁed ﬁeld theory,
he said he was unable to think of any crucial experiment that could decide
between this theory and other theories. He made it clear that his theory was not
equivalent to any previous theory, but it was so abstractly stated that he was
RUDOLF CARNAP
206

unable to deduce any consequences that could be observed under the present
degree of precision of our best instruments. He believed that, if his uniﬁed ﬁeld
theory were investigated further or if our instruments improved sufﬁciently, it
might be possible some day to make a decisive observation. It is very important to
understand that “equivalent theories,” as used here, means something much
stronger than the fact that two theories account for all known observations.
Equivalence here means that two theories lead in all cases to exactly the same
predictions, like the theories of the two physicists in our ﬂatland illustration.
In the next two chapters we will see in detail how Poincaré’s insight into the
observational equivalence of Euclidean and non-Euclidean theories of space leads
to a deeper understanding of the structure of space in relativity theory.
Note
1
Poincaré’s view on this matter is brought out most explicitly in his Science and
Hypothesis (London: 1905); (New York: Dover, 1952).
QUESTIONS
1
What are the three kinds of geometrical system? What does each kind of
geometry say about parallel lines?
2
What does each imply about the sum of the interior angles of a triangle?
3
Brieﬂy, how do we know that a non-Euclidean geometry is consistent?
4
In Carnap’s example of the physicists with the two different theories: (a) What
kind of geometry obtains according to T1? (b) What kind of geometry obtains
according to T2?
5
Which theory, if any, does Carnap prefer?
PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PHYSICS
207

Laurence BonJour, “Appendix: Non-Euclidean
Geometry and Relativity”
§A.1. Introduction
In this appendix, I will try to say something about the implications of non-
Euclidean geometry and especially its role in the theory of General Relativity for
a rationalist view of a priori knowledge. There can be little doubt that from a
historical standpoint, the development of non-Euclidean geometries was a major
factor in producing the widespread conviction that a rationalist position is
untenable. Euclidean geometry was after all the most striking example of seem-
ingly substantive a priori knowledge of independent reality, invoked by Kant
as one of the crucial examples of the synthetic a priori. But, according to the
simplest version of the standard story, within a few years after Kant, the devel-
opment of non-Euclidean geometry by Lobashevsky and others showed that
Euclidean geometry was not necessarily true of physical space, making it an
empirical issue which geometry correctly describes the physical world. And even-
tually, or so the story goes, this empirical question was resolved by General
Relativity in favor of a version of Riemannian or elliptical geometry and against
Euclid. The suggested further argument, often left fairly implicit, is that if the
rationalist view fails in this paradigmatic case, there can be no good reason for
thinking that it will in the end be any more acceptable elsewhere.
My view is that this picture is oversimpliﬁed and misleading in important
ways, which I will try to explain in what follows. But there are two important
caveats that must be borne in mind throughout. The ﬁrst is that there is no space
here for anything like a comprehensive discussion of these matters, even if that
were within my powers. And the second is that a really complete and authorita-
tive discussion is clearly not within my powers in any case: I am not a mathemat-
ician or a physicist, nor even a philosopher of mathematics or physics. But I do
not think that general epistemology can afford to leave these important issues
entirely to specialists (whose grasp of the general epistemological issues is in any
case not always beyond question).
One important point is easily made: even if the standard story were complete
and accurate in every respect, it is not at all obvious that it would pose a serious
objection to the sort of rationalist position that has been developed in the present
book, namely a moderate rationalism that recognizes and indeed insists on
the fallibility of rational insight. Even prior to the advent of non-Euclidean
Laurence BonJour, In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge University Press, 1998).
208

geometries, geometers and philosophers were worried about the status of the
Euclidean parallels postulate: it seemed “less certain” than the others, and it was
in fact in the course of attempts to derive it from the other postulates that non-
Euclidean geometries were discovered. One further consideration here is that
geometry is on any view a very special case. There is no reason to think that the
same sort of situation, with different deductive systems covering the same general
subject-matter, exists in other areas of alleged a priori knowledge: there are no
alternative arithmetics, no alternative versions of calculus, etc.; and though some
philosophers like to talk about alternative logics, it is far from clear that these are
in the end more than purely formal constructions.1 Thus there is, I submit, no
reason why a rationalist could not simply concede that the a priori convictions
underlying Euclidean geometry were mistaken in just the way the standard story
claims, while still insisting that this provides no serious reason for skepticism
about a priori justiﬁcation in general. But while I believe that such a guarded
response is dialectically adequate as a defense of the rationalist position, I also
think that there are other and more interesting responses available, which I will
brieﬂy explore here.
§A.2. The mathematical and scientiﬁc background
We may begin with a somewhat fuller, though still very compressed description of
the development of non-Euclidean geometry, followed by a similarly brief look at
the theory of general relativity.2 Euclid’s presentation of his system of geometry
relies on ﬁve postulates, the ﬁfth of which has become known as the Parallel
Postulate:
If a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on
the same side together less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if
produced indeﬁnitely, meet on that side on which the angles are together
less than two right angles.3
This postulate is substantially longer and more complicated than the other four.
Euclid seems to have regarded it as less intuitively obvious or self-evident than the
others and therefore makes as little use of it as possible. In the context of the
other postulates it is equivalent to the following more familiar postulate
(Playfair’s Postulate):
Through a given point not on a given line there exists exactly one parallel
(i.e., line that does not intersect the given line) to the given line.
Note carefully that “parallel” here means precisely that the two lines will never
intersect no matter how far they are extended, not that they are equidistant; and
that a straight line is to be taken, at least initially, as simply one whose length
between any two points on it is the shortest distance between those points.
Though Playfair’s version is somewhat easier to understand than Euclid’s ori-
ginal, it too was regarded as less than fully self-evident, and many attempts were
made through the years to derive the Parallel Postulate from the other Euclidean
postulates. Eventually, in the nineteenth century, it was discovered that if the
“APPENDIX: NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND RELATIVITY”
209

Parallel Postulate is replaced by one of the conﬂicting postulates (i) that many
parallels exist or (ii) that no parallels exist, alternative systems still intuitively
recognizable as geometries result. These systems (Lobashevskian or hyperbolic
geometry, resulting from the many parallels postulate; Riemannian or elliptic
geometry, resulting from the no parallels postulate4) can be modeled within
Euclidean geometry and hence are formally consistent on the assumption that
Euclidean geometry itself is consistent.
This result has by itself been widely regarded, both then and later, as a refuta-
tion of the claim that Euclidean geometry provides a priori insight into the nature
of physical space. It is easy, however, to see that such a conclusion does not
follow without an appeal to something like the moderate empiricist view of a
priori justiﬁcation, a view that was shown in Chapter 2, to be quite untenable.
That non-Euclidean geometries are formally consistent shows indeed that Eucli-
dean geometry is not logically necessary or analytic, that is, not such that its
denial results (via merely logical transformations) in a formal contradiction. But
from Kant’s standpoint or that of the traditional rationalist, this is in no way
surprising. Their claim, after all, is that geometry represents synthetic a priori
knowledge, a claim that is supported in part, not refuted, by the discovery that
competing geometries are formally consistent.
Thus the mere fact that non-Euclidean geometries are formally consistent, and
more generally that the mathematics of curved and multi-dimensional spaces is
perfectly acceptable as mathematics, does not, in and of itself, show that such
theories represent a priori possible accounts of the structure of actual physical
space. A useful issue for comparison here is that of the number of dimensions of
space. There is no doubt that the mathematics of n-dimensional spaces is per-
fectly clear-cut and unproblematic, no matter how large n is taken to be or even
indeed whether it remains ﬁnite. But it simply does not follow from the math-
ematics alone that, for example, ﬁfteen-dimensional physical space is a genuine
metaphysical possibility.5 Analogously, the fact that non-Euclidean spaces are
mathematically possible and coherent has in itself no tendency to show that the
rationalists were wrong to think that we can know a priori that the space of the
world is Euclidean.6
To give even the appearance of a problem for the rationalist, it is therefore
necessary to bring in the physical theory somewhat inappropriately referred to as
the General Theory of Relativity. General Relativity is fundamentally an attempt
to give an account of gravitation that is consistent with Einstein’s earlier (and
much more strongly conﬁrmed) theory of Special Relativity: one that avoids
treating gravitational attraction across space as instantaneous. Einstein accom-
plishes this goal in part by identifying the structure of the gravitational ﬁeld with
the structure of space itself. Intuitively, the result is a view in which space itself is
curved and in which the curvature of space varies with concentration of matter in
a particular location, with the curvature being described by a complicated ver-
sion of elliptical geometry. It is this result that, according to the simple version of
the story outlined above, establishes that Euclidean geometry, far from being the
a priori knowable truth about the physical world that rationalists have claimed,
is not true at all.
But, as I have already suggested, this view of the situation is at the very least
much too simple. In fact, the classic empirical tests of general relativity do not
LAURENCE BONJOUR
210

directly support the identiﬁcation of the gravitational ﬁeld with the structure of
space. Rather they show such things as that light rays are deﬂected by the pres-
ence of a large gravitational mass. This is why an alternative theory with ﬂat
Euclidean space (or rather ﬂat Minkowski space–time) can accommodate the
same observations. Such a theory would postulate what Reichenbach referred to
as “universal forces,” forces that depend on the concentration of matter and that
have the power to deﬂect light rays, distort measuring rods, affect the movement
of clocks, and deﬂect moving particles. According to such an alternative theory,
what Einstein discovered was not that Euclid was wrong about the structure of
space, but rather that the effects of gravitation are far more complicated and
pervasive than Newtonian physicists had realized.7
§A.3. Some alternatives
What then is the correct thing to say about the geometry of physical space in light
of non-Euclidean geometry and General Relativity? We may approach this issue
by considering the set of alternative positions distinguished by Sklar.8
(i)
Poincaré’s conventionalism: the choice between (a) General Relativity (with
a non-Euclidean account of the geometry of space as a component) and (b)
the view that combines a Euclidean account of space with a physics of
universal forces is a matter of convention, with the choice to be decided on
the basis of considerations like simplicity. Neither choice is correct in any
deep metaphysical or epistemological sense.
(ii)
Reichenbach’s positivistic empiricism: the fact that both of these alterna-
tives (and indeed others besides) are both logically consistent and
compatible with all the evidence shows that there is no metaphysically or
epistemologically signiﬁcant choice to be made; while there may be method-
ological reasons for preferring one combined view to the other, at bottom
they are simply two ways of saying the same thing, not two theories but just
two ways of formulating a single theory.
(iii) “Apriorism”: the view that Sklar refers to by this label holds that method-
ological criteria such as “simplicity, systematic power, elegance, etc.” (121)
provide a rational basis for deciding between empirically indistinguishable
theories, where this presumably means one that is relevant to likelihood of
truth, rather than to merely methodological or practical virtues (though
Sklar is substantially less clear on this point than one would like).
(iv) Skepticism: though the opposed views in question do make genuinely dis-
tinct claims about the world, there is no rational basis that is relevant to
truth for choosing among them. We are thus forever condemned to
ignorance concerning the actual geometry of physical space.
A full consideration of these alternatives would greatly exceed the allowable
bounds of the present discussion, but the points that matter for present purposes
can be made quite brieﬂy. (Sklar himself does not opt conclusively for any of
these views.)
First, it is extremely hard to make clear sense of the conventionalist view. If
conventionalism is to be distinct from the empiricist view, it must hold that the
“APPENDIX: NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND RELATIVITY”
211

combined views in question do indeed make distinct claims about the world. But
if this is so, why should it be thought acceptable to adopt one of these distinct
views on a merely conventional basis, assuming that such adoption is understood
to involve a claim of truth and not merely of practical acceptability? Lacking any
good answer to this question, the conventionalist position collapses into
skepticism—or else becomes indistinguishable from the empiricist view, if the
claim that the two combined views are genuinely distinct is withdrawn.
Second, the empiricist alternative also seems untenable, though in a quite dif-
ferent way. From an intuitive standpoint, it seems obvious that there is a genuine
difference between an inﬁnite Euclidean space and a ﬁnite (though unbounded)
Riemannian one, even if our empirical evidence is unable to distinguish between
them. The veriﬁcationism that underlies this alternative in effect evades skepti-
cism only by the transparent maneuver of insisting that any question that we are
unable to answer must not be meaningful. Such a view has been thoroughly
discredited in relation to other epistemological issues, and I can see no reason for
taking it any more seriously in this area.
Third, “apriorism” as construed by Sklar represents only a modest improve-
ment over the two positions just discussed. This view concedes, correctly I
believe, that the choice between the opposed combined views is genuine and does
not try to say that it can somehow be made on a merely conventional basis. But
the claim that following methodological criteria like simplicity is conductive to
ﬁnding the truth of the matter is almost entirely unsupported in Sklar’s account
and may well be insupportable. More importantly, as Sklar’s label recognizes,
any argument that could be made with respect to the truth conduciveness of these
criteria could only be an a priori argument – and, we may add, not one that could
be regarded as analytic in any plausible sense.
Thus Sklar’s other three views all threaten to collapse into skepticism. More-
over, the most plausible of these purportedly non-skeptical views could be made
adequate only by appeal to a priori insight of just the sort defended by the
rationalist. The speciﬁc insights required for this purpose may not in the end be
available, in which case the skeptic would prevail. But the fact that there is no
apparent non-skeptical alternative to rationalism as an account of how we might
have knowledge of the structure of space still seems to constitute a second reason,
over and above that offered at the end of the ﬁrst section above, for thinking that
no serious basis for an anti-rationalist argument is to be found in this area.
§A.4. Geometry and rational insight
There is, however, one further point to be made, in some respects the most fun-
damental of all. One important question that has not been considered so far is
whether there is after all any apparent rational insight or set of insights that
supports the claim that Euclidean geometry correctly describes the structure of
physical space. This question receives very little attention in the existing litera-
ture, where it tends to be assumed, without much discussion, that the seeming
obviousness of the Euclidean perspective is merely a kind of psychological
illusion.
Such a dismissive view may well be correct, but it does not seem to me obvi-
ously so. Nonetheless I will make no real effort to resolve this issue here, except
LAURENCE BONJOUR
212

to remark that it seems to me to turn in the end on whether or not we have an
intuitive grasp of the notion of straightness that is independent of the identiﬁca-
tion of straight lines with such physical phenomena as the path of a light ray, one
that would make it intelligible to say that all such physical phenomena might
follow curved paths. If we have such an intuitive conception of straightness, then
the usual discussions that turn on a dichotomy between a “pure geometry” that is
merely an uninterpreted formal system and an “applied geometry” or “physical
geometry” that depends on the identiﬁcation of straight lines with physical phe-
nomena omit a crucial alternative: a geometry that is neither merely formal nor in
this sense physical, but rather reﬂects our intuitive notion of straightness and its
implications. That there is such an alternative, which is obviously the one to
which a traditional rationalism in this area would want to appeal, is far from
clear; but to simply assume in setting up the issue that the dichotomy between
pure and applied geometry is exhaustive, as so many discussions do, obviously
begs the entire question.
My point for the moment, with which I will conclude this Appendix, is the
more modest one that if there is after all an a priori insight or apparent insight
that such a non-physical and also not merely formal geometry provides a correct
account of the necessary features of space (and if this insight survives further
reﬂective scrutiny), we have found no reason at all why it should not be accorded
fully as much weight as any other such insight. Far from refuting such an insight,
as we now see, the existence of consistent non-Euclidean geometries and the
empirical case for General Relativity do not count against it in any way, since
both of these results are fully compatible with a theory that incorporates the
Euclidean view.
To be sure, if there were an a priori case to be made along the lines of Sklar’s
“apriorism” for the truth-conduciveness of some methodological criterion (or
criteria) such as simplicity, and if the General Relativistic view that incorpor-
ates non-Euclidean geometry were preferable on the basis of this criterion (as it
seems likely that it would be), then the apparent rational insight in favor of
Euclid might after all be corrected and hence overridden, with experience play-
ing a role in this result. But this would only be an example of the fallibility and
corrigibility of apparent rational insight, as discussed above (see §§4.5–4.6),
and thus once again would pose no special problem for the moderate
rationalist.
Notes
1
An adequate defense of this remark would require a still wider investigation of
issues centering around, though not conﬁned to, the philosophy of quantum
mechanics, an investigation that is even more obviously impossible here. For
present purposes I can only record my conviction that the proposals for quantum
logics that have been offered are of no real help in resolving or even understand-
ing the seeming paradoxes that arise there. In a nutshell, what is required to
make sense of quantum mechanics, if indeed this is possible, is not a new and
better logic, but rather a new and better metaphysics.
2
I rely on many different sources here, but most of all on Lawrence Sklar’s won-
derful book Space, Time, and Spacetime (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California
“APPENDIX: NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND RELATIVITY”
213

Press, 1976). Parenthetical references in this Appendix are to the pages of this
book. Sklar’s own view of these issues will be brieﬂy considered below.
3
Quoted in Sklar, pp. 14–15.
4
Hyperbolic geometry retains the other Euclidean axioms and tacit assumptions
unaltered, but elliptic geometry requires changes in some of them as well: in
fact the existence of parallels (though not of a unique parallel) can be proved
from the other Euclidean axioms and assumptions; in addition, the fact that
elliptic straight lines are circular or closed (great circles on the surface of a
sphere are the most straightforward example) forces alterations in Euclid’s
implicit assumptions about the idea of betweenness (as made explicit, e.g., by
Hilbert). These niceties can, however, be ignored for our limited purposes
here.
5
For an argument, to my mind convincing, that space (as opposed to space–time)
could not have more than three dimensions, see Richard Swinburne, Space and
Time, 2nd ed. (London: Macmillan,  1981), chapter 7.
6
One possible source of confusion here is that mathematicians use the term
“space” to refer to any abstract set of relations that has a structure analogous
to ordinary space, i.e., roughly one that can be described in terms of locations
represented by n-tuples of numbers. In this abstract sense, there is no doubt
that non-Euclidean “spaces” are perfectly coherent and possible, as are n-
dimensional spaces for even inﬁnite values of n and indeed structures that are
even more intuitively bizarre.
7
See Sklar, pp. 98–101, for further discussion.
8
Ibid., pp. 88–146. I have somewhat simpliﬁed Sklar’s picture by abstracting
from his concern with the tenability of the observational/theoretical
distinction.
QUESTIONS
1
According to BonJour, is rational insight infallible?
2
According to BonJour, does the fact that non-Euclidean geometries are consist-
ent refute the rationalist conception of our geometrical knowledge? Explain
brieﬂy why or why not.
3
Of the two theories discussed by Reichenbach and Carnap, which one would a
rationalist be most likely to prefer?
FURTHER READING ON REASON AND THE A PRIORI
Ayer, A.J., “The A Priori,” in Language, Truth, and Logic (New York: Dover Publications,
1952).
Bealer, George, “A Theory of the A Priori,” Philosophical Perspectives 13 (1999):
29–55.
Benacerraf, Paul, “Mathematical Truth,” Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973): 661–79.
BonJour, Laurence, In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998).
Carnap, Rudolf, “The Elimination of Metaphysics through Logical Analysis of
LAURENCE BONJOUR
214

Language,” pp. 60–81 in Logical Positivism, ed. A.J. Ayer (New York: Free Press,
1959).
Field, Hartry, “Realism and Anti-Realism about Mathematics,” Philosophical Topics
13 (1982): 45–69.
Field, Hartry, “Epistemological Nonfactualism and the A Prioricity of Logic,” Philo-
sophical Studies 92 (1998): 1–24.
Frege, Gottlob, The Foundations of Arithmetic (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press, 1980).
Fumerton, Richard, “A Priori Philosophy after an A Posteriori Turn,” Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 23 (1999): 21–33.
Harris, James and Richard Severens (eds) Analyticity: Selected Readings (Chicago:
Quadrangle Books, 1970).
Irvine, A.D. (ed.) Physicalism in Mathematics (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990).
Kim, Jaegwon, “The Role of Perception in A Priori Knowledge: Some Remarks,”
Philosophical Studies 40 (1981): 339–54.
Kim, Jaegwon, “What is Naturalized Epistemology?,” pp. 216–36 in Supervenience
and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Kitcher, Philip, “A Priori Knowledge,” in Naturalizing Epistemology, ed. Hilary Kornblith
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994).
Kripke, Saul, Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1980).
Miscevic, Nenad, “The Rationalist and the Tortoise,” Philosophical Studies 92
(1998): 175–9.
Moser, Paul (ed.) A Priori Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).
Quine, W.V., From a Logical Point of View (New York: Harper, 1961).
Quine, W.V., Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1969).
Resnik, Michael (ed.) Mathematical Objects and Mathematical Knowledge (Brookﬁeld,
VT: Dartmouth Publishing Co., 1995).
Schirn, Matthias (ed.) The Philosophy of Mathematics Today (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1998).
“APPENDIX: NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY AND RELATIVITY”
215


4
TESTIMONY
Testimony, like memory, is an extremely pervasive source of knowledge that has
traditionally been neglected by epistemologists. Here, I use “testimony” broadly, to
include all cases in which a person asserts something, and another person hears,
reads, or otherwise witnesses the assertion. In this sense, my beliefs that China is in
Asia, that the Earth orbits the sun, and that my friend’s birthday is on June 29, are
all based on testimony. Testimony also plays a crucial role in science, where scien-
tists’ testimony as to their observations is relied upon by other scientists who
are constructing theories. Yet, little has been written about the epistemology of
testimony.
One reason for this neglect may lie in the traditional views, developed by such
thinkers as Locke and Hume, about the probative value of testimony. Locke has
particularly disparaging words to say about the practice of relying on testimony. He
thinks both that other people are a highly unreliable source of information and that,
even when they speak truthfully, one cannot gain true knowledge merely by taking
someone else’s word. His view was taken up by the Royal Society (a famous scientiﬁc
organization that started in the 1600s and continues today) which adopted the motto
Nullius in verba (“On no man’s word”). This sort of attitude was largely a reaction to
the over-reliance in medieval philosophy on appeals to authority.
David Hume is a bit more conciliatory: he regards testimony as simply one form of
inductive evidence among others. In his essay “Of Miracles” (mainly a criticism of the
belief in miracles), he lays down the basic principles of inductive evidence, including
testimonial evidence: the probability one should assign to a given kind of event
happening in given circumstances is proportional to the frequency with which events
of that kind have, in one’s past experience, happened in such circumstances. The
reason that we are often justiﬁed in believing the testimony of others is simply that in
the past, when we have been able to check, we have usually found the statements
made by others to be true. He goes on to use these principles to argue that a belief in
miracles cannot be justiﬁed on the basis of testimony, because it is always more
likely that the testator is lying or mistaken than it is that a miracle has happened,
since one has more past experience of people lying or being mistaken than one has
of laws of nature being violated.
Here as elsewhere, Thomas Reid rejected the conventional wisdom of his time.
Reid noticed that, if one had to rely solely upon induction as Hume proposed, one
would have little ground for believing the majority of the things that we in fact believe
on the testimony of others. The situation would be particularly difﬁcult for children
who, before accepting anything told them by an adult, would ﬁrst have to acquire
217

extensive experience and construct an inductive argument for the reliability of adults.
Many children would probably be run over by cars or poison themselves before they
succeeded in collecting all the necessary evidence. Fortunately, Reid observed,
human beings have two innate tendencies which enable us much more easily to gain
knowledge through testimony: the ﬁrst is our instinctive tendency to tell the truth (as
we see it); the second is the tendency simply to believe what others say. We have the
latter tendency even before we have had a chance to test the reliability of others, and
Reid thinks it is a good thing that we have it. This is not to deny that we may, after
acquiring experience, have reason either to increase or to decrease our degree of
trust in the testimony of others in certain circumstances (if you know someone has
lied to you many times in the past, your innate tendency to trust his word will be
defeated).
C.A.J. Coady similarly criticizes what he calls “the reductionist thesis,” which
holds that we rely on testimony because we have observed a correlation between
what people say and what is true. One way of interpreting this idea is that people in
general (or my community in general) have observed such a correlation. But this
would lead to a circular argument, because in order to know that people have gener-
ally observed such a correlation, I would have to accept the testimony of others that
they have observed such a correlation. Another interpretation is that each person
individually has observed such a correlation. But Coady ﬁnds this suggestion “obvi-
ously false,” in that most of us have never in fact checked on the veracity of the vast
majority of reports that we have received from others. It seems that we simply lack a
sufﬁcient inductive basis for generalizing as to the reliability of other people.
Coady goes on to argue, furthermore, that it is not even coherent to suppose, as a
proponent of the reductionist thesis does, that there could be a society in which
people were generally not reliable in their testimony. In order for people to have a
meaningful language or to count as making statements, there must be some sort of
correlation between their utterances and features of reality. If some society regularly
used the word “gnos” when in the absence of trees, it would not be correct to inter-
pret “gnos” as meaning “tree.” Finally, Coady criticizes one argument that Hume
seems to make for the reductionist thesis: namely, the argument that since inductive
evidence can undermine the credibility of testimony, therefore the credibility of testi-
mony depends upon positive inductive evidence in favor of its reliability. Coady ﬁnds
this argument invalid, comparing it to the (obviously invalid) argument that since
testimony can undermine a belief based on observation, therefore the credibility of
observation in general depends upon testimony.
PART I: SOURCES OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
218

John Locke, Essay Concerning
Human Understanding
(Book I, chapter iv)
§23. What censure, doubting thus of innate Principles, may deserve from Men,
who will be apt to call it, pulling up the old foundations of Knowledge and
Certainty, I cannot tell: I perswade my self, at least, that the way I have pursued,
being conformable to Truth, lays those foundations surer. This I am certain, I
have not made it my business, either to quit, or follow any Authority in the
ensuing Discourse: Truth has been my only aim; and where-ever that has
appeared to lead, my Thoughts have impartially followed, without minding,
whether the footsteps of any other lay that way, or no. Not that I want a due
respect to other Mens Opinions; but after all, the greatest reverence is due to
Truth; and, I hope, it will not be thought arrogance, to say, That, perhaps, we
should make greater progress in the discovery of rational and contemplative
Knowledge, if we sought it in the Fountain, in the consideration of Things them-
selves; and made use rather of our own Thoughts, than other Mens to ﬁnd it. For,
I think, we may as rationally hope to see with other Mens Eyes, as to know by
other Mens Understandings. So much as we our selves consider and comprehend
of Truth and Reason, so much we possess of real and true Knowledge. The
ﬂoating of other Mens Opinions in our brains makes us not one jot the more
knowing, though they happen to be true. What in them was Science, is in us but
Opiniatrety, whilst we give up our Assent only to reverend Names, and do not, as
they did, employ our own Reason to understand those Truths, which gave them
reputation. Aristotle was certainly a knowing Man, but no body ever thought
him so, because he blindly embraced, and conﬁdently vented the Opinions of
another. And if the taking up of another’s Principles, without examining them,
made not him a Philosopher, I suppose it will hardly make any body else so. In the
Sciences, every one has so much, as he really knows and comprehends: What he
believes only, and takes upon trust, are but shreads; which however well in the
whole piece, make no considerable addition to his stock, who gathers them. Such
borrowed Wealth, like Fairy-money, though it were Gold in the hand from which
he received it, will be but Leaves and Dust when it comes to use.
John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. P.H. Nidditch (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1975).
219

(Book IV, chapter xx)
§17. Fourthly, The fourth and last wrong Measure of Probability I shall take
notice of, and which keeps in Ignorance, or Errour, more People than all the other
together, is that which I have mentioned in the fore-going Chapter, I mean, the
giving up our Assent to the common received Opinions, either of our Friends, or
Party; Neighbourhood, or Country. How many Men have no other ground for
their Tenets, than the supposed Honesty, or Learning, or Number of those of the
same Profession? As if honest, or bookish Men could not err; or Truth were to be
established by the Vote of the Multitude: yet this with most Men serves the Turn.
The Tenet has had the attestation of reverend Antiquity, it comes to me with the
Pass-port of former Ages, and therefore I am secure in the Reception I give it:
other Men have been, and are of the same Opinion, (for that is all is said,) and
therefore it is reasonable for me to embrace it. A Man may more justiﬁably throw
up Cross and Pile for his Opinions, than take them up by such Measures. All Men
are liable to Errour, and most Men are in many Points, by Passion or Interest,
under Temptation to it. If we could but see the secret motives, that inﬂuenced the
Men of Name and Learning in the World, and the Leaders of Parties, we should
not always ﬁnd, that it was the embracing of Truth for its own sake, that made
them espouse the Doctrines, they owned and maintained. This at least is certain,
there is not an Opinion so absurd, which a Man may not receive upon this
ground. There is no Errour to be named, which has not had its Professors: And a
Man shall never want crooked Paths to walk in, if he thinks that he is in the right
way, where-ever he has the Foot-steps of others to follow.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Locke, is reliance on the authority of learned people a good way to
gain knowledge?
JOHN LOCKE
220

David Hume, “Of Miracles”
Part I
There is, in Dr. Tillotson’s writings, an argument against the real presence, which
is as concise, and elegant, and strong as any argument can possibly be supposed
against a doctrine, so little worthy of a serious refutation. It is acknowledged on
all hands, says that learned prelate, that the authority, either of the scripture or of
tradition, is founded merely in the testimony of the apostles, who were eye-
witnesses to those miracles of our Saviour, by which he proved his divine mission.
Our evidence, then, for the truth of the Christian religion is less than the evidence
for the truth of our senses; because, even in the ﬁrst authors of our religion, it was
no greater; and it is evident it must diminish in passing from them to their dis-
ciples; nor can any one rest such conﬁdence in their testimony, as in the immedi-
ate object of his senses. But a weaker evidence can never destroy a stronger; and
therefore, were the doctrine of the real presence ever so clearly revealed in scrip-
ture, it were directly contrary to the rules of just reasoning to give our assent to it.
It contradicts sense, though both the scripture and tradition, on which it is sup-
posed to be built, carry not such evidence with them as sense; when they are
considered merely as external evidences, and are not brought home to every one’s
breast, by the immediate operation of the Holy Spirit.
Nothing is so convenient as a decisive argument of this kind, which must at
least silence the most arrogant bigotry and superstition, and free us from their
impertinent solicitations. I ﬂatter myself, that I have discovered an argument of a
like nature, which, if just, will, with the wise and learned, be an everlasting check
to all kinds of superstitious delusion, and consequently, will be useful as long as
the world endures. For so long, I presume, will the accounts of miracles and
prodigies be found in all history, sacred and profane.
Though experience be our only guide in reasoning concerning matters of fact;
it must be acknowledged, that this guide is not altogether infallible, but in some
cases is apt to lead us into errors. One, who in our climate, should expect better
weather in any week of June than in one of December, would reason justly, and
conformably to experience; but it is certain, that he may happen, in the event, to
ﬁnd himself mistaken. However, we may observe, that, in such a case, he would
have no cause to complain of experience; because it commonly informs us
David Hume, Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (in Enquiries, ed. L.A. Selby-
Bigge, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1902).
221

beforehand of the uncertainty, by that contrariety of events, which we may learn
from a diligent observation. All effects follow not with like certainty from their
supposed causes. Some events are found, in all countries and all ages, to have
been constantly conjoined together: Others are found to have been more variable,
and sometimes to disappoint our expectations; so that, in our reasonings con-
cerning matter of fact, there are all imaginable degrees of assurance, from the
highest certainty to the lowest species of moral evidence.
A wise man, therefore, proportions his belief to the evidence. In such conclu-
sions as are founded on an infallible experience, he expects the event with the last
degree of assurance, and regards his past experience as a full proof of the future
existence of that event. In other cases, he proceeds with more caution: He weighs
the opposite experiments: He considers which side is supported by the greater
number of experiments: to that side he inclines, with doubt and hesitation; and
when at last he ﬁxes his judgement, the evidence exceeds not what we properly
call probability. All probability, then, supposes an opposition of experiments and
observations, where the one side is found to overbalance the other, and to pro-
duce a degree of evidence, proportioned to the superiority. A hundred instances
or experiments on one side, and ﬁfty on another, afford a doubtful expectation of
any event; though a hundred uniform experiments, with only one that is contra-
dictory, reasonably beget a pretty strong degree of assurance. In all cases, we
must balance the opposite experiments, where they are opposite, and deduct the
smaller number from the greater, in order to know the exact force of the superior
evidence.
To apply these principles to a particular instance; we may observe, that there is
no species of reasoning more common, more useful, and even necessary to human
life, than that which is derived from the testimony of men, and the reports of eye-
witnesses and spectators. This species of reasoning, perhaps, one may deny to be
founded on the relation of cause and effect. I shall not dispute about a word. It
will be sufﬁcient to observe that our assurance in any argument of this kind is
derived from no other principle than our observation of the veracity of human
testimony, and of the usual conformity of facts to the reports of witnesses. It
being a general maxim, that no objects have any discoverable connexion together,
and that all the inferences, which we can draw from one to another, are founded
merely on our experience of their constant and regular conjunction; it is evident,
that we ought not to make an exception to this maxim in favour of human
testimony, whose connexion with any event seems, in itself, as little necessary as
any other. Were not the memory tenacious to a certain degree, had not men
commonly an inclination to truth and a principle of probity; were they not sens-
ible to shame, when detected in a falsehood; Were not these, I say, discovered by
experience to be qualities, inherent in human nature, we should never repose the
least conﬁdence in human testimony. A man delirious, or noted for falsehood and
villany, has no manner of authority with us.
And as the evidence, derived from witnesses and human testimony, is founded
on past experience, so it varies with the experience, and is regarded either as a
proof or a probability, according as the conjunction between any particular kind
of report and any kind of object has been found to be constant or variable. There
are a number of circumstances to be taken into consideration in all judgements of
this kind; and the ultimate standard, by which we determine all disputes, that
DAVID HUME
222

may arise concerning them, is always derived from experience and observation.
Where this experience is not entirely uniform on any side, it is attended with an
unavoidable contrariety in our judgements, and with the same opposition and
mutual destruction of argument as in every other kind of evidence. We frequently
hesitate concerning the reports of others. We balance the opposite circumstances,
which cause any doubt or uncertainty; and when we discover a superiority on any
side, we incline to it; but still with a diminution of assurance, in proportion to the
force of its antagonist.
This contrariety of evidence, in the present case, may be derived from several
different causes; from the opposition of contrary testimony; from the character or
number of the witnesses; from the manner of their delivering their testimony; or
from the union of all these circumstances. We entertain a suspicion concerning
any matter of fact, when the witnesses contradict each other; when they are but
few, or of a doubtful character; when they have an interest in what they afﬁrm;
when they deliver their testimony with hesitation, or on the contrary, with too
violent asseverations. There are many other particulars of the same kind, which
may diminish or destroy the force of any argument, derived from human
testimony.
Suppose, for instance, that the fact, which the testimony endeavours to estab-
lish, partakes of the extraordinary and the marvellous; in that case, the evidence,
resulting from the testimony, admits of a diminution, greater or less, in propor-
tion as the fact is more or less unusual. The reason why we place any credit in
witnesses and historians, is not derived from any connexion, which we perceive a
priori, between testimony and reality, but because we are accustomed to ﬁnd a
conformity between them. But when the fact attested is such a one as has seldom
fallen under our observation, here is a contest of two opposite experiences; of
which the one destroys the other, as far as its force goes, and the superior can only
operate on the mind by the force, which remains. The very same principle of
experience, which gives us a certain degree of assurance in the testimony of
witnesses, gives us also, in this case, another degree of assurance against the fact,
which they endeavour to establish; from which contradition there necessarily
arises a counterpoize, and mutual destruction of belief and authority.
I should not believe such a story were it told me by Cato, was a proverbial
saying in Rome, even during the lifetime of that philosophical patriot.1 The
incredibility of a fact, it was allowed, might invalidate so great an authority.
The Indian prince, who refused to believe the ﬁrst relations concerning the
effects of frost, reasoned justly; and it naturally required very strong testimony to
engage his assent to facts, that arose from a state of nature, with which he was
unacquainted, and which bore so little analogy to those events, of which he had
had constant and uniform experience. Though they were not contrary to his
experience, they were not conformable to it.2
But in order to encrease the probability against the testimony of witnesses, let
us suppose, that the fact, which they afﬁrm, instead of being only marvellous, is
really miraculous; and suppose also, that the testimony considered apart and in
itself, amounts to an entire proof; in that case, there is proof against proof, of
which the strongest must prevail, but still with a diminution of its force, in
proportion to that of its antagonist.
A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature; and as a ﬁrm and unalterable
“OF MIRACLES”
223

experience has established these laws, the proof against a miracle, from the very
nature of the fact, is as entire as any argument from experience can possibly be
imagined. Why is it more than probable, that all men must die; that lead cannot,
of itself, remain suspended in the air; that ﬁre consumes wood, and is extin-
guished by water; unless it be, that these events are found agreeable to the laws of
nature, and there is required a violation of these laws, or in other words, a
miracle to prevent them? Nothing is esteemed a miracle, if it ever happen in the
common course of nature. It is no miracle that a man, seemingly in good health,
should die on a sudden: because such a kind of death, though more unusual than
any other, has yet been frequently observed to happen. But it is a miracle, that a
dead man should come to life; because that has never been observed in any age or
country. There must, therefore, be a uniform experience against every miraculous
event, otherwise the event would not merit that appellation. And as a uniform
experience amounts to a proof, there is here a direct and full proof, from the
nature of the fact, against the existence of any miracle; nor can such a proof be
destroyed, or the miracle rendered credible, but by an opposite proof, which is
superior.3
The plain consequence is (and it is a general maxim worthy of our attention),
“That no testimony is sufﬁcient to establish a miracle, unless the testimony be of
such a kind, that its falsehood would be more miraculous, than the fact, which it
endeavours to establish; and even in that case there is a mutual destruction of
arguments, and the superior only gives us an assurance suitable to that degree of
force, which remains, after deducting the inferior.” When anyone tells me, that he
saw a dead man restored to life, I immediately consider with myself, whether it be
more probable, that this person should either deceive or be deceived, or that the
fact, which he relates, should really have happened. I weigh the one miracle
against the other; and according to the superiority, which I discover, I pronounce
my decision, and always reject the greater miracle If the falsehood of his testi-
mony would be more miraculous, than the event which he relates; then, and not
till then, can he pretend to command my belief or opinion.
Part II
In the foregoing reasoning we have supposed, that the testimony, upon which a
miracle is founded, may possibly amount to an entire proof, and that the false-
hood of that testimony would be a real prodigy: But it is easy to shew, that we
have been a great deal too liberal in our concession, and that there never was a
miraculous event established on so full an evidence.
For ﬁrst, there is not to be found, in all history, any miracle attested by a
sufﬁcient number of men, of such unquestioned good-sense, education, and
learning, as to secure us against all delusion in themselves; of such undoubted
integrity, as to place them beyond all suspicion of any design to deceive others; of
such credit and reputation in the eyes of mankind, as to have a great deal to lose
in case of their being detected in any falsehood; and at the same time, attesting
facts performed in such a public manner and in so celebrated a part of the world,
as to render the detection unavoidable: All which circumstances are requisite to
give us a full assurance in the testimony of men.
Secondly. We may observe in human nature a principle which, if strictly
DAVID HUME
224

examined, will be found to diminish extremely the assurance, which we might,
from human testimony, have, in any kind of prodigy. The maxim, by which we
commonly conduct ourselves in our reasonings, is, that the objects, of which we
have no experience, resembles those, of which we have; that what we have found
to be most usual is always most probable; and that where there is an opposition
of arguments, we ought to give the preference to such as are founded on the
greatest number of past observations. But though, in proceeding by this rule, we
readily reject any fact which is unusual and incredible in an ordinary degree; yet
in advancing farther, the mind observes not always the same rule; but when
anything is afﬁrmed utterly absurd and miraculous, it rather the more readily
admits of such a fact, upon account of that very circumstance, which ought to
destroy all its authority. The passion of surprise and wonder, arising from mir-
acles; being an agreeable emotion, gives a sensible tendency towards the belief of
those events, from which it is derived. And this goes so far, that even those who
cannot enjoy this pleasure immediately, nor can believe those miraculous events,
of which they are informed, yet love to partake of the satisfaction at second-hand
or by rebound, and place a pride and delight in exciting the admiration of others.
With what greediness are the miraculous accounts of travellers received, their
descriptions of sea and land monsters, their relations of wonderful adventures,
strange men, and uncouth manners? But if the spirit of religion join itself to the
love of wonder, there is an end of common sense; and human testimony, in these
circumstances, loses all pretensions to authority. A religionist may be an enthusi-
ast, and imagine he sees what has no reality: he may know his narrative to be
false, and yet persevere in it, with the best intentions in the world, for the sake of
promoting so holy a cause: or even where this delusion has not place, vanity,
excited by so strong a temptation, operates on him more powerfully than on the
rest of mankind in any other circumstances; and self-interest with equal force.
His auditors may not have, and commonly have not, sufﬁcient judgement to
canvass his evidence: what judgement they have, they renounce by principle, in
these sublime and mysterious subjects: or if they were ever so willing to employ it,
passion and a heated imagination disturb the regularity of its operations. Their
credulity increases his impudence: and his impudence overpowers their credulity.
Eloquence, when at its highest pitch, leaves little room for reason or reﬂection;
but addressing itself entirely to the fancy or the affections, captivates the willing
hearers, and subdues their understanding. Happily, this pitch it seldom attains.
But what a Tully or a Demosthenes could scarcely effect over a Roman or Athe-
nian audience, every Capuchin, every itinerant or stationary teacher can perform
over the generality of mankind, and in a higher degree, by touching such gross
and vulgar passions.
The many instances of forged miracles, and prophecies, and supernatural
events, which, in all ages, have either been detected by contrary evidence, or
which detect themselves by their absurdity, prove sufﬁciently the strong pro-
pensity of mankind to the extraordinary and the marvellous, and ought reason-
ably to beget a suspicion against all relations of this kind. This is our natural way
of thinking, even with regard to the most common and most credible events. For
instance: There is no kind of report which rises so easily, and spreads so quickly,
especially in country places and provincial towns, as those concerning marriages;
insomuch that two young persons of equal condition never see each other twice,
“OF MIRACLES”
225

but the whole neighbourhood immediately join them together. The pleasure of
telling a piece of news so interesting, of propagating it, and of being the ﬁrst
reporters of it, spreads the intelligence. And this is so well known, that no man of
sense gives attention to these reports, till he ﬁnd them conﬁrmed by some greater
evidence. Do not the same passions, and others still stronger, incline the general-
ity of mankind to believe and report, with the greatest vehemence and assurance,
all religious miracles?
Thirdly. It forms a strong presumption against all supernatural and miraculous
relations, that they are observed chieﬂy to abound among ignorant and barbar-
ous nations; or if a civilized people has ever given admission to any of them, that
people will be found to have received them from ignorant and barbarous ances-
tors, who transmitted them with that inviolable sanction and authority, which
always attend received opinions. When we peruse the ﬁrst histories of all nations,
we are apt to imagine ourselves transported into some new world; where the
whole frame of nature is disjointed, and every element performs its operations in
a different manner, from what it does at present. Battles, revolutions, pestilence,
famine and death, are never the effect of those natural causes, which we experi-
ence. Prodigies, omens, oracles, judgements, quite obscure the few natural events,
that are intermingled with them. But as the former grow thinner every page, in
proportion as we advance nearer the enlightened ages, we soon learn, that there is
nothing mysterious or supernatural in the case, but that all proceeds from the
usual propensity of mankind towards the marvellous, and that, though this
inclination may at intervals receive a check from sense and learning, it can never
be thoroughly extirpated from human nature.
It is strange, a judicious reader is apt to say, upon the perusal of these wonder-
ful historians, that such prodigious events never happen in our days. But it is
nothing strange, I hope, that men should lie in all ages. You must surely have seen
instances enough of that frailty. You have yourself heard many such marvellous
relations started, which, being treated with scorn by all the wise and judicious,
have at last been abandoned even by the vulgar. Be assured, that those renowned
lies, which have spread and ﬂourished to such a monstrous height, arose from
like beginnings; but being sown in a more proper soil, shot up at last into prodi-
gies almost equal to those which they relate.
It was a wise policy in that false prophet, Alexander, who though now forgot-
ten, was once so famous, to lay the ﬁrst scene of his impostures in Paphlagonia,
where, as Lucian tells us, the people were extremely ignorant and stupid, and
ready to swallow even the grossest delusion. People at a distance, who are weak
enough to think the matter at all worth enquiry, have no opportunity of receiving
better information. The stories come magniﬁed to them by a hundred circum-
stances. Fools are industrious in propagating the imposture; while the wise and
learned are contented, in general, to deride its absurdity, without informing
themselves of the particular facts, by which it may be distinctly refuted. And thus
the impostor above mentioned was enabled to proceed, from his ignorant
Paphlagonians, to the enlisting of votaries, even among the Grecian philosophers,
and men of the most eminent rank and distinction in Rome: nay, could engage
the attention of that sage emperor Marcus Aurelius; so far as to make him trust
the success of a military expedition to his delusive prophecies.
The advantages are so great, of starting an imposture among an ignorant
DAVID HUME
226

people, that, even though the delusion should be too gross to impose on the
generality of them (which, though seldom, is sometimes the case) it has a much
better chance for succeeding in remote countries, than if the ﬁrst scene had been
laid in a city renowned for arts and knowledge. The most ignorant and barbarous
of these barbarians carry the report abroad. None of their countrymen have a
large correspondence, or sufﬁcient credit and authority to contradict and beat
down the delusion. Men’s inclination to the marvellous has full opportunity to
display itself. And thus a story, which is universally exploded in the place where it
was ﬁrst started, shall pass for certain at a thousand miles distance. But had
Alexander ﬁxed his residence at Athens, the philosophers of that renowned mart
of learning had immediately spread, throughout the whole Roman empire, their
sense of the matter; which, being supported by so great authority, and displayed
by all the force of reason and eloquence, had entirely opened the eyes of man-
kind. It is true; Lucian, passing by chance through Paphlagonia, had an
opportunity of performing this good ofﬁce. But, though much to be wished, it
does not always happen, that every Alexander meets with a Lucian, ready to
expose and detect his impostures.
I may add as a fourth reason, which diminishes the authority of prodigies, that
there is no testimony for any, even those which have not been expressly detected,
that is not opposed by an inﬁnite number of witnesses; so that not only the
miracle destroys the credit of testimony, but the testimony destroys itself. To
make this the better understood, let us consider, that, in matters of religion,
whatever is different is contrary; and that it is impossible the religions of ancient
Rome, of Turkey, of Siam, and of China should, all of them, be established on
any solid foundation. Every miracle, therefore, pretended to have been wrought
in any of these religions (and all of them abound in miracles), as its direct scope is
to establish the particular system to which it is attributed; so has it the same force,
though more indirectly, to overthrow every other system. In destroying a rival
system, it likewise destroys the credit of those miracles, on which that system was
established; so that all the prodigies of different religions are to be regarded as
contrary facts, and the evidences of these prodigies, whether weak or strong, as
opposite to each other. According to this method of reasoning, when we believe
any miracle of Mahomet or his successors, we have for our warrant the testimony
of a few barbarous Arabians: And on the other hand, we are to regard the
authority of Titus Livius, Plutarch, Tacitus, and, in short, of all the authors and
witnesses, Grecian, Chinese, and Roman Catholic, who have related any miracle
in their particular religion; I say, we are to regard their testimony in the same light
as if they had mentioned that Mahometan miracle, and had in express terms
contradicted it, with the same certainty as they have for the miracle they relate.
This argument may appear over subtile and reﬁned; but is not in reality different
from the reasoning of a judge, who supposes, that the credit of two witnesses,
maintaining a crime against any one, is destroyed by the testimony of two others,
who afﬁrm him to have been two hundred leagues distant, at the same instant
when the crime is said to have been committed.
One of the best attested miracles in all profane history, is that which Tacitus
reports of Vespasian, who cured a blind man in Alexandria, by means of his
spittle, and a lame man by the mere touch of his foot; in obedience to a vision of
the god Serapis, who had enjoined them to have recourse to the Emperor, for
“OF MIRACLES”
227

these miraculous cures. The story may be seen in that ﬁne historian;4 where every
circumstance seems to add weight to the testimony, and might be displayed at
large with all the force of argument and eloquence, if any one were now con-
cerned to enforce the evidence of that exploded and idolatrous superstition. The
gravity, solidity, age, and probity of so great an emperor, who, through the whole
course of his life, conversed in a familiar manner with his friends and courtiers,
and never affected those extraordinary airs of divinity assumed by Alexander and
Demetrius. The historian, a cotemporary writer, noted for candour and veracity,
and withal, the greatest and most penetrating genius, perhaps, of all antiquity;
and so free from any tendency to credulity, that he even lies under the contrary
imputation, of atheism and profaneness: The persons, from whose authority he
related the miracle, of established character for judgement and veracity, as we
may well presume; eye-witnesses of the fact, and conﬁrming their testimony, after
the Flavian family was despoiled of the empire, and could no longer give any
reward, as the price of a lie. Utrumque, qui interfuere, nunc quoque memorant,
postquam nullum mendacio pretium. To which if we add the public nature of the
facts, as related, it will appear, that no evidence can well be supposed stronger for
so gross and so palpable a falsehood.
There is also a memorable story related by Cardinal de Retz, which may well
deserve our consideration. When that intriguing politician ﬂed into Spain, to
avoid the persecution of his enemies, he passed through Saragossa, the capital of
Arragon, where he was shewn, in the cathedral, a man, who had served seven
years as a door-keeper, and was well known to every body in town, that had ever
paid his devotions at that church. He had been seen, for so long a time, wanting a
leg; but recovered that limb by the rubbing of holy oil upon the stump; and the
cardinal assures us that he saw him with two legs. This miracle was vouched by
all the canons of the church; and the whole company in town were appealed to
for a conﬁrmation of the fact; whom the cardinal found, by their zealous devo-
tion, to be thorough believers of the miracle. Here the relater was also con-
temporary to the supposed prodigy, of an incredulous and libertine character, as
well as of great genius; the miracle of so singular a nature as could scarcely admit
of a counterfeit, and the witnesses very numerous, and all of them, in a manner,
spectators of the fact, to which they gave their testimony. And what adds might-
ily to the force of the evidence, and may double our surprise on this occasion, is,
that the cardinal himself, who relates the story, seems not to give any credit to it,
and consequently cannot be suspected of any concurrence in the holy fraud. He
considered justly, that it was not requisite, in order to reject a fact of this nature,
to be able accurately to disprove the testimony, and to trace its falsehood,
through all the circumstances of knavery and credulity which produced it. He
knew, that, as this was commonly altogether impossible at any small distance of
time and place; so was it extremely difﬁcult, even where one was immediately
present, by reason of the bigotry, ignorance, cunning, and roguery of a great part
of mankind. He therefore concluded, like a just reasoner, that such an evidence
carried falsehood upon the very face of it, and that a miracle, supported by any
human testimony, was more properly a subject of derision than of argument.
There surely never was a greater number of miracles ascribed to one person,
than those, which were lately said to have been wrought in France upon the tomb
of Abbé Paris, the famous Jansenist, with whose sanctity the people were so long
DAVID HUME
228

deluded. The curing of the sick, giving hearing to the deaf, and sight to the blind,
were every where talked of as the usual effects of that holy sepulchre. But what is
more extraordinary; many of the miracles were immediately proved upon the
spot, before judges of unquestioned integrity, attested by witnesses of credit and
distinction, in a learned age, and on the most eminent theatre that is now in the
world. Nor is this all: a relation of them was published and dispersed every
where; nor were the Jesuits, though a learned body, supported by the civil magis-
trate, and determined enemies to those opinions, in whose favour the miracles
were said to have been wrought, ever able distinctly to refute or detect them.
Where shall we ﬁnd such a number of circumstances, agreeing to the corrobor-
ation of one fact? And what have we to oppose to such a cloud of witnesses, but
the absolute impossibility or miraculous nature of the events, which they relate?
And this surely, in the eyes of all reasonable people, will alone be regarded as a
sufﬁcient refutation.
Is the consequence just, because some human testimony has the utmost force
and authority in some cases, when it relates the battle of Philippi or Pharsalia for
instance; that therefore all kinds of testimony must, in all cases, have equal force
and authority? Suppose that the Cæsarean and Pompeian factions had, each of
them, claimed the victory in these battles, and that the historians of each party
had uniformly ascribed the advantage to their own side; how could mankind, at
this distance, have been able to determine between them? The contrariety is
equally strong between the miracles related by Herodotus or Plutarch, and those
delivered by Mariana, Bede, or any monkish historian.
The wise lend a very academic faith to every report which favours the passion
of the reporter; whether it magniﬁes his country, his family, or himself, or in any
other way strikes in with his natural inclinations and propensities. But what
greater temptation than to appear a missionary, a prophet, an ambassador from
heaven? Who would not encounter many dangers and difﬁculties, in order to
attain so sublime a character? Or if, by the help of vanity and a heated imagin-
ation, a man has ﬁrst made a convert of himself, and entered seriously into the
delusion; who ever scruples to make use of pious frauds, in support of so holy
and meritorious a cause?
The smallest spark may here kindle into the greatest ﬂame; because the
materials are always prepared for it. The avidum genus auricularum,5 the gazing
populace, receive greedily, without examination, whatever sooths superstition,
and promotes wonder.
How many stories of this nature have, in all ages, been detected and exploded
in their infancy? How many more have been celebrated for a time, and have
afterwards sunk into neglect and oblivion? Where such reports, therefore, ﬂy
about, the solution of the phenomenon is obvious; and we judge in conformity to
regular experience and observation, when we account for it by the known and
natural principles of credulity and delusion. And shall we, rather than have a
recourse to so natural a solution, allow of a miraculous violation of the most
established laws of nature?
I need not mention the difﬁculty of detecting a falsehood in any private or even
public history, at the place, where it is said to happen; much more when the scene
is removed to ever so small a distance. Even a court of judicature, with all the
authority, accuracy, and judgement, which they can employ, ﬁnd themselves
“OF MIRACLES”
229

often at a loss to distinguish between truth and falsehood in the most recent
actions. But the matter never comes to any issue, if trusted to the common
method of altercations and debate and ﬂying rumours; especially when men’s
passions have taken part on either side.
In the infancy of new religions, the wise and learned commonly esteem the
matter too inconsiderable to deserve their attention or regard. And when after-
wards they would willingly detect the cheat, in order to undeceive the deluded
multitude, the season is now past, and the records and witnesses, which might
clear up the matter, have perished beyond recovery.
No means of detection remain, but those which must be drawn from the very
testimony itself of the reporters: and these, though always sufﬁcient with the
judicious and knowing, are commonly too ﬁne to fall under the comprehension
of the vulgar.
Upon the whole, then, it appears, that no testimony for any kind of miracle has
ever amounted to a probability, much less to a proof; and that, even supposing it
amounted to a proof, it would be opposed by another proof; derived from the
very nature of the fact, which it would endeavour to establish. It is experience
only, which gives authority to human testimony; and it is the same experience,
which assures us of the laws of nature. When, therefore, these two kinds of
experience are contrary, we have nothing to do but substract the one from the
other, and embrace an opinion, either on one side or the other, with that assur-
ance which arises from the remainder. But according to the principle here
explained, this substraction, with regard to all popular religions, amounts to an
entire annihilation; and therefore we may establish it as a maxim, that no human
testimony can have such force as to prove a miracle, and make it a just founda-
tion for any such system of religion.
I beg the limitations here made may be remarked, when I say, that a miracle
can never be proved, so as to be the foundation of a system of religion. For I own,
that otherwise, there may possibly be miracles, or violations of the usual course
of nature, of such a kind as to admit of proof from human testimony; though,
perhaps, it will be impossible to ﬁnd any such in all the records of history. Thus,
suppose, all authors, in all languages, agree, that, from the ﬁrst of January 1600,
there was a total darkness over the whole earth for eight days: suppose that the
tradition of this extraordinary event is still strong and lively among the people:
that all travellers, who return from foreign countries, bring us accounts of the
same tradition, without the least variation or contradiction: it is evident, that our
present philosophers, instead of doubting the fact, ought to receive it as certain,
and ought to search for the causes whence it might be derived. The decay, corrup-
tion, and dissolution of nature, is an event rendered probable by so many
analogies, that any phenomenon, which seems to have a tendency towards that
catastrophe, comes within the reach of human testimony, if that testimony be
very extensive and uniform.
But suppose, that all the historians who treat of England, should agree, that,
on the ﬁrst of January 1600, Queen Elizabeth died; that both before and after her
death she was seen by her physicians and the whole court, as is usual with
persons of her rank; that her successor was acknowledged and proclaimed by the
parliament; and that, after being interred a month, she again appeared, resumed
the throne, and governed England for three years: I must confess that I should be
DAVID HUME
230

surprised at the concurrence of so many odd circumstances, but should not have
the least inclination to believe so miraculous an event. I should not doubt of her
pretended death, and of those other public circumstances that followed it: I
should only assert it to have been pretended, and that it neither was, nor possibly
could be real. You would in vain object to me the difﬁculty, and almost impossi-
bility of deceiving the world in an affair of such consequence; the wisdom and
solid judgement of that renowned queen; with the little or no advantage which
she could reap from so poor an artiﬁce: All this might astonish me; but I would
still reply, that the knavery and folly of men are such common phenomena, that
I should rather believe the most extraordinary events to arise from their
concurrence, than admit of so signal a violation of the laws of nature.
But should this miracle be ascribed to any new system of religion; men, in all
ages, have been so much imposed on by ridiculous stories of that kind, that this
very circumstance would be a full proof of a cheat, and sufﬁcient, with all men of
sense, not only to make them reject the fact, but even reject it without farther
examination. Though the Being to whom the miracle is ascribed, be, in this case,
Almighty, it does not, upon that account, become a whit more probable; since it
is impossible for us to know the attributes or actions of such a Being, otherwise
than from the experience which we have of his productions, in the usual course of
nature. This still reduces us to past observation, and obliges us to compare the
instances of the violation of truth in the testimony of men, with those of the
violation of the laws of nature by miracles, in order to judge which of them is
most likely and probable. As the violations of truth are more common in the
testimony concerning religious miracles, than in that concerning any other matter
of fact; this must diminish very much the authority of the former testimony,
and make us form a general resolution, never to lend any attention to it, with
whatever specious pretence it may be covered.
Lord Bacon seems to have embraced the same principles of reasoning. “We
ought,” says he, “to make a collection or particular history of all monsters and
prodigious births or productions, and in a word of every thing new, rare, and
extraordinary in nature. But this must be done with the most severe scrutiny, lest
we depart from truth. Above all, every relation must be considered as suspicious,
which depends in any degree upon religion, as the prodigies of Livy: And no less
so, every thing that is to be found in the writers of natural magic or alchimy, or
such authors, who seem, all of them, to have an unconquerable appetite for
falsehood and fable.”6
I am the better pleased with the method of reasoning here delivered, as I think
it may serve to confound those dangerous friends or disguised enemies to the
Christian Religion, who have undertaken to defend it by the principles of human
reason. Our most holy religion is founded on Faith, not on reason; and it is a sure
method of exposing it to put it to such a trial as it is, by no means, ﬁtted to
endure. To make this more evident, let us examine those miracles, related in
scripture; and not to lose ourselves in too wide a ﬁeld, let us conﬁne ourselves to
such as we ﬁnd in the Pentateuch, which we shall examine, according to the
principles of these pretended Christians, not as the word or testimony of God
himself, but as the production of a mere human writer and historian. Here then
we are ﬁrst to consider a book, presented to us by a barbarous and ignorant
people, written in an age when they were still more barbarous, and in all
“OF MIRACLES”
231

probability long after the facts which it relates, corroborated by no concurring
testimony, and resembling those fabulous accounts, which every nation gives of
its origin. Upon reading this book, we ﬁnd it full of prodigies and miracles. It
gives an account of a state of the world and of human nature entirely different
from the present: Of our fall from that state: Of the age of man, extended to near
a thousand years: Of the destruction of the world by a deluge: Of the arbitrary
choice of one people, as the favourites of heaven; and that people the countrymen
of the author: Of their deliverance from bondage by prodigies the most astonish-
ing imaginable: I desire any one to lay his hand upon his heart, and after a serious
consideration declare, whether he thinks that the falsehood of such a book, sup-
ported by such a testimony, would be more extraordinary and miraculous than
all the miracles it relates; which is, however, necessary to make it be received,
according to the measures of probability above established.
What we have said of miracles may be applied, without any variation, to
prophecies; and indeed, all prophecies are real miracles, and as such only, can be
admitted as proofs of any revelation. If it did not exceed the capacity of human
nature to foretell future events, it would be absurd to employ any prophecy as an
argument for a divine mission or authority from heaven. So that, upon the whole,
we may conclude, that the Christian Religion not only was at ﬁrst attended with
miracles, but even at this day cannot be believed by any reasonable person with-
out one. Mere reason is insufﬁcient to convince us of its veracity: And whoever is
moved by Faith to assent to it, is conscious of a continued miracle in his own
person, which subverts all the principles of his understanding, and gives him a
determination to believe what is most contrary to custom and experience.
Notes
1
Plutarch, in vita Catonis.
2
No Indian, it is evident, could have experience that water did not freeze in cold
climates. This is placing nature in a situation quite unknown to him; and it is
impossible for him to tell a priori what will result from it. It is making a new
experiment, the consequence of which is always uncertain. One may sometimes
conjecture from analogy what will follow; but still this is but conjecture. And it
must be confessed, that, in the present case of freezing, the event follows
contrary to the rules of analogy, and is such as a rational Indian would not look
for. The operations of cold upon water are not gradual, according to the degrees
of cold; but whenever it comes to the freezing point, the water passes in a
moment, from the utmost liquidity to perfect hardness. Such an event, therefore,
may be denominated extraordinary, and requires a pretty strong testimony, to
render it credible to people in a warm climate; But still it is not miraculous, nor
contrary to uniform experience of the course of nature in cases where all the
circumstances are the same. The inhabitants of Sumatra have always seen
water ﬂuid in their own climate, and the freezing of their rivers ought to be
deemed a prodigy: But they never saw water in Muscovy during the winter; and
therefore they cannot reasonably be positive what would there be the
consequence.
3
Sometimes an event may not, in itself, seem to be contrary to the laws of
nature, and yet, if it were real, it might, by reason of some circumstances, be
DAVID HUME
232

denominated a miracle; because, in fact, it is contrary to these laws. Thus if a
person, claiming a divine authority, should command a sick person to be well, a
healthful man to fall down dead, the clouds to pour rain, the winds to blow, in
short, should order many natural events, which immediately follow upon his
command; these might justly be esteemed miracles, because they are really, in
this case, contrary to the laws of nature. For if any suspicion remain, that the
event and command concurred by accident, there is no miracle and no trans-
gression of the laws of nature. If this suspicion be removed, there is evidently a
miracle, and a transgression of these laws; because nothing can be more con-
trary to nature than that the voice or command of a man should have such an
inﬂuence. A miracle may be accurately deﬁned, a transgression of a law of nature
by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition of some invisible agent.
A miracle may either be discoverable by men or not. This alters not its nature and
essence. The raising of a house or ship into the air is a visible miracle. The
raising of a feather, when the wind wants ever so little of a force requisite for that
purpose, is as real a miracle, though not so sensible with regard to us.
4
Hist. lib. iv. cap. 81. Suetonius gives nearly the same account in vita Vesp.
5
Lucret.
6
Nov. Org. lib. ii. aph. 29.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Hume, what is a miracle?
2
What is the difference between the sort of experience that provides a “proof” of
a generalization, and the sort of experience that provides “probability”?
3
(Referring to question 3) According to Hume, which sort of evidence do we have
for the laws of nature?
4
According to Hume, which sort of evidence do we have for the veracity of human
testimony?
“OF MIRACLES”
233

Thomas Reid, Inquiry into the Human Mind
Of the analogy between perception and the credit we give
to human testimony
The objects of human knowledge are innumerable; but the channels by which it is
conveyed to the mind are few. Among these, the perception of external things by
our senses, and the informations which we receive upon human testimony, are
not the least considerable; and so remarkable is the analogy between these two,
and the analogy between the principles of the mind which are subservient to the
one and those which are subservient to the other, that, without further apology,
we shall consider them together.
In the testimony of Nature given by the senses, as well as in human testimony
given by language, things are signiﬁed to us by signs: and in one as well as the
other, the mind, either by original principles or by custom, passes from the sign to
the conception and belief of the things signiﬁed.
We have distinguished our perceptions into original and acquired; and lan-
guage, into natural and artiﬁcial. Between acquired perception and artiﬁcial
language, there is a great analogy; but still a greater between original perception
and natural language.
The signs in original perception are sensations, of which Nature hath given us
a great variety, suited to the variety of the things signiﬁed by them. Nature hath
established a real connection between the signs and the things signiﬁed; and
Nature hath also taught us the interpretation of the signs—so that, previous to
experience, the sign suggests the thing signiﬁed, and create the belief of it.
The signs in natural language are features of the face, gestures of the body, and
modulations of the voice; the variety of which is suited to the variety of the things
signiﬁed by them. Nature hath established a real connection between these signs,
and the thoughts and dispositions of the mind which are signiﬁed by them; and
Nature hath taught us the interpretation of these signs; so that, previous to
experience, the signs suggest the thing signiﬁed, and create the belief of it.
A man in company, without doing good or evil, without uttering an articulate
sound, may behave himself gracefully, civilly, politely; or, on the contrary,
meanly, rudely, and impertinently. We see the dispositions of his mind by
their natural signs in his countenance and behaviour, in the same manner as we
Thomas Reid, Inquiry into the Human Mind, from Inquiry and Essays, ed. R.E.
Beanblossom and K. Lehrer (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1983).
234

perceive the ﬁgure and other qualities of bodies by the sensations which nature
hath connected with them.
The signs in the natural language of the human countenance and behaviour, as
well as the signs in our original perceptions, have the same signiﬁcation in all
climates and in all nations; and the skill of interpreting them is not acquired, but
innate.
In acquired perception, the signs are either sensations, or things which we
perceive by means of sensations. The connection between the sign and the thing
signiﬁed, is established by nature; and we discover this connection by experience;
but not without the aid of our original perceptions, or of those which we have
already acquired. After this connection is discovered, the sign, in like manner as
in original perception, always suggests the things signiﬁed, and creates the belief
of it.
In artiﬁcial language, the signs are articulate sounds, whose connection with
the things signiﬁed by them, is established by the will of men; and, in learning our
mother tongue, we discover this connection by experience; but not without the
aid of natural language, or of what we had before attained of artiﬁcial language.
And, after this connection is discovered, the sign, as in natural language, always
suggests the thing signiﬁed, and creates the belief of it.
Our original perceptions are few, compared with the acquired; but, without
the former, we could not possibly attain the latter. In like manner, natural lan-
guage is scanty, compared with artiﬁcial; but, without the former, we could not
possibly attain the latter.
Our original perceptions, as well as the natural language of human features
and gestures, must be resolved into particular principles of the human constitu-
tion. Thus, it is by one particular principle of our constitution that certain fea-
tures express anger; and, by another particular principle, that certain features
express benevolence. It is, in like manner, by one particular principle of our
constitution that a certain sensation signiﬁes hardness in the body which I handle;
and it is by another particular principle that a certain sensation signiﬁes motion
in that body.
But our acquired perceptions, and the information we receive by means of
artiﬁcial language, must be resolved into general principles of the human con-
stitution. When a painter perceives that this picture is the work of Raphael,
that the work of Titian; a jeweller, that this is a true diamond, that a counter-
feit; a sailor, that this is a ship of ﬁve hundred ton, that of four hundred; these
different acquired perceptions are produced by the same general principles of
the human mind, which have a different operation in the same person accord-
ing as they are variously applied, and in different persons according to the
diversity of their education and manner of life. In like manner, when certain
articulate sounds convey to my mind the knowledge of the battle of Pharsalia,
and others, the knowledge of the battle of Poltowa—when a Frenchman and
an Englishman receive the same information by different articulate sounds—the
signs used in these different cases, produce the knowledge and belief of the
things signiﬁed, by means of the same general principles of the human
constitution.
Now, if we compare the general principles of our constitution, which ﬁt us for
receiving information from our fellow-creatures by language, with the general
INQUIRY INTO THE HUMAN MIND
235

principles which ﬁt us for acquiring the perception of things by our senses, we
shall ﬁnd them to be very similar in their nature and manner of operation.
When we begin to learn our mother tongue, we perceive, by the help of natural
language, that they who speak to us use certain sounds to express certain things
we imitate the same sounds when we would express the same things; and ﬁnd
that we are understood.
But here a difﬁculty occurs which merits our attention, because the solution of
it leads to some original principles of the human mind, which are of great
importance, and of very extensive inﬂuence. We know by experience that men
have used such words to express such things; but all experience is of the past, and
can, of itself, give no notion or belief of what is future. How come we, then, to
believe, and to rely upon it with assurance, that men, who have it in their power
to do otherwise, will continue to use the same words when they think the same
things? Whence comes this knowledge and belief—this foresight, we ought rather
to call it—of the future and voluntary actions of our fellow-creatures? Have they
promised that they will never impose upon us by equivocation or falsehood? No,
they have not. And, if they had, this would not solve the difﬁculty; for such
promise must be expressed by words or by other signs; and, before we can rely
upon it, we must be assured that they put the usual meaning upon the signs which
express that promise. No man of common sense ever thought of taking a man’s
own word for his honesty; and it is evident that we take his veracity for granted
when we lay any stress upon his word or promise. I might add, that this reliance
upon the declarations and testimony of men is found in children long before they
know what a promise is.
There is, therefore, in the human mind an early anticipation, neither derived
from experience, nor from reason, nor from any compact or promise, that our
fellow-creatures will use the same signs in language, when they have the same
sentiments.
This is, in reality, a kind of prescience of human actions; and it seems to me to
be an original principle of the human constitution, without which we should be
incapable of language, and consequently incapable of instruction.
The wise and beneﬁcent Author of Nature, who intended that we should be
social creatures, and that we should receive the greatest and most important part
of our knowledge by the information of others, hath, for these purposes,
implanted in our natures two principles that tally with each other.
The ﬁrst of these principles is, a propensity to speak truth, and to use the signs
of language so as to convey our real sentiments. This principle has a powerful
operation, even in the greatest liars; for where they lie once, they speak truth a
hundred times. Truth is always uppermost, and is the natural issue of the mind. It
requires no art or training, no inducement or temptation, but only that we yield
to a natural impulse. Lying, on the contrary, is doing violence to our nature; and
is never practised, even by the worst men, without some temptation. Speaking
truth is like using our natural food, which we would do from appetite, although it
answered no end; but lying is like taking physic, which is nauseous to the taste,
and which no man takes but for some end which he cannot otherwise attain.
If it should be objected, That men may be inﬂuenced by moral or political
considerations to speak truth, and, therefore, that their doing so is no proof of
such an original principle as we have mentioned—I answer, First, That moral or
THOMAS REID
236

political considerations can have no inﬂuence until we arrive at years of under-
standing and reﬂection; and it is certain, from experience, that children keep to
truth invariably, before they are capable of being inﬂuenced by such consider-
ations. Secondly, When we are inﬂuenced by moral or political considerations,
we must be conscious of that inﬂuence, and capable of perceiving it upon reﬂec-
tion. Now, when I reﬂect upon my actions most attentively, I am not conscious
that, in speaking truth, I am inﬂuenced on ordinary occasions by any motive,
moral or political. I ﬁnd that truth is always at the door of my lips, and goes forth
spontaneously, if not held back. It requires neither good nor bad intention to
bring it forth, but only that I be artless and undesigning. There may indeed be
temptations to falsehood, which would be too strong for the natural principle of
veracity, unaided by principles of honour or virtue; but where there is no such
temptation, we speak truth by instinct—and this instinct is the principle I have
been explaining.
By this instinct, a real connection is formed between our words and our
thoughts, and thereby the former become ﬁt to be signs of the latter, which they
could not otherwise be. And although this connection is broken in every instance
of lying and equivocation, yet these instances being comparatively few, the
authority of human testimony is only weakened by them, but not destroyed.
Another original principle implanted in us by the Supreme Being, is a dis-
position to conﬁde in the veracity of others, and to believe what they tell us. This
is the counterpart to the former; and, as that may be called the principle of
veracity, we shall, for want of a more proper name, call this the principle
of credulity. It is unlimited in children, until they meet with instances of deceit
and falsehood; and it retains a very considerable degree of strength through life.
If Nature had left the mind of the speaker in aequilibrio, without any inclin-
ation to the side of truth more than to that of falsehood, children would lie as
often as they speak truth, until reason was so far ripened as to suggest the
imprudence of lying, or conscience, as to suggest its immorality. And if Nature
had left the mind of the hearer in aequilibrio, without any inclination to the side
of belief more than to that of disbelief, we should take no man’s word until we
had positive evidence that he spoke truth. His testimony would, in this case, have
no more authority than his dreams; which may be true or false, but no man is
disposed to believe them, on this account, that they were dreamed. It is evident
that, in the matter of testimony, the balance of human judgment is by nature
inclined to the side of belief; and turns to that side of itself, when there is nothing
put into the opposite scale. If it was not so, no proposition that is uttered in
discourse would be believed, until it was examined and tried by reason; and most
men would be unable to ﬁnd reasons for believing the thousandth part of what is
told them. Such distrust and incredulity would deprive us of the greatest beneﬁts
of society, and place us in a worse condition than that of savages.
Children, on this supposition, would be absolutely incredulous, and, therefore,
absolutely incapable of instruction: those who had little knowledge of human
life, and of the manners and characters of men, would be in the next degree
incredulous: and the most credulous men would be those of greatest experience,
and of the deepest penetration; because, in many cases, they would be able to ﬁnd
good reasons for believing testimony, which the weak and the ignorant could not
discover.
INQUIRY INTO THE HUMAN MIND
237

In a word, if credulity were the effect of reasoning and experience, it must
grow up and gather strength, in the same proportion as reason and experience
do. But, if it is the gift of Nature, it will be strongest in childhood, and limited and
restrained by experience; and the most superﬁcial view of human life shews, that
the last is really the case, and not the ﬁrst.
It is the intention of Nature, that we should be carried in arms before we are
able to walk upon our legs; and it is likewise the intention of Nature, that our
belief should be guided by the authority and reason of others, before it can be
guided by our own reason. The weakness of the infant, and the natural affection
of the mother, plainly indicate the former; and the natural credulity of youth, and
authority of age, as plainly indicate the latter. The infant, by proper nursing, and
care, acquires strength to walk without support. Reason hath likewise her
infancy, when she must be carried in arms: then she leans entirely upon authority,
by natural instinct, as if she was conscious of her own weakness; and, without
this support, she becomes vertiginous. When brought to maturity by proper cul-
ture, she begins to feel her own strength, and leans less upon the reason of others;
she learns to suspect testimony in some cases, and to disbelieve it in others; and
sets bounds to that authority to which she was at ﬁrst entirely subject. But still, to
the end of life, she ﬁnds a necessity of borrowing light from testimony, where she
has none within herself, and of leaning, in some degree, upon the reason of
others, where she is conscious of her own imbecility.
And as, in many instances, Reason, even in her maturity, borrows aid from
testimony, so in others she mutually gives aid to it, and strengthens its authority.
For, as we ﬁnd good reason to reject testimony in some cases, so in others we ﬁnd
good reason to rely upon it with perfect security, in our most important concerns.
The character, the number, and the disinterestedness of witnesses, the impossibil-
ity of collusion, and the incredibility of their concurring in their testimony with-
out collusion, may give an irresistible strength to testimony, compared to which
its native and intrinsic authority is very inconsiderable.
QUESTIONS
1
What does Reid mean by “natural language”?
2
Give an example of “acquired perception.”
3
According to Reid, the “Author of Nature” has implanted two principles in us to
enable the sharing of knowledge. What are those two principles?
4
According to Reid, is reliance on testimony a good way to gain knowledge?
THOMAS REID
238

C.A.J. Coady, “Testimony and Observation”
In answer to the question “Why do you believe that?” or “How do you know
that?” it is proper to make such replies as “I saw it” or “It follows from this” or
“It usually happens like that” or “Jones told me so.” There may be more than
these four kinds of reply possible (e.g., “It’s a matter of insight,” “I remember it,”
“I intuited it”) and there may be more than one way of interpreting or taking any
of them. Nonetheless there are at least these four kinds of reply possible and there
are at least four standard ways of interpreting them which give rise to four prima
facie categories of evidence: observation, deductive inference, inductive infer-
ence, and testimony. The ﬁrst three have had a great deal of attention paid to
them in philosophy but the fourth has been relatively neglected.1 I hope to do
something toward repairing that neglect; a neglect which certainly cannot have
arisen from the insigniﬁcance of the role played by testimony in the forming of
beliefs in the community since as Hume notes: “. . . there is no species of reason-
ing more common, more useful, and even necessary to human life, than that
which is derived from the testimony of men and the reports of eye-witnesses and
spectators.”2
Hume is, indeed, one of the few philosophers I have read who has offered
anything like a sustained account of testimony and if any view has a claim to the
title of “the received view” it is his. In what follows I shall examine and criticize
Hume’s position in the hope of throwing light on more general issues concerning
the nature and status of testimony. Hume’s account of the matter is offered in his
essay on Miracles which is Sect. 10 of An Enquiry Concerning Human Under-
standing. Essentially his theory constitutes a reduction of testimony as a form of
evidence or support to the status of a species (one might almost say, a mutation)
of inductive inference. And, again, insofar as inductive inference is reduced by
Hume to a species of observation and consequences attendant upon observations
then in a like fashion testimony meets the same fate. So we ﬁnd him saying
immediately after the piece quoted above:
This species of reasoning, perhaps, one may deny to be founded on the
relation of cause and effect. I shall not dispute about a word. It will be
sufﬁcient to observe that our assurance in any argument of this kind is
derived from no other principle than our observation of the veracity of
C.A.J. Coady, “Testimony and Observation,” American Philosophical Quarterly 10
(1973): 149–55.
239

human testimony, and of the usual conformity of facts to the reports of
witnesses. It being a general maxim, that no objects have any discoverable
connexion together, and that all the inferences, which we can draw from
one to another, are founded merely on our experience of their constant and
regular conjunction; it is evident that we ought not to make an exception to
this maxim in favour of human testimony, whose connexion with any event
seems, in itself, as little necessary as any other. (p. 111.)
And elsewhere in the same essay he says:
The reason why we place any credit in witnesses and historians, is not
derived from any connexion, which we perceive a priori, between testi-
mony and reality, but because we are accustomed to ﬁnd a conformity
between them.” (p. 113.)
This is the view that I want to contest and, as it is convenient to have a label, I
shall call it the Reductionist Thesis and shall employ the abbreviation R.T. to
refer to it. My criticism begins by calling attention to a fatal ambiguity in the use
of terms like “experience” and “observation” in the Humean statement of R.T.
We are told by Hume that we only trust in testimony because experience has
shown it to be reliable but where experience means individual observation and
the expectations it gives rise to, this seems plainly false and, on the other hand,
where it means common experience (i.e., the reliance upon the observations of
others) it is surely question-begging. To take the second horn of the dilemma
ﬁrst—let us call it R.T.2—we ﬁnd Hume speaking of “our observation of the
veracity of human testimony” and “our experience of their constant and regular
conjunction.” And it is clear enough that Hume often means to refer by such
phrases to the common experience of mankind and not to the mere solitary
observations of David Hume. Our reliance upon testimony as an institution, so to
speak, is supposed to be based on the same kind of footing as our reliance upon
laws of nature (Hume thinks of this as an important premiss in his critique of
miracles) and he speaks of the “ﬁrm and unalterable experience” which has
established these laws. It is an important part of his argument that a miracle must
be a violation of the laws of nature and so he says:
It is no miracle that a man, seemingly in good health, should die on a
sudden: because such a kind of death, though more unusual than any other,
has yet been frequently observed to happen. But it is a miracle that a dead
man should come to life; because that has never been observed in any age or
country. There must therefore be a uniform experience against every
miraculous event, otherwise the event would not merit that appellation.
(p. 115.)
We may ignore, for our purposes here, the validity of this highly debatable
account of a law of nature and the blatant question-begging of his “never been
observed in any age or country” and yet gather from this extract the need Hume
has to mean by “experience,” “observation,” and the like, the common experi-
ence of mankind. Clearly his argument does not turn on the fact, for instance,
C.A.J. COADY
240

that he has “frequently observed” the sudden death of a man “seemingly in good
health”—it is quite likely that Hume (like most of us) never had occasion to
observe personally anything of the kind. And the point is surely clinched by his
reference to “uniform experience” and his use of the phrase “observed in any age
or country.”
Evidently then, R.T., as actually argued by Hume, is involved in vicious circu-
larity since the experience upon which our reliance upon testimony as a form of
evidence is supposed to rest is itself reliant upon testimony which cannot itself be
reduced in the same way. The idea of taking seriously someone else’s observa-
tions, someone else’s experience, already requires us to take their testimony (in
this case, reports of what they observe) equally seriously. It is ludicrous to talk of
their observations being the major part of our justiﬁcation in taking their reports
seriously when we have to take their reports seriously in order to know what
their observations are.
Hume’s conﬂation of personal and communal observation can be further illus-
trated by a passage from the Treatise of Human Nature (Bk. I, Pt. IV, Sect. II).
Discussing our reasons for believing in the continued, independent existence of
material things, he says:
I receive a letter, which, upon opening it, I perceive by the handwriting and
subscription to have come from a friend, who says he is two hundred
leagues distant. It is evident I can never account for this phenomenon,
conformable to my experience in other instances, without spreading out in
my mind the whole sea and continent between us, and supposing the effects
and continued existence of posts and ferries, according to my memory and
observation. (p. 196, Selby-Bigge edition.)
Here we have Hume using “my” observation when he is clearly not entitled to do
so since there is probably no single person who has personally observed the
complete path of even one letter from the moment it leaves the sender’s hand to
the moment it reaches its destination. Hume might have observed postmen, posts,
ferries, etc., but his beliefs about what they do (his belief in the postal system) is
dependent upon a complicated web of testimony, a highlight among which
would no doubt be what he was told by his teachers or parents. And yet, “my
memory and observation.” How easy it is to appropriate at a very fundamental
level what is known by report and what is known by personal observation.
Similarly, that babies are born of women in a certain way is known to all of us
and it is a fact of observation but very few of us have ever observed it for
ourselves.
So much for the second part of the dilemma but what of the ﬁrst part—let us
call it R.T.1 Surely we can, on Hume’s behalf, retract his incautious commitment
to common experience and state the R.T. in terms of personal observations alone.
My claim was that so stated R.T.1 is plainly false but this has yet to be shown.
R.T.1 would run something like this:
We rely upon testimony as a species of evidence because each of us observes
for himself a constant and regular conjunction between what people report
and the way the world is. More particularly, we each observe for ourselves
“TESTIMONY AND OBSERVATION”
241

a constant conjunction between kinds of report and kinds of situation so
that we have good inductive grounds for expecting this conjunction to
continue in the future.
My justiﬁcation for bringing in the idea of a kind of report correlating with a
kind of situation is Hume himself:
And as the evidence, derived from witnesses and human testimony, is
founded on past experience, so it varies with the experience, and is
regarded either as a proof or a probability according as the conjunction
between any particular kind of report and any kind of object has been
found to be constant or variable. (p. 112.)
Now I characterized this sort of position as “plainly false” because it seems
absurd to suggest that, individually, we have done anything like the amount of
ﬁeldwork that R.T.1 requires. As mentioned earlier, most of us have never seen a
baby born nor have we examined the circulation of the blood nor the actual
geography of the world nor any fair sample of the laws of the land nor have we
made the observations that lie behind our knowledge that the lights in the sky are
heavenly bodies immensely distant nor a vast number of other observations that
R.T.1 would seem to require. Some people have of course made them for us but
we are precluded from taking any solace from this fact under the present inter-
pretation of R.T. So it was this general situation that made me speak of R.T.1 as
plainly false.
But the matter is perhaps more complex than such a characterization would
indicate as can be seen by considering a possible rejoinder by the defenders of
R.T.1. This rejoinder might run as follows: “You are ignoring the very important
provision, made by Hume, that the conjunction in individual experience is
between kinds of report and kinds of object. This cuts down the amount of
observing that has to be done and makes the project a manageable one for an
individual.” I think I may reasonably plead “not guilty” to this accusation inas-
much as I intended the list above (of conjunctions never checked personally by
most of us) to be more than a recital of particular conjunctions that R.T.1 requires
us to have personally checked. The list was supposed to be typical in the sense that it
indicated areas in which we rightly accept testimony without ever having engaged
in the sort of checking of reports against personal observation that R.T.1 demands.
But quite apart from this, there seem to me to be serious difﬁculties in the very
idea of ﬁnding constant conjunctions between (in Hume’s words) “any particular
kind of report and any kind of object.” Hume wants these conjunctions to be
something like the kinds of conjunctions he thinks are required to establish causal
laws and even laws of nature. In such matters the decisive constant conjunctions
are between one kind of object and another kind of object. But whatever we think
about the idea of a kind of object, the notion of a kind of report surely requires
some explanation in this context. Unfortunately Hume does nothing to provide
such an explanation and since the matter is also of interest in its own right I shall
risk a digression to consider some possible interpretations and their implications
before turning to a different, and perhaps more decisive, difﬁculty for the type of
approach represented by R.T.1.
C.A.J. COADY
242

It seems to me that “kind of report” may be meant to refer either to the kind of
speaker who gives the report or to the kind of content the report contains. If it is
the former that is intended (and some of Hume’s remarks seem to indicate this)
then presumably the kind of speaker will not be determined by such consider-
ations as color of skin or nationality or hair-style or height, rather, the relevant
kind will have something to do with authority or expertise or credentials to say.
So the R.T.1 would go something like: We rely upon testimony because we have
each personally observed a correlation between expert (or authoritative) reports
and the kinds of situations reported in a large number of cases.
But the major difﬁculty for this interpretation is that a man’s being an expert
or an authority on some matter cannot be a matter of mere inspection in the way
that his being white or tall is. That some man is an expert on, say, geography or
South East Asian politics, is either known on the testimony of others (by far the
most usual case) or it has to be established by observing some high correlation
between his reports and the relevant situations in the world. If the former then we
are no further advanced upon the R.T. program of justiﬁcation since the same
problem of establishing expertise must arise again and again. But if the latter,
then the notion of an authority or an expert no longer provides us with any
speciﬁcation of a kind of report. That is to say, we cannot use the idea of a kind of
report as equivalent to report of a kind of speaker and then proceed to validate
testimony along the lines of R.T.1 because the kind of correlation situation the
existence of which we would supposedly be investigating would have to be known
by us to exist already before we could set up the terms of the investigation.3
This indicates that the business of establishing constant conjunctions between
kinds of report and kinds of situation must begin with the interpretation of
“kinds of report” as “reports of kinds of situation.” And certainly this seems to
be a natural way of interpreting Hume’s intentions at this point. An initial prob-
lem for this interpretation concerns the degree of generality that should attach to
the content of a report before it qualiﬁes as a kind of report. That is to say, some
sort of decision would presumably be required as to whether or not the report
“There is a sick lion in Taronga Park Zoo” belonged to the kind medical report
or geographical report or empirical report or existence report. Perhaps it could be
said to belong to all of them or to some and not to others but whatever was said it
would be of considerable importance to the establishing of conjunctions, since a
decision here is a decision about the actual identity of the conjunctions and
hence, in consequence, about the degree of correlation likely to be established.
For instance, if the report were treated as belonging to the kind “existence
report” then it might be that Jones had personally established quite a large num-
ber of conjunctions between existence reports and the relevant existence situ-
ations without this being any real reason for accepting the report in question.
(Compare with: “There is a Martian in my study” which is equally well sup-
ported by Jones’s personal experience of existence reports.) On the other hand, if
it were treated as a medical report then Jones may have had very little personal
experience of correlations between medical reports and medical facts yet this
would hardly be a real reason for not accepting the report. In addition, Jones
would, on Hume’s hypothesis, now have a strong reason for accepting the report
if he classiﬁes it one way and no reason for accepting it if he classiﬁes it another
way. Since either classiﬁcation is logically permissible then it seems to be purely a
“TESTIMONY AND OBSERVATION”
243

matter of whim whether Jones has or has not good reason for accepting the
report. Clearly some sort of non-arbitrary restriction on the scope of “report of a
kind of situation” is required to make this notion of any real value in the elabor-
ation of R.T.1. Here, however, I shall pursue no further the interpretation of
“kind of report” and the difﬁculties involved in specifying clearly the sort of
correlations required by R.T.1 because, on the perhaps dubious assumption that
the difﬁculties are soluble, I want to raise what seems to me to be a more funda-
mental problem.
This difﬁculty consists in the fact that the whole enterprise of R.T.1 in its
present form requires that we understand what testimony is independently of
knowing that it is, in general, a reliable form of evidence about the way the world
is. This is, of course, the point of Hume’s saying:
The reason why we place any credit in witnesses and historians, is not
derived from any connexion, which we perceive a priori, between testi-
mony and reality, but because we are accustomed to ﬁnd a conformity
between them. (p. 113.)
It is a clear implication from this that we might have discovered (though in fact
we did not) that there was no conformity at all between testimony and reality.
Hume’s position requires the possibility that we clearly isolate the reports that
people make about the world for comparison by personal observation with the
actual state of the world and ﬁnd a high, low, or no correlation between them.
But it is by no means clear that we can understand this suggestion. To take the
most extreme discovery: imagine a world in which an extensive survey yields no
correlation between reports and (individually observed) facts. In such a colossally
topsy-turvy world what evidence would there possibly be for the existence of
reports at all? Imagine a community of Martians who are in the mess that R.T.1
allows as a possibility. Let us suppose for the moment that they have a language
which we can translate (there are difﬁculties in this supposition as we shall see
shortly) with names for distinguishable things in their environment and suitable
predicative equipment. We ﬁnd, however, to our astonishment, that whenever
they construct sentences addressed to each other in the absence (from their vicin-
ity) of the things designated by the names but when they are, as we should think,
in a position to report then they seem to say what we (more synoptically placed)
can observe to be false. But in such a situation there would be no reason to believe
that they even had the practice of reporting. There would be no behavior or
setting for what we know as reporting. There would, for instance, be no reliance
upon the utterances of others; just this curious fantasy practice rather like the
fantasy games of children (“Mummy, there’s a burglar in the house”) but general-
ized to the stage where we can discern no point in the activity at all, even a
parasitic point. The supposition that reports could be divorced from reality in
this way is like the supposition that orders might never be obeyed. If there were
Martians who uttered certain sounds in a tone of voice like the tone we use in
ordering we might initially conjecture that they were issuing orders in making
these sounds but this conjecture would just be refuted if it were found that these
sounds never had any effect that might be described as obedience upon any
audience.
C.A.J. COADY
244

But actually the situation with reporting and testifying is even worse than this
because the supposed Martian community seem to be in trouble even about the
content of the utterances that are alleged to be non-correlated reports. The ques-
tion of the meaning or content of what they say in their alleged reports is of great
importance because the task of looking for a correlation or conjunction of the
Humean type is dependent upon knowing what state of affairs is supposed to
correlate with the utterance. The principle of correlation has to be given by the
meaning of the utterances because, after all, any utterance is correlated with or
conjoined to any situation according to some principle of matching. So, even if
we allow, for the sake of argument, that we can understand what it is for the
Martians to engage in reporting, we cannot accept the coherence of the no-
correlation story unless we can understand what Martian reports actually say.
But it is precisely here that serious difﬁculties arise and to see how they arise we
must look more closely at the supposed Martian situation.
Although I have not tried to deﬁne testimony (and there are problems facing
any such attempt) it should be clear that, on any plausible deﬁnition, a very high
proportion of the statements made by a community over a sample period will
have to be testimony statements. These utterances will contrast with such speech
episodes as soliloquies, musings, and conjectures. In the Martian community a
common vocabulary is employed across different speech acts so that, as with us,
the same form of words may be used for either conjecture or testimony (e.g., “He
pushed her in”) although there may also be speech-act indicators available of an
Austinian or Searlean form (“I testify that . . . ,” “I conjecture that . . .”). Suppose
then that we encounter a Martian who uses the utterance “Kar do gnos u grin” in
the presence of a tree in a garden. Perhaps he waves a languid hand at the tree as
he does so. We speculate that this utterance means, can be translated as, “There is
a tree in the garden” and, in particular, that “gnos” means “tree.”4 We then ﬁnd,
however, that the Martian frequently uses “gnos” in remarks in situations not
involving the presence of a tree in his observational vicinity. Some few of these
remarks we assess as mere conjectures (and I shall ignore the problems raised by
the question of how this assessment is made) but the majority we decide to be
testimony. So we ﬁnd the Martian saying things of the form: “Kar do gnos u
grin,” “Kar do gnos u bilt,” “Kar do gnos u tonk” and we guess that these mean
“There is a tree in the garden,” “There is a tree in the study,” “There is a tree in
the ﬁeld,” or whatever. But then we ﬁnd that there never is a tree in the garden or
in the study or in the ﬁeld and that in fact this Martian never uses “gnos” to make
a true statement when he is talking (non-conjecturely) to others about, as it
seems, absent trees. Furthermore, no Martian ever uses “gnos” to make a true
report about absent trees though they make, as we surmise, constant attempts to
do so. Furthermore, no Martian ever contradicts or corrects another Martian
about absent trees on the basis of his own observation or the “testimony” of
others since by hypothesis no testimony ever matches the facts. Surely in this sort
of set-up we would have to conclude that “gnos” did not mean “tree” or that it
did not mean it unambiguously or possibly that the Martians have a device for
negation which we have not yet uncovered (so that “Kar do gnos u grin” really
means “There isn’t a tree in the garden”) or perhaps that the Martians are totally
incomprehensible to us. Indeed this last conclusion would be considerably forti-
ﬁed by the fact that the linguistic chaos described above is generated on behalf of
“TESTIMONY AND OBSERVATION”
245

not just one sound “gnos” that the Martians utter but by every sound which is
supposed to be a word and upon the reference of which the truth or falsity of an
alleged report could turn!
It might be complained at this point that I have not described the Martian
community in sufﬁcient detail and I readily concede that my account of their
circumstances is somewhat sketchy. Possibly an attempt could be made to ﬁll out
such details as whether their non-veridical testimony has the form of a massive
mistake or a massive deception but any such attempt would, I believe, only add
support to my conclusion that their supposed situation is eventually unintelligible
to us. I am content if enough has been said of their plight to raise serious doubts
about the task of identifying the contents of Martian-type reports and hence of
establishing Humean correlations in such a world. The general point here is that
although making true reports with words is not the same thing as using the words
correctly, nonetheless the ability to make true reports with words is connected
with using the words correctly and this ability is something that can only be
exhibited (even to the persons themselves) in the consistent making of true
reports.
There is a further point to be made about the connection of testimony with
meaning. If we take it that teaching someone the meaning of words involves the
giving of reports and testimony then the present form of R.T.1 is in even hotter
water than before since the suggestion that no reports in fact conform to reality
involves the claim that our imagined Martians never report to the Martian chil-
dren the actual use of their words. Here the idea that the Martians have a public
language gets no grip at all.5 I do not intend exploring this difﬁculty any further,
however, since I am not clear whether Hume would regard such remarks as
“‘Cat’ means one of these” or “‘Cat’ is the word for a four-legged etc.” as pieces
of testimony. I think it quite likely that he would insofar as he would probably
regard them as reports upon the empirical fact that such terms are used in a
certain way in a certain community. I do not want to prejudge the question of
whether they are such reports but if they are or if the proponent of R.T. believes
that they are then he has no way at all of setting up the possibility upon which his
theory rests.
Let us summarize our progress to date. From Hume’s account of testimony I
extracted a reductionist thesis which had two forms. I argued that the second
form, R.T.2, which justiﬁed testimony in terms of common experience was circu-
lar and that the ﬁrst form, R.T.1, which justiﬁed testimony in terms of individual
observation was simply false since our reliance upon testimony rightly goes
beyond anything that could be justiﬁed by personal observations. I then con-
sidered the rejoinder that R.T.1 might be more plausible if great weight were put
upon the observation of constant conjunction between kinds of report and kinds
of object and I argued that much was unclear about what was to count as a kind
of report, and hence what was to count as a correlation, for the purposes of R.T.1.
In any case R.T.1 surely requires that any such investigation into conjunctions of
reports with states of affairs might conclude that there were no such correlations
between the two. The supposition that such a situation obtained was pursued for
the purpose of reductio ad absurdum and I argued that in such a situation, (a)
there could be no such things as reports, (b) even if there were reports, there could
be no way of establishing Humean correlations or non-correlations since there
C.A.J. COADY
246

could be no way of determining the contents of the alleged reports in order to
correlate them, and (c) the idea of a public language seems undermined.
Am I then saying, in opposition to Hume, that there is an a priori connection
between testimony and reality? An answer to this question would have to rely on
a comprehensive theory of knowledge which could determine the conditions
under which an a priori connection holds between some x and reality and hence
not only whether there is such a connection between testimony and reality but
also whether such a connection holds, say, between perception and reality. I
cannot provide such a theory here but I do not understand the idea that testimony
could exist in a community and yet it be possible to discover empirically that it
had no “connection with reality.” Hence, I suspect that the problem of justifying
testimony is a pseudo-problem and that the evidence of testimony constitutes a
fundamental category of evidence which is not reducible to, or justiﬁable in terms
of, such other basic categories as observation or deductive inference. This opin-
ion I have not proved but if my argument so far is correct then there is no sense
to the idea of justifying testimony by observation, at least where this involves
anything like a search for Humean correlations.6
Now, of course, none of this sloganizing means that there is no such thing as
mistaken or lying testimony and it is, I think, the fact that there are conditions
and circumstances under which we disregard the reports of witnesses which
Hume sees as providing support for R.T. independently of his methodological
doctrine that there can be no necessary connection between any one object (or
kind of object) and any other object (or kind of object).
Were not the memory tenacious to a certain degree, had not men commonly
an inclination to truth and a principle of probity; were they not sensible to
shame, when detected in a falsehood: Were not these, I say, discovered by
experience to be qualities, inherent in human nature, we should never
repose the least conﬁdence in human testimony. A man delirious, or noted
for falsehood and villany, has no manner of authority with us. (p. 112.)
Hume’s argument is not fully explicit here but he seems to be claiming that
since we sometimes discover by observation and experience that some testimony
is unreliable (i.e., “A man delirious or noted for falsehood or villainy has no
manner of authority with us”) then we must discover the general reliability of
testimony by the same method. But this surely has only to be stated to be seen to
be invalid for the fact that observation can sometimes uncover false testimony
does nothing toward showing that the general reliability of testimony depends
upon observation in the way R.T. requires.
Furthermore, the fact that observation will sometimes lead us to reject some
piece of testimony needs to be set against two other facts, namely—
(a) That other testimony sometimes leads us to reject some piece of testimony
without personal observation entering into the matter. Consider, for instance,
Hume’s very example of the man noted for delirium or falsehood or villainy.
(b) That testimony sometimes leads us to reject some piece of observation.
There are many different sorts of cases here. In philosophical discussions about
people who “see” a table in front of them in optimum observational conditions
but become convinced that there is no table there because everyone around them
“TESTIMONY AND OBSERVATION”
247

says there isn’t. Less fancifully, this case springs from those in which the testi-
mony of others assures us that we are or are not hallucinating. Furthermore, there
are often situations where we accept correction of our ordinary mis-observations
from the reports of others:—“Look at that herd of cows,” “They’re not cows
they’re rock formations.” Or we observe a scufﬂe between three men and the
upshot is that one of them is stabbed. There were four of us observing it and I
hold that the man stabbed himself but the others maintain stoutly that one of the
other two, namely Smith, delivered the blow. I capitulate. Surely this could be the
reasonable thing to do in some circumstances. Indeed, it would seem equally as
valid, on Hume’s line of argument, to claim that since testimony sometimes leads
us to abandon an observation then we rely upon observation in general only
because we have established its reliability on the basis of testimony. But I think
Hume would hardly be happy with this employment of his mode of argument.
Notes
1
A notable non-neglector is Professor H.H. Price who has discussed the issue in
his recent book, Belief (London: Allen & Unwin, 1969). His chapter on this (“The
Evidence of Testimony”) has a quite different orientation to my discussion
although he shows himself to be well aware of some of those defects in the
traditional approach to which I shall be directing attention. Sydney Shoemaker
also touches upon some of the issues discussed here in ch. 6 of his book Self-
Knowledge and Self-Identity (Ithaca: N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1963).
Although Shoemaker is not primarily concerned with testimony he does, as I do,
reject the idea that the validity of testimony could be established by observation.
His arguments, however, are very different from mine and reﬂect his basic con-
cern with certain problems of self-knowledge and memory. They also reﬂect
certain Wittgensteinian assumptions about memory, language, and philosophy
which I do not wish either to discuss or employ in what follows.
2
Sect. 88, David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1957). All quotations hereafter from this work are taken from L. A.
Selby-Bigge’s Second Edition of the Enquiries published by Clarendon Press,
Oxford. Bracketed page references in my text are to that edition.
3
It may appear that part of this difﬁculty could be met by recourse to the qualiﬁca-
tion “report of a so-called expert” but this is mere appearance since we require
some assurance that we are checking the reports of those who are not merely
self-styled experts but widely acknowledged as such and this sort of assurance
could only be had by reliance upon testimony.
4
There is perhaps a problem in working out what he is up to and hence a puzzle as
to how we are even entitled to speculate that his utterance means this but
suppose that there is enough about his behavior to permit us to conclude that he
is soliloquizing in the fashion of one who is struck by the existence of that
particular tree in that particular garden.
5
The problem arises dramatically in the teaching situation but it might be
objected that it is a merely contingent fact that languages are acquired by teach-
ing. I am not altogether clear about the import here of the phrase “a merely
contingent fact” but in any event essentially the same difﬁculty arises in the
correction situation. It is surely unimaginable that a community could operate a
C.A.J. COADY
248

common language without the resources for correcting the inevitable
divergences from correct use.
6
I have not of course proved that our reliance on testimony may not be “justiﬁed”
in some other manner. Russell, for one, has attempted (in Human Knowledge Its
Scope and Limits [New York: Simon and Schuster, 1948]) to justify testimony by
recourse to a principle of analogy and Price (op. cit.) by recourse to a methodo-
logical rule. I hope it is clear from what has been said in this paper, however,
that such attempts face very serious difﬁculties, some of which are simple exten-
sions of the difﬁculties faced by Hume.
QUESTIONS
1
What is R.T.?
2
What are R.T.1 and R.T.2?
3
According to Coady, what is the basic problem with R.T.2?
4
What is the basic problem with R.T.1?
5
Does Coady think there could be a society in which people’s reports are gener-
ally false?
FURTHER READING ON TESTIMONY
Audi, Robert, “The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of Knowledge and Justiﬁcation,”
American Philosophical Quarterly 34 (1997): 405–22.
Burge, Tyler, “Content Preservation,” Philosophical Review 102 (1993): 457–88.
Christensen, David and Hilary Kornblith, “Testimony, Memory and the Limits of the ‘A
Priori,’” Philosophical Studies 86 (1997): 1–20.
Coady, C.A.J., Testimony: A Philosophical Study (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992).
Graham, Peter, “The Reliability of Testimony,” Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 61 (2000): 695–709.
Holder, Rodney, “Hume on Miracles: Bayesian Interpretation, Multiple Testimony,
and the Existence of God,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 49 (1998):
49–65.
Lyons, Jack, “Testimony, Induction and Folk Psychology,” Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 75 (1997): 163–78.
Owens, David, Reason without Freedom (London: Routledge, 2000).
Sobel, Jordan-Howard, “Hume’s Theorem on Testimony Sufﬁcient to Establish a
Miracle,” Philosophical Quarterly 41 (1991): 229–37.
“TESTIMONY AND OBSERVATION”
249


PART II
THE STRUCTURE AND
GROWTH OF JUSTIFICATION
AND KNOWLEDGE


5
INFERENCE IN GENERAL
The readings in this chapter discuss some miscellaneous issues about the nature of
reasoning.
Lewis Carroll’s well-known (to philosophers) story about Achilles and the Tortoise
implicitly illustrates the distinction between premises in an argument and rules of
inference. When a person makes an inference, say, from premises A and B to conclu-
sion Z, it seems that they must be aware of the logical relationship between the
premises and the conclusion—that is, it seems that they must know that if A and B
are true, Z is; otherwise, they would not accept the inference. Lewis Carroll’s story
shows, however, that if we think of this knowledge as an additional premise the
person must accept, then an inﬁnite regress ensues.
Richard Fumerton’s article addresses the question of the conditions under which
a person is justiﬁed in believing one thing on the basis of another. He comes to this
question from the consideration of a particular problem facing indirect realist theor-
ies of perceptual knowledge. Indirect realism (which Fumerton calls “empiricism,”
but note that he is using this term in a different sense from that used in Chapter 3
of this volume) holds that we are justiﬁed in believing claims about the physical
world on the basis of facts about the character of our own sensory experiences,
where experiences are understood as states or events going on in our own minds
(see Chapter 1). The problem is that people do not typically even entertain proposi-
tions about the character of their sensory experiences as they go about the world;
they just think about the physical objects around them. It is unclear how one can say
their physical object beliefs are justiﬁed by propositions that they do not even
consider.
Fumerton offers two possible solutions to this. The ﬁrst solution is to maintain that
dispositional beliefs may provide inferential justiﬁcation for other beliefs. A disposi-
tional belief (as opposed to an occurrent belief) is a belief that one is not presently
consciously entertaining. For example, you undoubtedly believe that six is less than
ten, although you were not consciously thinking of that proposition until I just men-
tioned it. Before I mentioned the proposition, then, you dispositionally believed that
six is less than ten. Fumerton suggests that a person dispositionally believes some-
thing if they would believe it (occurrently) if they considered it. This helps with the
indirect realist’s problem, since the indirect realist may maintain that people disposi-
tionally believe many propositions about their experiences, even though we do not
consciously entertain these propositions, and that these dispositional beliefs (or
dispositions to believe) cause us to accept propositions about the physical world.
Fumerton’s second proposed solution is to maintain that our beliefs about the
253

physical world are based on facts about sensory experiences only in the sense that
facts about sensory experiences cause us to accept physical-object propositions and
are in fact good evidence for physical-object propositions. Fumerton’s deﬁnitions D1
and D2 provide two possible accounts of the nature of inferential justiﬁcation.
David Hume, characteristically, provides a skeptical perspective on inferential jus-
tiﬁcation. He seems to argue that a person can never be justiﬁed in believing anything
on the basis of argument. The major stages of his argument are as follows. First, he
argues that any piece of reasoning is fallible; there is always at least some chance of
our making a mistake. To see this, note (a) that if you have just completed a compli-
cated, 50-page proof, it would not be rational to believe the conclusion with complete
certainty, without at least checking it over and perhaps showing it to others; and (b)
that a long and complicated proof just consists of a series of short, simple steps—or
in other words, it is equivalent to a series of short proofs. Therefore, if a complicated
proof is prone to error, then short proofs are also subject to error (the probability of
error increases with the length of the proof).
Second, Hume argues that because of this, one should always lower one’s level of
conﬁdence in the conclusion of any argument, according to one’s estimate of the
probability that one made a mistake in the argument. However, Hume says, one’s
estimate of the probability of error may itself be in error. So one should estimate the
probability of an error in one’s ﬁrst estimate of the probability of error. But one’s
second estimate may be in error . . . This leads to an inﬁnite series of corrections. At
each stage, Hume thinks, we should lower our conﬁdence in our original conclusion,
until eventually it is “reduc’d to nothing.”
Hume’s argument seems to be self-defeating, since it concludes that no argu-
ment, including itself, can justify anything. But note that Hume is not trying to con-
vince us to give up accepting conclusions of arguments. He is trying to show that the
causes of our beliefs—even when we are convinced by arguments—are not rational,
but (as we remarked in the introduction to Chapter 1) he did not consider this a
problem.
Lastly, Hilary Kornblith considers a more practically oriented kind of skepticism.
Although he does not endorse the argument, Kornblith considers an argument for the
conclusion that, in some areas at least, one should avoid reasoning things through.
The reason is that human reasoning may be strongly infected by bias, with the result
that clever reasoners succeed only in providing themselves with rationalizations for
holding onto beliefs that they are attracted to for non-rational reasons. Much of this is
unconscious; most people do not think they are rationalizing when they are.
For instance, a person who has a pro-capital punishment bias and is intelligent will
likely be able to come up with reasons for doubting the validity of the studies that
tend to show that capital punishment has no deterrent effect, and will also likely be
able to come up with arguments to counter any criticisms of the studies that tend to
show that it has a signiﬁcant deterrent effect. When evidence is ambiguous or very
complex, an intelligent person can generally construct a seemingly logical case for
whichever side he wants to defend; thus, the practice of reasoning may prove to be
useless, or even harmful, from the standpoint of the goal of getting to the truth. But
while Kornblith recognizes this as a signiﬁcant problem, he does not believe that we
should therefore give up reasoning. Instead, he thinks that we can to a large extent
counter the effects of bias through the practice of engaging in public debate with
people with a variety of viewpoints, in the hopes that the various biases of different
PART II: STRUCTURE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
254

people will in effect cancel each other out. Kornblith notes that whether this works or
not is an empirical question (it depends upon the characteristics of our present
intellectual community), so that the question of to what extent we should trust
reasoning is also empirical.
INFERENCE IN GENERAL
255

Lewis Carroll, “What the Tortoise said to Achilles”
Achilles had overtaken the Tortoise, and had seated himself comfortably on its
back.
“So you’ve got to the end of our race-course?” said the Tortoise. “Even though
it does consist of an inﬁnite series of distances? I thought some wiseacre or other
had proved that the thing couldn’t be done?”
“It can be done,” said Achilles. “It has been done! Solvitur ambulando. You
see the distances were constantly diminishing; and so—”
“But if they had been constantly increasing?” the Tortoise interrupted. “How
then?”
“Then I shouldn’t be here,” Achilles modestly replied; “and you would have
got several times round the world, by this time!”
“You ﬂatter me—ﬂatten, I mean,” said the Tortoise; “for you are a heavy
weight, and no mistake! Well now, would you like to hear of a race-course, that
most people fancy they can get to the end of in two or three steps, while it really
consists of an inﬁnite number of distances, each one longer than the previous
one?”
“Very much indeed!” said the Grecian warrior, as he drew from his helmet
(few Grecian warriors possessed pockets in those days) an enormous note-book
and a pencil. “Proceed! And speak slowly, please! Shorthand isn’t invented yet!”
“That beautiful First Proposition of Euclid!” the Tortoise murmured dreamily.
“You admire Euclid?”
“Passionately! So far, at least, as one can admire a treatise that wo’n’t be
published for some centuries to come!”
“Well, now, let’s take a little bit of the argument in that First Proposition—just
two steps, and the conclusion drawn from them. Kindly enter them in your note-
book. And in order to refer to them conveniently, let’s call them A, B, and Z:—
(A) Things that are equal to the same are equal to each other.
(B) The two sides of this Triangle are things that are equal to the same.
(Z) The two sides of this Triangle are equal to each other.
Readers of Euclid will grant, I suppose, that Z follows logically from A and B,
so that any one who accepts A and B as true, must accept Z as true?”
“Undoubtedly! The youngest child in a High School—as soon as High Schools
are invented, which will not be till some two thousand years later—will grant
that.”
Lewis Carroll, “What the Tortoise said to Achilles,” Mind 4 (1895): 278–80.
256

“And if some reader had not yet accepted A and B as true, he might still accept
the sequence as a valid one, I suppose?”
“No doubt such a reader might exist. He might say ‘I accept as true the Hypo-
thetical Proposition that, if A and B be true, Z must be true; but, I don’t accept A
and B as true.’ Such a reader would do wisely in abandoning Euclid, and taking
to football.”
“And might there not also be some reader who would say ‘I accept A and B as
true, but I don’t accept the Hypothetical’?”
“Certainly there might. He, also, had better take to football.”
“And neither of these readers,” the Tortoise continued, “is as yet under any
logical necessity to accept Z as true?”
“Quite so,” Achilles assented.
“Well, now, I want you to consider me as a reader of the second kind, and to
force me, logically, to accept Z as true.”
“A tortoise playing football would be—” Achilles was beginning
“—an anomaly, of course,” the Tortoise hastily interrupted. “Don’t wander
from the point. Let’s have Z ﬁrst, and football afterwards!”
“I’m to force you to accept Z, am I?” Achilles said musingly. “And your
present position is that you accept A and B, but you don’t accept the
Hypothetical—”
“Let’s call it C,” said the Tortoise.
“—but you don’t accept
(C) If A and B are true, Z must be true.”
“That is my present position,” said the Tortoise.
“Then I must ask you to accept C.”
“I’ll do so,” said the Tortoise, “as soon as you’ve entered it in that note-book
of yours. What else have you got in it?”
“Only a few memoranda,” said Achilles, nervously ﬂuttering the leaves: “a few
memoranda of—of the battles in which I have distinguished myself!”
“Plenty of blank leaves, I see!” the Tortoise cheerily remarked. “We shall need
them all!” (Achilles shuddered.) “Now write as I dictate:—
(A) Things that are equal to the same are equal to each other.
(B) The two sides of this Triangle are things that are equal to the same.
(C) If A and B are true, Z must be true.
(Z) The two sides of this Triangle are equal to each other.”
“You should call it D, not Z,” said Achilles. “It comes next to the other three.
If you accept A and B and C, you must accept Z.”
“And why must I?”
“Because it follows logically from them. If A and B and C are true, Z must be
true. You don’t dispute that, I imagine?”
“If A and B and C are true, Z must be true,” the Tortoise thoughtfully
repeated. “That’s another Hypothetical, isn’t it? And, if I failed to see its truth, I
might accept A and B and C, and still not accept Z, mightn’t I?”
“You might,” the candid hero admitted; “though such obtuseness would cer-
tainly be phenomenal. Still, the event is possible. So I must ask you to grant one
more Hypothetical.”
“Very good. I’m quite willing to grant it, as soon as you’ve written it down. We
will call it
“WHAT THE TORTOISE SAID TO ACHILLES”
257

(D) If A and B and C are true, Z must be true.
Have you entered that in your note-book?”
“I have!” Achilles joyfully exclaimed, as he ran the pencil into its sheath. “And
at last we’ve got to the end of this ideal race-course! Now that you accept A and B
and C and D, of course you accept Z.”
“Do I?” said the Tortoise innocently. “Let’s make that quite clear. I accept A
and B and C and D. Suppose I still refused to accept Z?”
“Then Logic would take you by the throat, and force you to do it!” Achilles
triumphantly replied. “Logic would tell you ‘You ca’n’t help yourself. Now that
you’ve accepted A and B and C and D, you must accept Z!’ So you’ve no choice,
you see.”
“Whatever Logic is good enough to tell me is worth writing down,” said the
Tortoise. “So enter it in your book, please. We will call it
(E) If A and B and C and D are true, Z must be true. Until I’ve granted that, of
course I needn’t grant Z. So it’s quite a necessary step, you see?”
“I see,” said Achilles; and there was a touch of sadness in his tone.
Here the narrator, having pressing business at the Bank, was obliged to leave
the happy pair, and did not again pass the spot until some months afterwards.
When he did so, Achilles was still seated on the back of the much-enduring
Tortoise, and was writing in his note-book, which appeared to be nearly full. The
Tortoise was saying “Have you got that last step written down? Unless I’ve lost
count, that makes a thousand and one. There are several millions more to come.
And would you mind; as a personal favour, considering what a lot of instruction
this colloquy of ours will provide for the Logicians of the Nineteenth Century—
would you mind adopting a pun that my cousin the Mock-Turtle will then make,
and allowing yourself to be re-named Taught-Us?”
“As you please!” replied the weary warrior, in the hollow tones of despair, as
he buried his face in his hands. “Provided that you, for your part, will adopt a
pun the Mock-Turtle never made, and allow yourself to be re-named A Kill-
Ease!”
QUESTIONS
1
What would step F in Achilles’ argument be?
2
How many steps does Achilles have to go through in order to reach his conclu-
sion Z?
LEWIS CARROLL
258

Richard Fumerton, “Inferential Justiﬁcation
and Empiricism”
In this paper I shall attempt to draw certain important distinctions between the
senses in which one can be said to have an inferentially justiﬁed belief. Making
these distinctions would lead one rather naturally, I think, to make correspond-
ing distinctions between different senses in which one can be said to have prop-
ositional knowledge. My point in making these distinctions is not simply to
indicate that they do exist, but, more importantly, to defend what I shall call the
empiricist’s version of foundationalism against an increasingly popular argu-
ment, an argument which proceeds from observations about what we do and do
not infer.
Given what is usually called the “traditional” analysis of knowledge, in order
for an individual S to know a proposition P, P must be true, S must believe P, and
S must be justiﬁed in believing P.1 Anyone who attempts to explicate knowledge
fully or partially in terms of the having of a justiﬁed true belief is obviously faced
with the problem of explicating the concept of justiﬁcation. What precisely are
those conditions under which one may be correctly described as having a justiﬁed
belief in some proposition P?
In answering this question, we might begin by observing that we often try to
justify a belief in one proposition P by appealing to the truth of another prop-
osition (or set of propositions) E, and by either explicitly or implicitly appealing
to a third proposition, namely that E conﬁrms or makes P probable. It seems
obvious that one can challenge such a claim to have justiﬁcation by challenging
the truth of one of two propositions:
(1) That we are justiﬁed in believing E.
(2) That we are justiﬁed in believing that E conﬁrms P.
This fact has led to the now familiar argument for the thesis of foundationalism.
If, in order to justify every belief we have, we must appeal to the truth of some
other proposition, we could never justify any belief, for we would have to com-
plete an inﬁnite regress of justiﬁcation. To claim that we have no justiﬁcation for
believing anything is absurd, the argument continues, and so we must be justiﬁed
in believing some propositions without having to appeal to the truth of any other
Richard Fumerton, “Inferential Justiﬁcation and Empiricism,” The Journal of
Philosophy 73 (1976): 557–69.
259

proposition. I shall call a belief that is justiﬁed without being justiﬁed through the
justiﬁcation of other beliefs a noninferentially justiﬁed belief. A belief that must
be justiﬁed through the justiﬁcation of other beliefs, I shall call an inferentially
justiﬁed belief. The thesis of foundationalism is the thesis that there are noninfer-
entially justiﬁed beliefs. One gets different versions of foundationalism, depend-
ing on what one takes to be the objects of noninferentially justiﬁed beliefs and
how one thinks these beliefs can be used to justify other beliefs. Anyone who
claims that one can have a noninferentially justiﬁed belief in some proposition
asserting the existence of a physical object, I shall call an epistemological direct
realist. The empiricist’s version of foundationalism, to which I alluded in my
introduction and which I shall be defending later in this paper, maintains that one
can never have a noninferentially justiﬁed belief in a physical-object proposition,
but that one must always justify one’s beliefs in propositions about the physical
world in part by appealing to noninferentially justiﬁed beliefs in propositions
about experience.2
Now the argument purporting to show the necessity of some version of foun-
dationalism is, I think, persuasive, though considerations I shall raise in this
paper now make it seem less conclusive than it once seemed to me. I am con-
vinced in any event that those who seek to escape the need for foundations by
appealing to the concept of circular justiﬁcation (big circles are all right—only the
little ones are fallacious) usually coupled with the so-called “coherence theory of
truth,” are in error. Circular reasoning is fallacious, and it remains fallacious no
matter how pedantic one cares to be in traversing the circumference of the circle.
Although the coherence theory of truth might seem to lend some credence to a
kind of circular justiﬁcation, I cannot believe that it will ever overcome the most
obvious difﬁculty: the possibility of mutually exclusive but internally consistent
sets of propositions.
In this paper I do not intend to attack the thesis of epistemological direct
realism (which I think can be attacked using the well-worn but, I believe, sound
argument from the possibility of hallucination) or to consider the reasons that
might be held for accepting the empiricist’s version of foundationalism. Rather, I
want to focus on one very speciﬁc objection that has been raised against empiri-
cism (or more generally against any thesis that contradicts epistemological direct
realism) most clearly, I think, by Anthony Quinton, in his well-known article,
“The Problem of Perception” and more recently in his book, The Nature of
Things.3
Quinton tries to assess the claim that justiﬁcation of our beliefs in propositions
describing physical objects is always inferential and that it is always from pro-
positions about the nature of our experiences that such inferences are made, by
noting that for the claim to be correct two conditions must be satisﬁed:
(1) Statements about experience must count as reasons or evidence for
statements about objects.
(2) Statements about experience must in some, no doubt rather obscure, sense be
accepted by those who make statements about objects (“The Problem of
Perception,” 519).
Quinton attempts to cast (1) and (2) in doubt by arguing, rather persuasively,
RICHARD FUMERTON
260

that it is surely not true that most people (who, we assume, have justiﬁed beliefs
in the existence of physical objects) are always in the “appropriate, sophisticated,
phenomenological frame of mind” (507) even to isolate in thought that element
of experience which C.I. Lewis called the “momentary given.” The very existence
of what the empiricist calls “sensation” or “experience” (i.e., understood as a
state of affairs the occurrence of which entails the existence of no physical object)
is a subject of great philosophical dispute, and for many philosophers it is only
after long, considered argument that such events are recognized or abstracted
from our everyday conception of the world. If most people do not even entertain
propositions about their experiences it is surely implausible to suggest that the
truth of such propositions constitutes their evidence justifying their beliefs in
propositions about the external world.
There are actually three different facts to which one might appeal in presenting
this kind of objection to empiricism. These are:
(A) That we seldom if ever consciously infer propositions about objects from
propositions about experiences.
(B) That most people, certainly most nonphilosophers, if challenged as to
their justiﬁcation for believing propositions about the external world, would
seldom if ever offer as their reasons or evidence propositions about
experiences.
(C) That it is quite meaningless, that it makes no sense to search for evidence
justifying a belief in the existence of a physical object that is before one under
optimum conditions of perception.
I shall argue that (A) is probably true, but is quite irrelevant to the truth of
empiricism; that (B) may well be false, but would be irrelevant to the truth of
empiricism even if it were true; and that (C), unsupported by either (A) or (B),
remains as simply an unargued denial of the empiricist’s version of
foundationalism.
(A) is the least controversial claim, but, as I have indicated, it seems to have the
least amount of force as an objection to the empiricist’s version of foundational-
ism. Most empiricists would probably admit that we do not entertain proposi-
tions describing solely the phenomenological character of our experience before
we accept the fact that we are surrounded by physical objects of various kinds.
The man who consciously makes inferences from the nature of his present and
past experiences to the truth of the proposition that there is a truck headed
toward him will spend most of his life in the hospital. It is important to note,
however, that Quinton himself places no weight on (A) as an objection to empiri-
cism. Though he does claim that “The best proof that statements about experi-
ences were reasons or evidence for statements about objects would be that we did
in fact commonly infer from the one to the other” (519/20) and does note that it
is simply not the case that this is so, he immediately discounts the signiﬁcance
of this observation in determining whether or not beliefs in physical object
propositions are inferentially justiﬁed:
Furthermore, there are many cases of knowledge by inference, where it is
not the least likely that any conscious process of reasoning has
“INFERENTIAL JUSTIFICATION AND EMPIRICISM”
261

occurred. . . . We only infer consciously in situations that are unfamiliar or
complex (520).
In The Nature of Things Quinton, in talking about the epistemological task of
reconstructing knowledge, cautions us that: “Such a reconstruction will, as
Reichenbach puts it, be concerned with the logical order of justiﬁcation of beliefs
rather than with the psychological or historical order of their discovery” (115).
Again, he insists that “Theory of Knowledge as a critical account of the logical
order of justiﬁcation, must be governed by Frege’s maxim that the logical and the
psychological should always be clearly distinguished from one another” (115).
The most obvious example of beliefs which would have to be inferentially
justiﬁed if they are to be justiﬁed at all, but which nevertheless are not usually if
ever consciously inferred from that which would constitute our evidence, are
beliefs about the future or about subjunctive conditionals. My belief that this
glass of water before me now would quench my thirst if I were to drink it is
hardly a belief that I form as a result of careful consideration of past instances of
water quenching thirst coupled with an application of a synthetic a priori prin-
ciple of induction. I had formed similar beliefs long before I knew what a
principle of induction would be.4
Well, if (A) leaves empiricism unscathed, perhaps (B) does not. Though I may
never have entertained a proposition asserting a correlation of past instances of
water quenching thirst, I would no doubt hit upon such a proposition eventually
if I were the least bit cooperative and were challenged to justify my belief that if I
were to drink water now it would quench my thirst. Perhaps Quinton is afraid
that people would not come up with propositions describing the phenomeno-
logical character of their experience, upon being asked to justify their belief in the
existence of a physical object before them under optimum conditions of percep-
tion. But why should Quinton believe this? No doubt most people would have a
difﬁcult time linguistically expressing the evidence the empiricist says they have—
the language of appearing5 or the sense-datum language (depending on what one
takes the correct analysis of sensations to be) is not the language of the ordinary
man—but if they are helped by a friendly philosopher and are coaxed into the
appropriate sophisticated frame of mind, why should we think that most people
would not come up with the answer the empiricist thinks is the right one?
Furthermore, even if it were not the case that people would respond to a
challenge of their beliefs in the way the empiricist thinks they should, it is not
clear that Quinton himself believes this would be a decisive objection to the
empiricist’s position about the nature of the evidence required for the justiﬁca-
tion of beliefs in an external world. In “The Problem of Perception” Quinton
asks us to consider ﬁve cases of belief:
(1) I can at once reproduce the course of reasoning that led me to say that it is
mother’s hat on top of the garage. This is conscious inference, where the
reason given is a premise already consciously afﬁrmed.
(2) I can, without hesitation, answer ‘by the way he sways about’ when asked
how I can tell someone is drunk, although I recollect no process of inferring.
(3) I may take some time over or require assistance in accounting for my claim
that Towzer is ill by the glazed look in his eye.
RICHARD FUMERTON
262

(4) I may be unable to give any reason of my own and unwilling to accept any
reason offered by another for my assertion that X dislikes Y. Yet commonly
in this type of case I may be extremely conﬁdent of the truth of my belief and
turn out, in the end, to be quite right.
(5) Finally, consider standing in broad daylight three feet away from a large and
perfectly normal chestnut cart-horse and saying “that is a horse” or, more
adventurously, “that horse is brown” (520).
Now I take Quinton to be implying that the ﬁrst four cases are examples of beliefs
that might be inferentially justiﬁed. The fourth case is more controversial, but let
us expand it as follows: I not only correctly decide that X dislikes Y, but in other
situations I have this uncanny ability to judge that one person dislikes another—I
am always caused to hold this belief by a similar feature of each situation, I am
always sure that a reason exists; that is, I am always quite sure that something
about the situation leads me to this belief, but I am quite unable to pick out that
something and offer it as evidence. This fourth case is particularly interesting, for
if one can have inferential beliefs of this kind, a failure to identify sensation as
evidence for the existence of physical objects should not count against the claim
that propositions about sensations are always the evidence from which we must
ultimately infer the truth of assertions about physical objects. That Quinton
himself recognizes that he must distinguish case (5) from case (4) in order to press
home his attack on empiricism is, of course, supported by the fact that he does so:
This (case 5) resembles the previous case (case 4) in that one would be quite
unable to give or accept any reason whatever for one’s assertion. It differs
from it in that one would not be in the very least abashed or apologetic
about this. For, in these conditions, the challenge ‘how can you tell?’ is
simply devoid of sense (521).
And here, I think, we ﬁnally have the “argument” against empiricism, or at least
that part of empiricism which insists that justiﬁcation of physical-object proposi-
tions always involves an inference from evidence concerning the nature of our
sensation, namely, the quite dogmatic, unargued assertion, introduced by Austin
(the animal in question has changed from a pig to a horse), that it does not always
make sense to ask for evidence justifying a belief in a physical-object proposition.
Surely one can hardly expect the empiricist to consider such an assertion seriously
as a criticism of his position unless it is supported by an argument. He, after all,
offers reasons for insisting upon his position (again the best, I think, is the argu-
ment from the possibility of hallucination), and it might be appropriate to note in
passing that philosophers began to conclude that the question of justifying beliefs
in physical-object propositions through evidence was on some occasions sense-
less only after a few frustrating hundreds of years spent in attempting to solve the
problems that ensue in trying to answer that question. The epistemological prob-
lems concerning perception are enormous, the ﬁght to stave off skepticism uphill,
if one accepts the empiricist’s version of foundationalism, but one does not make
go away a philosophical problem by ignoring it or by arbitrarily inventing a more
convenient epistemological starting point devoid of any epistemological signiﬁ-
cance (the observation statements of W.V. Quine might serve as an example here).
“INFERENTIAL JUSTIFICATION AND EMPIRICISM”
263

Let us see if we can draw from the above discussion more precise conclusions
concerning the nature of the claim that a belief is inferentially justiﬁed. Based
very roughly on the distinctions Quinton makes through speciﬁc examples, let us
try to distinguish more formally at least two senses in which one might be said to
have an inferentially justiﬁed belief. Our task is not to deﬁne the notions of
justiﬁcation and conﬁrmation themselves—if it were, the following deﬁnitions
would, of course, be circular—our task is, rather, to explicate the different senses
in which one might be said to have inferential justiﬁcation. Let me offer the
deﬁnitions ﬁrst, discuss an important distinction that can be made within
those deﬁnitions, and evaluate the empiricist’s foundationalism and Quinton’s
objections to that thesis in the light of these distinctions:
It is important to note that the above distinctions can be compounded by
recognizing a distinction between occurrent and dispositional belief. Each of you
believes or accepts many propositions that you are not now entertaining, about
which you are not now thinking. Five minutes ago, for example, you all believed
that 7 + 5 = 12 even though none of you were thinking about that proposition. If
an occurrent belief in a proposition can be thought of as a psychological state
attending the consideration of that proposition,6 then the most straightforward
analysis of a dispositional belief would employ a subjunctive conditional:
Now there seems to be no a priori reason why a person may not have an inﬁnite
number of dispositional beliefs, understood this way. Five minutes ago, for
example, you presumably believed dispositionally that the number 2 is greater
than the number 1, that the number 3 is greater than the number 1, that the
D1 S has an inferentially
justiﬁed belief in P
on the basis of E.
= Df 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
S believes P.
S justiﬁably believes both E and
the proposition that E conﬁrms P.
S believes P because he believes
both E and the proposition that E
conﬁrms P.
There is no proposition X such
that S is justiﬁed in believing both
X and that E & X does not
conﬁrm P.
D2 S has an inferentially
justiﬁed belief in P
on the basis of E.
= Df
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
S believes P.
E conﬁrms P.
The fact that E causes S to believe
P.
There is no proposition X such
that S is justiﬁed in believing both
X and that E & X does not
conﬁrm P.
D3 S dispositionally
believes P.
= Df 
S would believe (occurrently)
P if he were to consider it.
RICHARD FUMERTON
264

number 4 is greater than the number 1, etc. ad inﬁnitum. There also seems no
reason why one might not have both inferentially justiﬁed and noninferentially
justiﬁed dispositional beliefs. Thus ﬁve minutes ago you had the inferentially
justiﬁed dispositional belief that ﬁre is hot, a belief which is justiﬁed by virtue of
the fact that you hold other justiﬁed dispositional beliefs, for example, that every
time you approached ﬁre in the past it was hot. Again, it may be the case that ﬁve
minutes ago you had the noninferentially justiﬁed dispositional belief that you
were appeared to redly, a belief which, perhaps, was not actualized at that time
simply because you were not entertaining such an unusual proposition (unusual
in the sense that one normally thinks about the world, not about experience).
Nevertheless, the proposition in question, one about which you were not think-
ing, and, let us suppose, one about which you have never thought, may have been
one which you would have accepted were you to think about it, and may have
been one the truth of which would have been simply given or self-evident were
you to consider it; i.e., it may have been the kind of proposition that is such that,
when you are acquainted with it through thought, you are also on some occa-
sions given or acquainted with the fact to which it corresponds, as well as the fact
that it does so correspond. That one might be able to have an inﬁnite number
of justiﬁed dispositional beliefs, all of which can play a part in the justiﬁcation of
other beliefs, is the source of my aforementioned concern over the soundness
of the argument for foundations. That argument rested on the assertion that an
inﬁnite regress of justiﬁcation was vicious, an assertion which seems quite
uncontroversial as long as one thinks of justiﬁcation as involving a conscious
process of reasoning. We need not concern ourselves with further discussion of
this issue now, for in this paper we are concerned only with that part of empiri-
cism which insists that justiﬁcation of beliefs in physical-object propositions
always involves appeal to propositions about sensations. We can leave open the
second part of that thesis, namely that beliefs in some propositions about
experience are on some occasions noninferentially justiﬁed.
Let us allow, for the moment at least, the beliefs referred to in the above
deﬁnitions to be either occurrent or dispositional in the sense outlined by D3. If
one were to restrict one’s attention to occurrent beliefs, I suspect the cases of
inferential justiﬁcation as deﬁned by D1 would be extremely unusual indeed. For
one thing, the evidence essential to the justiﬁcation of almost all our everyday
beliefs is, quite simply, enormously complex. I come home, ﬁnd my window
broken, footsteps outside my window, my valuables missing, and I immediately
conclude that a thief has broken into my house. If asked to justify my belief I
would no doubt appeal to the aforementioned truths. But those facts by them-
selves do not conﬁrm the proposition that a thief broke into my house—it is only
those facts conjoined with a vast array of background knowledge essential to the
justiﬁcation of this and other similar beliefs: the fact that windows do not break
unless acted upon by some force, the fact that physical objects (such as the valu-
ables) do not customarily disappear in nihilo, the fact that physical objects do not
move by themselves, the fact that it is not a perfectly acceptable custom for one’s
friends to borrow one’s valuables by breaking into one’s house and taking
them. . . . All this, and, of course, much more, is part of the ediﬁce supporting
almost all our empirical beliefs, an ediﬁce which has been built up through years
of experiences, experiences which can legitimately be described and employed in
“INFERENTIAL JUSTIFICATION AND EMPIRICISM”
265

the premises of countless inductive arguments. That we actually entertain and
accept all the relevant propositions that constitute part of our evidence justifying
a belief in, for example, the proposition that a thief broke into a house, would be
virtually impossible. If we allow dispositional justiﬁed beliefs to justify other
beliefs and to be, perhaps, justiﬁed themselves by noninferentially justiﬁed dispo-
sitional beliefs, it may well turn out that many of our beliefs are, in fact, justiﬁed
in just the sense outlined by D1; for it may turn out that we have not only justiﬁed
dispositional beliefs in all the propositions that constitute our total body of evi-
dence, but also justiﬁed dispositional beliefs, presumably noninferentially justi-
ﬁed dispositional beliefs, in the relevant epistemic principles, again, principles
about which we may never have thought. Indeed, if we understand dispositional
belief in the way suggested by D3, it is not clear that one would have to appeal to
any sense other than D1 in which one might have an inferentially justiﬁed belief
in order to save empiricism from what seemed to be an initially plausible objec-
tion based on observations about what we do and do not infer. For all Quinton
has reasonably argued is that most people seldom if ever actually consider pro-
positions describing solely the phenomenological character of their experiences,
seldom if ever employ such propositions as premises in a process of conscious
inference, and seldom if ever actually offer propositions about the nature of
experience as evidence upon being challenged as to their justiﬁcation for a belief
in a physical-object proposition. But, of course, none of this would tell against
the possibility that we all have justiﬁed dispositional beliefs in propositions
describing experience, that we all have justiﬁed dispositional beliefs in the rele-
vant epistemic principles asserting a connection between the occurrence of these
experiences and the existence of physical objects, and that we are so constituted
that the having of these dispositional beliefs leads us to hold appropriate beliefs
about the external world.
Suppose, for a moment, however, that D3 as an analysis of dispositional belief
is too naive. Suppose that there really is something wrong about attributing to
someone a belief in a proposition he has never considered and, perhaps, lacks the
sophistication to consider. Would that part of the empiricist’s position which
contradicts epistemological direct realism fall apart? I think not, for I think we
would then reasonably turn to D2 by way of accepting another sense in which
one might be said to have inferential justiﬁcation. Unless dispositional beliefs will
do the job (as I suggested they might) in providing us with justiﬁcation, I think
the vast majority of the beliefs we think are justiﬁed are quite simply unjustiﬁed
in the sense deﬁned by D1, again, if for no other reason than that the ediﬁce
supporting the vast majority of our beliefs (whether or not the empiricist is cor-
rect) would have to be so enormously complex as to preclude examination and
acceptance. What is more, most people have simply never thought about, let
alone tried to justify their beliefs about, the connection between what they take as
their evidence and what they conclude from that evidence.
Insofar as reasoning involves a conscious process of inference, most of our
beliefs are quite a-rational. Even in those cases where we do consciously consider
and evaluate the truth of some propositions before accepting another proposition
on the basis of those propositions, it is simply not the case that we consciously
consider and accept all of that which is quite essential to our justiﬁcation. Indeed,
many of our beliefs, expectations, and behavior are largely on the level of the
RICHARD FUMERTON
266

lower animals, in that, much of the time, we simply react in certain ways to
certain stimuli.
Now one can call beliefs, expectations, and behavior that arise as a causal
consequence of given stimuli, without the mediation of any process of conscious
inference or reasoning, a-rational if one wants—nothing hinges on the applica-
tion of a label—but perhaps it would be more useful to characterize justiﬁcation
in such a way that some such beliefs will count as rational and some as irrational.
And that is precisely what D2 does. The crucial condition for having an inferen-
tially justiﬁed belief in the sense deﬁned by D2, the condition that will still allow
us to distinguish between rational and irrational belief, is that condition which is
of primary concern when we search for the more idealized kind of inferential
justiﬁcation deﬁned by D1, namely condition 2, that the proposition describing
that which causes us to accept a given proposition P does indeed conﬁrm or lend
support to P.
It might seem that, if both D1 and D2 were employed in analyzing two differ-
ent senses in which one could know a proposition, that concept of knowledge
which employs D2 would be approaching the so-called “causal” theory of know-
ing. But the crucial thing to remember is that the philosophical problems of
determining what we know and how we know it will not rest simply on questions
of what causes what, but will rest on what they have always rested on, questions
of what conﬁrms what or makes what probable. In examining the question of
whether we have knowledge of propositions asserting the existence of physical
objects, we still must ask ourselves whether the truth of such propositions is ever
simply given, i.e., if we are ever immediately acquainted with a physical-object
proposition, the fact to which it corresponds, and the fact that it does so corres-
pond. If we decide that the truth of such a proposition is never simply given, if we
decide that we must always consciously infer such propositions from other pro-
positions, e.g., propositions describing the nature of our experiences, or that we
are always caused to believe such proposition by some other fact, e.g., the fact
that we have certain sensations or experiences, we are then faced with the old
philosophical problem of determining whether and how propositions about
experiences do conﬁrm propositions about the physical world.
Let us note ﬁnally that, if what I have said above is true, Quinton in “The
Problem of Perception” and in The Nature of Things is really an empiricist.
Quinton does not deny that experiences (as the empiricist understands experi-
ence) exist; he does not deny that we can form beliefs about and descriptions of
experience; and he does not deny that the occurrence of sensations plays a crucial
role in the formation of our beliefs about the world, for he claims that they are, in
fact, what cause us to believe things about the external world and what in this
sense can be thought of as the reasons for our beliefs in physical object
propositions:
The relation between experiences and objects, then, neither is nor should be
logical. On the contrary it is causal, a matter of psychological fact. Our
beliefs about objects are based on experience in a way that requires not
justiﬁcation but explanation. Experiences are not my reasons for my beliefs
about objects—to have an experience is not to know or believe anything
“INFERENTIAL JUSTIFICATION AND EMPIRICISM”
267

which could be a reason in this sense—though they may be the reasons for
my believing what I do from the point of view of the psychologist. They
may, that is, be the causes of my beliefs and explain them. But they could
only be my reasons for my beliefs about objects if I already knew something
independently about the relations between experiences and objects (“The
Problem of Perception,” 525).
Quinton’s mistake is in thinking that, if he is correct in concluding that sensa-
tions cause us to hold beliefs about the world without serving as facts described
in premises that are employed in a conscious process of inference, he has by-
passed the old philosophical problem raised by empiricism. For, after concluding
that sensations cause us to have beliefs about the external world, we as epis-
temologists must still determine whether what causes us to have such beliefs has
any connection with the truth of that which we believe; that is, we must deter-
mine whether and how propositions describing the occurrence of certain sensa-
tions can conﬁrm or make probable propositions asserting the existence of a
physical object. Recognizing that there is no conscious process of inference from
propositions describing experience to propositions about the external world,
recognizing that our beliefs about the world are simply caused by the occurrence
of certain sensations, in no way eliminates this problem. We want to know and be
able to explicate how we can have inferentially justiﬁed beliefs about the world
either in the sense deﬁned by D1, allowing for the possibility of having a belief
that is both justiﬁed and dispositional, or in the sense deﬁned by D2. To do so we
must understand the epistemological relationship of experience to the world.
Notes
1
The well-known Gettier problem has convinced many philosophers to search for a
fourth condition to an analysis of knowledge. The approaches taken by Ernest
Sosa in “The Concept of Knowledge: How Do You Know?,” American Philo-
sophical Quarterly (April 1974): 113–122, and by Roderick M. Chisholm in a
second edition of Theory of Knowledge (Prentice Hall, soon to be published)
seem to me to be, if not right, at least on the right track.
2
One will presumably need, in addition, noninferentially justiﬁed beliefs in the
“bridge” principles (at least memory and induction) which enable one to get
beyond the content of one’s present experience. Throughout this paper I shall be
using the terms “experience” (a general term referring to the occurrence of any
mental process, e.g., believing, remembering, being in pain, etc.) and “sensa-
tion” (referring to a subclass of experience, e.g., visual, tactile, auditory, olfac-
tory, kinesthetic experiences) in the most neutral way possible. You may, for my
present purposes, understand a sensation as the sensing of a sense-datum or a
way of being appeared to. With all empiricists, however, I am using the terms in
such a way that the having of an experience entails no proposition asserting the
existence of a physical object.
3
“The Problem of Perception,” Mind 54 (January 1955): 26–51, reprinted in
Robert Swartz, ed., Perceiving, Sensing, and Knowing (Garden City: Doubleday,
1965), pp. 491–526 (page references to this article are to the reprinted ver-
sion); The Nature of Things (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973). Though I
RICHARD FUMERTON
268

believe Quinton’s exposition of this position is the clearest, I think similar
arguments can be found in the writings of J.L. Austin and the later Wittgenstein.
4
Quinton would concede the point: ibid., p. 116.
5
Used in what Chisholm called the “noncomparative” sense—see Chisholm, Per-
ceiving (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell, 1957), pp. 50–53—or what Lewis called the
“expressive” sense—see C.I. Lewis, An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation
(LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 1946), p. 179. Note that Quinton allows that appearing
language can be used in this way—see “The Problem of Perception,” p. 506.
6
This is not, of course, uncontroversial, but I would be prepared to defend this
thesis at length in another context.
QUESTIONS
1
What does Fumerton’s version of “empiricism” hold?
2
What is the difference between occurrent beliefs and dispositional beliefs?
3
According to Fumerton, does the fact that people do not normally consciously
entertain propositions about their experiences refute empiricism? Explain brieﬂy
why or why not.
“INFERENTIAL JUSTIFICATION AND EMPIRICISM”
269

David Hume, “Of Scepticism with Regard to Reason”
In all demonstrative sciences the rules are certain and infallible; but when we
apply them, our fallible and uncertain faculties are very apt to depart from them,
and fall into error. We must, therefore, in every reasoning form a new judgment,
as a check or controul on our ﬁrst judgment or belief; and must enlarge our view
to comprehend a kind of history of all the instances, wherein our understanding
has deceiv’d us, compar’d with those, wherein its testimony was just and true.
Our reason must be consider’d as a kind of cause, of which truth is the natural
effect; but such-a-one as by the irruption of other causes, and by the inconstancy
of our mental powers, may frequently be prevented. By this means all knowledge
degenerates into probability; and this probability is greater or less, according to
our experience of the veracity or deceitfulness of our understanding, and accord-
ing to the simplicity or intricacy of the question.
There is no Algebraist nor Mathematician so expert in his science, as to place
entire conﬁdence in any truth immediately upon his discovery of it, or regard it as
anything, but a mere probability. Every time he runs over his proofs, his con-
ﬁdence encreases; but still more by the approbation of his friends; and is rais’d to
its utmost perfection by the universal assent and applauses of the learned world.
Now ’tis evident, that this gradual encrease of assurance is nothing but the add-
ition of new probabilities, and is deriv’d from the constant union of causes and
effects, according to past experience and observation.
In accompts of any length or importance, Merchants seldom trust to the infal-
lible certainty of numbers for their security; but by the artiﬁcial structure of the
accompts, produce a probability beyond what is deriv’d from the skill and
experience of the accomptant. For that is plainly of itself some degree of prob-
ability; tho’ uncertain and variable, according to the degrees of his experience
and length of the accompt. Now as none will maintain, that our assurance in a
long numeration exceeds probability, I may safely afﬁrm, that there scarce is any
proposition concerning numbers, of which we can have a fuller security. For ’tis
easily possible, by gradually diminishing the numbers, to reduce the longest series
of addition to the most simple question, which can be form’d, to an addition of
two single numbers; and upon this supposition we shall ﬁnd it impracticable to
shew the precise limits of knowledge and of probability, or discover that particu-
lar number, at which the one ends and the other begins. But knowledge and
David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature in The Philosophical Works, ed. T.H. Green
and T.H. Grose, vol. 1 (London, 1886).
270

probability are of such contrary and disagreeing natures, that they cannot well
run insensibly into each other, and that because they will not divide, but must be
either entirely present, or entirely absent. Besides, if any single addition were
certain, every one wou’d be so, and consequently the whole or total sum; unless
the whole can be different from all its parts. I had almost said, that this was
certain; but I reﬂect that it must reduce itself, as well as every other reasoning,
and from knowledge degenerate into probability.
Since therefore all knowledge resolves itself into probability, and becomes at
last of the same nature with that evidence, which we employ in common life, we
must now examine this latterspecies of reasoning, and see on what foundation it
stands.
In every judgment, which we can form concerning probability, as well as con-
cerning knowledge, we ought always to correct the ﬁrst judgment, deriv’d from
the nature of the object, by another judgment, deriv’d from the nature of the
understanding. ’Tis certain a man of solid sense and long experience ought to
have, and usually has, a greater assurance in his opinions, than one that is foolish
and ignorant, and that our sentiments have different degrees of authority, even
with ourselves, in proportion to the degrees of our reason and experience. In the
man of the best sense and lougest experience, this authority is never entire; since
even such-a-one must be conscious of many errors in the past, and must still
dread the like for the future. Here then arises a new species of probability to
correct and regulate the ﬁrst, and ﬁx its just standard and proportion. As demon-
stration is subject to the controul of probability, so is probability liable to a new
correction by a reﬂex act of the mind, wherein the nature of our understanding,
and our reasoning from the ﬁrst probability become our objects.
Having thus found in every probability, beside the original uncertainty inher-
ent in the subject, a new uncertainty deriv’d from the weakness of that faculty,
which judges, and having adjusted these two together, we are oblig’d by our
reason to add a new doubt deriv’d from the possibility of error in the estimation
we make of the truth and ﬁdelity of our faculties. This is a doubt, which immedi-
ately occurs to us, and of which, if we wou’d closely pursue our reason, we
cannot avoid giving a decision. But this decision, tho’ it shou’d be favourable to
our preceding judgment, being founded only on probability, must weaken still
further our ﬁrst evidence, and must itself be weaken’d by a fourth doubt of the
same kind, and so on in inﬁnitum; till at last there remain nothing of the original
probability, however great we may suppose it to have been, and however small
the diminution by every new uncertainty. No ﬁnite object can subsist under a
decrease repeated in inﬁnitum; and even the vastest quantity, which can enter
into human imagination, must in this manner be reduc’d to nothing. Let our ﬁrst
belief be never so strong, it must infallibly perish by passing thro’ so many new
examinations, of which each diminishes somewhat of its force and vigour. When I
reﬂect on the natural fallibility of my judgment, I have less conﬁdence in my
opinions, than when I only consider the objects concerning which I reason; and
when I proceed still farther, to turn the scrutiny against every successive estima-
tion I make of my faculties, all the rules of logic require a continual diminution,
and at last a total extinction of belief and evidence.
Shou’d it here be ask’d me, whether I sincerely assent to this argument, which I
seem to take such pains to inculcate, and whether I be really one of those sceptics,
“OF SCEPTICISM WITH REGARD TO REASON”
271

who hold that all is uncertain, and that our judgment is not in any thing possest
of any measures of truth and falshood; I shou’d reply, that this question is
entirely superﬂuous, and that neither I, nor any other person was ever sincerely
and constantly of that opinion. Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable
necessity has determin’d us to judge as well as to breathe and feel; nor can we any
more forbear viewing certain objects in a stronger and fuller light, upon account
of their customary connexion with a present impression, than we can hinder
ourselves from thinking as long as we are awake, or seeing the surrounding
bodies, when we turn our eyes towards them in broad sunshine. Whoever has
taken the pains to refute the cavils of this total scepticism, has really disputed
without an antagonist, and endeavour’d by arguments to establish a faculty,
which nature has antecedently implanted in the mind, and render’d unavoidable.
My intention then in displaying so carefully the arguments of that fantastic
sect, is only to make the reader sensible of the truth of my hypothesis, that all our
reasonings concerning causes and effects are deriv’d from nothing but custom;
and that belief is more properly an act of the sensitive, than of the cogitative part
of our natures. I have here prov’d, that the very same principles, which make us
form a decision upon any subject, and correct that decision by the consideration
of our genius and capacity, and of the situation of our mind, when we examin’d
that subject; I say, I have prov’d, that these same principles, when carry’d farther,
and apply’d to every new reﬂex judgment, must, by continually diminishing the
original evidence, at last reduce it to nothing, and utterly subvert all belief and
opinion. If belief, therefore, were a simple act of the thought, without any pecu-
liar manner of conception, or the addition of a force and vivacity, it must infal-
libly destroy itself, and in every ease terminate in a total suspense of judgment.
But as experience will sufﬁciently convince any one, who thinks it worth while to
try, that tho’ he can ﬁnd no error in the foregoing arguments, yet he still con-
tinues to believe, and think, and reason as usual, he may safely conclude, that his
reasoning and belief is some sensation or peculiar manner of conception, which
’tis impossible for mere ideas and reﬂections to destroy.
But here, perhaps, it may be demanded, how it happens, even upon my
hypothesis, that these arguments above-explain’d produce not a total suspense of
judgment, and after what manner the mind ever retains a degree of assurance in
any subject? For as these new probabilities, which by their repetition perpetually
diminish the original evidence, are founded on the very same principles, whether
of thought or sensation, as the primary judgment, it may seem unavoidable, that
in either case they must equally subvert it, and by the opposition, either of con-
trary thoughts or sensations, reduce the mind to a total uncertainty. I suppose,
there is some question propos’d to me, and that after revolving over the impres-
sions of my memory and senses, and carrying my thoughts from them to such
objects, as are commonly conjoin’d with them, I feel a stronger and more forcible
conception on the one side, than on the other. This strong conception forms my
ﬁrst decision. I suppose, that afterwards I examine my judgment itself, and
observing from experience, that ’tis sometimes just and sometimes erroneous, I
consider it as regulated by contrary principles or causes, of which some lead to
truth, and some to error; and in ballancing these contrary causes, I diminish by a
new probability the assurance of my ﬁrst decision. This new probability is liable
to the same diminution as the foregoing, and so on, in inﬁnitum. ’Tis therefore
DAVID HUME
272

demanded, how it happens, that even after all we retain a degree of belief, which
is sufﬁcient for our purpose, either in philosophy or common life.
I answer, that after the ﬁrst and second decision; as the action of the mind
becomes forc’d and unnatural, and the ideas faint and obscure; tho’ the principles
of judgment, and the ballancing of opposite causes be the same as at the very
beginning; yet their inﬂuence on the imagination, and the vigour they add to, or
diminish from the thought, is by no means equal. Where the mind reaches not its
objects with easiness and facility, the same principles have not the same effect as
in a more natural conception of the ideas; nor does the imagination feel a sensa-
tion, which holds any proportion with that which arises from its common judg-
ments and opinions. The attention is on the stretch: The posture of the mind is
uneasy; and the spirits being diverted from their natural course, are not govern’d
in their movements by the same laws, at least not to the same degree, as when
they ﬂow in their usual channel.
If we desire similar instances, ’twill not be very difﬁcult to ﬁnd them. The
present subject of metaphysics will supply us abundantly. The same argument,
which wou’d have been esteem’d convincing in a reasoning concerning history or
politics, has little or no inﬂuence in these abstruser subjects, even tho’ it be
perfectly comprehended; and that because there is requir’d a study and an effort
of thought, in order to its being comprehended: And this effort of thought dis-
turbs the operation of our sentiments, on which the belief depends. The case is
the same in other subjects. The straining of the imagination always hinders the
regular ﬂowing of the passions and sentiments. A tragic poet, that wou’d repre-
sent his heroes as very ingenious and witty in their misfortunes, wou’d never
touch the passions. As the emotions of the soul prevent any subtile reasoning and
reﬂection, so these latter actions of the mind are equally prejudicial to the former.
The mind, as well as the body, seems to be endow’d with a certain precise degree
of force and activity, which it never employs in one action, but at the expense of
all the rest. This is more evidently true, where the actions are of quite different
natures; since in that case the force of the mind is not only diverted, but even the
disposition chang’d, so as to render us incapable of a sudden transition from one
action to the other, and still more of performing both at once. No wonder, then,
the conviction, which arises from a subtile reasoning, diminishes in proportion to
the efforts, which the imagination makes to enter into the reasoning, and to
conceive it in all its parts. Belief, being a lively conception, can never be entire,
where it is not founded on something natural and easy.
This I take to be the true state of the question, and cannot approve of that
expeditious way, which some take with the sceptics, to reject at once all their
arguments without enquiry or examination. If the sceptical reasonings be strong,
say they, ’tis a proof, that reason may have some force and authority: if weak,
they can never be sufﬁcient to invalidate all the conclusions of our understanding.
This argument is not just; because the sceptical reasonings, were it possible for
them to exist, and were they not destroy’d by their subtility, wou’d be succes-
sively both strong and weak, according to the successive dispositions of the mind.
Reason ﬁrst appears in possession of the throne, prescribing laws, and imposing
maxims, with an absolute sway and authority. Her enemy, therefore, is oblig’d to
take shelter under her protection, and by making use of rational arguments to
prove the fallaciousness and imbecility of reason, produces, in a manner, a patent
“OF SCEPTICISM WITH REGARD TO REASON”
273

under her hand and seal. This patent has at ﬁrst an authority, proportion’d to the
present and immediate authority of reason, from which it is deriv’d. But as it is
suppos’d to be contradictory to reason, it gradually diminishes the force of that
governing power and its own at the same time; till at last they both vanish away
into nothing, by a regular and just diminution. The sceptical and dogmatical
reasons are of the same kind, tho’ contrary in their operation and tendency; so
that where the latter is strong, it has an enemy of equal force in the former to
encounter; and as their forces were at ﬁrst equal, they still continue so, as long as
either of them subsists; nor does one of them lose any force in the contest, with-
out taking as much from its antagonist. ’Tis happy, therefore, that nature breaks
the force of all sceptical arguments in time, and keeps them from having any
considerable inﬂuence on the understanding. Were we to trust entirely to their
self-destruction, that can never take place, ’till they have ﬁrst subverted all
conviction, and have totally destroy’d human reason.
QUESTIONS
1
Hume says that, when a mathematician runs over a proof again, his conﬁdence
in the conclusion increases. What does this show (according to Hume)?
2
According to Hume, if the conclusion of a lengthy proof is uncertain, must the
conclusion of a short proof also be uncertain? Why?
3
What main conclusion is Hume trying to establish?
DAVID HUME
274

Hilary Kornblith, “Distrusting Reason”
The activity of reason-giving is an important part of our intellectual lives. At
times, we offer reasons to justify our actions or our beliefs, both to others and to
ourselves. Moreover, most of us take reason-giving to have normative force: if we
are presented with good reasons in favor of a belief or a course of action, we take
this to provide us with a presumption in favor of forming that belief or perform-
ing that action. This is, after all, why reason is so important: it serves, and rightly
so, as a guide to both belief and action.
But there are some who are distrustful of reason, who do not take the activity
of reason-giving at face value. Reason-giving may be viewed with suspicion as yet
one more instrument for wielding power over the oppressed. Views of this sort
have been articulated and defended by some feminists, Freudians, Marxists, and
deconstructionists, and some such inchoate view may be behind a certain climate
of anti-intellectualism that is currently a potent force in public debate on many
issues of real import.1
This distrust of reason needs to be taken more seriously than it has, to my
mind, not only as a political force, but as an intellectual position. In this paper, I
try to show that a certain skepticism about reason-giving deserves a hearing. In
coming to understand why someone might rationally be suspicious of the practice
of reason-giving, those of us who place our trust in this practice may come to
understand better what its presuppositions are and what it would take to ground
that trust. This paper thus attempts to make a contribution to the ﬁeld of social
epistemology: it attempts to spell out some of the social prerequisites for the
proper function of the activity of reason giving.2
I
Let us begin by examining a case of rationalization. Andrew has beliefs about the
effectiveness of the death penalty in reducing the murder rate which are, at bot-
tom, a product of wishful thinking. Andrew has certain views about the morality
of the death penalty, views which he holds on grounds independent of his views
about its deterrent effect. His views about the effectiveness of the death penalty as
a deterrent are not a product of his understanding of the relevant data. Instead, it
is his view about the morality of the death penalty that is driving his view about
Hilary Kornblith, “Distrusting Reason,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 23, ed. Peter A.
French and Howard K. Wettstein (Boston, Mass.: Blackwell, 1999).
275

its effects. Conveniently, he has come to believe that the policy he judges to be
morally correct also happens to have the best consequences. Andrew’s reason for
his belief about the deterrent effect of the death penalty is not a good reason. It
would not withstand public, or even private, scrutiny. But Andrew is unaware
that this is why he believes as he does. He sincerely believes that his reasons for
belief are quite different.
Andrew is not entirely uninformed about the various empirical studies that
have been done on the deterrent effect of the death penalty. Indeed, when such
studies are reported in the newspapers, Andrew is extremely attentive to the
details of the news story. The studies that Andrew has seen reported are mixed:
some present prima facie evidence of the effectiveness of the death penalty in
reducing the murder rate, whereas others present prima facie evidence of its
ineffectiveness. Andrew has latched on to the stories that ﬁt with his antecedent
view. He remembers them better than the others, and when asked about the death
penalty, he is often able to cite relevant statistics from them. He has less vivid
memories of the other studies, those that run counter to his belief about the death
penalty’s effectiveness, and when he reads about these studies he is typically able
to mount some perfectly plausible methodological challenge to them: some
important variable was not controlled for, the number of cases involved is not
statistically signiﬁcant, and so on. Andrew is intelligent and articulate. He is very
good at constructing reasons for his belief from the mixed evidence with which he
is confronted, and he is very good at presenting these reasons to others in discus-
sion about the issue. He believes that the reasons that he presents are the reasons
for which he holds his belief. But he is wrong about this. The reasons for his belief
are quite different. Thus, when Andrew offers reasons for his belief, he is offering
a rationalization.3
Andrew’s intelligence and articulateness are aids to the process of rationaliza-
tion. Andrew’s ability to construct and deploy arguments can be extremely con-
vincing, both to others and to himself. Someone less sophisticated than Andrew
would not be able to construct such convincing rationalizations, and opinions of
such a person that were the product of wishful thinking would be more easily
exposed, both to others and to the person himself. When Andrew offers rational-
izations for his badly grounded opinions, his intelligence works against him.
Ordinarily, when we reﬂect on our reasons for one of our beliefs, we are
motivated by a desire to have our beliefs conform to the truth. By scrutinizing our
reasons, we hope to be able to recognize cases where our beliefs have outstripped
our reasons and thus, where we should not be conﬁdent that our beliefs do indeed
conform to the truth. When we consider what to believe in prospect, we reﬂect on
our evidence, and this process of reﬂection is designed to guide belief ﬁxation so
as to make it likely that the beliefs we come to have also conform to the truth.
Both in the case of reﬂection on already existing beliefs and in the case of reﬂec-
tion on beliefs we might come to have, our motivation for thinking about reasons
is to get at the truth.
Now in the case of rationalization, our motivation for reﬂecting on reasons is
different. Our motivation in these cases may be to make ourselves feel better, to
avoid cognitive dissonance, or the like. But if our motivations in these cases are
different from those in the typical case, such motivations are not transparent to
us. When we rationalize, at least when we do it sincerely, we are not aware of
HILARY KORNBLITH
276

doing so; we are not aware of being motivated by anything other than a desire to
get at the truth. And it is precisely because of this that the process of scrutinizing
our reasons for belief may, at times, be terribly counterproductive from an epi-
stemological point of view. Scrutinizing our reasons, when we are engaged in
sincere rationalizing, will get in the way of the goal of believing truths.
Let us return to Andrew. When Andrew reﬂects on his reasons for believing as
he does about the effects of the death penalty, he is able to devise reasons for his
belief that give the appearance of supporting it. Indeed, the reasons he is able to
offer are prima facie good reasons for believing as he does. Thus, when Andrew
offers these reasons to others, if they are not independently well informed on this
matter, they may come, quite reasonably, to believe as Andrew does; and when
others do this, their believings, unlike Andrew’s, may be motivated by nothing
more than a desire to believe the truth. They, unlike Andrew, are being fully
responsive to the evidence, it seems. The only problem for Andrew’s interlocutors
is that Andrew has selectively presented the evidence; but this, of course, is not
something that they are in a position to know or even have any reason to suspect.
The reasons Andrew presents are, on their face, good reasons. Rational interlocu-
tors who lack independent evidence on the questions about which Andrew
speaks should come to believe as he does.
This fact about the interpersonal case of reason-giving is particularly import-
ant because it helps to explain why it is that the process of rationalization is so
easy to engage in. When we scrutinize our own reasons for belief, we, like
Andrew’s interlocutors, take the evidence that is available to us at face value.4
Because the biasing processes that selectively ﬁlter our evidence take place behind
the scenes, as it were, unavailable to introspection, we are able to produce per-
fectly good reasons for belief, reasons that not only survive our private scrutiny,
but would survive public scrutiny as well. The process of scrutinizing our
reasons, in the case of sincere rationalization, gives the illusion of being respon-
sive to available evidence. And the more intelligent one is and the better one is at
the skills of presenting and defending arguments, the more powerful the illusion
will be, if one engages in rationalizing, that one is forming beliefs in ways that are
appropriately responsive to evidence.
These facts about rationalization, I believe, go some distance toward making
sense of the phenomenon of distrusting reason. There are certain people who
have a deep skepticism about the signiﬁcance of rational argument. These people
are often unmoved by rational argument, and, indeed, seem to ﬁnd the activity of
reason-giving less persuasive the more careful and detailed the argument given.
Such people often say things like this: “I know that’s a perfectly good argument
for p, but I don’t know whether I should believe p”; and this, on its face, seems
deeply irrational. What should determine whether one should believe p, after all,
if not the arguments available for and against it?5
But I don’t think that this attitude need be irrational at all. First, the ability to
form one’s beliefs in a way that is responsive to evidence is not at all the same as
the ability to present reasons for one’s beliefs, either to others or to oneself.
Reason-giving requires a wide range of skills that need not be present in the
reasons-responsive person. One thing the skeptic about reason-giving may be
responding to is the recognition that some people are terriﬁcally adept at provid-
ing prima facie reasonable arguments for their beliefs, quite apart from whether
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
277

those beliefs are correct. Just as a reasonable person might willfully ignore the
appeals of a gifted speaker in order to avoid being misled, an intelligent person
who recognizes his own weakness in distinguishing apparently good but mis-
taken reasoning from the genuine item might also willfully ignore detailed and
subtle appeals to reason.6
But the second reason for thinking that skepticism about reason-giving may
often be quite reasonable ties in directly with the points we have made about
rationalization.7 People who are especially intelligent and articulate and who are
adept at providing reasons for their beliefs are also, in virtue of that very fact,
especially well equipped at providing rationalizations for their beliefs, rational-
izations that possess all of the hallmarks of good reasoning. It is not that devising
a convincing rationalization for a belief is easy, even for those gifted at argument.
But rationalization is often the product of very powerful motivating forces, and
thus a great deal of intellectual energy may be brought to the task; the result of
this is often a subtle and prima facie rational argument. This provides fuel for
skepticism about rational argument, and it is precisely for this reason that the
skeptic is especially wary of detailed and elaborate argument. Intricacy of argu-
ment, on this view, raises a red ﬂag, for it raises the possibility of rationalization
as the underlying source of the argument given rather than truth-responsive
reason-giving. Inspection of the details of the argument would be pointless in
trying to distinguish these two, for the subtle rationalizer is in a ﬁne position to
offer arguments that, on their face, are impeccable. The difference between truth-
responsive reason-giving and subtle rationalization does not lie in features
intrinsic to the arguments given. A reasonable person who is worried about the
possibility of rationalization as a source of a particular act of reason-giving will
thus not allow herself to be pulled into the intellectual task of examining the
quality of reasoning offered, for this is the wrong place to look to see whether
the conclusion is to be trusted. What needs to be examined is the source of the
argument—its motivation—rather than its logical credentials. One needs to
know whether the person offering the argument is motivated by a desire to
believe truths or by something else instead.
One might object at this point that the motivation of the person offering the
argument is simply irrelevant when we are trying to ﬁgure out what to believe. If
the argument offered is a good one, then it doesn’t matter whether it reﬂects the
reasons for which the person offering it believes the conclusion. We shouldn’t
care whether the argument offered is a reﬂection of the arguer’s reasons for belief;
all we should care about is whether the argument offered is a reﬂection of good
reasons for us to believe.
There is something right about this objection. The mere fact that an argument
offered does not reﬂect the reasons for which the arguer believes a conclusion
does not by itself undermine the value of the reasons offered. Nevertheless, as a
matter of empirical fact, the phenomenon of rationalization is typically accom-
panied by a number of factors that do tend to undermine the value of the reasons
offered by the rationalizer. As the case of Andrew illustrates, there is a tremen-
dous selectivity in the way in which rationalizers deal with evidence: they do not
present the evidence fairly, either to themselves, in memory, or to others. This
point, by itself, is sufﬁcient to show that we must be on the lookout for
rationalization.
HILARY KORNBLITH
278

In addition, many arguments involve subtle appeals to plausibility. There can
be little doubt that the rationalizer’s sense of plausibility is affected in important
ways by the motivation he has for rationalizing, and this does not aid in the
project of coming to believe truths. Thus, if an agent suspects that he himself is
rationalizing, he has reason to worry about his overall evaluations of plausibility.
That an argument is born of rationalization is importantly relevant in determin-
ing what one should believe.
More than this, the extent to which inchoate judgments of plausibility come
into play in evaluating arguments should be a source of concern even apart from
concerns about rationalization. Our sense of plausibility is a fragile reed. There
can be little doubt that it is socially conditioned. Being surrounded by people who
take a particular view seriously, or, alternatively, simply dismiss a view as
unworthy of serious consideration, is likely to have some effect on one’s own
assessments of plausibility. If those around one are well attuned to the truth, this
may be a ﬁne thing. But in less optimal circumstances, where one’s epistemic
community is badly misguided, one’s own sense of plausibility may be distorted
as a result. What passes for good reasoning in such communities may have very
little connection to the truth.
In the end, the difference between the person who places his full conﬁdence in
rational argument and the person who is skeptical of it may come down, in part,
to a disagreement about the frequency with which rationalization occurs and the
extent to which our sense of plausibility can be distorted. If one believes that
rationalization is extremely widespread and that plausibility judgments are
extremely malleable, then one may be well advised to be skeptical of rational
argument. Under these conditions, attending to the logical niceties of argument
would be no more useful in attaining one’s epistemic goals than attending to the
eye color of the person offering the argument. If, on the other hand, rationaliza-
tion is rare, and plausibility judgments are ﬁrmly ﬁxed in ways that track the
truth, then focusing on the logical features of reason-giving may serve as an
effective guide to true belief. What divides these two views, to the extent that
each is rationally held, is a disagreement about human psychology.
Let me spell out this disagreement in greater detail. The skeptic about reason-
giving may view the very activity of giving reasons as far more disconnected from
the truth, and indeed, in some cases, from the activity of belief ﬁxation, than we
are ordinarily accustomed to thinking. I take the traditional view to be as follows.
Human beings often form their beliefs as a result of self-consciously considering
reasons. When they do this, they are typically led to beliefs that are likely to be
true, at least relative to the evidence available to them. Even when self-conscious
consideration of reasons does not occur prior to forming a belief, we often scru-
tinize our reasons for belief after the fact. When we do this, we begin by determin-
ing what our reasons for holding a belief come to, and we then consider the
logical credentials of our reasons. When they are good reasons, we continue to
hold the belief, and when they are not good reasons, we come to give up the
belief. Our reasons are, for the most part, easily available to introspection, and
the activity of considering our reasons is thus deeply implicated in the ﬁxation of
belief in a way that guides it toward the truth.
But the skeptic about reason-giving may have a very different picture about the
relationship among the giving of reasons, belief ﬁxation, and the truth. On this
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
279

view, belief ﬁxation often occurs independent of self-conscious consideration of
reasons. This need not make belief ﬁxation irrational or unrelated to the truth,
for we may in many cases be responsive to good reasons even without self-
consciously considering them. When we do turn to self-conscious consideration
of reasons, on the skeptic’s view, the activity of reason-giving may often have
little effect on belief ﬁxation. Far from reasons determining which beliefs are
formed, as on the traditional view, it is the beliefs we antecedently hold that
largely determine the reasons we will come to ﬁnd. Reason-giving, on this view, is
often a matter of rationalization. From the point of view of belief ﬁxation,
reason-giving is frequently epiphenomenal.8
Even when reason giving is not epiphenomenal, on the skeptic’s view, it may
have little connection with the truth. Since our sense of plausibility is so easily
affected by the standards of our community, a community whose standards have
been distorted by external factors will come to taint even the judgments of those
otherwise unaffected by those distorting factors prevalent elsewhere in the com-
munity. When what passes for good reason really does play a role in belief
ﬁxation, then, it does not guide the self-conscious believer toward the truth, but
instead serves only to further distort that person’s judgment.
The issue between the skeptic about reason-giving and the person who places
his trust in it is, I believe, an important one, and I would like to examine it in
more detail. But before we try to ﬁgure out who is in the right here, we need to
consider an objection to the skeptic’s position, an objection that challenges its
internal coherence. The skeptic’s position is worthy of serious consideration only
if it can avoid this particular challenge.
II
The challenge I have in mind is that the skeptic’s view is self-undermining, for the
skeptic on the one hand proclaims that the activity of reason-giving is not con-
nected to the truth and that we should therefore be unmoved by it, and yet, on the
other hand, in order to convince us of this particular view, the skeptic offers us
reasons. If the skeptic is right about the activity of reason-giving, then her argu-
ment would not, and should not, convince us. According to the challenger, skep-
ticism about reason-giving is thus self-undermining.9
This challenge fails, I believe, and it fails in two different ways. First, the
skeptic’s argument may be seen as a simple reductio.10 The skeptic about reason-
giving need not be seen as endorsing the argument she gives; instead she may be
seen as merely showing that the position of the person who puts his trust in
reason-giving is internally inconsistent; that is, it fails to meet that person’s own
standards. The skeptic, on this view, demonstrates an internal tension in the view
of the person who places his trust in rational argument, a tension which that
person is in no position to resolve. This is sufﬁcient to undermine the trust in
rational argument.
Although this particular way of construing the skeptic’s argument absolves her
of the charge of undermining her own position, I think that there is a better way
to represent what the skeptic is up to. I thus turn to a second response to our
challenger.
As I see it, the skeptic does not mean merely to offer a reductio in the manner
HILARY KORNBLITH
280

just explained. Instead, the skeptic wishes to endorse the position that reason-
giving is so frequently a matter of mere rationalization, and our plausibility
judgments so frequently off the mark, that reason should not be taken at face
value. Indeed, this particular view of reason-giving is offered as the best available
explanation of the social phenomenon of inquiring about and presenting reasons
for belief. On this account of the skeptic’s position, the charge of internal
inconsistency, of self-defeat, is more acute. For on this account, the skeptic is
presenting a rational argument that she endorses for the view that rational argu-
ments should not produce conviction. How could such a position fail to be self-
defeating?
The answer to this question lies in the recognition that our skeptic about
reason giving is not a total skeptic; indeed, she is very far from it. She is not a
skeptic about the possibility of rational belief. She merely denies that a certain
activity, an activity that many see as paradigmatically rational, is, indeed, genu-
inely rational, at least in the typical case. On the skeptic’s view, rational belief is
not only possible, it is often actual. Beliefs that are not self-consciously arrived at
are frequently responsive to reason. Moreover, although the skeptic does not
accept the practice of reason-giving at face value, this does not mean that the
skeptic is forced to reject every case of reason-giving as bogus. Rather, her view
about the frequency of reason-giving as reason-responsive, and reason-giving as
mere rationalization, is just the reverse of the person who places his trust in the
practice of giving reasons.
Consider the attitude of a rational and cautious person when buying a used
car. Such a person will be faced with a good deal of reason-giving on the part of
the used car salesman, and it may well be that, if taken at face value, the reasons
offered for various purchases are wholly convincing. From the point of view of
logic alone, the used car salesman’s reasoning is impeccable. But the rational and
cautious person does not take the used car salesman’s arguments at face value.11
Rather, in this situation, although one does not simply ignore everything which is
said, one does not simply evaluate the logical cogency of the arguments offered
either. One may certainly approach argument in this way at the used car lot,
while forming beliefs on the basis of argument on other occasions.
Now the skeptic about reason-giving sees the practice of reason-giving gener-
ally in much the way that we all regard the arguments of the used car salesman.
The skeptic is not concerned about dishonesty or insincerity; rather, she is con-
cerned about sincere rationalization and a distorted sense of plausibility. But just
as we all regard the used car salesman’s utterances and arguments with a great
deal of suspicion, the skeptic sees the default situation almost everywhere as one
in which rational argument should not be taken at face value. By the same token,
there are situations in which we will come to believe at least some of what the
used car salesman tells us because we have independent grounds for overcoming
our prima facie distrust. Similarly, the skeptic will insist that the prima facie
concern about rationalization and distorted judgment is one that is not only in
principle but in practice surmountable, and that when these concerns are prop-
erly defeated, we should follow the arguments where they lead. Reason-giving is
not automatically irrelevant epistemically, on the skeptic’s view; it should simply
be regarded as irrelevant until proven otherwise.
Now it is important to recognize that the skeptic does not simply apply this
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
281

approach to others, assuming that she herself is immune to rationalization or
distorted judgment. Rather, she approaches her own explicit reasoning with the
same degree of suspicion with which she approaches that of others. After all, her
reason for concern about others has to do with rationalization and misguided
judgment, not lack of sincerity, and the person who offers sincere rationaliza-
tions or whose judgment is somehow misguided is not only a purveyor of mis-
leading arguments but a consumer of them as well. Thus, on the skeptic’s view,
we should approach all argument, even our own, with the default understanding
that it reﬂects rationalization or misguided judgment, a mere cover for reasons
that could not pass rational scrutiny if fully exposed. If an argument is to be
taken at face value, then, there must be reason for supposing that the default
condition does not apply.
There is no question that it is more difﬁcult to do this in the ﬁrst-person case
than it is in the third-person case. If I can take my own reasoning at face value,
then when I consider the reasoning of others of whom I have reason to be suspi-
cious, I have considerable resources on which to draw. In particular, I may reason
self-consciously and explicitly about their motivations, their interests and so on,
in order to try to ﬁgure out when they are most likely to offer mere rationaliza-
tions and when it is that their reasoning can be accepted on its face. But if I
cannot yet trust myself, or at least cannot yet trust my own explicit reasoning,
then my resources are considerably thinner. Nevertheless, I believe that we can
make perfectly good sense of the project to which the skeptic is committed.
After all, even those who are not skeptics about reason-giving in general will,
on occasion, have reason to treat their own reason-giving with a certain measure
of skepticism. We are all familiar with factors that may frequently interfere with
the operation of good reasoning, and in ways that are typically invisible to the
agent who is subject to them. We not only worry that judges who have a ﬁnancial
stake in the outcome of a certain decision might be biased by recognition of that
fact; we worry that we ourselves might also be biased when put in such a situ-
ation. Now it just won’t do in such a case to introspect and ask oneself whether
one is subject to any untoward inﬂuence, and then, if one passes the test, go
ahead and offer a decision. This won’t do simply because we know that such
biases work in ways that are not typically available to introspection. No doubt
the best thing to do in this kind of case is simply to opt out; one should insist that
one is not in a position to make the decision. But this is not to say that the only
two options here are either to opt out or to follow the casual deliverances of
introspection. And if opting out is not a possibility, then one may attempt sys-
tematically to eliminate, to the best of one’s ability, the various factors that might
serve as a source of bias.
Any such attempt will leave open the possibility of failure. One may, in spite of
sincere and responsible attempts to eliminate all possible bias, nevertheless fall
victim to it. But to say that there are no guarantees of getting things right here is
not to distinguish this situation, epistemically, from any other. Evidence may be
gathered here that is relevant to the question of one’s own bias, and one may, in
some cases, gain sufﬁcient reason to believe that one is not biased in the particu-
lar case. At least I see no reason in principle or in practice why this should not be
so.12 But if in this sort of case one may reasonably eliminate the hypothesis that
one is moved by rationalization, then the skeptic may do the same. And once the
HILARY KORNBLITH
282

skeptic can eliminate the likelihood of her own bias, in some particular case, then
she may approach others in the way we all approach used car dealers. The task of
evaluating reasoning for the skeptic is thus much more elaborate than it is for the
person who takes reason-giving at face value, but it is not in principle
impossible.13
In addition, it is important to point out that the skeptic about reason-giving is
likely to be, as I mentioned brieﬂy above, suspicious about pieces of reasoning in
direct proportion to their logical perspicuity: the more detailed and carefully
crafted the argument, the greater the suspicion that rationalization is at work.14
Reason-giving of a more discursive sort will thus evoke little suspicion. The late
Supreme Court Justice William Brennan Jr. described his own style of judicial
decision making, very much in this spirit, as seeking a “range of emotional and
intuitive responses” rather than “lumbering syllogisms of reason.”15 The skeptic
about reason-giving will thus have substantial resources with which to address
and resolve, in many cases, her concerns about rationalization. Where she cannot
turn back these concerns, she will simply ignore the arguments given.
The skeptic’s view is not self-undermining. More than this, I believe, it is a
view that needs to be taken quite seriously. So let us do that.
III
The skeptic’s view may at ﬁrst sound like the mirror image of some well-known
epistemic principles, principles that, though controversial, have a long history. I
have in mind, for example, Thomas Reid’s Principle of Credulity,16 the idea that
one should take other people’s utterances to be true unless one has speciﬁc reason
to believe otherwise, and Roderick Chisholm’s various principles of evidence,17
which involve accepting the “testimony of the senses” at face value, unless one
has speciﬁc counterevidence. These principles are often explained by way of an
analogy with the legal doctrine that one should assume a defendant innocent
until proven guilty. In the case of Reid and of Chisholm, various sources of
evidence are taken at face value unless there is some reason on the other side.
Special reason is required to dismiss these sources of evidence; none is required if
we are to follow where they seem to lead. The skeptic seems to have exactly the
opposite presumption: reason-giving is to be distrusted until there is special
reason to believe otherwise.
Chisholm defends his principles of evidence, however, as justiﬁed a priori, and
it is important to recognize that the skeptic about reason-giving does not see her
approach to reason-giving as having any such status. Rather, her presumption
about reasoning is seen as an empirical hypothesis that, on her view, is well
supported by available evidence. We may understand the skeptic’s position only
if we see it in that light.
We all recognize that sincere rationalization sometimes occurs, and that on
such occasions, we would do well not to take the rationalizer’s arguments, how-
ever logically impeccable, at face value. What the skeptic believes is that there is a
fairly strong correlation between the logical perspicuity with which arguments
tend to be offered and the amount of rationalization that underlies them. There is
nothing intrinsically wrong with logic or good reasoning itself on this view; any
such view would be absurd. Rather, as a matter of empirical fact, it is argued,
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
283

those who tend to present their arguments with the greatest logical perspicuity
are also, on those occasions, most frequently offering rationalizations, or at least
so frequently offering rationalizations as to make the best epistemic policy the
one of adopting the skeptic’s presumption.
Consider the contemporary practice of philosophy, in which a very high pre-
mium is attached to giving detailed and logically perspicuous arguments. Surely
philosophy is one of the natural homes of logical perspicuity. Is there reason to
think that philosophers ought to be especially concerned about the possibility of
rationalization? I think that there is. In ethics, for example, there is more than a
little reason to think that a philosopher’s views about right and wrong may often
derive from features of that philosopher’s upbringing that would do nothing at
all to confer any justiﬁcation on the views that result. For example, in many
cases, a person’s views about right and wrong are deeply inﬂuenced by that
person’s religious upbringing, even when that person would not appeal to any
religious doctrine in support of those views. Now I do not mean to suggest that a
religious origin for a view is automatically a source of distortion; but we all
believe that some religious origins of moral views are an important source of
distortion. When a person’s view is due to some such distorting inﬂuence, and
that person is able to offer detailed and logically perspicuous arguments
that somehow sidestep the real source of the person’s view, the worry about
rationalization and its inﬂuence is particularly acute.
Nor is this peculiar to ethics. In social and political philosophy, there is also
special reason to worry about the inﬂuence of distorting factors. We each have
ﬁnancial and personal interests that are at stake in any social and political
arrangement. The idea that we might be subject to rationalization when consider-
ing which arrangements are most just is hardly a paranoid fantasy. It would,
indeed, be quite remarkable if such factors rarely came to inﬂuence our views
about justice, equality, and the like.
Nor do I think that this concern is rightly limited to moral philosophy broadly
construed. Although the potential sources of distortion and subsequent rational-
ization are, I think, both most obvious and most pressing in the moral sphere, I
would not wholly exempt other areas of philosophy from these concerns. More-
over, when we consider the extent to which our philosophical views are ripe for
biasing inﬂuences and subsequent rationalization, it seems that, at a minimum,
the responsible philosopher ought to be especially concerned about the possibil-
ity of rationalization’s playing a large role in the adoption and defense of philo-
sophical views. Here, as elsewhere, merely introspecting to see whether one’s
own views might have such a source is not a responsible reaction to the problem.
Something much more nearly akin to the difﬁcult project the skeptic about
reason-giving is forced into may be forced on responsible philosophers as well.
Many will ﬁnd this suggestion distasteful and, more to the point, epistemically
counterproductive. It seems distasteful because in place of the rational discussion
of substantive issues in ethics, for example, the skeptic seems to be endorsing the
suggestion that when someone offers an argument for some moral view, the ﬁrst
thing we should think about, rather than the issue in moral philosophy that our
interlocutor has attempted to raise, is the psychology of our discussant. Only by
ﬁrst analyzing our interlocutor’s motivations may we determine whether the
argument offered, and indeed, the person offering it, are to be taken seriously. It
HILARY KORNBLITH
284

is surely distasteful to entertain such a suggestion, and it would surely be rude to
behave in such a way. A person’s motivations for offering an argument do some-
times need to be considered, but surely we entertain such thoughts only when the
arguments offered fall very far short of logical standards. Entertaining questions
about a person’s motivations in offering an argument should be a last resort, not
the ﬁrst.
Leaving issues of etiquette aside, this strategy will also surely strike many as
epistemically counterproductive, and for more than one reason. First, it will
erode the quality of debate by distracting people from the issues we care most
about—the moral issues, say—and focusing discussion on issues that are irrele-
vant to our real concerns: our interlocutors’ motivations. In addition, raising
these kinds of issues about people is not likely to be met with equanimity. Raising
such personal issues as a subject’s motivation in offering an argument, and, in
effect, challenging that person’s intellectual integrity, are not likely to allow for
any issues at all to be discussed in ways that will allow for their resolution. But
ﬁnally, and most importantly, the issue of a person’s motivation in offering
arguments is likely to be far more difﬁcult to resolve than the substantive issue
under investigation in, say, ethics. We have little access to the information we
would need to understand fully a person’s motivations, at least unless we know
the individual extremely well. Moreover, there is more reason to be concerned
about the possibility of rationalization in discussion of these personal issues of
character than there is most any of the issues that might be under discussion in
the ﬁrst place. Someone who is genuinely worried about the effects of rationaliza-
tion in others and in himself should recognize that even so much as entertaining
the issue of a person’s motivation in offering an argument dramatically increases
the likelihood that rationalization will come into play. Focusing on arguments
themselves does not assure that rationalization will not play a role, but it is a
better strategy than our skeptic is offering, the strategy of examining people’s
motivations directly.
There is, I believe, a great deal of good sense in this response to the skeptic’s
suggestions, but before I reply on behalf of the skeptic, I wish to point out how
much of the skeptic’s position is already granted in this response. This response
grants that the concern about rationalization and misguided judgment is a legit-
imate one and, indeed, does not even insist that the skeptic’s assessment of the
situation is terribly wide of the mark. There is a need to get around the problem
with which a tendency to rationalization and bad judgment presents us, and
whereas the skeptic proposes one solution to that—involving an assessment of
people’s motivations—our respondent has in mind a different solution: simply
focusing on argument unless, in the ﬁnal resort, the arguments themselves are so
bad that some view about a person’s motivations is rationally forced on us.
Focusing on the quality of argument here is seen as a pragmatic strategy for
dealing with the very problem the skeptic raises, and the skeptic’s strategy, it is
argued, merely exacerbates the very real problem about which she is herself
concerned.
In considering this response to the skeptic, we may therefore, at least tempor-
arily, accept the skeptic’s account of the problem—that apparently rational
argument is often deeply infected by rationalization—and focus on the merits of
the two solutions being offered. What I wish to suggest is that neither of these
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
285

two solutions is correct across the board; any reasonable response to the problem
will, I believe, require a mixture of these two strategies. How much of each
strategy should be used will depend, to a very large extent, on one’s assessment of
the ultimate source of the problem about rationalization.
Consider our respondent’s suggestion that issues about a person’s motivation
in offering an argument are more difﬁcult, epistemically, than the issues
addressed by the argument itself; better then to focus on the issue at hand than to
try to clear up questions about the person’s motivation before turning to the issue
he attempted to raise. This is simply not true in all cases. There are, without a
doubt, cases in which a person’s motivation in offering an argument is entirely
transparent, and what is transparent is that the person is offering a rationaliza-
tion for something believed on other grounds. Moreover, in some cases of this
sort, we are in no position to address the issue that the rationalizer attempted to
raise; we simply do not know enough about the issue to enter into discussion
with him. In such cases, we should not take the arguments offered by the ration-
alizer at face value. We should adopt the skeptic’s strategy and opt out of the
discussion. So we do not want to adopt the respondent’s strategy across the
board.
But how often do situations like this occur? How often are we in a position to
attribute a rationalization to someone, or at least have a strong prima facie
concern about it? How often is the question about an interlocutor’s motivation
more easily resolved than the question the interlocutor wishes to raise? This is
where, I believe, a particularly interesting difference between the skeptic and her
respondent comes out.
Here is one possibility. Rationalization may well occur quite frequently, but
the sources of rationalization may be many and idiosyncratic. Thus, when I offer
arguments, they are distorted by my peculiar concerns and irrationalities; when
others offer arguments, concerns and irrationalities peculiar to them go to work.
If this is the case, then ﬁguring out the kind of rationalization that is operative in
a particular argument, or whether rationalization is operative, will require a
great deal of knowledge of the particular individual involved. We will rarely have
such knowledge, and thus the epistemic task of determining the extent and kind
of rationalizations involved in particular arguments will typically be quite dif-
ﬁcult. This will make the skeptic’s project of examining the motivations behind
individual arguments practically infeasible. At the same time, it may also make
the skeptic’s project unnecessary. For if the sources of distortion vary a great
deal, then merely focusing on the arguments themselves may be a very good
strategy. My biased recall of relevant information may be salient to others who
lack my particular bias, and they will bring this into the open, not by attending to
the possible sources of my bias, but simply by focusing on the issue under discus-
sion. The public discussion of reasons here, although it brackets discussion of
sources of distortion, will thereby help to overcome the problem that the distort-
ing inﬂuences present. This, of course, is just what the respondent to the skeptic
suggested.18
But there is another possibility, and this involves a very different picture of the
sources of distortion and rationalization. Thus, suppose that instead of these
sources’ being varied and idiosyncratic, there are a very small number of sources
of signiﬁcant distortion and rationalization. Let us suppose, indeed, that there is a
HILARY KORNBLITH
286

single major sources of distortion and rationalization that is very widespread.
Thus, for example, Marxists have suggested that class interests form just such a
source of distortion and rationalization; some feminists have suggested that the
interests of male domination play such a role.19 If some such hypothesis is correct,
then the situation is exactly the reverse of the one described above. First, we need
not know much about the particular individual offering an argument to have
some sense of the extent or source of rationalization likely to be playing a role;
our epistemic task here, once we have come to understand the social factors at
work in society at large, is easy. And second, the idea that merely focusing on
argument will allow the sources of distortion to come out into the open would,
on this view, be mistaken. Because the ideas that tend to be discussed, on this
scenario, are all shaped by a common bias, the hope that idiosyncratic biases will
cancel one another out misses the point.20 On this view, the skeptic’s strategy is
not only epistemically feasible, it is the only strategy that is likely to address the
problem of bias and rationalization adequately.
Note too that if the skeptic is right in thinking that public debate is largely
shaped by a single source of bias, and that this bias is extremely likely to come
into play and overwhelm discussion when certain members of the epistemic
community are part of the debate, then a policy of isolation or exclusion will be
appropriate. This is just the opposite of the policy of including as many members
of the community as possible in discussion in the hope of having the various
biases cancel one another out. The policy of isolation or exclusion comes with
dangers of its own, of course. But which of these policies best gets at the truth is
very much dependent on features of the epistemic community, and the skeptic
about reason and the person conﬁdent about reason simply have differing views
about the nature of that community.
Those who have placed their trust in reason and public discussion of argument
are thus betting that the second of these possibilities governing the nature and
distribution of bias—a small number of distorting inﬂuences affecting the entire
tenor of debate—is not the case. The skeptic, on the other hand, suspects that it is
precisely this problem that is responsible for our current situation. The skeptic’s
hypothesis, I believe, is one that we need to take seriously, and the bet that we
make when we place our trust in the public discussion of reason is one of which
we need to be aware. It is only by taking the skeptic’s hypothesis seriously and, if
possible, laying it to rest, that our trust in public reason may be fully rational.
Moreover, insofar as the rational commitment to the public discussion of reasons
presupposes a certain social structure—one in which the effects of bias and
rationalization are canceled out—those who are committed to the public discus-
sion of reason should also be committed to ensuring that such a social structure is
more than just an ideal; we should be committed to making sure that it is realized
and sustained.21
Notes
1 A different, though complementary, source of distrust in reason comes from
some evolutionary psychologists, who suggest that the kinds of circumstances
with which our reasoning faculties are designed to deal are far narrower than the
ones to which they are currently applied. For a particularly interesting application
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
287

of such a view, see Colin McGinn, Problems in Philosophy: The Limits of Inquiry
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1993).
2 I approach the practice of reason-giving as one contingent social practice among
many that, like any other, may be called into question. In this, I contrast with
those who see reason-giving as different, somehow constitutive of rationality.
Thus, for example, Thomas Nagel claims that the practice of reason-giving is not
“merely another socially conditioned practice” (“Kolakowski: Modernity and the
Devil,” in his Other Minds: Critical Essays 1969–1994 [Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1995], 212). And he goes on:
A defender of the Kantian method must claim that it is legitimate to ask for
justifying reasons for a contingent social practice in a way in which it is not
legitimate to turn the tables and call reason itself into question by appeal-
ing to such a practice. The asymmetry arises because any claim to the
rightness of what one is doing is automatically an appeal to its justiﬁ-
ability, and therefore subject to rational criticism. All roads lead to the
same court of appeal, a court to which all of us are assumed to have
access. Reason is universal because no attempted challenge to its
results can avoid appealing to reason in the end—by claiming, for
example, that what was presented as an argument is really a rationaliza-
tion. This can undermine our conﬁdence in the original method or practice
only by giving us reasons to believe something else, so that ﬁnally we have
to think about the arguments to make up our minds. (Ibid., 212–13. A
large part of this passage is quoted, with hearty approval, by Daniel Den-
nett in his review of Other Minds in Journal of Philosophy 93 [1996]: 428.)
I will not respond to this argument point by point. Instead, this paper may be
viewed as presenting an alternative to Nagel’s Kantian defense of reason-giving,
a position that Nagel has further developed in The Last Word (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1997). As will become clear presently, I believe that the point
about rationalization that Nagel mentions in passing has a much deeper signiﬁ-
cance than he attaches to it and that it may be used to challenge the entire
practice of reason-giving. By the same token, if this challenge can be adequately
responded to, as I believe it can, then we are presented with a substantive,
rather than a transcendental, defense of the practice of reason-giving. For those
who are suspicious of transcendental arguments, this is an important result.
3 Andrew’s resourcefulness in handling data and the convenient asymmetries in
his forgetfulness are not unusual. Indeed, this example is simply adapted
from the results of a study on the effects of mixed data on prior opinion: C. Lord,
L. Ross, and M.R. Lepper, “Biased Assimilation and Attitude Polarization: The
Effects of Prior Theories on Subsequently Considered Evidence,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 37 (1979): 2098–2110.
4 See the discussion of the availability heuristic in Richard Nisbett and Lee Ross,
Inductive Inference: Strategies and Shortcomings of Social Judgment (Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1980).
5 Consider, for example, these comments of Jerry Fodor and Ernest Lepore: “It
seems to us that what there is no argument for, there is no reason to believe.
And what there is no reason to believe, one has no reason to believe.” Holism: A
Shopper’s Guide (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992), p. xiii.
HILARY KORNBLITH
288

6 By the same token, a person who is particularly good at presenting arguments
and recognizes the high regard in which such detailed reason-giving is typically
held may use his ability to present detailed arguments in a coercive or oppres-
sive manner. In such cases, it is not the logical features of the argument that are
at fault, nor is it irrational that many should fail to attend to such logical features
and simply dismiss arguments of this sort out of hand. This kind of concern has
been raised in some of the feminist literature.
7 This concern as well has been a focus of some feminist discussions of reason-
giving and the objection to what some have called “logocentrism.” Although I am
quite unsympathetic with most of what has been said under this label, the skep-
tic about reason giving of this paper may be seen as my own reconstruction of
what I take to be the most reasonable objection to so-called logocentrism. But I
would not attribute the details of the position developed here to any particular
feminist philosopher. For feminist philosophers who have developed such views,
see, e.g., Lorraine Code, Rhetorical Spaces: Essays on Gendered Locations. (New
York: Routledge, 1995) and Andrea Nye, Words of Power: A Feminist Reading of
the History of Logic (New York: Routledge, 1990).
8 I defend a qualiﬁed version of this view in “Introspection and Misdirection,”
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 67 (1989): 410–22.
9 The objection is similar to an objection frequently presented to total skepticism:
that the total skeptic undermines his own position in arguing for it because the
presentation of any such argument implicitly commits the skeptic to the exist-
ence some sort of knowledge whose existence he explicitly denies.
10 This follows the standard response to the claim that total skepticism is self-
defeating. See, e.g., Robert Fogelin, Pyrrhonian Reﬂections on Knowledge and
Justiﬁcation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994); Michael Frede, “The Skep-
tic’s Two Kinds of Assent and the Question of the Possibility of Knowledge,” in
Essays in Ancient Philosophy (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1987); and Michael Williams, “Skepticism without Theory,” Review of Metaphys-
ics 41 (1988): 547–88.
11 When I speak of taking an argument at face value, I do not mean to exclude all
critical evaluation; taking an argument at face value is not to be identiﬁed with
gullibility. There is, however, an important difference between focusing on the
subject matter of the argument given, however critically, and turning one’s atten-
tion to the motivations of the person giving it. I see the ﬁrst as taking the
argument at face value, whereas the second is what the skeptic has in mind
instead.
12 This is not to deny that individual cases may arrive in which one is not in a
position to resolve the question of one’s own bias. Cases must, however, be
dealt with individually. There is no all-purpose argument to show either that one
cannot have good evidence that one is bias-free or that one must always be able
to determine whether one is inﬂuenced by bias.
13 I do not believe that this is the only way in which one might extricate oneself from
the concern about rationalization. In particular, I believe that there may well be
cases in which one might rationally eliminate concern about rationalization in
particular others while still harboring reasonable concern about one’s own pro-
pensity to rationalize. But I need not insist on this in order to extricate the
skeptic about rational argument from the charge of undermining herself.
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
289

14 Even as great a champion of rational argument as W.V. Quine has expressed a
sentiment that is similar in important ways to that of the skeptic. Consider
Quine’s account of attending the American Philosophical Association convention
with Carnap:
We moved with Carnap as henchmen through the metaphysicians’ camp.
We beamed with partisan pride when he countered a diatribe of Arthur
Lovejoy’s in his characteristically reasonable way, explaining that if Lovejoy
means A then p, and if he means B then q. I had yet to learn how unsatisfy-
ing this way of Carnap’s could sometimes be. (“Homage to Carnap,” in The
Ways of Paradox and Other Essays, revised and enlarged edition
[Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1976], p. 42.)
See also Robert Nozick’s remarks about what he calls “coercive philosophy”
in Philosophical Explanations (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981),
pp. 4–8, in which he rejects the method of doing philosophy by way of “knock-
down arguments” in favor of the more discursive “philosophical explanations.”
15 Quoted by Alex Kozinski in “The Great Dissenter,” New York Times Book Review,
July 6, 1997, p. 15.
16 Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1969).
17 Theory of Knowledge, 3rd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1989).
18 This is just a special case of the point that by using different measuring instru-
ments to detect a given phenomenon, we may dramatically decrease the likeli-
hood that our results are mere artifacts of the instruments themselves. The
person who places his trust in argument sees individuals as roughly reliable
detectors; their individual biases are features of the detectors that lead to
experimental artifacts; and these artifacts are revealed as such by using other
individuals, that is, other roughly good detectors, who are likely to exhibit a differ-
ent pattern of experimental artifacts. The extent to which this method works in
practice depends on the extent to which the different detectors used are both
roughly reliable and exhibit the presupposed difference in experimental artifacts.
19 Notice that these are, in effect, socialized versions of the kinds of problems
suggested in the “heuristics and biases” literature of Tversky and Kahneman
and Nisbett and Ross. (See Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky,
eds., Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases [Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982]; and Nisbett and Ross, op. cit.) The social ﬁxation of the
reasoning strategies that concern the skeptic is of special concern because
such a process works far faster than Darwinian methods for ﬁxing inferential
strategies. Social ﬁxation of reasoning strategies is Lamarckian.
20 Note that Nagel’s assumption in the passage quoted in note 2 that there is
“equal access to the court of reason” is thus denied by many Marxists and
certain feminists. Consider also Frank Sulloway’s claim (Born to Rebel: Birth
Order, Family Dynamics, and Creative Lives [New York: Pantheon Books, 1996])
that ﬁrstborns are strongly disposed to resist conceptually innovative ideas and
that later-borns are strongly disposed to accept them. Add to this Sulloway’s
contention that ﬁrstborns tend to be disproportionately successful in their car-
eers. Sulloway notes:
[This] has practical implications for the selection of scientiﬁc commissions
HILARY KORNBLITH
290

and the evaluation of their conclusions. Because commission[s] tend to be
packed with eminent individuals (and hence ﬁrstborns), their votes should
perhaps be “weighted” to adjust for individual biases in attitudes toward
innovation. (p. 537, n. 43)
This suggestion of Sulloway’s, which I take to be eminently sensible, is just an
instance of the strategy recommended by the skeptic about reason-giving.
21 I want to thank Louise Antony, David Christensen, Mark Kaplan, William Mann,
Derk Pereboom, Joel Pust, Nishi Shah, Miriam Solomon, and William Talbott for
especially helpful comments on drafts of this paper, often by way of vigorous
disagreement. Versions of the paper were read at Middlebury College, Brigham
Young University, Rutgers University, the University of Michigan, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, and Dalhousie University, where helpful
discussions resulted in numerous changes.
QUESTIONS
1
In Kornblith’s example, what is the cause of Andrew’s belief that capital punish-
ment has a deterrent effect?
2
Instead of reasoning directly about, say, controversial political issues, what does
the skeptic suggest we should do?
3
According to Kornblith, what assumption about the nature of our community are
the people who place trust in public reason relying on?
FURTHER READING ON INFERENCE IN GENERAL
Audi, Robert, “Belief, Reason, and Inference,” Philosophical Topics 14 (1986):
27–65.
Fumerton, Richard, Metaepistemology and Skepticism (Lanham, Md.: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 1995).
Greco, John, “Scepticism and Epistemic Kinds,” in Skepticism, ed. Ernest Sosa and
Enrique Villanueva (Boston: Blackwell, 2000).
Huemer, Michael, “Fumerton’s Principle of Inferential Justiﬁcation,” Journal of Philo-
sophical Research, forthcoming (2002).
Kornblith, Hilary, “The Laws of Thought,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
52 (1992): 895–911.
Kyburg, Henry, Epistemology and Inference, (Minneapolis, Minn.: University of
Minnesota Press, 1983).
Miscevic, Nenad, “The Rationalist and the Tortoise,” Philosophical Studies 92
(1998): 175–9.
Pollock, John and Joseph Cruz, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, 2nd edn
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1999).
“DISTRUSTING REASON”
291


6
INDUCTIVE INFERENCE
Traditionally, there are said to be two kinds of inference, deductive and inductive.
Unfortunately, there are at least two uses of “induction” which are commonly con-
fused with each other. To avoid confusion, it is best to adopt the following deﬁnitions:
•
Deductive inference: A kind of reasoning in which the premises purportedly entail
the conclusion; that is, support the conclusion in such a way that it would be
impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
•
Non-deductive inference: A kind of reasoning in which the premises purportedly
support the conclusion without entailing it; that is, support the conclusion in
such a way that if the premises are true, it is more likely (but not necessary) that
the conclusion is true.
•
Inductive inference: A species of non-deductive reasoning in which the conclu-
sion generalizes on the information given in the premises. Example: the infer-
ence from “All observed ravens have been black” to “All ravens are black” is
inductive. Likewise for the inference, “The sun has risen every day in the past;
therefore, the sun will rise tomorrow.”
“Inductive inference” is also sometimes used to mean merely “non-deductive infer-
ence,” but that is not how I use it here.
Philosophically, the major questions concerning induction are the questions of
whether and how inductive inferences are justiﬁed—that is, whether and how the
premises of an inductive argument provide a reason for believing the conclusion. This
issue originates with David Hume’s famous argument in section IV of his Enquiry
Concerning Human Understanding. According to the standard interpretation, Hume
there puts forward the thesis of inductive skepticism: the thesis that inductive infer-
ences are never justiﬁed, that is, that the premises of an inductive argument provide
no reason at all for believing the conclusion.
This radical conclusion is supported by the following argument, the premises of
which Hume seems to endorse (though not in exactly this form) in the included
reading:
1. Our beliefs can be divided into three categories:
(a)
Beliefs about relations of ideas: These are beliefs that are true by deﬁnition
and can be known independent of observation, including (Hume thinks)
such examples as “All bachelors are unmarried” and “2 + 2 = 4.” In modern
terminology, these would be called “analytic a priori” beliefs.
293

(b)
Beliefs about observed matters of fact: These would be things one is actually
observing or has observed. (Matters of fact include all things that are not
relations of ideas.) For example, my belief that there is a desk here (while I
am looking at it and touching it) is an observed matter of fact.
(c)
Beliefs about unobserved matters of fact: These include all matters of fact
that I am not observing and have not observed. For instance, my belief that
there are people living in China is an unobserved (for me) matter of fact, as
is my belief that the sun will rise tomorrow. (Tomorrow, assuming I witness
the sunrise, it will become an observed matter of fact.)
2. All unobserved matter-of-fact beliefs depend upon inductive inference for their
justiﬁcation. For instance, I think the sun will rise tomorrow because it has risen
in the past, and I am generalizing on that experience. I think there are people in
China because I have heard things about the people in China and I believe the
testimony of others; but I believe the testimony of others because I have formed
an (inductive) generalization that people usually tell the truth (in this sort of
circumstance, about this sort of thing).
3. All inductive inferences presuppose some such premise as “The course of
nature is uniform” or “Unobserved things will resemble observed things.” Call
this “the Uniformity Principle.”
4. The Uniformity Principle is not a relation of ideas proposition, since it is not
analytically true. It is logically consistent to hypothesize that the course of nature
may not be uniform.
5. The Uniformity Principle is not an observed matter of fact, since it makes a claim
about unobserved objects.
6. The Uniformity Principle is an unobserved matter of fact belief. (From 1, 4, 5.)
7. The Uniformity Principle depends for its justiﬁcation on induction. (From 2, 6.)
8. But the Uniformity Principle cannot be justiﬁed by induction, since all inductive
inferences presuppose the Uniformity Principle (premise 3), and circular
reasoning is not acceptable.
9. The Uniformity Principle cannot be justiﬁed. (From 7, 8.)
10. No inductive inference can be justiﬁed. (From 3, 9.)
What has come to be known as “the problem of induction” is the problem of showing
what is wrong with the above argument and/or showing how inductive inference can
be justiﬁed.
Many people, upon ﬁrst encountering Hume’s discussion of induction, mistakenly
think that Hume’s central epistemological point is that the conclusions of induction
are fallible—sometimes unobserved objects turn out to be different from observed
objects, and so we cannot be absolutely certain, in any given case, that the conclu-
sion of an inductive argument is correct. Nevertheless, they think, the conclusions of
inductive arguments may still be highly probable.
This appears to be the view of Paul Edwards. Edwards is responding directly to a
discussion by Bertrand Russell, but Russell’s argument (Russell did not endorse
inductive skepticism, but he discusses the argument for it) is similar enough to
Hume’s that we may treat Edwards’ paper as a response to Hume as well. Edwards
thinks that Russell/Hume, in claiming that there is no reason for believing the con-
clusion of an inductive argument, was simply using the term “reason” in an unusually
(and absurdly) strong sense, namely, to mean “deductively conclusive reason.”
PART II: STRUCTURE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
294

Unfortunately, this is mistaken—Hume was not claiming merely that the conclusions
of inductive arguments are not absolutely certain, but rather that they are not justiﬁed
at all (see the above argument). Nevertheless, Edwards’ paper suggests one pos-
sible way of responding to the argument for inductive skepticism: one might reject
premise 3, on the grounds that it assumes that all justiﬁcation must be deductive.
One might say instead that “All observed ravens are black” just is, by itself, a (non-
demonstrative) reason for believing “All ravens are black.” To insist that we must add
“Unobserved ravens resemble observed ravens” as a second premise is to insist
that we must turn the argument into a deductive one. (“All observed ravens are black.
Unobserved ravens resemble observed ravens (in respect of color). Therefore, all
ravens are black.” is a deductive inference.) Therefore, it might be held that premise
3 begs the question.
Nelson Goodman argues for a “dissolution” of the traditional problem of induction.
In his view, in order to show that an inductive argument is justiﬁed, all we have to do is
show how that inference accords with our accepted argumentative practices. (He
compares this to how we ﬁnd a correct deﬁnition, by ﬁnding the deﬁnition that corres-
ponds to our actual use of the term that is to be deﬁned.) However, Goodman identi-
ﬁes another, “new” problem of induction, which is the problem of stating the actual
rules of inductive inference that we accept. Traditionally, it was thought, roughly, that
an inductive inference was simply any inference of the form,
All observed As have been B.
Therefore (probably), all As are B.
Goodman gives some counter-examples to this—that is, examples of inferences that
have that form, but that would generally not be accepted by ordinary people as
reasonable inductive inferences. Goodman’s most famous example is the inference:
All observed emeralds have been grue.
Therefore (probably), all emeralds are grue.
where
x is grue =df
[(x is ﬁrst observed before the year 2100 and x is green) or (x not ﬁrst
observed before the year 2100 and x is blue)].
In fact, all emeralds that have ever been observed have been grue, but we do not
infer, inductively or otherwise, that all emeralds are grue (for that would mean infer-
ring that the emeralds we dig out of the ground after 2100 will be blue). We think
future emeralds will not be grue. Since the traditional characterization of what induc-
tion is has been refuted by this example, we have a new problem of how to deﬁne
induction correctly.
Pace Goodman, most epistemologists still believe the old problem of induction—
the problem of how to justify inductive inferences—is a problem, so work has con-
tinued on diagnosing the problem in Hume’s argument. John Foster would probably
reject premise 2 in the argument. That premise assumes that all non-deductive
inferences must be inductive, but in fact there is another kind of non-deductive
inference, namely, inference to the best explanation. This is the kind of inference in
INDUCTIVE INFERENCE
295

which one starts from some observations that call for explanation (would be
improbable to occur by chance) and one infers the truth of the hypothesis that best
explains them. To see how this helps us, suppose that we have observed a certain
regularity in nature—say, the fact that massive objects when unsupported have
always fallen to the ground. According to Foster, the best explanation for this fact is
that there is a law of nature (the law of gravity) which makes it necessary for objects to
behave in that manner. If there were no law, so the bodies were acting randomly, then
it would be extremely improbable that the regularity would have been observed. But if
there is a law of nature, then that also implies that in the future we should expect to
see bodies fall to the ground when dropped. Thus, the inductive conclusion is justi-
ﬁed by means of an inference to the best explanation, followed by a prediction
deduced from that explanation. Foster goes on to consider other possible (skeptic-
friendly) explanations one might offer for the observed regularity but ﬁnds the
hypothesis of a law of gravity to be the best.
Another recent approach to the problem of induction is the Bayesian approach.
Broadly speaking, Bayesians (named after Bayes’ Theorem, a theorem in probability
theory to which they attribute great import) think that all non-deductive reasoning is
reasoning in accordance with the principles of probability and that therefore the
mathematical theory of probability should provide an explanation for why induction is
justiﬁed. The selection from Howson and Urbach’s book on the subject is intended to
familiarize the reader with some of the basic principles of probability, including the
four axioms of probability theory and Bayes’ Theorem. This should help to prepare
the student for the following selection by David Stove.
Stove treats probabilities as something like degrees of justiﬁcation—that is, the
more probable a proposition is, the more one is justiﬁed in accepting it (so a prob-
ability of 1 would correspond to conclusive reason for accepting a proposition; a
probability of 0 would correspond to conclusive reason for rejecting it). He then
argues, on the basis of the principles of probability theory, that the conclusion of an
inductive argument can indeed be strongly justiﬁed by its premises. Suppose we have
taken a large sample of ravens from around the world, and found 95% of them to be
black. (The other 5% might be albino ravens, dark grey ravens, etc.) We would ordinar-
ily conclude, inductively, that the next raven we look at will probably be black. Essen-
tially, Stove thinks this is justiﬁed because (this is a simpliﬁed form of the argument):
1.
Almost all large samples taken from the population are representative (that is,
have a proportion of black ravens that is close to the proportion in the total
population). This is a necessary mathematical truth (Stove calls it “the
arithmetical form of the law of large numbers”).
2.
Therefore, other things being equal (that is, absent any special reasons for
thinking this sample is unusual), this sample is probably representative. (From 1.)
3.
This sample contains 95% black ravens.
4.
Therefore, the total population probably contains about 95% black ravens. (From
2, 3.)
5.
Therefore, other things being equal, the next raven I select will probably be black.
(From 4.)
Thus, Stove thinks he has proven that induction is rational. The “other things being
equal” clauses in steps (2) and (5) seem to give some leeway for a skeptic, but,
PART II: STRUCTURE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
296

arguably, they shift the burden of proof, since a skeptic would have to show reason for
thinking this particular sample is special; moreover, it cannot be the case in
general that the samples we take are always special. Thus, it does not seem possible
to defend a general skeptical thesis about induction, although of course some
particular inductive arguments can be criticized.
INDUCTIVE INFERENCE
297

David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding
Section IV Sceptical doubts concerning the operations of the understanding
Part I
All the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two
kinds, to wit, Relations of Ideas, and Matters of Fact. Of the ﬁrst kind are the
sciences of Geometry, Algebra, and Arithmetic; and in short, every afﬁrmation
which is either intuitively or demonstratively certain. That the square of the
hypothenuse is equal to the square of the two sides, is a proposition which
expresses a relation between these ﬁgures. That three times ﬁve is equal to the
half of thirty, expresses a relation between these numbers. Propositions of this
kind are discoverable by the mere operation of thought, without dependence on
what is anywhere existent in the universe. Though there never were a circle or
triangle in nature, the truths demonstrated by Euclid would for ever retain their
certainty and evidence.
Matters of fact, which are the second objects of human reason, are not ascer-
tained in the same manner; nor is our evidence of their truth, however great, of a
like nature with the foregoing. The contrary of every matter of fact is still pos-
sible; because it can never imply a contradiction, and is conceived by the mind
with the same facility and distinctness, as if ever so conformable to reality. That
the sun will not rise to-morrow is no less intelligible a proposition, and implies no
more contradiction, than the afﬁrmation, that it will rise. We should in vain,
therefore, attempt to demonstrate its falsehood. Were it demonstratively false, it
would imply a contradiction, and could never be distinctly conceived by the
mind.
It may, therefore, be a subject worthy of curiosity, to enquire what is the
nature of that evidence which assures us of any real existence and matter of fact,
beyond the present testimony of our senses, or the records of our memory. This
part of philosophy, it is observable, has been little cultivated, either by the
David Hume, “Sceptical Doubts Concerning the Operations of the Understanding,” An
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, in Enquiries Concerning Human Under-
standing and Concerning the Principles of Morals, 2nd edn, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1902).
298

ancients or moderns; and therefore our doubts and errors, in the prosecution of
so important an enquiry, may be the more excusable; while we march through
such difﬁcult paths without any guide or direction. They may even prove useful,
by exciting curiosity, and destroying that implicit faith and security, which is the
bane of all reasoning and free enquiry. The discovery of defects in the common
philosophy, if any such there be, will not, I presume, be a discouragement, but
rather an incitement, as is usual, to attempt something more full and satisfactory
than has yet been proposed to the public.
All reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of
Cause and Effect. By means of that relation alone we can go beyond the evidence
of our memory and senses. If you were to ask a man, why he believes any matter
of fact, which is absent; for instance, that his friend is in the country, or in France;
he would give you a reason; and this reason would be some other fact; as a letter
received from him, or the knowledge of his former resolutions and promises. A
man ﬁnding a watch or any other machine in a desert island, would conclude that
there had once been men in that island. All our reasonings concerning fact are of
the same nature. And here it is constantly supposed that there is a connexion
between the present fact and that which is inferred from it. Were there nothing to
bind them together, the inference would be entirely precarious. The hearing of an
articulate voice and rational discourse in the dark assures us of the presence of
some person: Why? because these are the effects of the human make and fabric,
and closely connected with it. If we anatomize all the other reasonings of this
nature, we shall ﬁnd that they are founded on the relation of cause and effect, and
that this relation is either near or remote, direct or collateral. Heat and light are
collateral effects of ﬁre, and the one effect may justly be inferred from the other.
If we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning the nature of that evi-
dence, which assures us of matters of fact, we must enquire how we arrive at the
knowledge of cause and effect.
I shall venture to afﬁrm, as a general proposition, which admits of no excep-
tion, that the knowledge of this relation is not, in any instance, attained by
reasonings a priori; but arises entirely from experience, when we ﬁnd that any
particular objects are constantly conjoined with each other. Let an object be
presented to a man of ever so strong natural reason and abilities; if that object be
entirely new to him, he will not be able, by the most accurate examination of its
sensible qualities, to discover any of its causes or effects. Adam, though his
rational faculties be supposed, at the very ﬁrst, entirely perfect, could not have
inferred from the ﬂuidity and transparency of water that it would suffocate him,
or from the light and warmth of ﬁre that it would consume him. No object ever
discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which
produced it, or the effects which will arise from it; nor can our reason, unassisted
by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and matter of
fact.
This proposition, that causes and effects are discoverable, not by reason but by
experience, will readily be admitted with regard to such objects, as we remember
to have once been altogether unknown to us; since we must be conscious of the
utter inability, which we then lay under, of foretelling what would arise from
them. Present two smooth pieces of marble to a man who has no tincture of
natural philosophy; he will never discover that they will adhere together in such a
AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
299

manner as to require great force to separate them in a direct line, while they make
so small a resistance to a lateral pressure. Such events, as bear little analogy to the
common course of nature, are also readily confessed to be known only by experi-
ence; nor does any man imagine that the explosion of gunpowder, or the attrac-
tion of a loadstone, could ever be discovered by arguments a priori. In like
manner, when an effect is supposed to depend upon an intricate machinery or
secret structure of parts, we make no difﬁculty in attributing all our knowledge of
it to experience. Who will assert that he can give the ultimate reason, why milk or
bread is proper nourishment for a man, not for a lion or a tiger?
But the same truth may not appear, at ﬁrst sight, to have the same evidence
with regard to events, which have become familiar to us from our ﬁrst appear-
ance in the world, which bear a close analogy to the whole course of nature, and
which are supposed to depend on the simple qualities of objects, without any
secret structure of parts. We are apt to imagine that we could discover these
effects by the mere operation of our reason, without experience. We fancy, that
were we brought on a sudden into this world, we could at ﬁrst have inferred that
one Billiard-ball would communicate motion to another upon impulse; and
that we needed not to have waited for the event, in order to pronounce with
certainty concerning it. Such is the inﬂuence of custom, that, where it is strongest,
it not only covers our natural ignorance, but even conceals itself, and seems not
to take place, merely because it is found in the highest degree.
But to convince us that all the laws of nature, and all the operations of bodies
without exception, are known only by experience, the following reﬂections may,
perhaps, sufﬁce. Were any object presented to us, and were we required to pro-
nounce concerning the effect, which will result from it, without consulting past
observation; after what manner, I beseech you, must the mind proceed in this
operation? It must invent or imagine some event, which it ascribes to the object as
its effect; and it is plain that this invention must be entirely arbitrary. The mind
can never possibly ﬁnd the effect in the supposed cause, by the most accurate
scrutiny and examination. For the effect is totally different from the cause, and
consequently can never be discovered in it. Motion in the second Billiard-ball is a
quite distinct event from motion in the ﬁrst; nor is there anything in the one to
suggest the smallest hint of the other. A stone or piece of metal raised into the air,
and left without any support, immediately falls: but to consider the matter a
priori, is there anything we discover in this situation which can beget the idea of a
downward, rather than an upward, or any other motion, in the stone or metal?
And as the ﬁrst imagination or invention of a particular effect, in all natural
operations, is arbitrary, where we consult not experience; so must we also esteem
the supposed tie or connexion between the cause and effect, which binds them
together, and renders it impossible that any other effect could result from the
operation of that cause. When I see, for instance, a Billiard-ball moving in a
straight line towards another; even suppose motion in the second ball should by
accident be suggested to me, as the result of their contact or impulse; may I not
conceive, that a hundred different events might as well follow from that cause?
May not both these balls remain at absolute rest? May not the ﬁrst ball return in a
straight line, or leap off from the second in any line or direction? All these
suppositions are consistent and conceivable. Why then should we give the prefer-
ence to one, which is no more consistent or conceivable than the rest? All our
DAVID HUME
300

reasonings a priori will never be able to show us any foundation for this
preference.
In a word, then, every effect is a distinct event from its cause. It could not,
therefore, be discovered in the cause, and the ﬁrst invention or conception of it, a
priori, must be entirely arbitrary. And even after it is suggested, the conjunction
of it with the cause must appear equally arbitrary; since there are always many
other effects, which, to reason, must seem fully as consistent and natural. In vain,
therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event, or infer any cause or
effect, without the assistance of observation and experience.
Hence we may discover the reason why no philosopher, who is rational and
modest, has ever pretended to assign the ultimate cause of any natural operation,
or to show distinctly the action of that power, which produces any single effect in
the universe. It is confessed, that the utmost effort of human reason is to reduce
the principles, productive of natural phenomena, to a greater simplicity, and to
resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes, by means of reason-
ings from analogy, experience, and observation. But as to the causes of these
general causes, we should in vain attempt their discovery; nor shall we ever be
able to satisfy ourselves, by any particular explication of them. These ultimate
springs and principles are totally shut up from human curiosity and enquiry.
Elasticity, gravity, cohesion of parts, communication of motion by impulse; these
are probably the ultimate causes and principles which we shall ever discover in
nature; and we may esteem ourselves sufﬁciently happy, if, by accurate enquiry
and reasoning, we can trace up the particular phenomena to, or near to, these
general principles. The most perfect philosophy of the natural kind only staves
off our ignorance a little longer: as perhaps the most perfect philosophy of the
moral or metaphysical kind serves only to discover larger portions of it. Thus the
observation of human blindness and weakness is the result of all philosophy, and
meets us at every turn, in spite of our endeavours to elude or avoid it.
Nor is geometry, when taken into the assistance of natural philosophy, ever
able to remedy this defect, or lead us into the knowledge of ultimate causes, by all
that accuracy of reasoning for which it is so justly celebrated. Every part of mixed
mathematics proceeds upon the supposition that certain laws are established by
nature in her operations; and abstract reasonings are employed, either to assist
experience in the discovery of these laws, or to determine their inﬂuence in par-
ticular instances, where it depends upon any precise degree of distance and quan-
tity. Thus, it is a law of motion, discovered by experience, that the moment or
force of any body in motion is in the compound ratio or proportion of its solid
contents and its velocity; and consequently, that a small force may remove the
greatest obstacle or raise the greatest weight, if, by any contrivance or machinery,
we can increase the velocity of that force, so as to make it an overmatch for its
antagonist. Geometry assists us in the application of this law, by giving us the just
dimensions of all the parts and ﬁgures which can enter into any species of
machine; but still the discovery of the law itself is owing merely to experience,
and all the abstract reasonings in the world could never lead us one step towards
the knowledge of it. When we reason a priori, and consider merely any object or
cause, as it appears to the mind, independent of all observation, it never could
suggest to us the notion of any distinct object, such as its effect; much less, show
us the inseparable and inviolable connexion between them. A man must be very
AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
301

sagacious who could discover by reasoning that crystal is the effect of heat, and
ice of cold, without being previously acquainted with the operation of these
qualities.
Part II
But we have not yet attained any tolerable satisfaction with regard to the ques-
tion ﬁrst proposed. Each solution still gives rise to a new question as difﬁcult as
the foregoing, and leads us on to farther enquiries. When it is asked, What is the
nature of all our reasonings concerning matter of fact? the proper answer seems
to be, that they are founded on the relation of cause and effect. When again it is
asked, What is the foundation of all our reasonings and conclusions concerning
that relation? it may be replied in one word, Experience. But if we still carry on
our sifting humour, and ask, What is the foundation of all conclusions from
experience? this implies a new question, which may be of more difﬁcult solution
and explication. Philosophers, that give themselves airs of superior wisdom and
sufﬁciency, have a hard task when they encounter persons of inquisitive disposi-
tions, who push them from every corner to which they retreat, and who are sure
at last to bring them to some dangerous dilemma. The best expedient to prevent
this confusion, is to be modest in our pretensions; and even to discover the
difﬁculty ourselves before it is objected to us. By this means, we may make a kind
of merit of our very ignorance.
I shall content myself, in this section, with an easy task, and shall pretend only
to give a negative answer to the question here proposed. I say then, that, even
after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions
from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the
understanding. This answer we must endeavour both to explain and to defend.
It must certainly be allowed, that nature has kept us at a great distance from all
her secrets, and has afforded us only the knowledge of a few superﬁcial qualities
of objects; while she conceals from us those powers and principles on which the
inﬂuence of these objects entirely depends. Our senses inform us of the colour,
weight, and consistence of bread; but neither sense nor reason can ever inform us
of those qualities which ﬁt it for the nourishment and support of a human body.
Sight or feeling conveys an idea of the actual motion of bodies; but as to that
wonderful force or power, which would carry on a moving body for ever in a
continued change of place, and which bodies never lose but by communicating it
to others; of this we cannot form the most distant conception. But notwithstand-
ing this ignorance of natural powers1 and principles, we always presume, when
we see like sensible qualities, that they have like secret powers, and expect that
effects, similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them. If a
body of like colour and consistence with that bread, which we have formerly eat,
be presented to us, we make no scruple of repeating the experiment, and foresee,
with certainty, like nourishment and support. Now this is a process of the mind
or thought, of which I would willingly know the foundation. It is allowed on all
hands that there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the
secret powers; and consequently, that the mind is not led to form such a conclu-
sion concerning their constant and regular conjunction, by anything which it
knows of their nature. As to past Experience, it can be allowed to give direct and
DAVID HUME
302

certain information of those precise objects only, and that precise period of time,
which fell under its cognizance: but why this experience should be extended to
future times, and to other objects, which for aught we know, may be only in
appearance similar; this is the main question on which I would insist. The bread,
which I formerly eat, nourished me; that is, a body of such sensible qualities was,
at that time, endued with such secret powers: but does it follow, that other bread
must also nourish me at another time, and that like sensible qualities must always
be attended with like secret powers? The consequence seems nowise necessary. At
least, it must be acknowledged that there is here a consequence drawn by the
mind; that there is a certain step taken; a process of thought, and an inference,
which wants to be explained. These two propositions are far from being the
same, I have found that such an object has always been attended with such an
effect, and I foresee, that other objects, which are, in appearance, similar, will be
attended with similar effects. I shall allow, if you please, that the one proposition
may justly be inferred from the other: I know, in fact, that it always is inferred.
But if you insist that the inference is made by a chain of reasoning, I desire you to
produce that reasoning. The connexion between these propositions is not intui-
tive. There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an
inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning and argument. What that medium
is, I must confess, passes my comprehension; and it is incumbent on those to
produce it, who assert that it really exists, and is the origin of all our conclusions
concerning matter of fact.
This negative argument must certainly, in process of time, become altogether
convincing, if many penetrating and able philosophers shall turn their enquiries
this way and no one be ever able to discover any connecting proposition or
intermediate step, which supports the understanding in this conclusion. But as
the question is yet new, every reader may not trust so far to his own penetration,
as to conclude, because an argument escapes his enquiry, that therefore it does
not really exist. For this reason it may be requisite to venture upon a more
difﬁcult task; and enumerating all the branches of human knowledge, endeavour
to show that none of them can afford such an argument.
All reasonings may be divided into two kinds, namely, demonstrative reason-
ing, or that concerning relations of ideas, and moral reasoning, or that concern-
ing matter of fact and existence. That there are no demonstrative arguments in
the case seems evident; since it implies no contradiction that the course of nature
may change, and that an object, seemingly like those which we have experienced,
may be attended with different or contrary effects. May I not clearly and dis-
tinctly conceive that a body, falling from the clouds, and which, in all other
respects, resembles snow, has yet the taste of salt or feeling of ﬁre? Is there any
more intelligible proposition than to afﬁrm, that all the trees will ﬂourish in
December and January, and decay in May and June? Now whatever is intelli-
gible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never be
proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning à priori.
If we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and
make it the standard of our future judgement, these arguments must be probable
only, or such as regard matter of fact and real existence, according to the division
above mentioned. But that there is no argument of this kind, must appear, if our
explication of that species of reasoning be admitted as solid and satisfactory. We
AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
303

have said that all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of
cause and effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from
experience; and that all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the suppos-
ition that the future will be conformable to the past. To endeavour, therefore, the
proof of this last supposition by probable arguments, or arguments regarding
existence, must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that for granted, which
is the very point in question.
In reality, all arguments from experience are founded on the similarity which
we discover among natural objects, and by which we are induced to expect effects
similar to those which we have found to follow from such objects. And though
none but a fool or madman will ever pretend to dispute the authority of experi-
ence, or to reject that great guide of human life, it may surely be allowed a
philosopher to have so much curiosity at least as to examine the principle of
human nature, which gives this mighty authority to experience, and makes us
draw advantage from that similarity which nature has placed among different
objects. From causes which appear similar we expect similar effects. This is the
sum of all our experimental conclusions. Now it seems evident that, if this con-
clusion were formed by reason, it would be as perfect at ﬁrst, and upon one
instance, as after ever so long a course of experience. But the case is far otherwise.
Nothing so like as eggs; yet no one, on account of this appearing similarity,
expects the same taste and relish in all of them. It is only after a long course of
uniform experiments in any kind, that we attain a ﬁrm reliance and security with
regard to a particular event. Now where is that process of reasoning which, from
one instance, draws a conclusion, so different from that which it infers from a
hundred instances that are nowise different from that single one? This question I
propose as much for the sake of information, as with an intention of raising
difﬁculties. I cannot ﬁnd, I cannot imagine any such reasoning. But I keep my
mind still open to instruction, if any one will vouchsafe to bestow it on me.
Should it be said that, from a number of uniform experiments, we infer a
connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers; this, I must con-
fess, seems the same difﬁculty, couched in different terms. The question still
recurs, on what process of argument this inference is founded? Where is the
medium, the interposing ideas, which join propositions so very wide of each
other? It is confessed that the colour, consistence, and other sensible qualities of
bread appear not, of themselves, to have any connexion with the secret powers of
nourishment and support. For otherwise we could infer these secret powers from
the ﬁrst appearance of these sensible qualities, without the aid of experience;
contrary to the sentiment of all philosophers, and contrary to plain matter of fact.
Here, then, is our natural state of ignorance with regard to the powers and
inﬂuence of all objects. How is this remedied by experience? It only shows us a
number of uniform effects, resulting from certain objects, and teaches us that
those particular objects, at that particular time, were endowed with such powers
and forces. When a new object, endowed with similar sensible qualities, is pro-
duced, we expect similar powers and forces, and look for a like effect. From a
body of like colour and consistence with bread we expect like nourishment and
support. But this surely is a step or progress of the mind, which wants to be
explained. When a man says, I have found, in all past instances, such sensible
qualities conjoined with such secret powers: And when he says, Similar sensible
DAVID HUME
304

qualities will always be conjoined with similar secret powers, he is not guilty of a
tautology, nor are these propositions in any respect the same. You say that the
one proposition is an inference from the other. But you must confess that the
inference is not intuitive; neither is it demonstrative: Of what nature is it, then?
To say it is experimental, is begging the question. For all inferences from experi-
ence suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that
similar powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities. If there be any
suspicion that the course of nature may change, and that the past may be no rule
for the future, all experience becomes useless, and can give rise to no inference or
conclusion. It is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience can
prove this resemblance of the past to the future; since all these arguments are
founded on the supposition of that resemblance. Let the course of things be
allowed hitherto ever so regular; that alone, without some new argument or
inference, proves not that, for the future, it will continue so. In vain do you
pretend to have learned the nature of bodies from your past experience. Their
secret nature, and consequently all their effects and inﬂuence, may change, with-
out any change in their sensible qualities. This happens sometimes, and with
regard to some objects: Why may it not happen always, and with regard to all
objects? What logic, what process of argument secures you against this suppos-
ition? My practice, you say, refutes my doubts. But you mistake the purport of
my question. As an agent, I am quite satisﬁed in the point; but as a philosopher,
who has some share of curiosity, I will not say scepticism, I want to learn the
foundation of this inference. No reading, no enquiry has yet been able to remove
my difﬁculty, or give me satisfaction in a matter of such importance. Can I do
better than propose the difﬁculty to the public, even though, perhaps, I have
small hopes of obtaining a solution? We shall at least, by this means, be sensible
of our ignorance, if we do not augment our knowledge.
I must confess that a man is guilty of unpardonable arrogance who concludes,
because an argument has escaped his own investigation, that therefore it does not
really exist. I must also confess that, though all the learned, for several ages,
should have employed themselves in fruitless search upon any subject, it may still,
perhaps, be rash to conclude positively that the subject must, therefore, pass all
human comprehension. Even though we examine all the sources of our know-
ledge, and conclude them unﬁt for such a subject, there may still remain a sus-
picion, that the enumeration is not complete, or the examination not accurate.
But with regard to the present subject, there are some considerations which seem
to remove all this accusation of arrogance or suspicion of mistake.
It is certain that the most ignorant and stupid peasants—nay infants, nay even
brute beasts—improve by experience, and learn the qualities of natural objects,
by observing the effects which result from them. When a child has felt the sensa-
tion of pain from touching the ﬂame of a candle, he will be careful not to put his
hand near any candle; but will expect a similar effect from a cause which is
similar in its sensible qualities and appearance. If you assert, therefore, that the
understanding of the child is led into this conclusion by any process of argument
or ratiocination, I may justly require you to produce that argument; nor have you
any pretence to refuse so equitable a demand. You cannot say that the argument
is abstruse, and may possibly escape your enquiry; since you confess that it is
obvious to the capacity of a mere infant. If you hesitate, therefore, a moment, or
AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
305

if, after reﬂection, you produce any intricate or profound argument, you, in a
manner, give up the question, and confess that it is not reasoning which engages
us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar effects from
causes which are, to appearance, similar. This is the proposition which I intended
to enforce in the present section. If I be right, I pretend not to have made any
mighty discovery. And if I be wrong, I must acknowledge myself to be indeed a
very backward scholar; since I cannot now discover an argument which, it seems,
was perfectly familiar to me long before I was out of my cradle.
Section V Sceptical solution of these doubts
Part I
The passion for philosophy, like that for religion, seems liable to this inconveni-
ence, that, though it aims at the correction of our manners, and extirpation of our
vices, it may only serve, by imprudent management, to foster a predominant
inclination, and push the mind, with more determined resolution, towards that
side which already draws too much, by the bias and propensity of the natural
temper. It is certain that, while we aspire to the magnanimous ﬁrmness of the
philosophic sage, and endeavour to conﬁne our pleasures altogether within our
own minds, we may, at last, render our philosophy like that of Epictetus, and
other Stoics, only a more reﬁned system of selﬁshness, and reason ourselves
out of all virtue as well as social enjoyment. While we study with attention the
vanity of human life, and turn all our thoughts towards the empty and transitory
nature of riches and honours, we are, perhaps, all the while ﬂattering our natural
indolence, which, hating the bustle of the world, and drudgery of business, seeks
a pretence of reason to give itself a full and uncontrolled indulgence. There is,
however, one species of philosophy which seems little liable to this inconveni-
ence, and that because it strikes in with no disorderly passion of the human mind,
nor can mingle itself with any natural affection or propensity; and that is the
Academic or Sceptical philosophy. The academics always talk of doubt and
suspense of judgement, of danger in hasty determinations, of conﬁning to very
narrow bounds the enquiries of the understanding, and of renouncing all specula-
tions which lie not within the limits of common life and practice. Nothing, there-
fore, can be more contrary than such a philosophy to the supine indolence of the
mind, its rash arrogance, its lofty pretensions, and its superstitious credulity.
Every passion is mortiﬁed by it, except the love of truth; and that passion never is,
nor can be, carried to too high a degree. It is surprising, therefore, that this
philosophy, which, in almost every instance, must be harmless and innocent,
should be the subject of so much groundless reproach and obloquy. But, perhaps,
the very circumstance which renders it so innocent is what chieﬂy exposes it to
the public hatred and resentment. By ﬂattering no irregular passion, it gains few
partizans: By opposing so many vices and follies, it raises to itself abundance of
enemies, who stigmatize it as libertine, profane, and irreligious.
Nor need we fear that this philosophy, while it endeavours to limit our enquir-
ies to common life, should ever undermine the reasonings of common life, and
carry its doubts so far as to destroy all action, as well as speculation. Nature will
always maintain her rights, and prevail in the end over any abstract reasoning
DAVID HUME
306

whatsoever. Though we should conclude, for instance, as in the foregoing sec-
tion, that, in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind
which is not supported by any argument or process of the understanding; there is
no danger that these reasonings, on which almost all knowledge depends, will
ever be affected by such a discovery. If the mind be not engaged by argument to
make this step, it must be induced by some other principle of equal weight and
authority; and that principle will preserve its inﬂuence as long as human nature
remains the same. What that principle is may well be worth the pains of enquiry.
Suppose a person, though endowed with the strongest faculties of reason and
reﬂection, to be brought on a sudden into this world; he would, indeed, immedi-
ately observe a continual succession of objects, and one event following another;
but he would not be able to discover anything farther. He would not, at ﬁrst, by
any reasoning, be able to reach the idea of cause and effect; since the particular
powers, by which all natural operations are performed, never appear to the
senses; nor is it reasonable to conclude, merely because one event, in one
instance, precedes another, that therefore the one is the cause, the other the effect.
Their conjunction may be arbitrary and casual. There may be no reason to infer
the existence of one from the appearance of the other. And in a word, such a
person, without more experience, could never employ his conjecture or reasoning
concerning any matter of fact, or be assured of anything beyond what was
immediately present to his memory and senses.
Suppose, again, that he has acquired more experience, and has lived so long in
the world as to have observed familiar objects or events to be constantly con-
joined together; what is the consequence of this experience? He immediately
infers the existence of one object from the appearance of the other. Yet he has not,
by all his experience, acquired any idea or knowledge of the secret power by
which the one object produces the other; nor is it, by any process of reasoning, he
is engaged to draw this inference. But still he ﬁnds himself determined to draw it:
And though he should be convinced that his understanding has no part in the
operation, he would nevertheless continue in the same course of thinking. There
is some other principle which determines him to form such a conclusion.
This principle is Custom or Habit. For wherever the repetition of any particu-
lar act or operation produces a propensity to renew the same act or operation,
without being impelled by any reasoning or process of the understanding, we
always say, that this propensity is the effect of Custom. By employing that word,
we pretend not to have given the ultimate reason of such a propensity. We only
point out a principle of human nature, which is universally acknowledged, and
which is well known by its effects. Perhaps we can push our enquiries no farther,
or pretend to give the cause of this cause; but must rest contented with it as the
ultimate principle, which we can assign, of all our conclusions from experience. It
is sufﬁcient satisfaction, that we can go so far, without repining at the narrowness
of our faculties because they will carry us no farther. And it is certain we here
advance a very intelligible proposition at least, if not a true one, when we assert
that, after the constant conjunction of two objects—heat and ﬂame, for instance,
weight and solidity—we are determined by custom alone to expect the one from
the appearance of the other. This hypothesis seems even the only one which
explains the difﬁculty, why we draw, from a thousand instances, an inference
which we are not able to draw from one instance, that is, in no respect, different
AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
307

from them. Reason is incapable of any such variation. The conclusions which it
draws from considering one circle are the same which it would form upon survey-
ing all the circles in the universe. But no man, having seen only one body move
after being impelled by another, could infer that every other body will move after
a like impulse. All inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom,
not of reasoning.2
Custom, then, is the great guide of human life. It is that principle alone which
renders our experience useful to us, and makes us expect, for the future, a similar
train of events with those which have appeared in the past, Without the inﬂuence
of custom, we should be entirely ignorant of every matter of fact beyond what is
immediately present to the memory and senses. We should never know how to
adjust means to ends, or to employ our natural powers in the production of any
effect. There would be an end at once of all action, as well as of the chief part of
speculation.
But here it may be proper to remark, that though our conclusions from experi-
ence carry us beyond our memory and senses, and assure us of matters of fact
which happened in the most distant places and most remote ages, yet some fact
must always be present to the senses or memory, from which we may ﬁrst pro-
ceed in drawing these conclusions. A man, who should ﬁnd in a desert country
the remains of pompous buildings, would conclude that the country had, in
ancient times, been cultivated by civilized inhabitants; but did nothing of this
nature occur to him, he could never form such an inference. We learn the events
of former ages from history; but then we must peruse the volumes in which this
instruction is contained, and thence carry up our inferences from one testimony
to another, till we arrive at the eyewitnesses and spectators of these distant events.
In a word, if we proceed not upon some fact, present to the memory or senses,
our reasonings would be merely hypothetical; and however the particular links
might be connected with each other, the whole chain of inferences would have
nothing to support it, nor could we ever, by its means, arrive at the knowledge of
any real existence. If I ask why you believe any particular matter of fact, which
you relate, you must tell me some reason; and this reason will be some other fact,
connected with it. But as you cannot proceed after this manner, in inﬁnitum, you
must at last terminate in some fact, which is present to your memory or senses; or
must allow that your belief is entirely without foundation.
What, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter? A simple one; though, it
must be confessed, pretty remote from the common theories of philosophy. All
belief of matter of fact or real existence is derived merely from some object,
present to the memory or senses, and a customary conjunction between that and
some other object. Or in other words; having found, in many instances, that any
two kinds of objects—ﬂame and heat, snow and cold—have always been con-
joined together; if ﬂame or snow be presented anew to the senses, the mind is
carried by custom to expect heat or cold, and to believe that such a quality does
exist, and will discover itself upon a nearer approach. This belief is the necessary
result of placing the mind in such circumstances. It is an operation of the soul,
when we are so situated, as unavoidable as to feel the passion of love, when we
receive beneﬁts; or hatred, when we meet with injuries. All these operations are a
species of natural instincts, which no reasoning or process of the thought and
understanding is able either to produce or to prevent.
DAVID HUME
308

At this point, it would be very allowable for us to stop our philosophical
researches. In most questions we can never make a single step farther; and in all
questions we must terminate here at last, after our most restless and curious
enquiries. But still our curiosity will be pardonable, perhaps commendable, if it
carry us on to still farther researches, and make us examine more accurately the
nature of this belief, and of the customary conjunction, whence it is derived. By
this means we may meet with some explications and analogies that will give
satisfaction; at least to such as love the abstract sciences, and can be entertained
with speculations, which, however accurate, may still retain a degree of doubt
and uncertainty. As to readers of a different taste; the remaining part of this
section is not calculated for them, and the following enquiries may well be
understood, though it be neglected.
Notes
1
The word, Power, is here used in a loose and popular sense. The more accurate
explication of it would give additional evidence to this argument.
2
Nothing is more useful than for writers, even, on moral, political, or physical
subjects, to distinguish between reason and experience, and to suppose, that
these species of argumentation are entirely different from each other. The for-
mer are taken for the mere result of our intellectual faculties, which, by consider-
ing à priori the nature of things, and examining the effects, that must follow from
their operation, establish particular principles of science and philosophy. The
latter are supposed to be derived entirely from sense and observation, by which
we learn what has actually resulted from the operation of particular objects, and
are thence able to infer, what will, for the future, result from them. Thus, for
instance, the limitations and restraints of civil government, and a legal constitu-
tion, may be defended, either from reason, which reﬂecting on the great frailty
and corruption of human nature, teaches, that no man can safely be trusted with
unlimited authority; or from experience and history, which inform us of the enor-
mous abuses, that ambition, in every age and country, has been found to make
of so imprudent a conﬁdence.
The same distinction between reason and experience is maintained in all our
deliberations concerning the conduct of life; while the experienced statesman,
general physician, or merchant is trusted and followed; and the unpractised
novice, with whatever natural talents endowed, neglected and despised. Though
it be allowed, that reason may form very plausible conjectures with regard to the
consequences of such a particular conduct in such particular circumstances; it
is still supposed imperfect, without the assistance of experience, which is alone
able to give stability and certainty to the maxims, derived from study and
reﬂection.
But notwithstanding that this distinction be thus universally received, both in
the active speculative scenes of life, I shall not scruple to pronounce, that it is, at
bottom, erroneous, at least, superﬁcial.
If we examine those arguments, which, in any of the sciences above men-
tioned, are supposed to be the mere effects of reasoning and reﬂection, they will
be found to terminate, at last, in some general principle or conclusion, for which
we can assign no reason but observation and experience. The only difference
AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING
309

between them and those maxims, which are vulgarly esteemed the result of pure
experience, is, that the former cannot be established without some process of
thought, and some reﬂection on what we have observed, in order to distinguish
its circumstances, and trace its consequences: Whereas in the latter, the
experienced event is exactly and fully familiar to that which we infer as the result
of any particular situation. The history of a Tiberius or a Nero makes us dread a
like tyranny, were our monarchs freed from the restraints of laws and senates:
But the observation of any fraud or cruelty in private life is sufﬁcient, with the aid
of a little thought, to give us the same apprehension; while it serves as an
instance of the general corruption of human nature, and shows us the danger
which we must incur by reposing an entire conﬁdence in mankind. In both cases,
it is experience which is ultimately the foundation of our inference and
conclusion.
There is no man so young and unexperienced, as not to have formed, from
observation, many general and just maxims concerning human affairs and the
conduct of life; but it must be confessed, that, when a man comes to put these in
practice, he will be extremely liable to error, till time and farther experience both
enlarge these maxims, and teach him their proper use and application. In every
situation or incident, there are many particular and seemingly minute circum-
stances, which the man of greatest talent is, at ﬁrst, apt to overlook, though on
them the justness of his conclusions, and consequently the prudence of his
conduct, entirely depend. Not to mention, that, to a young beginner, the general
observations and maxims occur not always on the proper occasions, nor can be
immediately applied with due calmness and distinction. The truth is, an unexpe-
rienced reasoner could be no reasoner at all, were he absolutely unexperienced;
and when we assign that character to any one, we mean it only in a comparative
sense, and suppose him possessed of experience, in a smaller and more
imperfect degree.
QUESTIONS
1
What is a “relation of ideas” proposition?
2
According to Hume, how does one discover cause-and-effect relationships?
3
What is the main conclusion of section IV?
4
According to Hume, why can’t arguments from experience prove that the future
will resemble the past?
5
According to Hume, what causes people to accept inductive reasoning?
DAVID HUME
310

Paul Edwards, “Russell’s Doubts
about Induction”
I.
A. In the celebrated chapter on induction in his Problems of Philosophy, Ber-
trand Russell asks the question: “Have we any reason, assuming that they (laws
like the law of gravitation) have always held in the past, to suppose that these
laws will hold in the future?”1 Earlier in the same chapter he raises the more
speciﬁc question: “Do any number of cases of a law being fulﬁlled in the past
afford evidence that it will be fulﬁlled in the future?”2 We may reformulate these
questions in a way which lends itself more easily to critical discussion as
follows:
(1) Assuming that we possess n positive instances of a phenomenon, observed in
extensively varied circumstances, and that we have not observed a single
negative instance (where n is a large number), have we any reason to suppose
that the n + 1st instance will also be positive?
(2) Is there any number n of observed positive instances of a phenomenon which
affords evidence that the n + 1st instance will also be positive?
It is clear that Russell uses “reason” synonymously with “good reason” and
“evidence” with “sufﬁcient evidence”. I shall follow the same procedure
throughout this article.
Russell asserts that unless we appeal to a non-empirical principle which he
calls the “principle of induction”, both of his questions must be answered in the
negative. “Those who emphasised the scope of induction”, he writes, “wished to
maintain that all logic is empirical, and therefore could not be expected to realise
that induction itself, their own darling, required a logical principle which obvi-
ously could not be proved inductively, and must therefore be a priori if it could be
known at all”.3 “We must either accept the inductive principle on the ground of
its intrinsic evidence or forgo all justiﬁcation of our expectations about the
future”.4
In conjunction with the inductive principle, on the other hand, question (1) at
least, he contends, can be answered in the afﬁrmative. “Whether inferences from
past to future are valid depends wholly, if our discussion has been sound, upon
the inductive principle: if it is true, such inferences are valid.”5 Unfortunately
Paul Edwards, “Russell’s Doubts about Induction,” Mind 58 (1949): 141–63.
311

Russell does not make it clear whether in his opinion the same is true about
question (2).
As against Russell, I shall try to show in this article that question (1) can be
answered in the afﬁrmative without in any way appealing to a non-empirical
principle. I shall also attempt to show that, without in any way invoking a non-
empirical principle, numbers of observed positive instances do frequently afford
us evidence that unobserved instances of the same phenomenon are also positive.
At the outset, I shall concentrate on question (1) since this is the more general
question. Once we have answered question (1) it will require little further effort
to answer question (2).
I want to emphasise here that, to keep this paper within manageable bounds, I
shall refrain from discussing, at any rate explicitly, the questions “Are any induct-
ive conclusions probable?” and “Are any inductive conclusions certain?” I hope
to ﬁll in this gap on another occasion.
It will be well to conduct our discussion in terms of a concrete example. Sup-
posing a man jumps from a window on the ﬁftieth ﬂoor of the Empire State
Building. Is there any reason to suppose that his body will move in the direction
of the street rather than say in the direction of the sky or in a ﬂat plane? There can
be no doubt that any ordinary person and any philosophically unsophisticated
scientist, would answer this question in the afﬁrmative without in any way
appealing to a non-empirical principle. He would say that there is an excellent
reason to suppose that the man’s body will move towards the street. This excel-
lent reason, he would say, consists in the fact that whenever in the past a human
being jumped out of a window of the Empire State Building his body moved in a
downward direction; that whenever any human being anywhere jumped out of
a house he moved in the direction of the ground; that, more generally, whenever a
human body jumped or was thrown off an elevated locality in the neighbourhood
of the earth, it moved downwards and not either upwards or at an angle of 180°;
that the only objects which have been observed to be capable of moving upwards
by themselves possess certain special characteristics which human beings lack;
and ﬁnally in all the other observed conﬁrmations of the theory of gravitation.
B. The philosophers who reject commonsense answers like the one just
described, have relied mainly on three arguments. Russell himself explicitly
employs two of them and some of his remarks make it clear that he also approves
of the third. These three arguments are as follows: (a) Defenders of commonsense
point to the fact that many inferences to unobserved events were subsequently, by
means of direct observation, found to have resulted in true conclusions. How-
ever, any such appeal to observed results of inductive inferences is irrelevant. For
the question at stake is: Have we ever a reason, assuming that all the large
number of observed instances of a phenomenon are positive, to suppose that an
instance which is still unobserved is also positive? The question is not: Have we
ever a reason for supposing that instances which have by now been observed but
were at one time unobserved are positive? In Russell’s own words: “We have
experience of past futures, but not of future futures, and the question is: Will
future futures resemble past futures? This question is not to be answered by an
argument which starts from past futures alone.”6
(b) Cases are known where at a certain time a large number of positive
instances and not a single negative instance had been observed and where the
PAUL EDWARDS
312

next instance nevertheless turned out to be negative. “We know that in spite of
frequent repetitions there sometimes is a failure at the last.”7 The man, for
instance, “who has fed the chicken every day throughout its life at last wrings its
neck instead.”8 Even in the case of the human being who is jumping out of the
Empire State Building, “we may be in no better position than the chicken which
unexpectedly has its neck wrung.”9
(c) The number of positive and negative necessary conditions for the occur-
rence of any event is inﬁnite or at any rate too large to be directly observed by a
human being or indeed by all human beings put together. None of us, for
example, has explored every corner of the universe to make sure that there
nowhere exists a malicious but powerful individual who controls the movements
of the sun by means of wires which are too ﬁne to be detected by any of our
microscopes. None of us can be sure that there is no such Controller who, in
order to play a joke with the human race, will prevent the sun from rising to-
morrow. Equally, none of us can be sure that there is nowhere a powerful indi-
vidual who can, if he wishes, regulate the movement of human bodies by means
of ropes which are too thin to be detected by any of our present instruments.
None of us therefore can be sure than when a man jumps out of the Empire State
Building he will not be drawn skyward by the Controller of Motion. Hence we
have no reason to suppose that the man’s body will move in the direction of the
street and not in the direction of the sky.
In connexion with the last of these three arguments attention ought to be
drawn to a distinction which Russell makes between what he calls the “interest-
ing” and the “uninteresting” doubt about induction.10 The uninteresting doubt is
doubt about the occurrence of a given event on the ground that not all the
conditions which are known to be necessary are in fact known to be present.
What Russell calls the interesting doubt is the doubt whether an event will take
place although all the conditions known to be necessary are known to obtain.
Russell’s “interesting doubt”, if I am not mistaken, is identical with Donald
Williams’s “tragic problem of induction”.11
II.
As I indicated above, it is my object in this article to defend the commonsense
answers to both of Russell’s questions. I propose to show, in other words, that,
without in any way calling upon a non-empirical principle for assistance, we
often have a reason for supposing that a generalisation will be conﬁrmed in the
future as it has been conﬁrmed in the past. I also propose to show that numbers
“of cases of a law being fulﬁlled in the past” do often afford evidence that it will
be fulﬁlled in the future.
However, what I have to say in support of these answers is so exceedingly
simple that I am afraid it will not impress the philosophers who are looking for
elaborate and complicated theories to answer these questions. But I think I can
make my case appear plausible even in the eyes of some of these philosophers if I
describe at some length the general method of resolving philosophical puzzles
which I shall apply to the problem of induction.
Let us consider a simple statement like “there are several thousand physicians
in New York”. We may call this a statement of commonsense, meaning thereby
“RUSSELL’S DOUBTS ABOUT INDUCTION”
313

no more than that anybody above a certain very moderate level of instruction and
intelligence would conﬁdently give his assent to it.
The word “physician”, as ordinarily used, is not entirely free from ambiguity.
At times it simply means “person who possesses a medical degree from a recog-
nised academic institution”. At other times, though less often, it means the same
as “person who possesses what is by ordinary standards a considerable skill in
curing diseases”. On yet other occasions when people say about somebody that
he is a physician they mean both that he has a medical degree and that he pos-
sesses a skill in curing diseases which considerably exceeds that of the average
layman.
Let us suppose that in the commonsense statement “there are several thousand
physicians in New York” the word “physician” is used exclusively in the last-
mentioned sense. This assumption will simplify our discussion, but it is not at all
essential to any of the points I am about to make. It is essential, however, to
realise that when somebody asserts in ordinary life that there are several
thousand physicians in New York, he is using the word “physician” in one or
other of the ordinary senses just listed. By “physician” he does not mean for
example “person who can speedily repair bicycles” or “person who can cure any
conceivable illness in less than two minutes”.
Now, supposing somebody were to say “Really, there are no physicians at all
in New York”, in the belief that he was contradicting and refuting commonsense.
Supposing that on investigation it turns out that by “physician” he does not mean
“person who has a medical degree and who has considerably more skill in curing
disease than the average layman”. It turns out that by “physician” he means
“person who has a medical degree and who can cure any conceivable illness in
less than two minutes”.
What would be an adequate reply to such an “enemy of commonsense”?
Clearly it would be along the following lines: “What you say is true. There are no
physicians in New York—in your sense of the word. There are no persons in New
York who can cure any conceivable disease in less than two minutes. But this in
no way contradicts the commonsense view expressed by “there are several thou-
sand physicians in New York”. For the latter asserts no more than that there are
several thousand people in New York who have a medical degree and who pos-
sess a skill in curing disease which considerably exceeds that of the average
layman. You are guilty of ignoratio elenchi since the proposition you refute is
different from the proposition you set out to refute.”
Our discussion from here on will be greatly simpliﬁed by introducing a few
technical terms. Let us, ﬁrstly, call “ignoratio elenchi by redeﬁnition” any
instance of ignoratio elenchi in which (i) the same sentence expresses both the
proposition which ought to be proved and the proposition which is confused
with it and where (ii) in the latter employment of the sentence one or more of its
parts are used in a sense which is different from their ordinary sense or senses.
Secondly, let us refer to any redeﬁnition of a word which includes all that the
ordinary deﬁnition of the word includes but which includes something else as
well as a “high redeﬁnition”; and to the sense which is deﬁned by a high
redeﬁnition we shall refer as a high sense of the word. Thus “person who has a
medical degree and who is capable of curing any conceivable disease in less than
two minutes” is a high redeﬁnition of “physician” and anybody using the word in
PAUL EDWARDS
314

that fashion is using it in a high sense. Thirdly, we shall refer to a redeﬁnition of a
word which includes something but not all of what the ordinary deﬁnition
includes and which includes nothing else as a “low redeﬁnition”; and the sense
which is deﬁned by a low redeﬁnition we shall call a low sense of the word.
“Person capable of giving ﬁrst aid” or “person who knows means of alleviating
pain” would be low redeﬁnitions of “physician”. Finally, it will be convenient to
call a statement in which a word is used in a high or in a low sense a redeﬁnitional
statement. If the word is used in a high sense we shall speak of a highdeﬁnitional
statement; if it is used in a low sense we shall speak of a lowdeﬁnitional
statement.
A short while ago, I pointed out that the man who says “there are no phys-
icians in New York”, meaning that there are no people in New York who have a
medical degree and who can cure any conceivable illness in less than two minutes,
is not really contradicting the commonsense view that there are physicians in
New York. I pointed out that he would be guilty of what in our technical lan-
guage is called an ignoratio elenchi by redeﬁnition. Now, it seems to me that the
relation between the assertion of various philosophers that past experience never
constitutes a reason for prediction or generalisation except perhaps in conjunc-
tion with a non-empirical principle and the commonsense view that past experi-
ence does often by itself constitute a reason for inferences to unobserved events
has some striking resemblances to the relation between the redeﬁnitional state-
ment about physicians in New York and the commonsense view which this
redeﬁnitional statement fails to refute. And more generally, it strongly seems to
me that almost all the bizarre pronouncements of philosophers—their “para-
doxes”, their “silly” theories—are in certain respects strikingly like the statement
that there are no physicians in New York, made by one who means to assert that
there are no people in New York who have medical degrees and who are capable
of curing any conceivable disease in less than two minutes.
In making the last statement I do not mean to deny that there are also import-
ant differences between philosophical paradoxes and the highdeﬁnitional state-
ment about physicians. There are three differences in particular which have to
be mentioned if my subsequent remarks are not to be seriously misleading.
Firstly, many of the philosophical paradoxes are not without some point; they
do often draw attention to likenesses and differences which ordinary usage
obscures. Secondly, the redeﬁnitions which are implicit in philosophical para-
doxes do quite often, though by no means always, receive a certain backing from
ordinary usage. Frequently, that is to say, there is a secondary sense or trend in
ordinary usage which corresponds to the philosophical redeﬁnition, the “real”
sense of the word.12 Thirdly, philosophical paradoxes are invariably ambiguous
in a sense in which the highdeﬁnitional statement about the physicians is not
ambiguous. . . .13
A. Supposing a man, let us call him M, said to us “I have not yet found any
physicians in New York”. Suppose we take him to Park Avenue and introduce
him to Brown, a man who has a medical degree and who has cured many people
suffering from diseases of the ear. Brown admits, however, that he has not been
able to cure all the patients who ever consulted him. He also admits that many of
his cures took a long time, some as long as eight years. On hearing this, M says
“Brown certainly isn’t a physician”.
“RUSSELL’S DOUBTS ABOUT INDUCTION”
315

Supposing we next take M to meet Black who has a medical degree and who
can prove to M’s and to our satisfaction that he has cured every patient who ever
consulted him. Moreover, none of Black’s cures took more than three years.
However, on hearing that some of Black’s cures took as long as two years and ten
months, M says “Black certainly isn’t a physician either”.
Finally we introduce M to White who has a medical degree and who has cured
every one of his patients in less than six months. When M hears that some of
White’s cures took as long as-ﬁve and a half months, he is adamant and exclaims
“White—what a ridiculous error to call him a physician!”
At this stage, if not much sooner, all of us would impatiently ask M: What on
earth do you mean by “physician”? And we would plainly be justiﬁed in adding:
Whatever you may mean by “physician”, in any sense in which we ever use the
word, Black and Brown and White are physicians and very excellent ones at that.
Let us return now to Russell’s doubt about the sun’s rising to-morrow or about
what would happen to a man who jumps out of the Empire State Building. Let us
consider what Russell would say in reply to the following question: Supposing
that the observed conﬁrmatory instances for the theory of gravitation were a
million or ten million times as extensive as they now are and that they were
drawn from a very much wider ﬁeld; would we then have a reason to suppose
that the man will fall into the street and not move up into the sky? It is obvious
that Russell and anybody taking his view would say “No”. He would reply that
though our expectation that the man’s body will move in the direction of the
street would be even stronger then than it is at present, we would still be without
a reason.
Next, let us imagine ourselves to be putting the following question to Russell:
Supposing the world were such that no accumulation of more than ﬁve hundred
observed positive instances of a phenomenon has ever been found to be followed
by a negative instance; supposing, for instance, that all the chickens who have
ever been fed by the same man for 501 days in succession or more are still alive
and that all the men too are still alive feeding the chickens every day—would the
observed conﬁrmations of the law of gravity in that case be a reason to suppose
that the man jumping out of the Empire State Building will move in the direction
of the street and not in the direction of the sky? I am not quite sure what Russell
would say in reply to this question. Let us assume he would once again answer
“No—past experience would not even then ever be a reason”.
Thirdly and ﬁnally, we have to consider what Russell would say to the follow-
ing question: Supposing we had explored every corner of the universe with
instruments millions of times as ﬁne and accurate as any we now possess and that
we had yet failed to discover any Controller of the movements of human
bodies—would we then in our predictions about the man jumping out of the
Empire State Building be in a better position than the chicken is in predicting its
meals? Would our past observations then be a reason for our prediction? What-
ever Russell would in fact say to this, it is clear that his remarks concerning the
“interesting” doubt about induction require him to answer our question in
the negative. He would have to say something like this: “Our expectation that the
man’s body will move in a downward direction will be even stronger than it is
now. However, without invoking a non-empirical principle, we shall not really be
in a better position than the chicken. We should still fail to possess a reason.”
PAUL EDWARDS
316

As in the case of the man who refused to say that Brown, Black, and White
were doctors, our natural response to all this will be to turn to Russell and say:
What do you mean by “being in a better position”? What on earth do you mean
by “a reason”? And, furthermore, why should anybody be interested in a reason
in your sense of the word?
Russell’s remarks about the need for a general principle like his principle of
induction to serve as major premiss in every inductive argument make it clear
what he means by a reason: like the Rationalists and Hume (in most places), he
means by “reason” a logically conclusive reason and by “evidence” deductively
conclusive evidence. When “reason” is used in this sense, it must be admitted that
past observations can never by themselves be a reason for any prediction what-
soever. But “reason” is not used in this sense when, in science or in ordinary life,
people claim to have a reason for a prediction.
So far as I can see, there are three different trends in the ordinary usage of
“reason for an inductive conclusion” and according to none of them does the
word mean “logically conclusive reason”. Among the three trends one is much
more prominent than the others. It may ﬁtly be called the main sense of the word.
According to this main sense, what we mean when we claim that we have a
reason for a prediction is that the past observations of this phenomenon or of
analogical phenomena are of a certain kind: they are exclusively or predomin-
antly positive, the number of the positive observations is at least fairly large, and
they come from extensively varied sets of circumstances. This is of course a very
crude formulation. But for the purposes of this article it is, I think, sufﬁcient.14
Next, there is a number of trends according to which we mean very much less
than this. Occasionally, for instance, we simply mean that it is reasonable to infer
the inductive conclusion. And clearly it may be reasonable to infer an inductive
conclusion for which we have no reason in the main sense. Thus let us suppose I
know that Parker will meet Schroeder in a game in the near future and that it is
imperative for me not to suspend my judgment but to come to a conclusion as to
who will win. Supposing I know nothing about their present form and nothing
also about the type of court on which the match is to be played. All I know is that
Parker and Schroeder have in the previous two seasons met six times, Parker
scoring four victories to Schroeder’s two. In these circumstances it would be
reasonable for me to predict that Parker will win and unreasonable to predict
that Schroeder will win. Clearly however, in the main sense of the word I have no
reason for either prediction.
Again there is a trend according to which any positive instance of a phenom-
enon is a reason for concluding that the next instance of the phenomenon will be
positive. Thus in the circumstances described in the preceding paragraph, it
would be quite proper to say we have more reason for supposing that Parker will
win than for predicting Schroeder’s victory. It would be quite proper also to say
that we have some reason for supposing that Schroeder will win. It would be
proper to say this even if Schroeder had won only one of the six matches. To
all these and similar trends in the ordinary usage of “reason for an inductive
conclusion” I shall from now on refer as the second ordinary sense of the word.
There can be no doubt that in both these ordinary senses of the word, we
frequently have a reason for an inductive conclusion. In these senses we have an
excellent reason for supposing that the man jumping out of the Empire State
“RUSSELL’S DOUBTS ABOUT INDUCTION”
317

Building will move in the direction of the street, that the sun will rise to-morrow
and that Stalin will die before the year 2000. The answer to question (1) is
therefore a ﬁrm and clear “Yes”: in many domains we have a multitude of
exclusively positive instances coming from extensively different circumstances.
The same is true if “reason” is used in the third ordinary sense. . . . For the time
being it will be convenient and, I think, not at all misleading to speak as if what I
have called the main sense is the only ordinary sense of “reason for an inductive
conclusion”.
It should now be clear that, when Russell says that observed instances are
never by themselves a reason for an inductive conclusion, he is guilty of an
ignoratio elenchi by redeﬁnition. His assertion that the premisses of an inductive
argument never by themselves constitute a logically conclusive reason for an
inductive conclusion in no way contradicts the commonsense assertion that they
frequently constitute a reason in the ordinary sense of the word. Russell’s deﬁn-
ition of “reason” is indeed in one respect not a redeﬁnition since in certain
contexts we do use “reason” to mean “deductively conclusive reason”. However,
it is a redeﬁnition in that we never in ordinary life use “reason” in Russell’s sense
when we are talking about inductive arguments.
Moreover, if “reason” means “deductively conclusive reason”, Russell’s ques-
tions are no more genuinely questions than e.g., the sentence “Is a father a female
parent?” For, since part of the deﬁnition of “inductive inference” is inference
from something observed to something unobserved, it is a contradiction to say
that an inference is both inductive and at the same time in the same respect
deductively conclusive. Russell’s “interesting” doubt, then, is no more sensible or
interesting than the “doubt” whether we shall ever see something invisible or ﬁnd
an object which is a father and also female or an object which is a man but not a
human being.
Notes
1 New York: Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 64.
2 p. 62.
3 Our Knowledge of the External World (London: Allen & Unwin, 1926), p. 226.
4 Problems of Philosophy, p. 68.
5 External World, p. 226.
6 Problems of Philosophy, p. 65.
7 loc. cit., p. 66.
8 loc. cit., p. 63.
9 Ibid.
10 loc. cit., p. 61.
11 “Induction and the Future,” Mind 57 (1948): p. 227.
12 Prominent instances of this phenomenon are “real certainty,” “real knowledge,”
“real sameness,” “real freedom,” and “really contemporaneous events.”
13 The last of these points seems to me to be of enormous importance for under-
standing the phenomenon of philosophical paradoxes.
14 I have so far left out one important element in the main sense of “reason for an
inductive conclusion”. . . . this omission will not affect any of my points.
PAUL EDWARDS
318

QUESTIONS
1
Does Edwards think that we have good reason to accept inductive conclusions?
2
In Edwards’ example of the man who says there are no physicians in New York,
what does the man mean by “physician”?
3
According to Edwards, what does Russell mean by “reason”?
“RUSSELL’S DOUBTS ABOUT INDUCTION”
319

Nelson Goodman, “The New Riddle
of Induction”
1. The old problem of induction
At the close of the preceding lecture, I said that today I should examine how
matters stand with respect to the problem of induction. In a word, I think they
stand ill. But the real difﬁculties that confront us today are not the traditional
ones. What is commonly thought of as the Problem of Induction has been solved,
or dissolved; and we face new problems that are not as yet very widely under-
stood. To approach them, I shall have to run as quickly as possible over some
very familiar ground.
The problem of the validity of judgments about future or unknown cases
arises, as Hume pointed out, because such judgments are neither reports of
experience nor logical consequences of it. Predictions, of course, pertain to what
has not yet been observed. And they cannot be logically inferred from what has
been observed; for what has happened imposes no logical restrictions on what
will happen. Although Hume’s dictum that there are no necessary connections of
matters of fact has been challenged at times, it has withstood all attacks. Indeed, I
should be inclined not merely to agree that there are no necessary connections of
matters of fact, but to ask whether there are any necessary connections at all1—
but that is another story.
Hume’s answer to the question how predictions are related to past experience
is refreshingly non-cosmic. When an event of one kind frequently follows upon
an event of another kind in experience, a habit is formed that leads the mind,
when confronted with a new event of the ﬁrst kind, to pass to the idea of an event
of the second kind. The idea of necessary connection arises from the felt impulse
of the mind in making this transition.
Now if we strip this account of all extraneous features, the central point is that
to the question “Why one prediction rather than another?”, Hume answers that
the elect prediction is one that accords with a past regularity, because this regu-
larity has established a habit. Thus among alternative statements about a future
moment, one statement is distinguished by its consonance with habit and
thus with regularities observed in the past. Prediction according to any other
alternative is errant.
How satisfactory is this answer? The heaviest criticism has taken the righteous
Nelson Goodman, “The New Riddle of Induction,” Fact, Fiction, and Forecast
(Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973).
320

position that Hume’s account at best pertains only to the source of predic-
tions, not their legitimacy; that he sets forth the circumstances under which we
make given predictions—and in this sense explains why we make them—but
leaves untouched the question of our license for making them. To trace ori-
gins, runs the old complaint, is not to establish validity: the real question is
not why a prediction is in fact made but how it can be justiﬁed. Since this
seems to point to the awkward conclusion that the greatest of modern philo-
sophers completely missed the point of his own problem, the idea has
developed that he did not really take his solution very seriously, but regarded
the main problem as unsolved and perhaps as insoluble. Thus we come to
speak of “Hume’s problem” as though he propounded it as a question without
answer.
All this seems to me quite wrong. I think Hume grasped the central question
and considered his answer to be passably effective. And I think his answer is
reasonable and relevant, even if it is not entirely satisfactory. I shall explain
presently. At the moment, I merely want to record a protest against the prevalent
notion that the problem of justifying induction, when it is so sharply dissociated
from the problem of describing how induction takes place, can fairly be called
Hume’s problem.
I suppose that the problem of justifying induction has called forth as much
fruitless discussion as has any half-way respectable problem of modern phil-
osophy. The typical writer begins by insisting that some way of justifying predic-
tions must be found; proceeds to argue that for this purpose we need some
resounding universal law of the Uniformity of Nature, and then inquires how this
universal principle itself can be justiﬁed. At this point, if he is tired, he concludes
that the principle must be accepted as an indispensable assumption; or if he
is energetic and ingenious, he goes on to devise some subtle justiﬁcation for
it. Such an invention, however, seldom satisﬁes anyone else; and the easier course
of accepting an unsubstantiated and even dubious assumption much more sweep-
ing than any actual predictions we make seems an odd and expensive way of
justifying them.
2. Dissolution of the old problem
Understandably, then, more critical thinkers have suspected that there might be
something awry with the problem we are trying to solve. Come to think of it,
what precisely would constitute the justiﬁcation we seek? If the problem is to
explain how we know that certain predictions will turn out to be correct, the
sufﬁcient answer is that we don’t know any such thing. If the problem is to ﬁnd
some way of distinguishing antecedently between true and false predictions, we
are asking for prevision rather than for philosophical explanation. Nor does it
help matters much to say that we are merely trying to show that or why certain
predictions are probable. Often it is said that while we cannot tell in advance
whether a prediction concerning a given throw of a die is true, we can decide
whether the prediction is a probable one. But if this means determining how the
prediction is related to actual frequency distributions of future throws of the die,
surely there is no way of knowing or proving this in advance. On the other hand,
if the judgment that the prediction is probable has nothing to do with subsequent
“THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION”
321

occurrences, then the question remains in what sense a probable prediction is any
better justiﬁed than an improbable one.
Now obviously the genuine problem cannot be one of attaining unattainable
knowledge or of accounting for knowledge that we do not in fact have. A better
understanding standing of our problem can be gained by looking for a moment at
what is involved in justifying non-inductive inferences. How do we justify a
deduction? Plainly, by showing that it conforms to the general rules of deductive
inference. An argument that so conforms is justiﬁed or valid, even if its conclu-
sion happens to be false. An argument that violates a rule is fallacious even if its
conclusion happens to be true. To justify a deductive conclusion therefore
requires no knowledge of the facts it pertains to. Moreover, when a deductive
argument has been shown to conform to the rules of logical inference, we usually
consider it justiﬁed without going on to ask what justiﬁes the rules. Analogously,
the basic task in justifying an inductive inference is to show that it conforms to
the general rules of induction. Once we have recognized this, we have gone a long
way towards clarifying our problem.
Yet, of course, the rules themselves must eventually be justiﬁed. The validity of
a deduction depends not upon conformity to any purely arbitrary rules we may
contrive, but upon conformity to valid rules. When we speak of the rules of
inference we mean the valid rules—or better, some valid rules, since there may be
alternative sets of equally valid rules. But how is the validity of rules to be deter-
mined? Here again we encounter philosophers who insist that these rules follow
from some self-evident axiom, and others who try to show that the rules are
grounded in the very nature of the human mind. I think the answer lies much
nearer the surface. Principles of deductive inference are justiﬁed by their conform-
ity with accepted deductive practice. Their validity depends upon accordance
with the particular deductive inferences we actually make and sanction. If a rule
yields inacceptable inferences, we drop it as invalid. Justiﬁcation of general rules
thus derives from judgments rejecting or accepting particular deductive
inferences.
This looks ﬂagrantly circular. I have said that deductive inferences are justiﬁed
by their conformity to valid general rules, and that general rules are justiﬁed by
their conformity to valid inferences. But this circle is a virtuous one. The point is
that rules and particular inferences alike are justiﬁed by being brought into
agreement with each other. A rule is amended if it yields an inference we are
unwilling to accept; an inference is rejected if it violates a rule we are unwilling to
amend. The process of justiﬁcation is the delicate one of making mutual adjust-
ments between rules and accepted inferences; and in the agreement achieved lies
the only justiﬁcation needed for either.
All this applies equally well to induction. An inductive inference, too, is justi-
ﬁed by conformity to general rules, and a general rule by conformity to accepted
inductive inferences. Predictions are justiﬁed if they conform to valid canons of
induction; and the canons are valid if they accurately codify accepted inductive
practice.
A result of such analysis is that we can stop plaguing ourselves with certain
spurious questions about induction. We no longer demand an explanation for
guarantees that we do not have, or seek keys to knowledge that we cannot
obtain. It dawns upon us that the traditional smug insistence upon a hard-and-
NELSON GOODMAN
322

fast line between justifying induction and describing ordinary inductive practice
distorts the problem. And we owe belated apologies to Hume. For in dealing with
the question how normally accepted inductive judgments are made, he was in fact
dealing with the question of inductive validity.2 The validity of a prediction con-
sisted for him in its arising from habit, and thus in its exemplifying some past
regularity. His answer was incomplete and perhaps not entirely correct; but it
was not beside the point. The problem of induction is not a problem of demon-
stration but a problem of deﬁning the difference between valid and invalid
predictions.
This clears the air but leaves a lot to be done. As principles of deductive
inference, we have the familiar and highly developed laws of logic; but there are
available no such precisely stated and well-recognized principles of inductive
inference. Mill’s canons hardly rank with Aristotle’s rules of the syllogism, let
alone with Principia Mathematica. Elaborate and valuable treatises on prob-
ability usually leave certain fundamental questions untouched. Only in very
recent years has there been any explicit and systematic work upon what I call the
constructive task of conﬁrmation theory.
3. The constructive task of conﬁrmation theory
The task of formulating rules that deﬁne the difference between valid and invalid
inductive inferences is much like the task of deﬁning any term with an established
usage. If we set out to deﬁne the term “tree”, we try to compose out of already
understood words an expression that will apply to the familiar objects that
standard usage calls trees, and that will not apply to objects that standard usage
refuses to call trees. A proposal that plainly violates either condition is rejected;
while a deﬁnition that meets these tests may be adopted and used to decide cases
that are not already settled by actual usage. Thus the interplay we observed
between rules of induction and particular inductive inferences is simply an
instance of this characteristic dual adjustment between deﬁnition and usage,
whereby the usage informs the deﬁnition, which in turn guides extension of the
usage.
Of course this adjustment is a more complex matter than I have indicated.
Sometimes, in the interest of convenience or theoretical utility, we deliberately
permit a deﬁnition to run counter to clear mandates of common usage. We accept
a deﬁnition of “ﬁsh” that excludes whales. Similarly we may decide to deny the
term “valid induction” to some inductive inferences that are commonly con-
sidered valid, or apply the term to others not usually so considered. A deﬁnition
may modify as well as extend ordinary usage.3
Some pioneer work on the problem of deﬁning conﬁrmation or valid induction
has been done by Professor Hempel.4 Let me remind you brieﬂy of a few of his
results. Just as deductive logic is concerned primarily with a relation between
statements—namely the consequence relation—that is independent of their truth
or falsity, so inductive logic as Hempel conceives it is concerned primarily with a
comparable relation of conﬁrmation between statements. Thus the problem is to
deﬁne the relation that obtains between any statement S1 and another S2 if and
only if S1 may properly be said to conﬁrm S2 in any degree.
With the question so stated, the ﬁrst step seems obvious. Does not induction
“THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION”
323

proceed in just the opposite direction from deduction? Surely some of the
evidence-statements that inductively support a general hypothesis are con-
sequences of it. Since the consequence relation is already well deﬁned by deduct-
ive logic, will not be on ﬁrm ground in saying that conﬁrmation embraces the
converse relation? The laws of deduction in reverse will then be among the laws
of induction.
Let’s see where this leads us. We naturally assume further that whatever con-
ﬁrms a given statement conﬁrms also whatever follows from that statement.5 But
if we combine this assumption with our proposed principle, we get the embar-
rassing result that every statement conﬁrms every other. Surprising as it may be
that such innocent beginnings lead to such an intolerable conclusion, the proof is
very easy. Start with any statement S1. It is a consequence of, and so by our
present criterion conﬁrms, the conjunction of S1 and any statement whatsoever—
call it S2. But the conﬁrmed conjunction, S1·S2, of course has S2 as a consequence.
Thus every statement conﬁrms all statements.
The fault lies in careless formulation of our ﬁrst proposal. While some state-
ments that conﬁrm a general hypothesis are consequences of it, not all its con-
sequences conﬁrm it. This may not be immediately evident; for indeed we do in
some sense furnish support for a statement when we establish one of its con-
sequences. We settle one of the questions about it. Consider the heterogeneous
conjunction:
8497 is a prime number and the other side of the moon is ﬂat and Elizabeth
the First was crowned on a Tuesday.
To show that any one of the three component statements is true is to support
the conjunction by reducing the net undetermined claim. But support6 of this
kind is not conﬁrmation; for establishment of one component endows the whole
statement with no credibility that is transmitted to other component statements.
Conﬁrmation of a hypothesis occurs only when an instance imparts to the
hypothesis some credibility that is conveyed to other instances. Appraisal of
hypotheses, indeed, is incidental to prediction, to the judgment of new cases on
the basis of old ones.
Our formula thus needs tightening. This is readily accomplished, as Hempel
points out, if we observe that a hypothesis is genuinely conﬁrmed only by a
statement that is an instance of it in the special sense of entailing not the hypoth-
esis itself but its relativization or restriction to the class of entities mentioned by
that statement. The relativization of a general hypothesis to a class results from
restricting the range of its universal and existential quantiﬁers to the members of
that class. Less technically, what the hypothesis says of all things the evidence
statement says of one thing (or of one pair or other n-ad of things). This obvi-
ously covers the conﬁrmation of the conductivity of all copper by the conductivity
of a given piece; and it excludes conﬁrmation of our heterogeneous conjunction
by any of its components. And, when taken together with the principle that what
conﬁrms a statement conﬁrms all its consequences, this criterion does not yield
the untoward conclusion that every statement conﬁrms every other.
New difﬁculties promptly appear from other directions, however. One is the
infamous paradox of the ravens. The statement that a given object, say this piece
NELSON GOODMAN
324

of paper, is neither black nor a raven conﬁrms the hypothesis that all non-black
things are non-ravens. But this hypothesis is logically equivalent to the hypothesis
that all ravens are black. Hence we arrive at the unexpected conclusion that the
statement that a given object is neither black nor a raven conﬁrms the hypothesis
that all ravens are black. The prospect of being able to investigate ornithological
theories without going out in the rain is so attractive that we know there must be
a catch in it. The trouble this time, however, lies not in faulty deﬁnition, but in
tacit and illicit reference to evidence not stated in our example. Taken by itself,
the statement that the given object is neither black nor a raven conﬁrms the
hypothesis that everything that is not a raven is not black as well as the hypoth-
esis that everything that is not black is not a raven. We tend to ignore the former
hypothesis because we know it to be false from abundant other evidence—from
all the familiar things that are not ravens but are black. But we are required to
assume that no such evidence is available. Under this circumstance, even a much
stronger hypothesis is also obviously conﬁrmed: that nothing is either black or a
raven. In the light of this conﬁrmation of the hypothesis that there are no
ravens, it is no longer surprising that under the artiﬁcial restrictions of the
example, the hypothesis that all ravens are black is also conﬁrmed. And the
prospects for indoor ornithology vanish when we notice that under these same
conditions, the contrary hypothesis that no ravens are black is equally well
conﬁrmed.7
On the other hand, our deﬁnition does err in not forcing us to take into
account all the stated evidence. The unhappy results are readily illustrated. If two
compatible evidence statements conﬁrm two hypotheses, then naturally the con-
junction of the evidence statements should conﬁrm the conjunction of the
hypotheses.8 Suppose our evidence consists of the statements E1 saying that a
given thing b is black, and E2 saying that a second thing c is not black. By our
present deﬁnition, E1 conﬁrms the hypothesis that everything is black, and E2 the
hypothesis that everything is non-black. The conjunction of these perfectly com-
patible evidence statements will then conﬁrm the self-contradictory hypothesis
that everything is both black and non-black. Simple as this anomaly is, it requires
drastic modiﬁcation of our deﬁnition. What given evidence conﬁrms is not what
we arrive at by generalizing from separate items of it, but—roughly speaking—
what we arrive at by generalizing from the total stated evidence. The central idea
for an improved deﬁnition is that, within certain limitations, what is asserted to
be true for the narrow universe of the evidence statements is conﬁrmed for the
whole universe of discourse. Thus if our evidence is E1 and E2, neither the
hypothesis that all things are black nor the hypothesis that all things are non-
black is conﬁrmed; for neither is true for the evidence-universe consisting of b
and c. Of course, much more careful formulation is needed, since some state-
ments that are true of the evidence-universe—such as that there is only one black
thing—are obviously not conﬁrmed for the whole universe. These matters are
taken care of by the studied formal deﬁnition that Hempel develops on this basis;
but we cannot and need not go into further detail here.
No one supposes that the task of conﬁrmation-theory has been completed. But
the few steps I have reviewed—chosen partly for their bearing on what is to
follow—show how things move along once the problem of deﬁnition displaces
the problem of justiﬁcation. Important and long-unnoticed questions are brought
“THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION”
325

to light and answered; and we are encouraged to expect that the many remaining
questions will in time yield to similar treatment.
But our satisfaction is shortlived. New and serious trouble begins to appear.
4. The new riddle of induction
Conﬁrmation of a hypothesis by an instance depends rather heavily upon fea-
tures of the hypothesis other than its syntactical form. That a given piece of
copper conducts electricity increases the credibility of statements asserting that
other pieces of copper conduct electricity, and thus conﬁrms the hypothesis that
all copper conducts electricity. But the fact that a given man now in this room is a
third son does not increase the credibility of statements asserting that other men
now in this room are third sons, and so does not conﬁrm the hypothesis that all
men now in this room are third sons. Yet in both cases our hypothesis is a
generalization of the evidence statement. The difference is that in the former case
the hypothesis is a lawlike statement; while in the latter case, the hypothesis is a
merely contingent or accidental generality. Only a statement that is lawlike—
regardless of its truth or falsity or its scientiﬁc importance—is capable of receiv-
ing conﬁrmation from an instance of it; accidental statements are not. Plainly,
then, we must look for a way of distinguishing lawlike from accidental
statements.
So long as what seems to be needed is merely a way of excluding a few odd and
unwanted cases that are inadvertently admitted by our deﬁnition of conﬁrm-
ation, the problem may not seem very hard or very pressing. We fully expect that
minor defects will be found in our deﬁnition and that the necessary reﬁnements
will have to be worked out patiently one after another. But some further
examples will show that our present difﬁculty is of a much graver kind.
Suppose that all emeralds examined before a certain time t are green.9 At time
t, then, our observations support the hypothesis that all emeralds are green; and
this is in accord with our deﬁnition of conﬁrmation. Our evidence statements
assert that emerald a is green, that emerald b is green, and so on; and each
conﬁrms the general hypothesis that all emeralds are green. So far, so good.
Now let me introduce another predicate less familiar than “green”. It is the
predicate “grue” and it applies to all things examined before t just in case they are
green but to other things just in case they are blue. Then at time t we have, for
each evidence statement asserting that a given emerald is green, a parallel evi-
dence statement asserting that that emerald is grue. And the statements that
emerald a is grue, that emerald b is grue, and so on, will each conﬁrm the general
hypothesis that all emeralds are grue. Thus according to our deﬁnition, the pre-
diction that all emeralds subsequently examined will be green and the prediction
that all will be grue are alike conﬁrmed by evidence statements describing the
same observations. But if an emerald subsequently examined is grue, it is blue
and hence not green. Thus although we are well aware which of the two
incompatible predictions is genuinely conﬁrmed, they are equally well conﬁrmed
according to our present deﬁnition. Moreover, it is clear that if we simply choose
an appropriate predicate, then on the basis of these same observations we shall
have equal conﬁrmation, by our deﬁnition, for any prediction whatever about
other emeralds—or indeed about anything else.10 As in our earlier example, only
NELSON GOODMAN
326

the predictions subsumed under lawlike hypotheses are genuinely conﬁrmed; but
we have no criterion as yet for determining lawlikeness. And now we see that
without some such criterion, our deﬁnition not merely includes a few unwanted
cases, but is so completely ineffectual that it virtually excludes nothing. We are
left once again with the intolerable result that anything conﬁrms anything. This
difﬁculty cannot be set aside as an annoying detail to be taken care of in due
course. It has to be met before our deﬁnition will work at all.
Nevertheless, the difﬁculty is often slighted because on the surface there seem
to be easy ways of dealing with it. Sometimes, for example, the problem is
thought to be much like the paradox of the ravens. We are here again, it is
pointed out, making tacit and illegitimate use of information outside the stated
evidence: the information, for example, that different samples of one material are
usually alike in conductivity, and the information that different men in a lecture
audience are usually not alike in the number of their older brothers. But while it is
true that such information is being smuggled in, this does not by itself settle the
matter as it settles the matter of the ravens. There the point was that when the
smuggled information is forthrightly declared, its effect upon the conﬁrmation of
the hypothesis in question is immediately and properly registered by the deﬁn-
ition we are using. On the other hand, if to our initial evidence we add statements
concerning the conductivity of pieces of other materials or concerning the num-
ber of older brothers of members of other lecture audiences, this will not in the
least affect the conﬁrmation, according to our deﬁnition, of the hypothesis con-
cerning copper or of that concerning this lecture audience. Since our deﬁnition is
insensitive to the bearing upon hypotheses of evidence so related to them, even
when the evidence is fully declared, the difﬁculty about accidental hypotheses
cannot be explained away on the ground that such evidence is being surrepti-
tiously taken into account.
A more promising suggestion is to explain the matter in terms of the effect of
this other evidence not directly upon the hypothesis in question but indirectly
through other hypotheses that are conﬁrmed, according to our deﬁnition, by such
evidence. Our information about other materials does by our deﬁnition conﬁrm
such hypotheses as that all pieces of iron conduct electricity, that no pieces of
rubber do, and so on; and these hypotheses, the explanation runs, impart to the
hypothesis that all pieces of copper conduct electricity (and also to the hypothesis
that none do) the character of lawlikeness—that is, amenability to conﬁrmation
by direct positive instances when found. On the other hand, our information
about other lecture audiences disconﬁrms many hypotheses to the effect that all
the men in one audience are third sons, or that none are; and this strips any
character of lawlikeness from the hypothesis that all (or the hypothesis that none)
of the men in this audience are third sons. But clearly if this course is to be
followed, the circumstances under which hypotheses are thus related to one
another will have to be precisely articulated.
The problem, then, is to deﬁne the relevant way in which such hypotheses
must be alike. Evidence for the hypothesis that all iron conducts electricity
enhances the lawlikeness of the hypothesis that all zirconium conducts elec-
tricity, but does not similarly affect the hypothesis that all the objects on my
desk conduct electricity. Wherein lies the difference? The ﬁrst two hypotheses
fall under the broader hypothesis—call it “H”—that every class of things of the
“THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION”
327

same material is uniform in conductivity; the ﬁrst and third fall only under
some such hypothesis as—call it “K”—that every class of things that are either
all of the same material or all on a desk is uniform in conductivity. Clearly the
important difference here is that evidence for a statement afﬁrming that one of
the classes covered by H has the property in question increases the credibility
of any statement afﬁrming that another such class has this property; while
nothing of the sort holds true with respect to K. But this is only to say that H
is lawlike and K is not. We are faced anew with the very problem we are trying
to solve: the problem of distinguishing between lawlike and accidental
hypotheses.
The most popular way of attacking the problem takes its cue from the fact that
accidental hypotheses seem typically to involve some spatial or temporal restric-
tion, or reference to some particular individual. They seem to concern the people
in some particular room, or the objects on some particular person’s desk; while
lawlike hypotheses characteristically concern all ravens or all pieces of copper
whatsoever. Complete generality is thus very often supposed to be a sufﬁcient
condition of lawlikeness; but to deﬁne this complete generality is by no means
easy. Merely to require that the hypothesis contain no term naming, describing,
or indicating a particular thing or location will obviously not be enough. The
troublesome hypothesis that all emeralds are grue contains no such term; and
where such a term does occur, as in hypotheses about men in this room, it can be
suppressed in favor of some predicate (short or long, new or old) that contains no
such term but applies only to exactly the same things. One might think, then, of
excluding not only hypotheses that actually contain terms for speciﬁc individuals
but also all hypotheses that are equivalent to others that do contain such terms.
But, as we have just seen, to exclude only hypotheses of which all equivalents
contain such terms is to exclude nothing. On the other hand, to exclude all
hypotheses that have some equivalent containing such a term is to exclude
everything; for even the hypothesis
All grass is green
has as an equivalent
All grass in London or elsewhere is green.
The next step, therefore, has been to consider ruling out predicates of certain
kinds. A syntactically universal hypothesis is lawlike, the proposal runs, if its
predicates are “purely qualitative” or “non-positional.”11 This will obviously
accomplish nothing if a purely qualitative predicate is then conceived either as
one that is equivalent to some expression free of terms for speciﬁc individuals, or
as one that is equivalent to no expression that contains such a term; for this only
raises again the difﬁculties just pointed out. The claim appears to be rather that at
least in the case of a simple enough predicate we can readily determine by direct
inspection of its meaning whether or not it is purely qualitative. But even aside
from obscurities in the notion of “the meaning” of a predicate, this claim seems
to me wrong. I simply do not know how to tell whether a predicate is qualitative
or positional, except perhaps by completely begging the question at issue and
NELSON GOODMAN
328

asking whether the predicate is “well-behaved”—that is, whether simple
syntactically universal hypotheses applying it are lawlike.
This statement will not go unprotested. “Consider”, it will be argued, “the
predicates ‘blue’ and ‘green’ and the predicate ‘grue’ introduced earlier, and also
the predicate ‘bleen’ that applies to emeralds examined before time t just in case
they are blue and to other emeralds just in case they are green. Surely it is clear”,
the argument runs, “that the ﬁrst two are purely qualitative and the second two
are not; for the meaning of each of the latter two plainly involves reference to a
speciﬁc temporal position.” To this I reply that indeed I do recognize the ﬁrst two
as well-behaved predicates admissible in lawlike hypotheses, and the second two
as ill-behaved predicates. But the argument that the former but not the latter are
purely qualitative seems to me quite unsound. True enough, if we start with
“blue” and “green”, then “grue” and “bleen” will be explained in terms
of “blue” and “green” and a temporal term. But equally truly, if we start with
“grue” and “bleen”, then “blue” and “green” will be explained in terms of
“grue” and “bleen” and a temporal term; “green”, for example, applies to emer-
alds examined before time t just in case they are grue, and to other emeralds just
in case they are bleen. Thus qualitativeness is an entirely relative matter and does
not by itself establish any dichotomy of predicates. This relativity seems to be
completely overlooked by those who contend that the qualitative character of a
predicate is a criterion for its good behavior.
Of course, one may ask why we need worry about such unfamiliar predicates
as “grue” or about accidental hypotheses in general, since we are unlikely to use
them in making predictions. If our deﬁnition works for such hypotheses as are
normally employed, isn’t that all we need? In a sense, yes; but only in the sense
that we need no deﬁnition, no theory of induction, and no philosophy of know-
ledge at all. We get along well enough without them in daily life and in scientiﬁc
research. But if we seek a theory at all, we cannot excuse gross anomalies result-
ing from a proposed theory by pleading that we can avoid them in practice. The
odd cases we have been considering are clinically pure cases that, though seldom
encountered in practice, nevertheless display to best advantage the symptoms of a
widespread and destructive malady.
We have so far neither any answer nor any promising clue to an answer to the
question what distinguishes lawlike or conﬁrmable hypotheses from accidental
or non-conﬁrmable ones; and what may at ﬁrst have seemed a minor technical
difﬁculty has taken on the stature of a major obstacle to the development of a
satisfactory theory of conﬁrmation. It is this problem that I call the new riddle of
induction.
5. The pervasive problem of projection
At the beginning of this lecture, I expressed the opinion that the problem of
induction is still unsolved, but that the difﬁculties that face us today are not the
old ones; and I have tried to outline the changes that have taken place. The
problem of justifying induction has been displaced by the problem of deﬁning
conﬁrmation, and our work upon this has left us with the residual problem of
distinguishing between conﬁrmable and non-conﬁrmable hypotheses. One might
say roughly that the ﬁrst question was “Why does a positive instance of a
“THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION”
329

hypothesis give any grounds for predicting further instances?”; that the newer
question was “What is a positive instance of a hypothesis?”; and that the crucial
remaining question is “What hypotheses are conﬁrmed by their positive
instances?”
The vast amount of effort expended on the problem of induction in modern
times has thus altered our afﬂictions but hardly relieved them. The original dif-
ﬁculty about induction arose from the recognition that anything may follow
upon anything. Then, in attempting to deﬁne conﬁrmation in terms of the con-
verse of the consequence relation, we found ourselves with the distressingly
similar difﬁculty that our deﬁnition would make any statement conﬁrm any
other. And now, after modifying our deﬁnition drastically, we still get the old
devastating result that any statement will conﬁrm any statement. Until we ﬁnd a
way of exercising some control over the hypotheses to be admitted, our deﬁn-
ition makes no distinction whatsoever between valid and invalid inductive
inferences.
The real inadequacy of Hume’s account lay not in his descriptive approach but
in the imprecision of his description. Regularities in experience, according to
him, give rise to habits of expectation; and thus it is predictions conforming to
past regularities that are normal or valid. But Hume overlooks the fact that some
regularities do and some do not establish such habits; that predictions based on
some regularities are valid while predictions based on other regularities are not.
Every word you have heard me say has occurred prior to the ﬁnal sentence of this
lecture; but that does not, I hope, create any expectation that every word you will
hear me say will be prior to that sentence. Again, consider our case of emeralds.
All those examined before time t are green; and this leads us to expect, and
conﬁrms the prediction, that the next one will be green. But also, all those exam-
ined are grue; and this does not lead us to expect, and does not conﬁrm the
prediction, that the next one will be grue. Regularity in greenness conﬁrms
the prediction of further cases; regularity in grueness does not. To say that valid
predictions are those based on past regularities, without being able to say which
regularities, is thus quite pointless. Regularities are where you ﬁnd them, and you
can ﬁnd them anywhere. As we have seen, Hume’s failure to recognize and deal
with this problem has been shared even by his most recent successors.
As a result, what we have in current conﬁrmation theory is a deﬁnition that is
adequate for certain cases that so far can be described only as those for which it is
adequate. The theory works where it works. A hypothesis is conﬁrmed by state-
ments related to it in the prescribed way provided it is so conﬁrmed. This is a
good deal like having a theory that tells us that the area of a plane ﬁgure is one-
half the base times the altitude, without telling us for what ﬁgures this holds. We
must somehow ﬁnd a way of distinguishing lawlike hypotheses, to which our
deﬁnition of conﬁrmation applies, from accidental hypotheses, to which it does
not.
Today I have been speaking solely of the problem of induction, but what has
been said applies equally to the more general problem of projection. As pointed
out earlier, the problem of prediction from past to future cases is but a narrower
version of the problem of projecting from any set of cases to others. We saw that
a whole cluster of troublesome problems concerning dispositions and possibility
can be reduced to this problem of projection. That is why the new riddle
NELSON GOODMAN
330

of induction, which is more broadly the problem of distinguishing between
projectible and non-projectible hypotheses, is as important as it is exasperating.
Our failures teach us, I think, that lawlike or projectible hypotheses cannot be
distinguished on any merely syntactical grounds or even on the ground that these
hypotheses are somehow purely general in meaning. Our only hope lies in re-
examining the problem once more and looking for some new approach. This will
be my course in the ﬁnal lecture.
Notes
1 Although this remark is merely an aside, perhaps I should explain for the sake of
some unusually sheltered reader that the notion of a necessary connection of
ideas, or of an absolutely analytic statement, is no longer sacrosanct. Some, like
Quine and White, have forthrightly attacked the notion; others, like myself, have
simply discarded it; and still others have begun to feel acutely uncomfortable
about it.
2 A hasty reader might suppose that my insistence here upon identifying the prob-
lem of justiﬁcation with a problem of description is out of keeping with my paren-
thetical insistence in the preceding lecture that the goal of philosophy is some-
thing quite different from the mere description of ordinary or scientiﬁc pro-
cedure. Let me repeat that the point urged there was that the organization of the
explanatory account need not reﬂect the manner or order in which predicates are
adopted in practice. It surely must describe practice, however, in the sense that
the extensions of predicates as explicated must conform in certain ways to the
extensions of the same predicates as applied in practice. Hume’s account is a
description in just this sense. For it is an attempt to set forth the circumstances
under which those inductive judgments are made that are normally accepted as
valid; and to do that is to state necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for, and thus
to deﬁne, valid induction. What I am maintaining above is that the problem of
justifying induction is not something over and above the problem of describing or
deﬁning valid induction.
3 For a fuller discussion of deﬁnition in general see Chapter I of Nelson Goodman,
The Structure of Appearance (Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966).
4 The basic article is ‘A Purely Syntactical Deﬁnition of Conﬁrmation’, Journal of
Symbolic Logic 8 (1943): 122–43. A much less technical account is given in
‘Studies in the Logic of Conﬁrmation’, Mind 54 (1945), pp. 1–26 and 97–121.
Later work by Hempel and others on deﬁning degree of conﬁrmation does not
concern us here.
5 I am not here asserting that this is an indispensable requirement upon a deﬁn-
ition of conﬁrmation. Since our commonsense assumptions taken in combin-
ation quickly lead us to absurd conclusions, some of these assumptions have to
be dropped; and different theorists may make different decisions about which to
drop and which to preserve. Hempel gives up the converse consequence condi-
tion, while Carnap (Logical Foundations of Probability, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1962, pp. 474–6) drops both the consequence condition and
the converse consequence condition. Such differences of detail between
different treatments of conﬁrmation do not affect the central points I am
making in this lecture.
“THE NEW RIDDLE OF INDUCTION”
331

6 Any hypothesis is ‘supported’ by its own positive instances; but support—or
better, direct factual support—is only one factor in conﬁrmation. This factor has
been separately studied by John G. Kemeny and Paul Oppenheim in ‘Degree of
Factual Support’, Philosophy of Science, vol. 19 (1952), pp. 307–24. As will
appear presently, my concern in these lectures is primarily with certain other
important factors in conﬁrmation, some of them quite generally neglected.
7 An able and thorough exposition of this paragraph is given by Israel Schefﬂer in
his Anatomy of Inquiry (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1963), pp. 286–91.
8 The status of the conjunction condition is much like that of the consequence
condition—see note 5. Although Carnap drops the conjunction condition also
(p. 394), he adopts for different reasons the requirement we ﬁnd needed
above: that the total available evidence must always be taken into account (pp.
211–13).
9 Although the example used is different, the argument to follow is substantially
the same as that set forth in my note ‘A Query on Conﬁrmation’, Journal of
Philosophy 43 (1946): 383–5.
10 For instance, we shall have equal conﬁrmation, by our present deﬁnition, for the
prediction that roses subsequently examined will be blue. Let “emerose” apply
just to emeralds examined before time t, and to roses examined later. Then all
emeroses so far examined are grue, and this conﬁrms the hypothesis that all
emeroses are grue and hence the prediction that roses subsequently examined
will be blue. The problem raised by such antecedents has been little noticed, but
is no easier to meet than that raised by similarly perverse consequents.
11 Carnap took this course in his paper ‘On the Application of Inductive Logic’,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 8 (1947), pp. 133–47, which is in
part a reply to my ‘A Query on Conﬁrmation’. The discussion was continued in my
note ‘On Inﬁrmities of Conﬁrmation Theory’, Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 8 (1947), pp. 149–51; and in Carnap’s ‘Reply to Nelson Goodman’,
same journal, same volume, pp. 461–2.
QUESTIONS
1
What is the “old problem” of induction?
2
According to Goodman, how can one show that a rule of inference is justiﬁed?
3
What is the “new problem” of induction?
4
Deﬁne “x is grue.”
5
According to Goodman, is the sentence “All emeralds are grue” projectible?
What about the sentence “All emeralds are green”?
NELSON GOODMAN
332

John Foster, “Induction, Explanation and
Natural Necessity”
I want to examine a possible solution to the problem of induction—one which, as
far as I know, has not been discussed elsewhere. The solution makes crucial use of
the notion of objective natural necessity. For the purposes of this discussion, I
shall assume that this notion is coherent. I am aware that this assumption is
controversial, but I do not have space to examine the issue here.
I
Ayer is one philosopher who denies that the notion is coherent. But he also claims
that even if it were, it would not help in meeting the problem of induction. “If on
the basis of the fact that all the A’s hitherto observed have been B’s we are seeking
for an assurance that the next A we come upon will be a B, the knowledge, if we
could have it, that all A’s are B’s would be quite sufﬁcient; to strengthen the
premise by saying that they not only are but must be B’s adds nothing to the
validity of the inference. The only way in which this move could be helpful would
be if it were somehow easier to discover that all A’s must be B’s than that they
merely were so.”1 And this, Ayer thinks, is clearly impossible. “It must be easier
to discover, or at least ﬁnd some good reason for believing, that such and such an
association of properties always does obtain, than that it must obtain; for it
requires less for the evidence to establish.”2
Despite its initial plausibility, Ayer’s reasoning is fallacious. The ﬁrst point to
notice is that there is a form of empirical inference which is rational, but not
inductive in the relevant sense. In the relevant sense, we make an inductive infer-
ence when, from our knowledge that all the examined As are Bs, we infer that all
As are Bs or that some particular unexamined A is B. In such cases the inductive
inference is just an extrapolation from the evidence—an extension to all or some
of the unexamined cases of what we have found to hold for the examined cases.
Not all rational empirical inferences are of this kind. Thus consider the way in
which chemists have established that water is H2O. No doubt there is a step of
extrapolative induction, from the chemical composition of the samples examined
to the composition of water in general.3 But this is not the only step of inference.
For the composition of the samples is not directly observed: it is detected by
John Foster, “Induction, Explanation and Natural Necessity,” Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society 83 (1982–83): 87–101.
333

inference from how the samples respond to certain tests. The rationale for such
inference is the explanatory power of the conclusion it yields. The conclusion is
accepted because it best explains the experimental ﬁndings—at least it does so in
the framework of a more comprehensive chemical theory which is itself accepted
largely on explanatory grounds. Thus the conclusion is reached not by extrapola-
tion, but by an inference to the best explanation.
Now look again at Ayer’s argument. Ayer is assuming that since “All As must
be Bs” makes a stronger claim than “All As are Bs,” it is no good, in the face of
the sceptic’s challenge, trying to justify an acceptance of the second via an infer-
ence to the ﬁrst. Now if extrapolative induction is the only form of inference
available, Ayer is clearly right. An extrapolation to the stronger conclusion
(which associates A and B across all nomologically possible worlds) already
includes an extrapolation to the weaker (which associates A and B in the actual
world) and hence cannot serve to mediate it: any sceptical objection to the
smaller extrapolation is automatically an objection to the larger. But suppose we
could reach the stronger conclusion by an inference to the best explanation. This
would allow an inference to the stronger conclusion to be what justiﬁes an
acceptance of the weaker. For it might be precisely because the stronger conclu-
sion is stronger that it has the explanatory power required to make it worthy of
acceptance, and thus precisely because we are justiﬁed in accepting the stronger
conclusion on explanatory grounds that we are justiﬁed in accepting the weaker
conclusion it entails. This is the possibility which Ayer has missed and which I
want to examine in the subsequent sections.
II
Let us focus on a particular case. Hitherto (or so I shall assume), as far as our
observations reveal, bodies have always behaved gravitationally—and here I use
‘gravitational behaviour’ to cover all the various kinds of behaviour, such as
stones falling and planets following elliptical orbits, which are normally taken as
manifestations of gravitational force. On this basis we are conﬁdent that bodies
will continue to behave gravitationally in future. But is such conﬁdence well-
founded? Does the past regularity afford rational grounds for expecting its future
continuation? Here is what strikes me as a natural response. The past consistency
of gravitational behaviour calls for some explanation. For given the inﬁnite
variety of ways in which bodies might have behaved non-gravitationally and,
more importantly, the innumerable occasions on which some form of non-
gravitational behaviour might have occurred and been detected, the consistency
would be an astonishing coincidence if it were merely accidental—so astonishing
as to make the accident-hypothesis quite literally incredible. But if the past con-
sistency calls for some explanation, what is that explanation to be? Surely it must
be that gravitational behaviour is the product of natural necessity: bodies have
hitherto always behaved gravitationally because it is a law of nature that bodies
behave in that way. But if we are justiﬁed in postulating a law of gravity to
explain the past consistency, then we are justiﬁed, to at least the same degree,
in expecting gravitational behaviour in future. For the claim that bodies have
to behave gravitationally entails the weaker claim that they always do.
Consequently, our conﬁdence that bodies will continue to behave in this way is
JOHN FOSTER
334

well-founded. The past regularity does indeed, by means of an explanatory
inference, afford rational grounds for expecting its future continuation.
This is just one case. But it illustrates what is arguably a quite general solution
to the problem of induction—a solution which is summarized by the following
three claims:
(1) The only primitive rational form of empirical inference is inference to the
best explanation.
(2) When rational, an extrapolative inference can be justiﬁed by being recast as
the product of two further steps of inference, neither of which is, as such,
extrapolative. The ﬁrst step is an inference to the best explanation—an
explanation of the past regularity whose extrapolation is at issue. The second
is a deduction from this explanation that the regularity will continue or that
it will do so subject to the continued obtaining of certain conditions.
(3) A crucial part of the inferred explanation, and sometimes the whole of it, is
the postulation of certain laws of nature—laws which are not mere general-
izations of fact, but forms of (objective) natural necessity.
How this solution works out in detail will, of course, vary from case to case.
Sometimes the nomological postulates will form the whole explanation (when
the past regularity is a consequence of the laws alone) and sometimes only part
(when the past regularity is only a consequence of the laws together with the
obtaining of certain speciﬁc conditions). Sometimes the predictive conclusion
deduced from the explanation will be categorical (“the regularity will continue”)
and sometimes hypothetical (“the regularity will continue if such and such condi-
tions continue to obtain”). And most importantly, in any particular case, our
choice of the best explanation will depend to a large extent on what other
explanatory theories we have already established or have good reason to accept.
To gain a better understanding of the proposed solution—let us call it the
nomological-explanatory solution (NES)—three points must now be noted.
(i) Some philosophers hold, contrary to claim (1), that extrapolative induction
is a primitive form of rational inference (i.e. inherently rational) and that con-
sequently any attempt to justify it by its reduction to other forms of inference is
misconceived. I cannot accept this view. Suppose (perhaps per impossible) we
knew that there were no laws or other kinds of objective constraint governing the
motions of bodies and thus had to interpret the past consistency of gravitational
behaviour as purely accidental. Such knowledge is logically compatible with the
belief that the regularity will continue. But clearly we would have no grounds for
thinking that it will. For in knowing that there were no constraints, we would
know that on any future occasion any form of behaviour was as objectively likely
as any other, and this would deprive the past consistency of any predictive value.
This result is in line with NES, since the envisaged knowledge explicitly blocks
the explanatory inference: if we know there are no laws, we cannot offer a nomo-
logical explanation of the past regularity. But how can the result be explained
by those who hold induction to be inherently rational? Why should the envis-
aged knowledge undermine the extrapolative inference unless the rationality
of that inference depends on some further inference with whose conclusion the
knowledge logically conﬂicts? I can see no answer to this.
“INDUCTION, EXPLANATION AND NATURAL NECESSITY”
335

(ii) As indicated in (3), the postulated laws are forms of objective natural
necessity. This is crucial. If the laws were mere factual generalizations, or such
generalizations set in the perspective of some attitude we have towards them,4
they would not be explanatory in the relevant sense. In particular, their postula-
tion could not be justiﬁed by an inference of a non-extrapolative kind. Thus
suppose we construed the law of gravity as merely the fact that bodies always
behave gravitationally. There is, I suppose, a sense in which the postulation of
this ‘law’ might be taken to explain the past consistency of gravitational
behaviour—the sense in which to explain a fact is to subsume it under something
more general. But it cannot be this sort of explanation which is involved in NES.
For if it were, the inference to it would be an ordinary step of extrapolative
induction and hence vulnerable to the sceptic’s attack. In subsuming the past
regularity under a universal regularity we would not be diminishing its coinci-
dental character, but merely extending the scope of the coincidence to cover a
larger domain. And it is just this kind of extension which the sceptic calls in
question. The reason we can hope to do better with laws of a genuinely neces-
sitational kind is that, arguably, their postulation can be justiﬁed by reasoning of
a quite different sort. Thus, arguably, we are justiﬁed in postulating a law of
gravity, as a form of objective natural necessity, because it eliminates what would
otherwise be an astonishing coincidence: it enables us to avoid the incredible
hypothesis that the past consistency of gravitational behaviour, over such a vast
range of bodies, occasions and circumstances, is merely accidental.
(iii) It may be wondered whether past regularities really do call for explan-
ation. Suppose I toss a coin 1000 times, randomizing the method and circum-
stances of the tossing from occasion to occasion, and each time it comes down
heads. Let H be the hypothesis that the coin is unbiased, i.e. (in effect) that, for an
arbitrary toss, its chances of heads and tails are equal. On the supposition of H,
the antecedent probability of the run of heads was astronomically small: (1
2)1000. But
while astronomically small, it was no less than the antecedent probability of any
other of the possible sequences of outcomes: for 1000 tosses, there are 21000
possible sequences and on the hypothesis of no bias each has the same prob-
ability. This may lead us to suppose that the occurrence of the run does not count
as evidence against H and hence does not call for any explanation. For it seems
that on the supposition of H we should be no more surprised at the run of heads
than at any other sequence which might have occurred. In the same way we may
be led to suppose that the past consistency of gravitational behaviour calls for no
explanation—that on the supposition of no laws or constraints this consistency
should seem, in retrospect, no more astonishing than any other determinate
sequence of behavioural outcomes.
However, this reasoning is fallacious. Suppose I selected the coin at random
from a bag of coins, knowing that half are unbiased and half are very strongly
biased in favour of heads. Prior to the series of tosses, I could assign equal
epistemic probabilities to H and to the alternative hypothesis (H′) that the coin is
heads-biased. If the reasoning above were sound, the subsequent run would not
alter these probabilities: that is, even after the run I should have no more reason
to accept H′ than H, since on the supposition of H the antecedent probability of
the run was no smaller than that of any other possible sequence. But this is clearly
wrong. Obviously I have very strong grounds for accepting H′. If I were to make
JOHN FOSTER
336

a habit of betting on H′ in such circumstances, I could expect to win almost every
time. For what matter here are not the relative antecedent probabilities of alter-
native sequences on the supposition of H, but the relative antecedent prob-
abilities of the run on the alternative hypotheses. What makes H′ overwhelmingly
more credible given the evidence of the run is that, antecedently, the run was
overwhelmingly more probable on the supposition of H′ than of H. Another
relevant factor, of course, are the relative epistemic probabilities of H and H′
prior to the evidence of the run. Had we set the initial probability of H higher
than H′, this would have reduced the strength of the subsequent grounds for
accepting H′ on the evidence. But to make any practical difference, we would
have had to set the initial probability of H′ astronomically low, simply because of
the extreme difference in the antecedent probabilities of the run on the two
hypotheses.
Let us now apply these considerations to the gravitational case. One hypoth-
esis (H1) is that, in the respects which concern us, the behaviour of bodies is not
subject to any laws or constraints, so that any consistent pursuit of gravitational
behaviour would be purely accidental. What makes the past consistency count so
strongly against H1 is not just that its antecedent probability would be astro-
nomically small on the supposition of H1 (for this would be true of each possible
sequence of behavioural outcomes), but that there are alternative hypotheses on
which this probability would be substantially higher and which do not, on the
face of it, have a sufﬁciently lower initial probability to balance this difference. In
particular, there is the hypothesis (H2) that it is a law of nature that bodies behave
gravitationally. On this hypothesis, which has been proposed as the best explan-
ation of the consistency, the consistency would be antecedently inevitable. As far
as I can see, the only way in which one could rationally retain H1 in the face of the
evidence would be by maintaining that the very notion of natural necessity is
incoherent. This is an arguable position (though I think it is mistaken), but, as I
said at the outset, I am discounting it for the purposes of the present discussion.
III
NES is beginning to look very plausible. However, there are two major objections
to it—in effect, two versions of a single objection. I shall consider one in this
section and the other in the next.
The past consistency of gravitational behaviour would indeed be an astonish-
ing coincidence if it were merely accidental. Let us agree, then, that we are justi-
ﬁed in taking it to be the product of natural necessity: bodies have always
behaved gravitationally, within the scope of our observations, because they had
to. But why should we suppose that this natural necessity holds constant over all
bodies, all places and all times? Why should we suppose that there is a universal
law of gravity rather than one which, while covering our data, is restricted in
scope to some particular set of bodies or some particular portion of the space–
time continuum? For example, with t as the present moment, consider the follow-
ing three nomological hypotheses:
(A) It is a law for all times that (alternatively,5 it is a law that at all times) bodies
behave gravitationally.
“INDUCTION, EXPLANATION AND NATURAL NECESSITY”
337

(B) It is a law for all times before t that (alternatively,5 it is a law that at all times
before t) bodies behave gravitationally.
(C) (B) and there is no more comprehensive gravitational law.
To justify our belief that bodies will continue to behave gravitationally in future,
we have to justify an acceptance of (A) in preference to (C). But how can this be
done by an explanatory inference? For both (A) and (C), by including (B),
account for the gravitational regularity so far. It seems that to justify an accept-
ance of (A) we have to fall back on extrapolative induction, arguing that because
gravitational behaviour has been necessary hitherto, it is likely to be necessary in
future. But if so, we have not answered the sceptical problem. Nor, indeed, do we
seem to have made any progress at all. For if we have to resort to induction at this
point, we might just as well apply it directly to the past regularity without
bringing in nomological explanation at all.
Is this objection decisive? Well it is certainly true that (B), and hence both (A)
and (C), offer explanations, in the relevant sense, of the past regularity. But this
alone is not enough to sustain the objection. What the objector must show is that,
as explanations, (C) is not inferior to (A); or put another way, that (B) is not
inferior to (A) as a terminus of explanation. And it is on this point, I think, that
the defender of NES has a reasonable case. For it seems to me that a law whose
scope is restricted to some particular period is more mysterious, inherently more
puzzling, than one which is temporally universal. Thus if someone were to pro-
pose (C), our response would be to ask why the fundamental law should be time-
discriminatory in that way. Why should t have this unique signiﬁcance in the
structure of the universe that bodies are gravitationally constrained in the period
up to t but not thereafter? Barring the postulation of a malicious demon, these
questions are unanswerable: any answer we could receive would only serve to
show that the fundamental laws were not as suggested—that there was a deeper
explanation in terms of time-impartial laws and a difference, relevant to the
operation of these laws, in the conditions which obtain in the two periods. It is
because these questions seem pertinent and yet are ex hypothesi unanswerable
that we are left feeling that, as hypothesized, nature is inherently puzzling and
precludes an explanation of our empirical data which is both correct and, from
the standpoint of our rational concerns, fully satisfactory. And it is for this reason
that, presented with the data (the past gravitational consistency) and the alterna-
tives (A) and (C), we are justiﬁed in preferring (A). We are justiﬁed in preferring
(A) because it is the better explanation, and it is the better explanation because,
unlike (C), it dispels one mystery without creating another: it dispels the mystery
of past regularity without creating the mystery of capricious necessity. For the
same reason we are justiﬁed in preferring (A) to other hypotheses of a similar
kind to (C) such as those which restrict the scope of the gravitational law to some
particular set of bodies or some particular region of space.
The objector might reply that I am guilty of double standards. I am claiming
that in the case of behaviour we should avoid unexplained regularity, while in the
case of necessity we should avoid unexplained caprice. What I hold to be prob-
lematic is, in the one case, a behavioural uniformity not explained by laws and, in
the other, a variation in behavioural constraints not explained by a difference in
the relevant conditions. But why should our expectations for behaviour and
JOHN FOSTER
338

necessity be so strikingly different? If there is no problem in expecting irregular
behaviour when there are no laws to forbid it, why should there be a problem in
building a measure of irregularity into the laws themselves? Conversely, if it is
reasonable to expect the laws to be uniform over bodies, space and time, given no
positive evidence against it, why should it not also be reasonable to expect uni-
formities of behaviour without the backing of laws? It seems that I am relying on
opposite standards of rationality in the two cases.
Well in a sense I am. But that is just because the cases are quite different. What
makes them quite different is that, unlike the concept of behaviour, the concept of
necessity has some notion of generality built into it. Thus try to imagine a world
in which there are no conspicuous uniformities, but in which for each object x
and time y there is a separate law prescribing how x is to behave at y. In such a
world everything that happens has to happen, by natural necessity, but there is no
uniform system of necessity, or anything remotely resembling one, which
imposes the same constraints on situations of the same kind. Each law is con-
cerned with the behaviour of a unique object at a unique time. Now it seems to
me that such a world is not possible, not because we cannot conceive of such
randomness in behaviour, but because we cannot conceive of such singularity in
the scope of the laws. And this is not just a trivial point about the meaning of the
word “law”—a point which we could avoid by choosing another term. Rather,
we cannot make sense of the claim that it is naturally necessary for a particular
object to behave in a certain way at a particular time except as a claim which is
implicitly more general, concerning how it is naturally necessary for objects of a
certain type to behave in situations of a certain kind. This is not to say that we
cannot conceive of laws (i.e. natural necessities) which are to some degree
restricted by some singular reference. We can, I think, conceive of the law postu-
lated by (C), whose scope is restricted to a certain period. But this is only because
the restriction leaves room for enough generality of scope for the notion of law to
gain purchase. In itself a singular restriction is something which runs counter to
the direction of nomological explanation. This is why we serve the purposes of
explanation better, if there is a need for explanation at all, by postulating laws
without such restrictions, if we can do so compatibly with our data. And in
particular, this is why, given the past consistency of gravitational behaviour, we
rightly regard (A) as a more satisfactory explanation than (C) or any other
explanation of a similarly restricted kind, whether the restriction is to a period, to
a region or to a sample of bodies. None of these considerations which apply to
our concept of natural necessity carry over to our concept of behaviour. There is
no implicit notion of generality in our concept of an object’s behaving in a certain
way at a certain time. Indeed, our rational expectation is that without the back-
ing of laws the total pattern of behaviour will be more or less random, not
because there is anything to ensure this, but because there is nothing to ensure
regularity and because, if it is left to chance, the probability of any signiﬁcant
regularity is exceedingly small. In short, there is something a priori perplexing
about an arbitrary restriction in the laws and something a priori surprising about
a coincidental regularity in behaviour.
“INDUCTION, EXPLANATION AND NATURAL NECESSITY”
339

IV
We must now consider the second major objection to NES. Here again I shall
continue to focus on the case of gravity.
Let us agree that the past consistency of gravitational behaviour calls for
nomological explanation and that, since there is no special reason to impose a
singular restriction, this explanation should be in terms of laws which are uni-
versal in scope. Even so the sceptic has ample room for manoeuvre. All he needs is
some general description “,” not involving, explicitly or implicitly, any singular
reference, such that “” applies to the circumstances of the past regularity but
not, as far as we know, to other circumstances or to those particular circum-
stances with which we are predictively concerned. He can then claim that the past
regularity is adequately explained by the hypothesis:
(D) It is a law that in -circumstances bodies behave gravitationally.
This postulates a universal law, covering all bodies, places and times. But it does
not entail anything about the behaviour of bodies in non- circumstances, i.e. in
precisely those circumstances with which, given the evidence of the past regular-
ity, we are predictively concerned. The sceptic will argue that because (D)
adequately explains the past regularity, then, to the extent that (A) goes beyond
(D), we have no grounds for accepting (A)—in other words, that we have no
grounds, other than inductive, for preferring (A) to the alternative hypothesis,
(E), which conjoins (D) with the denial that there is a more comprehensive gravi-
tational law. Obviously, the same objection could be applied to any case in which
NES was invoked to justify an inductive inference.
It is not easy to evaluate this objection. One difﬁculty is that we need some
general but reasonably detailed account of what makes one explanation better
than another. Clearly there is at least one factor on the side of the sceptic: if two
hypotheses both explain the data and one hypothesis is stronger than the other
(i.e. entails but is not entailed by it), then, other things being equal, the weaker
hypothesis is to be preferred (thus if other things were equal, (D) would be
preferable both to (A) and to (E)). What is far from clear is how we are to
determine whether other things are equal. It is easy enough to say something very
general and non-committal: e.g. other things are not equal just in case the weaker
hypothesis, while explaining the data, postulates some state of affairs which itself
calls for further explanation of a kind which the stronger hypothesis supplies, or
the conjunction of the weaker hypothesis and the negation of the stronger postu-
lates a state of affairs which is inherently more puzzling than the state of affairs
which the stronger hypothesis postulates. But what we need, to evaluate the
objection, is a set of more speciﬁc principles, justiﬁed independently of induction,
which will enable us to decide case by case whether a state of affairs does call for
explanation or is inherently puzzling. And the formulation of such principles
would be a large and difﬁcult task, if it is possible at all. A further difﬁculty, at
least for a defender of NES, is that there is an inﬁnite range of non-equivalent
descriptions which could play the role of “.” To rebut the objection entirely, it
would be necessary to divide this range into a ﬁnite number of categories, show
that the differences within each category were, relative to the present issue,
JOHN FOSTER
340

irrelevant and then rebut the objection for each category. This too promises to be
a difﬁcult and perhaps impossible task, even if, for each separate description, the
objection could be shown to fail.
All I can do here is to examine some of the more obvious cases on their own
merits. One such case would be to model (D) and (E) on the cases of (B) and (C)
considered earlier. Thus suppose “S” is a state-description of the universe at t (i.e.
the present moment) and “Fx” is deﬁned as “the universe is in state S at time x.”
Then we have as examples of (D) and (E):
(D1) It is a law that at any time before an F-time bodies behave gravitationally.
(E1) (D1) and there is no more comprehensive gravitational law.
For all we know, an F-time will not occur in the future. So explaining the regular-
ity by (D1) provides no basis for extrapolation. The question is: are there non-
inductive grounds for claiming that (A) serves better than (D1) as a terminus of
explanation? And this question becomes: is the state of affairs postulated by (E1)
inherently more puzzling than that postulated by (A)? I think the answer is
“Yes,” for two reasons. Firstly, in effect (E1) involves action at a temporal dis-
tance. For if (E1) were true, then (and here I assume, for simplicity, that t is the
only F-time) each past instance of gravitational behaviour would directly caus-
ally depend, in part, on the intrinsic state of the universe at t, there being no
continuous causal chain mediating this causal dependence and spanning the
temporal interval between t and time of the behaviour. Secondly, since t is sub-
sequent to the past instances of gravitational behaviour, the direction of the
causal inﬂuence involved would be from later to earlier: the occurrence of gravi-
tational behaviour in the past would be partly the causal result of the state of the
universe now. In both these respects, and especially the second, what (E1) postu-
lates is inherently more puzzling than what (A) postulates, and consequently (A)
is a better explanation than (E1) and better, as a terminus of explanation,
than (D1).
One way for the sceptic to eliminate both these defects would be as follows.
Take each occasion i of observed gravitational behaviour and form a very
detailed description “F1” of the intrinsic conditions obtaining immediately prior
to this behaviour—a description sufﬁciently detailed to distinguish it, as far as we
know, from the conditions which will obtain on any future occasion or on those
future occasions with which we are predictively concerned. We then let “” be
the disjunction of these descriptions, so that “in -circumstances” means “either
in F1-circumstances or in F2-circumstances or . . .” where the disjunctive list
exactly covers all the speciﬁc conditions in which gravitational behaviour has
occurred and been detected so far. Let us call (D) and (E) thus interpreted (D2)
and (E2). Then (E2) avoids the two mentioned defects of (E1). It does not postulate
any backwards causation or any direct causation at a temporal distance. If (E2)
were true, each past instance of gravitational behaviour would causally depend
solely on the intrinsic conditions obtaining on that occasion.
Are there any other grounds for claiming that (A) is a better explanation than
(E2) and better, as a terminus of explanation, than (D2)? I think there are. The ﬁrst
point to notice is that, in effect, (D2) explains the past regularity of gravitational
behaviour by providing a separate explanation of each past instance. Because “”
“INDUCTION, EXPLANATION AND NATURAL NECESSITY”
341

does not signify a natural generic property, but rather a disjunctive list of the
complex properties separately drawn from the separate instances, it would be less
misleading to reformulate (D2) as a long list of separate hypotheses: “It is a law
that in F1-circumstances bodies behave gravitationally; it is a law that in F2-
circumstances bodies behave gravitationally; . . .”. The whole list would provide
an explanation of the past consistency only in the sense that each hypothesis
provided an ad hoc explanation of one behavioural instance. How then should we
respond to someone who offers (D2) as a terminus of explanation, i.e. asserts
(E2)? Well, we are likely to ﬁnd the state of affairs he postulates inherently puz-
zling, since the way the laws discriminate between  and non- circumstances is
not based on any natural mode of classiﬁcation: it seems peculiar that just the
listed circumstances should be gravitationally efﬁcacious when they are no more
similar to each other than they are to other circumstances. Still, it may be hard to
establish that the grounds for this puzzlement are non-inductive, and for this
reason I would put the stress on a different point. Even though in a sense (D2)
explains the past consistency of gravitational behaviour (by separately explaining
each instance), it leaves us with another consistency which calls for explanation
and which would be very hard to explain if we accepted (E2): for although there
are inﬁnitely many types of circumstances (all those that are non-) to which the
(D2)-law does not apply, whenever we have checked for gravitational behaviour
the circumstances have always been of a type () to which the law does apply.
This would be an astonishing coincidence if it were purely accidental, and, on the
face of it, it would be purely accidental on the supposition of (E2).6 No such
coincidence arises on the supposition of (A), and for this reason, if no other, (A) is
the preferable hypothesis.
These are, of course, only two examples of the way in which the sceptic might
pose the objection and the fact that we can rebut them does not mean that he
cannot turn to others. But the onus is now on him to produce a convincing
case. My guess is that whatever he chooses for “,” there will be some way of
vindicating our preference for (A).
V
It goes without saying that this discussion has been sketchy and inconclusive. I
have concentrated throughout on a single example of inductive inference (that
concerning gravity) and even with respect to this example I have not had space to
deal adequately with the issues raised in the last section. Moreover, I have carried
throughout the controversial assumption that we can make sense of the notion of
objective natural necessity. What I hope I have shown is that, if we can make
sense of this notion, the nomological-explanatory solution is worth considering.
I, for one, ﬁnd it quite plausible.
Notes
1
Ayer, The Central Questions of Philosophy (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson,
1973), pp. 149–50.
2
Ibid. p. 150.
3
I.e. to what pre-theoretically qualiﬁes as water.
JOHN FOSTER
342

4
For an attitudinal account, see Ayer, The Concept of a Person (New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1963), ch. 8.
5
I shall not inquire as to whether these are merely alternative formulations or
differ in substance. As far as I can see, if there is a difference in substance, it
does not affect my argument.
6
Of course it was not accidental that the sceptic chose to postulate a law which
exactly covered the examined cases. But that is beside the point.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Foster, how does a “law” differ from a mere factual generalization?
2
According to Foster, what is the best explanation for the fact that we have always
observed bodies to “behave gravitationally”?
3
Consider the hypothesis that it is a law of nature that all bodies behave gravi-
tationally until time t, but not thereafter. Why, according to Foster, would this not
be a good explanation of our evidence?
“INDUCTION, EXPLANATION AND NATURAL NECESSITY”
343

Colin Howson and Peter Urbach, Scientiﬁc
Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach
Some logical preliminaries
We shall be employing some, but not many, of the notions of elementary logic—
principally just the so-called logical connectives, or truth-functional operations,
“and,” “or,” and “not.” We shall use a fairly standard notation here, symbolising
“and” by “&”, “or” by “v”, and “not” by “∼”. Thus a & b is the conjunction of
the sentences a and b, and it will be taken to be true just when a and b are both
true (we should strictly put “a & b” in quotation marks, but the text would look
awful and where no confusion is likely to arise we shall omit them). “v” is
inclusive “or”, that is, a v b will be false just when a and b are both false. Every
sentence will be taken to be true or false when all its referring terms are assigned a
speciﬁc reference (this is called the condition of bivalence). ∼a, of course, will be
true just when a is false. Occasionally we shall make use of the biconditional
“↔”: a ↔b is true just in case a and b are both true or both false.
We shall use the notation a  b to signify that a entails b deductively; and to say
that a entails b deductively is simply to say that it is impossible, independently of
the state of the world, for a to be true and b false. a  a, a  ∼∼a, a & b  a, a  a v
b, are some simple examples of entailment.
The notation a <=> b will signify that a is equivalent to b; that is to say, it is
impossible, independently of the state of the world, for a and b to possess differ-
ent truth values (i.e. true, false). a <=> a, a <=> ∼∼a, a & b <=> b & a, a v b <=> b
v a are some simple examples of equivalence. It is not difﬁcult to infer that a <=>
b just in case a  b and b  a, and that a <=> b just in case a ↔b is a tautology.
A tautology is a sentence, like “if it is not the case that it is not raining here
now, then it is raining here now”, which is true independently of the state of the
world, and a contradiction is a statement, like “Socrates is a man and it is not the
case that Socrates is a man”, which is false independently of the state of the
world. Both types of statement are easy to generate using the connectives: thus, a
v ∼a, ∼(a & ∼a) are examples of tautologies so generated, and it is fairly obvious
that once one has a tautology, one can obtain a contradiction (or vice versa) by
simply negating it. Moreover, it is also a simple inference from the deﬁnitions of
tautology and contradiction that any statement deductively entails a tautology
and is entailed by a contradiction.
Colin Howson and Peter Urbach, Scientiﬁc Reasoning: The Bayesian Approach (La
Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1989).
344

Our notions of entailment and equivalence are stronger than the purely logical
ones, as they are to be understood as incorporating all of contemporary math-
ematics. Thus, for example, if x is any individual, and A and B any two sets, then
“x  A & x  B” will be regarded as deductively entailing “x  A ∩B”.  as usual
signiﬁes the membership relation, and ∩ the intersection of the two sets A and B,
that is to say, the set whose members are common to A and B. The union A ∪B
of two sets A and B is the set whose members are in A or in B or in both A and B.
The complement B −A of a set A with respect to some set B is the set whose
members are the members of B excluding all those which are also members of A.
“A ⊆B” signiﬁes that A is a subset of B; that is, every member of A is also a
member of B. It follows immediately that every set is a subset of itself. A singleton
set is a set with one member only. The empty set is, as usual, denoted by the
symbol ∅.
The probability calculus
The axioms
Let us assume that we are given a class S of sentences a, b, c, . . . , which may also
contain conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations of any given sentences which it
contains. At the extreme, S may be closed under these truth-functional oper-
ations; that is to say, S may be such that it contains a & b, a v b, ∼a, and ∼b,
whenever it contains a and b. We shall not assume this to be the case, though we
shall assume that S is non-empty, and also that it contains at least one tautology.
A probability function on S is a function which assigns non-negative real num-
bers to the sentences in S, in such a way that every tautology is assigned the value
1, and the sum of the probabilities of two mutually inconsistent sentences is equal
to the probability of their disjunction; in other words, the following three condi-
tions, or axioms, are satisﬁed:
(1) P(a) ≥ 0 for all a in S
(2) P(t) = 1 if t is a tautology
(3) P(a v b) = P(a) + P(b) if a and b and a v b are all in S, and a and b are mutually
inconsistent; i.e., such that one entails the negation of the other.
These three conditions sufﬁce to generate that part of the probability calculus
dealing with so-called absolute, or unconditional, probabilities. (3) is often called
the Additivity Principle, since it states that P adds over disjunctions of pairs of
mutually inconsistent statements. As we shall show shortly, (3) together with the
other axioms implies that P adds over all ﬁnite disjunctions of mutually exclusive
statements.
So-called conditional probabilities are given as a function P(· | ·) of two vari-
ables, called the conditional probability function based on P, which satisﬁes the
condition
(4) P(a | b) = P(a & b)
P(b)
,
SCIENTIFIC REASONING: THE BAYESIAN APPROACH
345

where a, b, and a & b are in S, and where P(b) ≠ 0. Many authors take P(a | b)
to be deﬁned by this condition; we prefer to regard (4), however, as a postulate on
a par with (1)–(3). (This means that “P(a | b)” is in effect a primitive of the theory
in the same way as P(a).) The reason for this is that in some interpretations of the
calculus, independent meanings are given conditional and unconditional prob-
abilities, and equation (4) becomes a synthetic, not an analytic, truth.
In what follows, any result involving P(a | b), for any a, b, will be taken to have
satisﬁed the conditions stated in (4), that P(b) > 0, and that the statements b and
a & b are in S. . . .
Two different interpretations of the probability calculus
We have presented the fundamental principles of the probability calculus in a
rather unmotivated and abstract way because, as has been remarked since the
beginning of the nineteenth century, there are at least two quite distinct
notions of probability, both of which appear to satisfy the formal conditions 1–4
above. According to one of these, the probability calculus expresses the funda-
mental laws regulating the assignment of objective physical probabilities to
events deﬁned in the outcome spaces of stochastic experiments (a classical
example of a stochastic trial, and, because of its simplicity, one we shall make
much use of subsequently, is that of tossing a coin and noting which face falls
uppermost).
The other notion of probability is epistemic. This type of probability is, to
use Laplace’s famous words, “relative in part to [our] ignorance, in part to
[our] knowledge”1: it expresses numerically degrees of uncertainty in the light
of data. We shall be discussing these two notions in considerable detail in the
following chapters; we mention them here not only because they involve dis-
tinct interpretations of the probability-values themselves, but also because the
statements to which they assign probabilities are of quite distinct types. In the
latter, epistemic, interpretation, the statements to which the probabilities are
assigned are speciﬁc hypotheses, like “the Labour Party will not win the next
General Election in the UK”. As we shall see, however, there is more than one
epistemic interpretation, an ostensibly person-independent one, and a frankly
subjective one.
There is also more than one objectivist interpretation of the probability func-
tion, and in at least one of these, the statements describe generic events which can
arise as possible outcomes of a stochastic trial or experiment. But here we are
faced with an apparent difﬁculty: “the coin lands heads” is true or false relative
to speciﬁc tosses of speciﬁc coins. How can a sentence describe the generic event
of landing heads? The answer is, in brief, that it does so by leaving the referents of
the appropriate singular terms in the sentence unspeciﬁed within the type, or
class, from which they come. In a natural language such as English, we are not
accustomed to the notion of a syntactically well-formed but partially
uninterpreted sentence. Within the notation of formal logic, however, the notion
is easily characterised. Thus, B(a), where a is an individual name, or constant,
and B a predicate symbol, describes a speciﬁc individual event when a and B are
both ﬁxed (a might, for example, be made to refer to the next toss of this coin,
and B be the predicate, lands heads). The same formal sentence B(a) will be said
COLIN HOWSON AND PETER URBACH
346

to describe the generic event of this coin’s landing heads, when a is not speciﬁed
as any one of the tosses of this coin, but B remains ﬁxed as the predicate lands
heads, referred to the class of tosses of this coin. It might seem more appropriate
to employ a free-variable formula B(x) to refer to the generic event, and some
authors do. Nothing is wrong with this in principle, but choosing that expression
would deny us the use of ordinary vernacular sentences, where there is no syn-
tactical distinction between terms which have deﬁnite as opposed to indeﬁnite
reference. As probabilities are characteristically assigned to vernacular sentences
and not to the formulas of formal languages, we shall accordingly use one and the
same sentence for both speciﬁc and generic reference, distinguishing those uses by
appropriate contextual stipulation.
The reader should note that even a sentence like “This coin lands heads on the
ith toss” is as ambiguous between speciﬁc and generic reference as “this coin
lands heads”. The term “the ith toss” refers implicitly to a ﬁnite or inﬁnite
sequence of tosses of this coin, but again, we may choose to make that reference
generic or speciﬁc. The motive, speaking for objective-probability theorists of a
certain stripe, for attaching probabilities to generic events, or rather to the sen-
tences characterising those generic events, is, as we shall see in Chapter 9, that the
associated probability numbers are not intended to describe features of the out-
come of any particular performance of the experiment, but, on the contrary, to
express the frequency with which the event in question occurs in long sequences
of performances of that experiment. But some people have also tried to construct
theories of objective probability in which these probabilities are attached to pre-
dictions about the outcome of a speciﬁc performance of some stochastic trial. We
shall defer all discussion of these attempts to the appropriate chapter, however,
and proceed now to derive the familiar “laws” of the probability calculus from
the axioms 1–4.
Useful theorems of the calculus
. . . The ﬁrst result states the well-known fact that the probability of a sentence
and that of its negation sum to 1:
(5) P(∼a) = 1 −P(a)
Proof.
a  ∼∼a. Hence by (3) P(a v ∼a) = P(a) + P(∼a). But by (2) P(a v ∼a) = 1,
whence (5).
Next, it is simple to show that contradictions have zero probability:
(6) P(f) = 0, where f is any contradiction.
Proof.
∼f is a tautology. Hence P(∼f) = 1 and by (5) P(f) = 0.
SCIENTIFIC REASONING: THE BAYESIAN APPROACH
347

Our next result states that equivalent sentences have the same probability:
(7) If a <=> b then P(a) = P(b).
Proof.
First, note that a v ∼b is a tautology if a <=> b. Assume that a <=> b. Then
P(a v ∼b) = 1. Also if a <=> b, then a  ∼∼b; so P(a v ∼b) = P(a) + P(∼b). But
by (5) P(∼b) = 1 −P(b), whence P(a) = P(b).
We can now prove the important property of probability functions that they
respect the entailment relation; to be precise, the probability of any consequence
of a is at least as great as that of a itself:
(8) If a  b then P(a) ≥P(b).
Proof.
If a  b then [a v (b & ∼a)] <=> b. Hence by (7). P(b) = P(a v (b & ∼a)). But a 
∼(b & ∼a) and so P(a v (b & ∼a)) = P(a) + P(b & ∼a). Hence P(b) = P(a) +
P(b & ∼a). But by (1) P(b & ∼a) ≥ 0, and so P(a) ≤P(b).
From (8) it follows that probabilities are numbers between 0 and 1 inclusive:
(9) 0 ≤P(a) ≤ 1, for all a in S.
Proof.
f  a  t, where f is any contradiction and t any tautology. Hence by (6), (2),
and (8): 0 ≤P(a) ≤ 1.
We shall now demonstrate the general (ﬁnite) additivity condition:
(10) Suppose ai  ∼aj, where 1 ≤i < j ≤n. Then P(a1 v . . . v an) = P(a1) + . . .
+ P(an).
Proof.
P(a1 v . . . v an) = P((a1) v . . . v an−1) v an), assuming that n > 1; if not the
result is obviously trivial. But since ai  ∼aj, for all i ≠j, it follows that (a1 v . . .
v an−1)  ∼an, and hence P(a1 v . . . v an) = P(a1 v . . . v an−1) + P(an).
Now simply repeat this for the remaining a1, . . ., an−1 and we have (10). (This is
essentially a proof by mathematical induction.)
Corollary. If a1 v . . . v an is a tautology, and ai  ∼aj for i ≠j, then 1 = P(a1) +
. . . + P(an).
COLIN HOWSON AND PETER URBACH
348

Our next result is often called the “theorem of total probability”.
(11) If a1 v . . . v an is a tautology, and ai  ∼aj for i ≠j, then P(b) = P(b & a1) +
. . . + P(b & an), for any sentence b.
The proof is left to the reader.
A useful consequence of this is the following:
(12) If a1 v . . . v an is a tautology and ai  ∼aj for i ≠j, and P(ai) > 0, then for
any sentence b, P(b) = P(b | a1)P(a1) + . . . + P(b | an) P(an).
Proof.
A direct application of (4) to (11).
Corollary. P(b) = P(b | c)P(c) + P(b | ∼c) P(∼c), for any c.
We shall now develop some of the important properties of the function P(a | b).
Recall that we are assuming in these derivations that the second argument b of
P(a | b) has positive probability (though this of course is not in practice always
going to be the case).
(13) Let b be some ﬁxed sentence, and deﬁne the function Q(a) of the one
variable sentence a to be P(a | b). Then Q(a) satisﬁes axioms 1–3, that is,
it is a probability function.
Now deﬁne “a is a tautology modulo b” simply to mean “b  a” (for then
b  (t ↔a), where t is a tautology, so that relative to b, a and t are
equivalent), and “a and c are exclusive modulo b” to mean “b & a  ∼c”;
then
(14) Q(a) = 1 if a is a tautology modulo b; and the corollary
(15) Q(b) = 1;
(16) Q(a v c) = Q(a) + Q(c), if a and c are exclusive modulo b.
The proofs of (13)–(16) are very straightforward and are left for the
reader.
We are now in a position to state the results which variously go under the name
Bayes’s Theorem. This theorem, or rather these theorems, are named after the
eighteenth century English clergyman Thomas Bayes. Although Bayes, in a post-
humously published and justly celebrated Memoir to the Royal Society of Lon-
don (1763), derived the ﬁrst form of the theorem named after him, the second is
due to the great French mathematician Laplace.
Bayes’s Theorem (ﬁrst form)
(17) P(a | b) = P(b | a) P(a)
P(b)
, where P(a), P(b) > 0.
SCIENTIFIC REASONING: THE BAYESIAN APPROACH
349

Proof.
P(a | b) = P(a & b)
P(b)
 = P(b | a) P(a)
P(b)
.
This result which, as we have seen, is mathematically trivial, is nonetheless of
central importance in the context of so-called Bayesian inference; there a is usu-
ally the hypothesis to be evaluated relative to empirical data b, and this form of
Bayes’s Theorem thus states that the probability of the hypothesis conditional on
the data (or the posterior probability of the hypothesis) is equal to the probability
of the data conditional on the hypothesis (or the likelihood of the hypothesis)
times the probability (the so-called prior probability) of the hypothesis, all div-
ided by the probability of the data.
Bayes’s Theorem (second form)
(18) If P(b1 v . . . v bn) = 1 and bi  ∼bj for i ≠j, and P(bi), P(a) > 0 then
P(bk | a) = P(a | bk) P(bk)

n
i = 1
P(a | bi) P(bi)
The proof is straightforward, and is left to the reader.
(19) (Corollary) If b1 v . . . v bn is a tautology, then if P(bi) > 0 and bi  ∼bj and
P(a) > 0, then
P(bk | a) = P(a | bk) P(bk)

n
i = 1
P(a | bi) P(bi)
. . .
Probabilistic independence
Two sentences h1 and h2 are said to be probabilistically independent (relative to
some given probability measure P) if and only if P(h1 & h2) = P(h1)P(h2). It
follows immediately that, where P(h1) and P(h2) are both greater than zero, so
that the conditional probabilities are deﬁned, P(h1 | h2) = P(h1) and P(h2 | h1) =
P(h2), just in case h1 and h2 are probabilistically independent.
Let us consider a simple example, which is also instructive in that it displays an
interesting relationship between probabilistic independence and the so-called
Classical Deﬁnition of probability. A repeatable experiment is determined by the
conditions that a given a coin is to be tossed twice and the resulting uppermost
faces are to be noted in the sequence in which they occur. Suppose each of the
four possible types of outcome—two heads, two tails, a head at the ﬁrst throw
and a tail at the second, a tail at the ﬁrst throw and a head at the second—has the
COLIN HOWSON AND PETER URBACH
350

same probability, which of course must be one quarter. A convenient way of
describing these outcomes is in terms of the values taken by two random vari-
ables X1 and X2, where X1 is equal to 1 if the ﬁrst toss yields a head and 0 if it is a
tail, and X2 is equal to 1 if the second toss yields a head and 0 if a tail.
According to the Classical Deﬁnition, or as we shall call it, the Classical The-
ory of Probability, which we look at in the next chapter (and which should not be
confused with the Classical Theory of Statistical Inference, which we shall also
discuss), the probability of the sentence “X1 = 1” is equal to the ratio of the
number of those possible outcomes of the experiment which satisfy that sentence,
divided by the total number, namely four, of possible outcomes. Thus, the prob-
ability of the sentence “X1 = 1” is equal to 1
2, as is also, it is easy to check, the
probability of each of the four sentences of the form “Xi = xi”, i = 1 or 2, xi = 0 or
1. By the same Classical criterion, the probability of each of the four sentences
“X1 = x1 & X2 = x2” is 1
4. Hence
P(X1 = x1 & X2 = x2) = P(X1 = x1)P(X2 = x2)
and consequently the pairs of sentences “X1 = x1”, “X2 = x2” are probabilistically
independent (we have avoided answering, or trying to answer here, the question
of what criteria justify the application of the Classical “deﬁnition” . . .).
Notes
1
Pierre Simon de Laplace, Philosophical Essay on Probabilities (New York: Dover
Publications, 1951), p. 6.
QUESTIONS
1
Show how Bayes’ Theorem can be derived from the axioms of probability.
2
Based on the axioms of probability, show that the following equation is true:
P(b) = [P(a) × P(b|a)] + [P(∼a) × P(b|∼a)].
3
When is a “probabilistically independent” of b?
SCIENTIFIC REASONING: THE BAYESIAN APPROACH
351

David Stove, “Another Attempt to Prove
that Induction is Justiﬁed: The Law of
Large Numbers”
The argument to be advanced here . . . is an attempt to prove the falsity of the
minimal sceptical thesis about induction. In particular it is an attempt to prove
that there is at least one inductive inference, thought by non-sceptics to have high
probability, which really does so.
The basic idea of this attempted proof is an old one, going back at least to
Laplace. In order for the version of it which I give in (iii) below to be properly
understood, some account of the history of the argument, and especially of its
more recent history, is an essential preliminary.
(i)
Suppose I learn that a certain coin is a fair one: that is, that any time it is tossed the
probability of its coming up heads is 1
2. Then I conﬁdently infer that if it is tossed a
large number of times, say 3000 times, it will come up heads about half of those
times. I do not infer, with anything like the same degree of conﬁdence, that it will
come up heads about half the time if it is tossed a small number of times, say four
times.
Everyone else, obviously, makes that same inference, and the same non-
inference, as I do. Equally obviously, there is nothing special about the value 1
2. If
we learn that a coin is biased in such a way that at each toss with it the prob-
ability of heads is 1
3, we conﬁdently infer that in a large number of tosses the
relative frequency of heads will be about 1
3, and we do not infer with anything like
the same conﬁdence anything about the relative frequency of heads in a small
number of tosses. Equally obviously, the kind of inference of which I am speaking
is not conﬁned to cases of coins, but is made whenever we learn something of the
form “The probability of the event E at each trial is x.”
In other words we all believe, or at least we all reason in countless cases as
though we believe, “the law of large numbers”: that if the probability of the event
E at each trial is x, then the probability is extremely high that in a large number of
trials E will occur with a relative frequency which is close to x. Nor is this a belief
which has become universal only recently, or only as a result of scientiﬁc
discoveries: the opposite is obviously the case.
David Stove, “Another Attempt to Prove that Induction is Justiﬁed: The Law of Large
Numbers,” The Rationality of Induction (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).
352

Here, then, is a kind of inference—“direct inference,” to give it its old name—
concerning which everyone believes that the difference between a large and a
small number of cases or “trials” makes all the difference to how conclusive the
inference is. Everyone believes, for example, that
(64) This coin will come up heads about half the time in 3000 tosses,
is highly probable in relation to
(65) The probability of heads at each toss with this coin is 1
2;
and everyone believes, on the other hand, that, in relation to (65) it is not highly
probable that
(66) This coin will come up heads about half the time in four tosses.
It is obvious, moreover, that these beliefs are true.
((65) is, of course, a contingent proposition, and in particular, an assessment
of factual probability. But in speaking of the probability of (64) or (66) in rela-
tion to (65), we were of course speaking of logical probability: the probability of
a proposition in relation to another. To make it less likely that the two concepts of
probability should be confused with each other in what follows, I will sometimes
signal the occurrence of the factual concept of probability in the way that Carnap
did, thus: “probability2.” But it may be worth while to point out in addition that,
although various assessments of factual probability are mentioned in this book,
none is asserted; whereas, of course, many assessments of logical probability are
asserted here.)
Human nature is so ﬁrmly wedded to belief in the law of large numbers, in fact,
that we all have an inveterate tendency to go beyond the law, and to believe that a
fair coin, if it is tossed a large number of times, is certain to come up heads about
half the time. This belief has been reproved as a vulgar error by most of the better
sort of writers on probability; and so it is. But the error is by no means conﬁned
to the vulgar. It was one of the greatest philosophers of the modern period who
wrote that “if you suppose a dye to have any biass, however small, to a particular
side, this biass, though, perhaps, it may not appear in a few throws, will certainly
prevail in a great number. . . .”1 Again, what is the frequency interpretation of
probability2, but this error, proclaimed as a conceptual truth?
Still, even if this exaggeration of it is false, the law of large numbers itself is
true. It is also believed, as I have said, semper et unique. Proof of it, however, had
to wait until the publication in 1714 of Jacques Bernoulli’s Ars Conjectandi. That
this book does contain such a proof is one of the principal things which entitle the
theory of probability, in the period from about 1650 to 1850, to the glorious
name of the classical theory.
It may well be asked, though, where is the glory? Everyone believes the law of
large numbers, everyone always has believed it, and the belief is true. What, then,
does a proof of it matter? There is merit in this question, because it is only too
easy to misunderstand the nature of Bernoulli’s achievement.
What Bernoulli proved for the ﬁrst time was that direct inference has high
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
353

probability when the number of trials is large; or, we may say, a fortiori, what he
did was to prove that, where the number of trials is large, direct inference is
justiﬁed. Now it is easy to let oneself say, instead of that, that in Ars Conjectandi
direct inference to large numbers was justiﬁed for the ﬁrst time. To say this makes
Bernoulli’s achievement much more momentous, of course, but it does so at the
price of absurdity, since it implies that before 1714 direct inference to large
number was not justiﬁed! No, what Bernoulli did was to prove for the ﬁrst time
the proposition—the truth of which everyone knew before—that direct inference
to large numbers is justiﬁed.
Now it is true that a proof of a proposition which everyone knew before
cannot matter very much. It can have a certain importance, however, and Ber-
noulli’s proof does, if only for a reason I will now explain.
Direct inference is not the only kind of inference concerning which everyone
thinks that the difference between a small and a larger number of cases makes all
the difference to the conclusiveness of the inference. Another kind is what I will
call “gamblers’ inference.”
Every one of us, if he learns that
(67) At all of the 20 tosses with this fair coin it has come up heads,
is disposed to have an increased degree of belief in the proposition
(68) It will not come up heads next time;
whereas we are not so disposed by learning that
(69) At the two tosses with this fair coin it has come up heads.
Yet of course (68) is not more probable in relation to (67) than it is in relation to
(69). Here, then, is a case of a universal belief, or at least a universal tendency to
belief, that the difference between a larger and a small number of trials makes an
inference more conclusive, but a case in which we are all mistaken in so believing
or tending to believe.
Now suppose that some inﬂuential philosopher had taken it into his head to
maintain that we are all mistaken, in the same way, about direct inference too:
that the difference which large numbers seem to make to the probability of direct
inferences is hallucinatory (as it certainly is in the case of gamblers’ inference).
This philosopher would have been wrong, of course, and everyone would have
known he was wrong. But it could not have been proved, before 1714, that he
was wrong, whereas after that date, it could be. Here, then, is a reason why a
proof of the law of large numbers has at least a certain conditional importance: it
is a disproof of silly philosophical scepticism, should that ever arise, about direct
inference.
(Has it ever arisen in fact? In particular, was Hume a sceptic about direct
inference, as he was about inductive? He certainly should have been, because of
his extreme deductivist bias; but there is more direct evidence as well that he was.
Section XI of Book I, Part III of the Treatise appears to be a discussion of direct
inference, or of something very like it, and a sceptical evaluation of the kind of
DAVID STOVE
354

inference there discussed is certainly implied by the ﬁrst two sentences of section
XIII. It is impossible, however, to be sure of this matter. The main reason is that
Hume shows scarcely any interest in the evaluation of the inferences he is discuss-
ing in XI: his interest is absorbed in their psychodynamics. Anyway, if he was a
sceptic about direct inference, no one noticed; whereas everyone, of course,
noticed his scepticism about inductive inference.)
As well as direct inference and gamblers’ inference, there is a third kind of
inference concerning which we all think that the difference between large number
of trials or cases and a small number makes all the difference to the probability of
the inference. This is what used to be called ‘inverse inference’, that is, direct
inference turned round, or what we call inductive inference. Thus everyone
believes that the inference to
(70) The probability2 of heads with this coin is about 1
2 at each toss
from
(71) This coin came up heads in half of 3000 tosses
is justiﬁed, and that the inference to (70) from
(72) This coin came up heads in half of two tosses,
is not. That is, just as everyone thinks and always has thought that direct infer-
ence to large numbers is justiﬁed, and to small numbers not, so everyone thinks
and always has thought that induction from large numbers is justiﬁed, and from
small numbers not. These universal beliefs further resemble the corresponding
beliefs about direct inference in being obviously true. And to complete the paral-
lel, there is even an inveterate tendency in the inductive case, as there is in the
direct, to go beyond the truth: to believe that, for example, if a coin has come up
heads half the time in a large number of tosses, then it is certain that the coin is an
approximately fair one.
Because of these parallels, and because the theory of probability is, as Laplace
said, only ‘bon sens reduit au calcul’, it was natural to expect, after Bernoulli,
that what the theory of probability had done for direct inference to large num-
bers, it could do for inductive inference from large numbers. There were some
people indeed, both before and after Laplace, who thought that the law of large
numbers itself proved that induction from large numbers is justiﬁed, at the same
time as it proved that direct inference to large numbers is justiﬁed. That is a
natural enough belief, especially if the law of large numbers is formulated as
saying, for example, that between the relative frequency of an event in a large
number of trials, and the probability of the event at each trial, there is most
unlikely to be any wide divergence. Others however, of whom Laplace was one,
thought that, as inductive inference is the ‘inverse’ of direct inference, what was
required to prove it justiﬁed was a proof of an “inverse,” as distinct from the
“direct,” law of large numbers: the proposition that if the relative frequency of an
event E in a large number of trials is x, then the probability is extremely high that
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
355

the probability of E at each trial is close to x. And Laplace in fact advanced what
he claimed was a proof of this proposition.2
But whereas Bernoulli’s argument for the “direct” law has never been seriously
challenged, Laplace’s argument for an “inverse” law of large numbers met with a
very different reception. At ﬁrst, indeed, it seemed to carry conviction with most
readers, and with some it continued to do so for a long time. (You can ﬁnd strong
traces of it as late as 1892, for example in Karl Pearson’s The Grammar of
Science.) But there was always a critical reaction to it as well, and in the longer
run it was this reaction which seemed to prevail entirely. By about the middle of
the twentieth century Keynes,3 Kneale,4 and other weighty authorities, had pro-
nounced Laplace’s argument a tissue of absurdity and confusion.
No one ever doubted the existence of God, it has been said, until the Boyle
lecturers tried to prove it; and there is deep truth in this old joke. For it is a fact,
although the process is evidently not an entirely rational one, that the failure, or
what is believed to be the failure, of an attempt to prove a certain proposition,
prompts people to wonder whether the proposition is true at all. Accordingly,
Laplace being judged to have failed in his attempt to prove that induction from
large numbers is justiﬁed, some people began to wonder whether induction, even
from large numbers, is justiﬁed. That large numbers make all the difference to the
conclusiveness of direct inferences, no one, as I have said, (with the possible
exception of Hume), has ever doubted. But now the thought was bound to arise,
that perhaps induction is different. Perhaps the difference that large numbers
seem to make to the conclusiveness of inductive inference is simply a universal
hallucination, as it is in the case of gamblers’ inference.
The Boyle-lecturers’ effect (as we might call it) was assisted in this case by
another and much more important historical circumstance: the fact that,
between the death of Bernoulli and the birth of Laplace, an inﬂuential phil-
osopher had taken it into his head to maintain, and with all possible emphasis,
what I have just mentioned as a dawning suspicion. To maintain, that is, that in
inductive inference the superiority which we all ascribe to a large over a small
number of cases is entirely imaginary. This was Hume, of course. “Reason is
incapable of any such variation,” he wrote, as that by which “we draw, from a
thousand instances, an inference which we are not able to draw from one
instance . . .”5
This cloud, the cloud of scepticism about induction, was scarcely bigger than a
man’s hand in Laplace’s time; and in any case Laplace claimed and was at ﬁrst
widely believed (as I have said) to have dispersed it. But it was not dispersed. On
the contrary, by the mid-twentieth century the cloud covered the sky. An inﬂuen-
tial minority of philosophers (Popper and his followers) actually embraced
Hume’s inductive scepticism;6 and even the majority who did not were (as I
indicated in Chapter II) “half in love with easeful death” in its sceptical form. The
suspicion that the value ascribed to large numbers is illusory in the case of induc-
tion, just as it is in the case of gamblers’ inference, had penetrated almost every
mind. And whether or not anything else could “justify induction,” one thing
which by 1950 every competent philosopher was supposed to know was that at
any rate the theory of probability could not.7 The Laplacean argument, con-
sequently, seemed to be as dead as a doornail.
It was therefore entirely against the run of play when D.C. Williams published
DAVID STOVE
356

The Ground of Induction in 1947, a book which in essence resurrected the
Laplacean idea, and purported to justify induction by means of a certain version
of the law of large numbers. (In fact, since Williams denies the need for any
‘inversion’ of the law of large numbers, his position is even closer to certain pre-
Laplacean ideas than it is to Laplace himself.) Williams gives two versions of his
central argument. The following is a summary of the second and better version.
Consider a certain class of inferences which are not inductive, but are in fact
closely related to direct inferences: a class which Williams calls “proportional
syllogisms.” These are the instances of the schema
(73)
m
n ths of the F’s are G
x is an F
x is G.
Williams thinks that, while many philosophers are sceptical or uncertain about
the probability of inductive inferences, no one is sceptical or uncertain about the
probability of proportional syllogisms. If you take any instance of (73), everyone
knows that the probability of the conclusion in relation to the premisses is m
n for
example, that the probability of the inference
(74) 95% of ravens are black
Abe is a raven
Abe is black
is 0.95. The same holds for inferences which are proportional syllogisms in a
slightly widened sense, where the major premiss has an indeﬁnite quantiﬁer, such
as “The great majority . . .” or “At least 2
3; . . .” Thus everyone knows, for
example, that the inference
(75) At least 2
3 of ravens are black
Abe is a raven
Abe is black
has high, though indeﬁnite, probability (viz., at least 2
3).
Now, in view of the existence of this fund of common knowledge, it will be
sufﬁcient to justify inductive inference, Williams thinks, if it can be shown that
there exist inductive inferences which have the same high (even if indeﬁnite)
degree of probability as for example (75) has.
This can be proved, Williams thinks, with respect to instances of the schema
(76) m
nths of a large sample S of the F’s are G
About m
nths of the population of F’s are G.
For there is a purely arithmetical law of large numbers, he says, which states that
for any ﬁnite population F, any attribute G, and any proportion m
n in which G
occurs in F, the vast majority of large samples—samples, say, of 3000 or more—
must have approximately the same proportion of G’s in them as the population F
itself does. (Williams sketches the proof of a micro-instance or two of this law.
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
357

Perhaps the best way to approach it ﬁrst is to try the experiment of imagining the
opposite: a population of F’s in which most of the large samples are very unlike
the population in the proportion of G’s that they contain.)
Suppose, then, that our experience has been such as to furnish us with a large
sample S of ravens, of which just 95 per cent are black. By the arithmetical law of
large numbers, the vast majority of large samples of ravens must nearly match the
raven population with respect to the proportion of black ravens that they con-
tain. Hence any large sample of ravens is almost certain to be one of these near-
population-matching, or in other words representative, samples. Hence, by the
principle of the proportional syllogism, our large-sample S is almost certainly a
representative sample. Hence the population of ravens very probably contains
about 95 per cent of black ones. “This is the logical justiﬁcation of induction.”8
The reception of Williams’s book was such as could have been predicted from
the state of opinion that I have sketched. It was thought to be an ignorant or a
perverse attempt to revive an argument justly discredited long before. After
attracting considerable attention, all unfavourable, at the time of its publication,
the book was virtually forgotten soon afterwards.
I ﬁrst read The Ground of Induction about 1955, and no other philosophical
book has ever inﬂuenced me so much. It seemed to me the complete answer, not
only to the inductive sceptics, but to the majority of philosophers who nowadays,
without being sceptics about induction, are afﬂicted with “modern nervousness”
on that subject. Such people, echoing Hume, ask “Why should I believe that the
unobserved resembles the observed? True, I have seen many ravens, and 95 per
cent of them have been black. But why should I believe that the sample with
which nature happens to have furnished me is a representative sample of the
raven population?” To this question Williams, echoing Laplace, replies: “Because
it probably is a representative sample. It probably is, because most large samples
are representative. And most large samples are, because most large samples
arithmetically must be, representative ones.” This answer seemed to me, in 1955,
to be supremely sane, right, and sufﬁcient. In essence, though not in detail, it
seems to me to be so now.
Between then and now, however, I completely lost my initial conﬁdence in
Williams’s book. This was not owing to any of the published criticisms of it; for
these, although numerous, and written in many cases by distinguished philo-
sophers, have all along seemed to me to be entirely worthless. But I slowly
became conscious of various distinctions, all of them essential to a defensible
version of Williams’s argument, which are entirely neglected in his book. (The
distinction between logical and factual probability, and the distinction between
assessments and principles of probability, are two of them.) These were faults of
omission, of course, and therefore not incurable. But ﬁnally I did ﬁnd in the
central argument of his book a fault of commission, and one which seemed to me
incurable and mortal. As this fault was one which is very far from being peculiar
to Williams, I will say what it was.
We often express an assessment of factual probability by saying something of
this form: “The probability of an F being G is such-and-such.” Here we use the
indeﬁnite article “an” or “a,” not as a universal quantiﬁer, nor yet as an existen-
tial quantiﬁer, but in a way which is—well, a way peculiar to assessments
of factual probability! But often, too, we express an assessment of factual
DAVID STOVE
358

probability by using instead a universal quantiﬁer, and ascribing the probability
to each of the individual F’s: “Any F has a probability such-and-such of being
G.” Thus where we might have said, for example, that the probability of an F
being G is 0.9, or is high, or is close to certainty, we often say instead that:
(77)  Any F
has a probability 0.9 of being
has a high probability of being
is very probably a
is almost certainly
is almost certain to be
G.
⎧
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎭
Analogous schemas exist, of course, whatever may be the value ascribed to the
probability: “0.2,” “low,” or whatever.
It is from instances of schemas like (77), I may observe, that what is called the
‘propensity-interpretation’ of factual probability draws all its sustenance. And
such instances, it must be admitted, abound in science, in everyday life, and in
writings about probability, including the preceding pages of this section. They
are everywhere, and no statements could appear more innocent. But this appear-
ance, like that of so much else that we say about probability, is deceptive.
One instance of the schema (77) is the generalization, with which biologists
have made us all familiar, that
(78) Any mutation is almost certain to be harmful.
This, conjoined with
(79) M is a mutation,
entails that
(80) M is almost certain to be harmful.
Indeed, how could it not? What is “any” in (78), if it is not a universal quantiﬁer?
And what is a universal quantiﬁer, if it does not have syllogistic force? But if
“any” in (78) does have syllogistic force, then (78), conjoined, as it consistently
can be, with what might perfectly well be true,
(81) M is a beneﬁcial mutation,
entails that
(82) M is beneﬁcial and almost certain to be harmful.
And (82), unfortunately, either makes no sense at all or is necessarily false.
Now the central argument of Williams’s book fairly swarms with instances of
the schema (77). (For example: “. . . any sizable sample very probably matches its
population in any speciﬁable respect.”9) And I thought for some time that such
statements are actually indispensable to his argument. I therefore thought that I
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
359

had detected in that argument a fatal defect: that it could not dispense with
statements which, conjoined with truths, can generate necessary falsities or
nonsense.
I tried to prove this in a paper which I gave (in a departmental seminar) about
ﬁve years ago. But in the ensuing discussion Mr R.M. Kuhn (then an undergradu-
ate) convinced me that I was mistaken, not as to the philosophy of the matter, but
as to the fact: that Williams’s argument could be so reconstructed as to be free
from any instance of the fatal schema (77).
Soon afterwards Mr Kuhn wrote out at my request his version of Williams’s
argument. This was the immediate predecessor of my version in (iii) below.
Kuhn’s version still had, in my opinion, a number of defects. All of these, I think,
I have removed. Whether I have not, in this process, introduced new defects of
my own into the argument—as I have often done before—remains to be seen.
(ii)
As it is usually formulated, the law of large numbers contains (as we have seen)
not just one but two occurrences of the word ‘probability’ or some synonym of it.
But it is possible to formulate the law in a way which does not contain any
occurrence of any such word, but is purely mathematical. (Perhaps this is why
Keynes said that Bernoulli’s law “exhibits algebraical rather than logical
insight.”10) It was just such a purely mathematical law of large numbers, as I have
said, that Williams invoked in the second version of his central argument.
What corresponds to Williams’s law of large numbers in my version of his
argument will likewise be a purely mathematical proposition. But my premiss
will be far less general than his was, and the amount of “algebraical insight”
required of the reader in order to see that it is true will be much less than that
which William’s argument demanded. Indeed, the mathematics which my
argument requires is, in principle, entirely elementary.
But philosophers are very unused to having any mathematics at all made an
essential part of a philosophical argument. There is therefore a serious danger
that the mathematical part of my argument, despite its being in principle elem-
entary, will present an obstacle to the philosophical reader. The present section is
an attempt to circumvent this danger, by allaying in advance any doubts that a
philosopher might have about the one mathematical premiss that I do employ.
Consider, then, a population consisting of just one million ravens, and the
large samples of ravens which this population contains.
It is not, of course, meant here, by calling a sample “large,” that it is large in
relation to the size of the population. “Large” is used here in an absolute, though
indeﬁnite, sense. For example, it is a sufﬁcient condition of a sample of our
population being a large one, that it contain 3000 ravens.
In this population there must be some particular proportion, either 0 or 1 or
something between, of black ravens. On the value of this proportion will depend
the value of certain other proportions. One of these is, the proportion of 3000-
fold samples which do not differ by more than 3 per cent, in the proportion of
black ravens they contain, from the proportion of black ravens in the population
itself.
Evidently, this proportion will be a maximum, that is, 1, if the proportion of
DAVID STOVE
360

black ravens in the population is 1; in other words, if all ravens in the population
are black. It will be a maximum, similarly, if the proportion of black ravens in the
population is 0; that is, if none of them is black. For in either of these cases, no
large sample (or any sample) can diverge at all, in its proportion of black ravens,
from the proportion of black ravens in the population.
This proportion falls below the maximum, of course, as soon as the proportion
of black ravens in the population departs from the extreme cases of 1 and 0. If
just 99 per cent of the million ravens are black then ‘the chance’ (to speak loosely)
of a 3000-fold sample diverging by more than 3 per cent in its blackness-
frequency from 99 per cent is positive, though small. Similarly if just 1 per cent of
the population is black. The proportion (to speak accurately), among the 3000-
fold samples, of samples which are thus non-divergent or near-matching, though
close to 1, is less than 1 in either of these cases. For in either of these cases the
materials from which not-near-matching samples can be assembled do exist,
though they are not abundant.
This proportion falls still further, obviously, as the blackness-frequency in the
population departs still further from the extremes of 1 and 0. The number of
3000-fold samples whose blackness-frequency departs by more than 3 per cent
from the blackness-frequency of the population will obviously be far greater, if
just 75 per cent of the population is black, for example, than it will be if just 99
per cent of the population is black. For the materials from which such divergent
samples can be assembled are far more abundant in the former case than in
the latter; while of course the total number of 3000-fold samples included in the
population is ﬁxed.
It is clear, therefore, that the ‘worst case’ for a 3000-fold sample of our
population being one which is a near-matcher of the blackness-frequency in
the population, is the case in which the latter is just 50 per cent. It is just then
that “the chance” (as we say) of such a sample departing by more than 3 per cent
from the blackness-frequency in the population is at its maximum. Or, to
speak accurately, it is just then that the proportion of near-population-matching
3000-fold samples, to all 3000-fold samples, is at its lowest.
All of this is very obvious. What is not obvious, but in fact surprising, is this:
that even this worst case is still a very good one. That is, the proportion, among
3000-fold samples, of those which do not diverge by more than 3 per cent in their
blackness-frequency from the blackness-frequency in the population, is still very
high even when the population-frequency is 50 per cent.
What is that proportion in this case?
The number of 3000-fold samples which a population of a million ravens
contains is, of course, simply the number of different combinations, each of 3000
individuals, which can be formed from among a million individuals. The number
of different combinations of n individuals which can be formed from m
individuals is
m!
n! (m −n)!
(“m!” is short for “factorial m,” which in turn means the product of the numbers
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
361

m, m−1, m−2 . . . , m−(m−1).) So the number of 3000-fold samples in a popula-
tion of a million is
1,000,000!
3000! 997,000!.
This, then, is the denominator of the fraction we are seeking.
The numerator is, the number of 3000-fold samples in our population which
do not diverge in blackness-frequency by more than 3 per cent from 50 per cent.
This number will evidently be the sum of: the number of 3000-fold samples
which contains exactly 47 per cent black ones (that is, 1410 black ones); the
number which contains exactly 48 per cent black ones (that is, 1440 black ones);
and so on, up to the number which contains exactly 53 per cent (that is, 1590)
black ones; as well as the number of 3000-fold samples which contain some non-
integral percentage of black ravens between these limits of 47 and 53 per cent
(such as 1414 black ones).
How is each of these numbers to be arrived at? Well, take for example the
number of 3000-fold samples which contain exactly 47 per cent black ones. That
number must be the product of: the number of different combinations of 1410
individuals that could be drawn from the 500,000 black ravens; and the number
of different combinations of 1590 individuals that could be drawn from the
500,000 non-black ones in the population. That is,
500,000!
1410! 498590! ×
500,000!
1590! 498410!.
This, then, is the ﬁrst of the numbers which are to be summed in the numerator of
the fraction we are seeking.
It will be evident to the reader that both the denominator of our fraction, and
each of the numbers to be summed in its numerator, is a number so enormous
that to calculate its value exactly is in practice out of the question, here or in any
other context. But methods of closely approximating such values have been
known for a long time.
When these methods of approximation are applied, the denominator of the
fraction we seek, that is, the number of 3000-fold samples in a population of a
million, turns out to be approximately 108867.9. The ﬁrst of the numbers to be
summed in the numerator, that is, the number of 3000-fold samples which con-
tain just 47 per cent black ones, turns out to be approximately 108864.2. The sum
of all the terms to be summed in the numerator, that is, the number of 3000-fold
samples containing between 47 and 53 per cent black ones, turns out to be
approximately 108867.9 − 0.00087.
That is, in a population of a million ravens just 50 per cent of which are black,
the proportion of 3000-fold samples which match within 3 per cent the
blackness-frequency in the population is:
108867.9 − 0.00087
108867.9
.
DAVID STOVE
362

But this is very high: in fact more than 99 per cent.
This means that even when the blackness-frequency in the population has that
value which makes the proportion of near-matchers among 3000-fold samples
the lowest it can be, that proportion is still more than 90 per cent. In other words,
whatever the proportion of black ravens may be in a population of a million, at
least nine out of ten 3000-fold samples of that population do not diverge from
that proportion by more than 3 per cent in the proportion of black ravens they
contain.
This is, for my purposes, the all-important result. And as the reader has seen,
nothing more is in principle required to reach it than the elementary theory of
combinations. It is true that the mathematics required by the methods of
approximation are not elementary; but everything else is.
The result which is italicized above also holds if, with the sample size still ﬁxed
at 3000, we consider instead a population of two million, or of three million. In
fact it holds independently of any increase in the population-size beyond a
million.
The same result will obviously hold a fortiori if we consider instead samples
which are larger than 3000-fold. (For such samples actually improve the
“chance” of a match.) Hence, with a population of a million or more, at least
nine out of ten 3000-or-more-fold samples will nearly match the blackness-
frequency of the population.
Nor does the above result depend on the population being as small as one
million. It holds, in fact, however small the population is, as long as it is of such
size that it does contain ten 3000-fold samples. Suppose, for example, that the
population contains only 3020 ravens. Then it remains true that at least nine out
of ten 3000-fold samples are near-matching ones, and true a fortiori that at least
nine out of ten 3000-or-more-fold samples are near-matchers. For in this case, of
course, all 3000-or-more-fold samples are near-matching ones.
(iii)
Some abbreviations are needed.
“Pop” will be short for: “the population of ravens, each at least 100 cc in
volume and no two overlapping, on earth between 10,000 bc and ad 10,000.”
By calling a sample of Pop a “near-Pop-matcher with respect to the proportion
of black ravens it contains”, I mean (as in the preceding section) that the propor-
tion of black ravens in that sample does not differ from the proportion of black
ravens in Pop by more than 3 per cent. Similarly for “near” in the proposition E
below: “near 95 per cent” means “between 92 and 98 per cent.”
Certain propositions are abbreviated by capital letters, as follows:
A:
S is a 3020-fold sample of Pop.
B:
At least 9
10ths of the 3000-or-more-fold samples in Pop are near-Pop-
matchers with respect to the proportion of black ravens that they contain.
C:
S is a near-Pop-matcher with respect to the proportion of black ravens it
contains.
D: Just 95 per cent of the ravens in S are black.
E:
The proportion of black ravens in Pop is near 95 per cent.
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
363

(The propositions A–E are all contingent, since each of them entails that Pop
contains at least one raven. None of them, of course, is asserted in the argument
below. They are simply mentioned in certain other propositions, principally
assessments of logical probability.)
Hereafter I omit the cumbrous phrase, always intended to be understood after
“near-Pop-matcher(s),” ‘with respect to the proportion of black ravens that they
(it) contain(s).”
The inference from the conjunction of A and D to E is an inductive one. It is
also an inference which people who are not sceptics about the induction think has
high probability: that is, they think that the conclusion has high probability in
relation to the premisses. The following version of William’s neo-Laplacean
argument is, I think, a proof that the non-sceptics are right in thinking so.
(83) For all x, all m
n , all r > 3000,
P(x is a near-Pop-matcher|x is an r-fold sample of Pop, and at least
m
nths of the 3000-or-more-fold samples in Pop are near-Pop-matchers)
≥m
n.
(This premiss is what corresponds in my version to Williams’s premiss about the
probability of proportional syllogisms: which was that P(x is G|x is F, and m
nths of
the F’s are G) = m
n, for all x, all F, all G, all m
n. What (83) says is simply this. Take
any inference which is an instance of the schema.
(84) At least m
nths of the 3000-fold samples in Pop are near-Pop-matchers
x is an r-fold sample of Pop
x is a near-Pop-matcher;
then, if r > 3000, this inference has probability ≥m
n.)
It follows from (83) that
(85) P(S is a near-Pop-matcher|S is a 3020-fold sample of Pop, and at least
9
10 of the 3000-or-more-fold samples in Pop are near-Pop-matchers) ≥
0.9.
That is, in virtue of the above abbreviations,
(86) P(C|A.B) ≥ 0.9
Now,
(87) Necessarily, if Pop is ﬁnite, and large enough to contain ten 3000-or-
more-fold samples, then at least 9
10 of the 3000-or-more-fold samples
in Pop are near-Pop-matchers.
(This premiss is what corresponds in my version to Williams’s mathematical law
of large numbers. Since (87) is entirely lacking in generality, it is, of course, no
sort of law. But the conditional which it says is necessary is, if what was said in
the preceding section is true, an arithematical truth.)
DAVID STOVE
364

(88) Necessarily, Pop is ﬁnite.
(The members of Pop, it will be recalled, are by deﬁnition conﬁned to a ﬁnite
region of space-time, and required to be of a speciﬁed minimum size, with no
overlaps.)
From (87) and (88) it follows that
(89) Necessarily, if Pop is large enough to contain ten 3000-or-more-fold
samples, then at least 9
10 of the 3000-or-more-fold samples in Pop are
near-Pop-matchers.
From the abbreviations above, it is obvious that
(90) Necessarily, if A then Pop is large enough to contain ten 3000-or-
more-fold samples.
From (90) and (89) it follows that
(91) Necessarily, if A then at least 9
10 of the 3000-or-more-fold samples in
Pop are near-Pop-matchers.
That is, in virtue of the abbreviations above,
(92) Necessarily, if A then B.
It is a principle of logical probability, and in any case obvious, that
(93) If necessarily if p then r, P(q|p.r) = P(q|p).
That is, r is irrelevant to q in relation to p, if it is necessarily true that if p then r.
It follows from (93), (92), and (86) that
(94) P(C|A) ≥ 0.9.
Now,
(95) P(C|A.D) ≥ P(C|A).
That is, “Just 95 per cent of the ravens in S are black” is not unfavourably
relevant (in Keynes’s sense) to “S is a near-Pop-matcher,” in relation to “S is a
3020-fold sample of Pop.” This is obvious.
(If we let D′ be short for “Just 50 per cent of the ravens in S are black,” then D′
is unfavourably relevant to C in relation to A. That is, “S is a near-Pop-matcher”
is less probable, in relation to “S is a 3020-fold sample of Pop and just 50 per cent
of the ravens in S are black,” than it is in relation to the ﬁrst conjunct of that
conjunction. Even this unfavourable relevance is slight in amount: for as we have
seen, (94) P(C|A) ≥ 0.9, and, as the consideration of the “worst case” in the
preceding section will have suggested to the reader, P(C|A.D) is also ≥ 0.9. But in
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
365

any case the unfavourable relevance of D′ is of course entirely consistent with the
not unfavourable relevance of D, which is all that my (95) asserts. To admit it is
no more than to acknowledge what is obvious, that where one proposition is not
unfavourably relevant, a contrary proposition may be. Indeed, the unfavourable
relevance of D′ would furnish us with one of the premisses of a proof of the not-
unfavourable relevance of D, that is, of (95), if it were worth while, as it is not, to
prove (95), rather than to take it as a premiss. For it is a principle of logical
probability that if r, s, t, etc., are exhaustive and pairwise-exclusive alternatives,
then if one of these alternatives is unfavourably relevant to q in relation to p, then
at least one other alternative is not so. The possible blackness-frequencies in S are
exhaustive and pairwise-exclusive alternatives. Whence if one of them is
unfavourably relevant to C in relation to A, at least one other of them is not.)
From (95) and (94) it follows that
(96) P(C|A.D) ≥ 0.9.
It is a principle of logical probability, and in any case obvious, that
(97) P(q|p.r) = P(q.r|p.r).
That is, a premiss of an inference can always be conjoined with the conclusion
salva probabilitate.
It follows from (97) that
(98) P(C|A.D) = P(C.D|A.D).
Whence with (96) it follows that
(99) P(C.D|A.D) ≥ 0.9.
It is obvious, from the abbreviations above, that
(100) Necessarily, if C.D then E.
It is a principle of logical probability, and in any case obvious, that
(101) P(r|p) ≥ P(q|p), if necessarily if q then r.
(That is, the probability, in relation to p, of any r such that q necessitates r,
cannot be less than the probability of q itself.)
It follows from (101), (100), and (99), that
(102) P(E|A.D) ≥ 0.9.
(103) The inference from A.D to E is inductive.
So
(104) The inductive inference from A.D to E has high probability.
DAVID STOVE
366

(iv)
The argument just completed, along with the two arguments of the preceding
chapter, forms the core of the rest of this book. Everything that follows is either
an extension of one of these three arguments, or a defence of one or more of these
arguments or extensions.
While these three arguments are thus all-important for my purposes, they are
not as easily surveyable as one would wish. It is not easy for a reader to remember
all their premisses. For this reason I here collect, in a form which is easily
surveyable, all the premisses of each of the three arguments.
To assist the reader further, I have in each case distinguished between those
premisses which are principles of logical probability, those which are statements
of logical probability, and those which are neither. . . .
The premisses of the argument of Chapter VI:
Principles of logical probability: (93), (97), (101).
Statements of logical probability: (83), (95).
Other premisses: (87), (88), (90), (100), (103).
Notes
1 David Hume, The Philosophical Works, ed. Green and Grose (London: Longmans,
Green & Co., 1882), vol. 3, p. 175.
2 Cf. I. Todhunter, A History of the Mathematical Theory of Probability (Cambridge
and London, 1865; reprinted New York: Chelsea Pub. Co., 1965), pp. 554ff.
3 Cf. J.M. Keynes, A Treatise on Probability (London: Macmillan, 1921), ch. xxx.
4 Cf. W. Kneale, Probability and Induction (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1949),
pp. 201ff.
5 David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, this volume,
pp. 307–8.
6 Cf. David Stove, Popper and After: Four Modern Irrationalists (Oxford: Pergamon
Press, 1982), ch. III.
7 Cf. G.H. von Wright, The Logical Problem of Induction (Oxford: Blackwell, 1957),
pp. 153, 176.
8 D.C. Williams, The Ground of Induction (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1947), p. 97.
9 Ibid., p. 100.
10 Keynes, Treatise on Probability, p. 341.
QUESTIONS
1
What is Stove trying to prove?
2
Give an example of a “direct inference”.
3
What does the law of large numbers say?
4
In Stove’s example, what is meant by a “near-Pop-matcher”?
5
According to Stove, what proportion of 3000-fold samples taken from a popula-
tion of a million would be near-Pop-matchers?
“ANOTHER ATTEMPT . . . LARGE NUMBERS”
367

FURTHER READING ON INDUCTIVE INFERENCE
Earman, John, Bayes or Bust? (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992).
Hempel, Carl, “Inductive Inconsistencies,” Synthese 12 (1960): 439–69.
Huemer, Michael, “The Problem of Defeasible Justiﬁcation,” Erkenntnis 54 (2001):
375–97.
Kornblith, Hilary, Inductive Inference and its Natural Ground (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1995).
Popper, Karl, Conjectures and Refutations (New York: Harper & Row, 1968).
Popper, Karl, The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, 3rd edn (London: Hutchinson, 1968).
Russell, Bertrand, “On Induction,” pp. 60–9 in The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1959).
Skyrms, Brian, Choice and Chance: An Introduction to Inductive Logic, 2nd edn
(Belmont, Calif.: Dickenson, 1975).
Stove, David, Probability and Hume’s Inductive Skepticism (Oxford: Clarendon, 1973).
Stove, David, Anything Goes: Origins of the Cult of Scientiﬁc Irrationalism (Paddington,
Australia: Macleay Press, 1998).
Strawson, P.F., “Hume, Wittgenstein and Induction,” in Skepticism and Naturalism
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1985).
Swinburne, Richard (ed.) The Justiﬁcation of Induction (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1974).
Williams, D.C., The Ground of Induction (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1947).
DAVID STOVE
368

7
THE ARCHITECTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
Some beliefs are supported (justiﬁed) by other beliefs—I may believe A because I
believe B. These other beliefs may themselves be supported by still further beliefs—
perhaps I believe B because of C—and so on. For a given belief or piece of know-
ledge, then, we can ask what is the overall structure of the series of reasons for it—
the structure of its justiﬁcation. There are four ultimate possibilities (see Figure 7.1):
(a)
There could be a ﬁnite series of reasons, none of which repeat. In this case, I
come ﬁnally to some belief for which I have no further reasons.
(b)
There could be a circular series, i.e., one in which, as I state the series of
reasons behind A, I would eventually repeat A (or repeat some other proposition
that was given as a reason for A).
(c)
There could be an inﬁnite regress, i.e., I can go on forever offering new reasons.
(d)
There could be no structure (no reasons) at all. This alternative would hold if the
belief was simply unjustiﬁed.
Figure 7.1
369

For each of these possible structures (with the possible exception of (c)), at least
one philosopher has held that it is the actual structure of the justiﬁcation for all of our
beliefs. Sextus Empiricus and I.T. Oakley, for instance, have held the skeptical pos-
ition that there is no structure of justiﬁcation at all—in other words, that all of our
beliefs are unjustiﬁed, and we have no reasons for believing anything. They arrive at
this position by a process of elimination, on the grounds that alternatives (a), (b), and
(c) do not seem acceptable. The problem with structure (a) is that it requires an
ultimate starting point (this is represented by the dot at the bottom of the diagram for
(a)), but, the skeptics think, any such starting point could only be arbitrary, since by
deﬁnition there is no reason for accepting it. Structure (b) appears to be no better,
since it would involve the classic fallacy of circular reasoning. Your beliefs would have
structure (b) if, for instance, you believe A on the basis of B, which you accept
because of C, which you accept because of A. Nor does structure (c) seem possible,
since it would require one to complete an inﬁnite chain of reasoning. Thus, (d) seems
the only remaining possibility.
In contrast, Laurence BonJour defends a version of the coherence theory of justiﬁ-
cation (or “coherentism” for short). This theory holds that beliefs are justiﬁed by
virtue of their coherence with each other (BonJour makes this claim about empirical
beliefs, but not about a priori beliefs). To illustrate this, imagine that you are a
detective interviewing witnesses to a crime. You interview them separately so they
cannot inﬂuence each other’s answers. Let us say you ask them to report the license
plate number of the getaway car that the bank robbers used. If both of them report
the same number, then you will conclude that that is the correct number. This would
be true even if you initially had no conﬁdence in their veracity (e.g., if you thought they
were as likely as not to misreport), since if they were both mistaken or lying, it would
be highly unlikely that their answers would cohere; it would be much more likely in
that case that they would pick different numbers. Similarly, BonJour thinks, if our
perceptual mechanisms were not generally connected to reality, then it would be
highly unlikely that our various perceptual beliefs, formed by different senses at
different times, would all ﬁt together to give us a coherent picture of the world. The
coherence theory is often seen as a sophisticated way of endorsing structure (b) for
our justiﬁed beliefs: our beliefs are mutually supporting, rather than there being one
belief or group of beliefs that comes ﬁrst and confers justiﬁcation on the others.
Coherentism is usually contrasted with foundationalism, which asserts that all
beliefs have a justiﬁcatory structure of type (a). There are certain starting beliefs,
called “foundational beliefs,” which do not require any reasons for them, and all the
rest of our justiﬁed beliefs are based upon them. This view came under attack from
various quarters in the twentieth century. In “Has Foundationalism Been Refuted?”,
William Alston defends foundationalism against some of these attacks, arguing that
they depend upon misunderstandings of what foundationalism requires. For
instance, it has often been mistakenly assumed that a foundational belief must be
immune from later revision, or that a belief with foundational justiﬁcation can never
be false, or that foundational beliefs must be conceived of as “justifying them-
selves.” Critics have then argued that there are no beliefs having these character-
istics. Alston responds to the criticisms by showing that one need not make such
strong claims in order to be a foundationalist.
Susan Haack has recently proposed a kind of marriage between the traditionally
opposed schools of foundationalism and coherentism. Her view, dubbed “foundherent-
PART II: STRUCTURE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
370

ism,” holds that some beliefs have some degree of foundational (non-inferential)
justiﬁcation, but that at the same time, these beliefs can also be further justiﬁed by
their coherence with each other. The analogy is to a crossword puzzle: each entry is
supported to some degree by the clue for that entry, and entries are also mutually
supported by their ability to ﬁt together. She goes on to outline the factors that go into
determining the level of justiﬁcation of a belief. How justiﬁed a belief is depends upon
how good the subject’s evidence is for that belief, which depends, in turn, upon three
factors: (a) the degree to which his evidence supports the belief, (b) the degree to
which the subject’s evidence is itself justiﬁed (independently of its support by the
belief in question), and (c) the comprehensiveness of the subject’s evidence (a belief
is better justiﬁed by virtue of cohering with a larger body of evidence than it is by
cohering with a smaller body). For purposes of assessing support relations, Haack
proposes to treat a person’s evidence as a body of propositions that includes all the
propositions the person believes, plus propositions correctly and completely describ-
ing the character of the subject’s experiences. She believes her theory avoids some
of the main problems of both coherentism and foundationalism.
THE ARCHITECTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
371

Sextus Empiricus, “The Five Modes”1
The later Sceptics, however, teach ﬁve modes of suspension. These are the follow-
ing. The ﬁrst is based on disagreement. The second is that which produces to
inﬁnity. Third, that based on relativity. Fourth, that from assumption. And ﬁfth,
the argument in a circle.
That based on disagreement is the one in which we ﬁnd that in regard to a
proposed matter there has arisen in the opinions both of people at large and of
the philosophers an unresolved dissension. Because of this dissension we are
unable either to choose or to reject anything, and thus we end with suspension of
judgement. The mode based on the extension to inﬁnity is the one in which we
say that the proof offered for the veriﬁcation of a proposed matter requires a
further veriﬁcation, and this one another, and so on to inﬁnity, so that since we
lack a point of departure for our reasoning, the consequence is suspension of
judgement. That based on relativity is that in which, just as we have already said,
the object appears thus or thus in relation to the thing judging and the things
perceived along with it, while as to its true nature we suspend judgement. The
mode from assumption exists when the dogmatists, in their regressus ad inﬁni-
tum, take as their point of departure a proposition which they do not establish by
reasoning, but simply and without proof assume as conceded to them. The mode
of argument in a circle arises when that which ought itself to be conﬁrmatory of
the matter under investigation requires veriﬁcation from the thing being investi-
gated; at that point, being unable to take either of them to establish the other, we
suspend judgement about both.
That it is possible to refer every question to these modes we shall show brieﬂy
as follows. The object proposed is either an object of sense or an object of
thought; but no matter which it is, it is a disputed point. For some say that the
objects of sense alone are true, some say only the objects of thought are true,
while others say that some objects of sense and some objects of thought are true.
Now, will they assert that the disagreement is resolvable, or irresolvable? If
irresolvable, then we have the necessity of suspension granted; for it is not pos-
sible to pronounce on things when the dispute about them is irresolvable. But if
the dispute is resolvable, then we ask from what quarter the decision is to come.
Taking, for example, the object of sense (to ﬁx our argument on this one ﬁrst), is
it to be judged by an object of sense or by an object of thought? If by an object of
Sextus Empiricus, Scepticism, Man, and God (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University
Press, 1964).
372

sense, then, seeing that our inquiry is about objects of sense, that object too will
need another as conﬁrmation. And if that other is an object of sense, again it will
itself need another to conﬁrm it, and so on to inﬁnity. But if the object of sense
will have to be judged by an object of thought, then, since objects of thought also
are a matter of dispute, this object, being an object of thought, will require
judgment and conﬁrmation. Where, then, is the conﬁrmation to come from? If it
is to be conﬁrmed by an object of thought, we shall likewise have an extension ad
inﬁnitum; but if by an object of sense, the mode of circular reasoning is intro-
duced, because an object of thought was employed for the conﬁrmation of the
object of sense and an object of sense for the conﬁrmation of the object of
thought.
If, however, our interlocutor should try to escape from these conclusions and
claim the right to assume, as a concession without proof, some proposition serv-
ing to prove the rest of his argument, then the mode of assumption will be
brought in, which leaves him no way out. For if a person is worthy of credence
when he makes an assumption, then we shall in each case also be not less worthy
of credence if we make the opposite assumption. And if the person making the
assumption assumes something which is true, he renders it suspicious by taking it
on assumption instead of proving it. But if what he assumes is false, the founda-
tion of what he it trying to prove will be unsound. Moreover, if assumption
conduces at all towards proof, let the thing in question itself be assumed and not
something else by means of which he will then prove the thing under discussion.
But if it is absurd to assume the thing in question, it will also be absurd to assume
what transcends it.
But it is evident that all objects of sense are also relative, for they exist as such
in relation to those who perceive them. It is clear, then, that whatever sensible
object is set before us, it can easily be referred to the ﬁve modes. Our reasoning
concerning the intelligible object is similar. For if it should be said that it is the
subject of an irresolvable disagreement, the necessity of suspending judgement on
this matter will be granted us. But in the case of a resolution of the disagreement,
if the resolution is reached by means of an object of thought, we shall have
recourse to the extension ad inﬁnitum; if by means of an object of sense, we shall
have recourse to the mode of circular reasoning. For as the sensible again is an
object of disagreement, and incapable, because of the extension to inﬁnity, of
being decided by means of itself, it will stand in need of the intelligible just as the
intelligible also requires the sensible. For these reasons, whoever accepts anything
on assumption will again be in an absurd position. But intelligibles are also
relative, for they are relative to the intellect in which they appear, whence their
name. And if they really were in nature such as they are said to be, there would
be no disagreement about them. Thus the intelligible too has been referred to the
ﬁve modes, so that in any case we must suspend judgment with regard to the
object presented.
Such are the ﬁve modes taught by the later Sceptics. Their purpose in setting
them forth is not to repudiate the ten modes, but to provide for a more diversiﬁed
exposure of the rashness of the dogmatists by combining these modes with the
others.
“THE FIVE MODES”
373

Note
1
Usually attributed to Agrippa, about whom virtually nothing is known.
QUESTIONS
1
What sort of things does Sextus think we should suspend judgment about?
2
If one of the “dogmatists” claims the right to assume some premise without
proof, how would Sextus respond?
SEXTUS EMPIRICUS
374

I.T. Oakley, “An Argument for Scepticism
Concerning Justiﬁed Beliefs”
1. Outline of the argument
I shall argue that no beliefs are justiﬁed (or reasonable, or rational). I offer no
analysis of the term “justiﬁed,” since this is not required by my argument, and
take the notion to be a commonsense one, regularly though unreﬂectively used by
us all. Strictly it is a person at a time who is justiﬁed or not in a belief, but for
brevity I shall often speak of beliefs being justiﬁed. Since a belief may be justiﬁed
to a greater or lesser extent, I shall stipulate now that when I speak of a belief’s
being justiﬁed, I mean that it is justiﬁed to some extent or other, even if only a
minimal extent. So in this paper, I shall be arguing that no one is justiﬁed in any
beliefs even to the most minimal degree.
Consider the claim that person A is justiﬁed in belief p. Now p’s being justiﬁed
(understand throughout: for A) either depends on A’s being justiﬁed in some
further belief q, or it does not. Let us call beliefs in which A is justiﬁed and which
are such that his being justiﬁed in them does not depend on his being justiﬁed in
any other beliefs, basic beliefs. The concept of dependence used here requires,
and receives below, further attention. Let us agree for the present merely to so
use the term that the relation is transitive. Thus (to adopt a self-explanatory
abbreviation), if Jp dep Jq, and Jq dep Jr, then Jp dep Jr.
Someone claiming A to be justiﬁed in p must accept that p is either: (1) itself
basic, or else dependent on one or more basic beliefs; or (2) a member of a series
of an inﬁnite number of different beliefs, justiﬁedness in each of which is depend-
ent upon justiﬁedness in its successors, in the series; or (3) p is a member of a
series of a ﬁnite number of different beliefs justiﬁedness in at least one member of
which depends at least partially upon itself. In traditional terms, we must choose
between a sort of foundationalism, an inﬁnite regress, or a coherence account of
justiﬁedness. The chain of beliefs upon which p depends for its justiﬁedness either
stops, is inﬁnite, or loops back on itself. In what follows, I shall argue against
each of the three possibilities, concluding that the chain does not in fact start: p is
not justiﬁed. Before this, however, I turn to the concept of dependence.
I.T. Oakley, “An Argument for Scepticism Concerning Justiﬁed Beliefs,” American
Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976): 221–8.
375

2. The concept of dependence
I take the concept to be reasonably clear on an intuitive level, though it proves
surprisingly difﬁcult to analyse. We will agree, I think, that to say that p’s justi-
ﬁedness depends on q’s justiﬁedness is not the same as saying that p was inferred
from q, or that q was the person’s reason for p (in the context concerned). One
may arrive at p by inferring it from q, but be in the position that one would have
been justiﬁed in p anyway. Further, I shall be presenting examples below of cases
where p’s justiﬁedness does depend on q’s justiﬁedness, but where q is not what
we would normally call a reason or ground for p.
The key notion is that if Jp dep Jq, then Jq is necessary for Jp. By “necessary”
here, we cannot mean logically necessary. The necessity of Jq for Jp will of course
be contingent on there not being to hand, for the person in question, other ways
of justifying his belief in p, which do not involve being justiﬁed in q. In such a
case, Jp might depend on Jq or Jr.
Regrettably the beliefs justiﬁedness in which is necessary for Jp include some
upon which we do not want to say Jp depends.1 Such beliefs are those immedi-
ately and obviously entailed by p, such as p disjoined with any other belief, q.
Someone not justiﬁed in the disjunction would not be justiﬁed in p, but I take it
that we wish to capture a concept of dependence which would not have any Jp
depending on J (p v q) where q is any belief whatever, but would say that Jp dep
J(p v q) only in such cases as where J not-q as well. Another obvious point is that
justiﬁedness in any belief will clearly be such that justiﬁedness in some other
belief is necessary for it, yet we should not want our account of dependence on its
own to rule out the existence of any basic beliefs. (At least I presume we don’t.
However, should anyone be inclined to accept this quick route to the denial of
basic beliefs, I shall be happy enough, and he or she will not have to worry with
section 3 below, where I argue that point in detail.)
Ruling out the unwanted cases in which Jq is necessary for Jp in a non-circular
way proves extremely troublesome. However, I take it that we may leave the
matter at an intuitive level, and allow that Jp dep Jq if Jq is necessary for Jp,
provided the necessity does not arise merely in virtue of p’s entailing q in some
very straightforward way.
A ﬁnal problem about dependence arises from the fact that we would, I think,
generally agree that someone may be justiﬁed in holding a belief he does not
actually hold. The question then arises as to whether Jp can ever depend on Jq
when q is not actually held. We need not actually decide this question here,
though I shall present examples below some of which seem to me to depend on
the justiﬁedness of unheld beliefs. We need at least to cover this possibility in our
arguments, since to show that a belief was basic in the sense of not depending on
justiﬁedness in any other held belief would be fairly uninteresting epistemologic-
ally if it were allowed that it might none the less depend on justiﬁedness in some
unheld belief. So in all cases, except where specially indicated, when I speak of p’s
justiﬁedness, I shall imply nothing about p’s actually being held.
I.T. OAKLEY
376

3. Reasons for denying the existence of basic beliefs
My case rests on a consideration of examples, and my contention is that it is
impossible to ﬁnd cases of justiﬁed beliefs which do not depend for their justi-
ﬁedness on the justiﬁedness of any other beliefs, even when one takes one’s
examples from the classes of beliefs that seem most promising in this respect:
beliefs based on perception of one’s immediate physical environment, or beliefs
about what are often called our immediate experiences.
For each plausible candidate, p, for the status of basicness, I shall seek to show
that there is in fact a q, such that if q were not justiﬁed, p would not be justiﬁed to
the least extent. In framing examples to establish this in particular cases, I shall
take cases in which: (i) p does not entail q; (ii) q is true, and (iii) where the person,
A, is not justiﬁed in believing q, but neither is he justiﬁed in believing not-q, or,
indeed, in any other belief which might imply not-p. I shall ask my reader to agree
with me that in these cases A is not justiﬁed in p. It will be impossible to put down
A’s failure to be justiﬁed in p to q’s falsity, or to A’s being justiﬁed in a further
belief such as not-q which would constitute a reason for not-p. If the agreement I
seek as to what we are prepared to say about p is in fact forthcoming, I will take
the examples to show that Jp dep Jq. Should the reader reject my examples as
failing to provide instances where q is true, and where the subject is justiﬁed in
neither q nor not-q, I invite him or her to construct examples where this fault is
remedied, and to test his or her intuitions on these. Should the reader accept my
description of the cases, but fail to agree that in the circumstances A would not be
justiﬁed in p, my argument fails.
3.1 Beliefs based on perception
A.J. Ayer states one version of the position I hope to disprove here. He claims that
some beliefs are justiﬁed
simply because one is having or has had certain experiences. What, for
example, gives me the right to be sure that this is a sheet of paper? Well,
partly my seeing what I now do, partly the fact that my past experiences
have been such that I can identify pieces of paper when I see them. But it is
not necessary that I should believe any propositions about the contents of
my visual ﬁeld . . . or about the character of my past experience. It is
enough that I am having the experience that I am and that I have acquired
the necessary skill in identifying what I see.2
In direct opposition to Ayer’s view, I contend that to be justiﬁed in a perception-
based belief it is not sufﬁcient that someone have the experience that he is having,
and have certain discriminatory skills: it is necessary that he be justiﬁed in believ-
ing, inter alia, that he has the relevant skills, and also that there are no special
circumstances currently interfering with his exercise of them. Thus his being
justiﬁed in
p: There is a piece of white paper in front of me
would typically depend on justiﬁedness in
“AN ARGUMENT . . . JUSTIFIED BELIEFS”
377

q: I have the capacity to discriminate pieces of white paper
and
r: p was not induced in me by hypnotic suggestion.
Though it would doubtless be rare for someone to be unjustiﬁed in q, the
situation might arise in the case, familiar from other contexts, of the man blind
from birth, given his sight by an operation. After limited use of his newly gained
faculty, he might indeed possess the discriminatory capacity, but with no feed-
back on the accuracy of his judgments, be left unjustiﬁed in believing either q or
its negation. In this case, despite q’s truth, it seems clear that we should not allow
that Jp. It is important to note that this is not because he is justiﬁed in any belief
constituting for him a positive reason for the falsity of p. (He has, of course,
reason to doubt his justiﬁedness in p, but that is another matter.) Not-q would
imply not-Jp, but he is not justiﬁed in the former. Admittedly, the example
requires that he be justiﬁed in
s: I do not know whether or not I have the capacity to discriminate pieces
of white paper,
but s does not imply not-p, either by itself, or in conjunction with anything else in
which we might assume him justiﬁed.
Now consider the case where neither Jr nor J not-r, and r is in fact true. He is
justiﬁed in believing
t: Some proportion, between the minutest fraction and the vast majority,
of my current beliefs has been induced in me by hypnosis.
This leaves him not justiﬁed (even minimally) in r, nor in not-r, and as a result, I
submit, not justiﬁed (even minimally) in p. His failure to be justiﬁed in p is
traceable only to his failure to be justiﬁed in r. Even given the belief that beliefs
induced by hypnosis are likely to be false, t does not imply not-p.
At this point, a qualiﬁcation is called for, since it may reasonably be objected
that Jp cannot depend on Jr, since children who have never heard of hypnosis
surely cannot be justiﬁed in r, yet equally surely are, on occasion, justiﬁed in p.
We might perhaps seek to reply by insisting that one may be justiﬁed in a belief
one is incapable of formulating. However, I choose the alternative course of
shifting ground, and suggesting another belief to replace r, upon justiﬁedness in
which Jp depends, even for the child. This is
u: There are no factors present of a type which would probably cause me to
make mistakes about the presence or absence of white pieces of paper.
Such a belief is regularly justiﬁedly held not only by children, but by adults who
are well aware that there are possible illusion-producing factors of which they
know nothing. Ju in general derives from beliefs to the effect that such factors
would probably manifest themselves in some way (such as the light looking
I.T. OAKLEY
378

funny, or the appearances of things being contrary to expectation in some way),
and to the effect that there are currently no such manifestations. A child who not
only knew nothing of hypnosis, but knew nothing at all of factors which induce
mistakes in perceptual judgments is not, I suggest, really justiﬁed in those judg-
ments. But this case aside, consider someone unjustiﬁed in u, and also unjustiﬁed
in not-u, in a case where u was in fact true. This could arise where someone found
himself subject to a number of unexplained sensory illusions in sensory modal-
ities other than sight, and was left in complete doubt as to whether or not he
might expect illusions of sight as well. Such a situation would not involve his
having justiﬁed beliefs which implied not-p, but he would surely not be justiﬁed
in p.
The examples considered are few, but the way of dealing with them is obvi-
ously generalisable without difﬁculty, not only to perception-based beliefs in
general, but also to beliefs based on memory.
3.2 Beliefs about immediate experiences
I contend that these beliefs just as much as the perception beliefs just considered,
depend for their justiﬁedness on other beliefs. Let our p be A’s belief that it
appears to him too that something is blue, when he has no beliefs about whether
there actually exists anything blue, nor about whether it appears to anyone else
that anything is blue. Such a belief, I contend, depends for its justiﬁcation on the
justiﬁedness of
q: There are no factors present of a type which would probably cause error
in judgments about immediate experience.
We will of course be justiﬁed in q if we are justiﬁed in believing that beliefs like p
are incorrigible. But one might believe p corrigible, yet be justiﬁed in q. (“Incor-
rigible” is used here in the sense in which a belief, if incorrigible, is such that its
being believed entails its truth. In fact, if my arguments are correct, the incorrigi-
bility issue is much overrated in epistemology where the important concept is
basicness. For that, incorrigibility is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient.)
Suppose that one believed like Reichenbach3 that statements about one’s
immediate experiences were corrigible, and that one could fall into error in such
beliefs on account of such factors as wishful thinking, and that one’s arguments
for this position were at least good enough to make us say that one was not
justiﬁed in believing the contrary. Suppose further that one was not justiﬁed in
believing that wishful thinking had not led one into error in the case of p.
Remember that “not justiﬁed” here means “not in the least degree justiﬁed.” This
is of course a very unlikely case. In general, even where there is a suspicion that
wishful thinking may have entered the picture, one will be justiﬁed in thinking
that it probably did not. Our hypothetical case is that in which we are not even
minimally justiﬁed in believing wishful thinking absent. And though very
unlikely, the case is possible enough, and could arise, perhaps where one was
unhappily aware of a particularly bad record of wishful thinking in similar cir-
cumstances. In such a situation then, we are not justiﬁed in q. q might at the same
time be true: perhaps such statements as p are incorrigible, or in any case, our
“AN ARGUMENT . . . JUSTIFIED BELIEFS”
379

belief that p was indeed uninﬂuenced by wishful thinking. But despite q’s truth, I
contend, if we are not justiﬁed in q then we must say that we are not justiﬁed in p
either. For to say that we are not justiﬁed in believing p to be in principle free
from error, and that we are not justiﬁed in believing that sources of error have
played no part in our believing that p surely makes it quite unjustiﬁed to believe
p. The principle of this argument is very similar to that of our argument above
concerning the perception-based belief that there is a piece of white paper in front
of me.
I conclude then, that we have failed to ﬁnd any basic beliefs in the places where
it seemed reasonable to look for them, and that it is therefore appropriate to
conclude that there are no such beliefs. (The reader convinced by the above
arguments should have no trouble framing for himself arguments of a parallel
kind to establish the non-basicness of the truths we label “necessary.”)
4. Against a coherence theory of justiﬁed beliefs
Such a theory is one which allows that Jp may depend on Jq, and Jq (via, perhaps,
a series of other justiﬁed beliefs) similarly on Jp. The dependence relation may
thus connect a set of beliefs into a circle and thus is not, as might be expected,
assymetrical, but is non-symmetrical.
4.1 The viciousness of circularity
Where Jp depends on Jq and vice versa simultaneously, it seems that our immedi-
ate intuitive judgment is that neither belief is justiﬁed, as this is a case of just what
we should call vicious circularity. This point, though an appeal to intuitive judg-
ment, strikes me as having considerable force. Consider the following example, in
which, I submit, A is unjustiﬁed in all the beliefs on the ground that there is
circularity of this sort. Suppose A’s justiﬁedness in believing his senses have not
been deceiving him for the past week depends on his justiﬁedness in certain
beliefs about the conditions and his perceptual capacities during that week. These
in turn depend for justiﬁedness on certain perception-based beliefs acquired dur-
ing the past week, which depend for their justiﬁedness, ﬁnally, on the belief with
which we started. (I am not here arguing, of course, that we are in fact all in A’s
position.)
A proponent of the non-symmetry thesis might here defend himself by insist-
ing that there is a crucial difference between fairly small circles, which are rela-
tively accessible to our intuitive judgment, and are clearly to be rejected as
vicious, and big circles, embracing very large portions of our corpus of beliefs,
about which we do not have any clear intuitions, and which may be accepted as
non-vicious. Against this I would argue that, given the transitivity of the depend-
ence relation, big circles can be re-described as little circles merely by leaving out
some elements. Thus the distinction does not seem an important one for our
purposes. And signiﬁcantly, it is by no means clear that the circles involved in
our actual justiﬁcations of our beliefs are going to be especially big, if they exist
at all. Have we any reason to expect anything bigger than that described in the
example above? It appeared to be a perfectly manageable target for our intu-
itions. One cannot help feeling that the inaccessibility to our intuitions of the
I.T. OAKLEY
380

very large circles envisaged is due not to their size but to the fact that they are not
articulated.
4.2 A second argument against the coherence account
The argument at issue deals mainly with sets of beliefs some of which are unheld.
In section 3 above, we argued that experience was never sufﬁcient for justiﬁed-
ness in a belief p, but not that it was never necessary. Consider then a set of beliefs
containing p such that each member of the set depended for justiﬁedness on
nothing more than justiﬁedness in one or more other members of the set, plus the
having by A of some experience or experiences from a set of experiences E. This is
presumably the picture of our justiﬁed beliefs that a coherence theorist would
wish to present.
The trouble is that for any set of experiences E, it will be possible to construct
another set of beliefs, not including the belief p, and indeed including the belief
not-p, such that the same dependence relations will obtain. That is, J not-p will
depend, as will all other members of the set, only upon other members of the set,
plus parts of E. Which is to say that given any set of experiences, plus the coher-
ence theorist’s permission to allow circles of justiﬁcation dependence, we will
always be “justiﬁed” in both p and not-p. More strictly, since we shall have equal
degrees of “justiﬁedness” in p and not-p, we shall be in fact justiﬁed in neither.
The coherence account thus commits us to the conclusion that no beliefs are
justiﬁed. I am of course willing to embrace this conclusion, but presume that
most would wish to take it as an argument against the account.
A variant of this argument deals with the case where it is not even demanded
that experience should enter at some point into our justiﬁcation of a belief. If we
allow this possibility, we allow sets of beliefs where each member depends for
justiﬁedness only on justiﬁedness in other members. Here, a circle of necessity
becomes a circle of sufﬁciency. For any belief p, and also for not-p, it will be
possible to construct sets of beliefs such that p, and all other members of the set,
depend for justiﬁedness on no more than justiﬁedness in other members. In such
cases we need not even restrict ourselves to circles with unheld beliefs. Consider
A who holds
p Each of my houses has been burgled recently
q Each of my houses has been repainted at the same time
r There is a strong correlation between the burglary of my houses and their
being re-painted.
Allow that justiﬁedness in any depends solely upon justiﬁedness in the other two.
On the coherence account, permitting circular dependence, we are immediately
committed to saying A is justiﬁed in all these beliefs, despite the lack of any
independent justiﬁcation for any of them, provided only that he lacks external
justiﬁcation for their negations.
“AN ARGUMENT . . . JUSTIFIED BELIEFS”
381

4.3 A third argument against the coherence account
The disastrous surfeit of justiﬁed beliefs of the above section could be avoided by
someone wishing to restrict our attention to held beliefs, since we relatively sel-
dom actually hold more than one set of beliefs to which the same set of experi-
ences would be relevant. I turn then to an argument speciﬁcally concerned with
sets of held beliefs.
Suppose A holds a set, p, q, r, and s, such that each member depends only on
other members plus some part of a set of experiences, E. Now take any further
belief held by A, t, such that (i) A is not justiﬁed in not-t, (ii) justiﬁedness in t
would not result in his ceasing to be justiﬁed in p, q, r, or s, and (iii) A does not
also hold not-t. (If it should be taken as impossible that one should ever hold both
a belief and its negation at once, so much the better.)
Now conjoin t with each of p, q, r and s, to get a new set of conjunctive beliefs,
p & t, q & t, etc. A need not hold this new set in all cases since occasionally one
will hold two beliefs and fail to hold the conjunction (again, if this is not
accepted, so much the better), but usually he will. Now if he holds the second set
and is justiﬁed in every member of the ﬁrst, he will clearly be justiﬁed in every
member of the second. If Jp dep Jq and Jr and exp e1, then Jp & t dep Jq & t and
Jr & t and exp e1. And if Jp & t, then presumably Jt.
Thus, acceptance of A’s being justiﬁed in just one belief by virtue of its mem-
bership of a set involving circular dependence relations commits us to calling him
justiﬁed in any number of further beliefs in which we should never normally call
him justiﬁed.
I conclude that we have sufﬁcient grounds for rejecting coherence accounts of
our justiﬁed beliefs.4
5. Against inﬁnite regresses
Few seem to have held the view that a belief might be justiﬁed in virtue of its
membership in an inﬁnite series of beliefs, each depending on its successors
(though perhaps the view could gain sympathisers convinced of the inadequacy
of coherence accounts and the non-existence of basic beliefs). The reason may be
the assumption that a man cannot hold an inﬁnite number of beliefs. However,
this is less than clear, and my arguments do not rest on it.
In the ﬁrst place, acceptance of the inﬁnite series possibility immediately pre-
vents us from drawing a distinction we are very much inclined to draw: that
between on the one hand an inﬁnite series of justiﬁed beliefs where each depends
for its justiﬁedness on the justiﬁedness of its successors (inter alia, perhaps), and
on the other, an inﬁnite series of unjustiﬁed beliefs such that if they were justiﬁed,
each would depend for its justiﬁedness on the justiﬁedness of its successors. Fur-
thermore, it becomes a mystery how we can ever know, or be justiﬁed in believ-
ing, or even simply come to believe, that a particular one of our beliefs is justiﬁed
or not. In any given case, how do we know that the series of beliefs is inﬁnite as
opposed to simply fairly long? We have no direct check, clearly, and it is hard to
see what sort of indirect evidence we have to go on, nor on what cues our
intuitive judgments might be based.5
I.T. OAKLEY
382

5.1 Against inﬁnite series of held beliefs
Great difﬁculty is encountered as soon as we start to try to reconstruct even the
early stages of a regress. Any attempt to articulate the series seems highly arti-
ﬁcial, and, worse still, usually to end up in a circularity at some point or other, or
else to involve a series which must come to an end because of the ﬁnite age of the
believer. I must leave the reader to do most of the thought experiments for himself
here, but will mention some of the main possibilities. Beliefs based on perception
depend for their justiﬁedness partly on our justiﬁedness in other beliefs about our
perceptual capacities. These in turn depend for justiﬁedness on other perception-
based beliefs. Now either we already have a circularity here, or else the last
mentioned perception-based beliefs are conceived of as different from the initial
perception-based belief. And they in turn are conceived of as depending for their
justiﬁcation on justiﬁedness in beliefs about discriminatory capacities possessed
at different times, and these beliefs upon yet other perception-based beliefs. But
our temporal ﬁnitude does mean we only have a ﬁnite number of temporally
distinct perceptions, and corresponding perception-based beliefs, and so that
regress is not inﬁnite.
Some believe that our beliefs about the world can be justiﬁed in terms of our
beliefs about our own experience, holus bolus, as it were, as a theory is supported
by its data. Here, though, we strike a circularity again, as we have already seen
that justiﬁedness in beliefs about our own experiences depends on justiﬁedness in
beliefs about incorrigibility, or about the absence of mistake-inducing factors:
i.e., beliefs which are not themselves about immediate experiences.
5.2 A second argument against inﬁnite series
The argument now at issue parallels that against coherence in 4.2, and deals in
the ﬁrst instance with series which include unheld beliefs. Assume p to be the
head of an inﬁnite series in which each member depends upon its successor and in
some cases upon the having of an experience as well. We will always be able to
construct a series headed by not-p, and depending upon all the same experiences
as were depended upon by the ﬁrst series.
Thus, let s be a belief somewhere in our series headed by p, and t be the
successor of s. Js dep Jt and, say, experience e1. Thus Jt and e1 are severally
necessary and jointly sufﬁcient for Js. But e1 and Ju, where u is some other
appropriately selected belief, may well be jointly sufﬁcient for J not-s.
To put ﬂesh on the bones, e1 might be the experience of something white, and
we might have
s. There appears something white.
t. s is incorrigible.
u. I am currently very liable to mistakes about appearances.
We may conclude that any p and its negation are equally justiﬁed, and so we
remain justiﬁed in no beliefs, held or upheld. As in 4.2, the matter is clearer still if
we make no empiricist demand that experience enter into the justiﬁcation of any
belief. For any belief, it will be easy to construct a series extending away from it,
“AN ARGUMENT . . . JUSTIFIED BELIEFS”
383

each member comprising a conjunction of all the beliefs upon justiﬁedness in
which justiﬁedness in the member above depends. And if experience need not
enter the picture, this means that justiﬁedness in a member will be sufﬁcient for
justiﬁedness in its predecessor. Thus any belief will be justiﬁed by its successor,
and, the chain being inﬁnite, there will always be a successor.
Again, as in 4.2, we need not even restrict ourselves at this point to unheld
beliefs. Suppose A indeed holds the right sort of inﬁnite series, thus:
p: From my front door there extends a long carpet, the ﬁrst foot-length of
which is red.
q: From my front door there extends a long carpet, the ﬁrst two-foot-
length of which is red.
r: From my . . . ﬁrst three-foot-length of which is red.
Etc., ad inﬁnitum.
A does not hold the belief that the carpet is of inﬁnite length. He simply holds an
inﬁnite number of beliefs about inﬁnite lengths. Further, let us suppose that A is
not justiﬁed in any belief (about, for instance, the manufacture of carpets, or
about the state of affairs in the space extending from his front door) justiﬁedness
in which would be sufﬁcient for his being justiﬁed in the negation of any of the
beliefs in the above series. Even on this last supposition, we would surely have no
inclination at all to say that he was justiﬁed in p, or any other member of the
sequence. Once we permit justiﬁcation to depend on an inﬁnite series of beliefs,
however, we cannot avoid saying that every member of the series is justiﬁed.
But the main argument of this section is directed against series with unheld
members, and fails against series composed entirely of held beliefs. The subject’s
simple failure to hold some beliefs will there protect him from the embarrassment
of riches otherwise looming. I turn then to an argument directed speciﬁcally
against series of held beliefs.
5.3 A third argument against inﬁnite series
The argument at issue here parallels the anti-coherence argument of 4.3. Let us
suppose A justiﬁed in p in the way envisaged by the regress theorist, that is, as the
head of an actually held series each member of which depends for justiﬁedness on
its successors, and perhaps on experiences as well. Conjoin with every member of
the series a further belief of A’s, q, on which we place the same restrictions as
those on t in 4.3. We get the same result, and for the same reasons. Assuming A
holds the second series of conjunctive beliefs, and was justiﬁed in each member of
the ﬁrst, he will be justiﬁed in each member of the second.
Again, then, A’s being justiﬁed in just one belief by virtue of its membership of
the required type of inﬁnite series forces on us an unwanted further set of justiﬁed
beliefs.
The argument fails, it should be noted, once we allow justiﬁedness in unheld
beliefs. For then we could form a third series by conjoining not-q with the mem-
bers of the ﬁrst series, arriving thus at justiﬁedness in both q and not q. This
would leave us unjustiﬁed in both, failing independent justiﬁcation for one or
other. This however is just the position we believe ourselves in, and so would be a
I.T. OAKLEY
384

consequence happily embraced by the proponent of inﬁnite series. This point also
underlies the restriction that A should not actually believe both q and not-q (or
both t and not-t in 4.3).
I conclude that we have sufﬁcient reason to reject the inﬁnite regress theorist’s
account of our justiﬁed beliefs.
6. Conclusion: no beliefs are justiﬁed
Note that this scepticism does not entail a broader scepticism about knowledge
unless one accepts that Jp is a necessary condition for knowing p. (Some do not.)
However, despite this restriction, our scepticism is extremely broad: it embraces
beliefs about immediate experiences and it is not merely a claim about the unat-
tainability of certainty, since it maintains we are never justiﬁed in a belief to the
least degree. I conclude then, with a brief examination of some problems likely to
be raised concerning my sceptical position.
First, it might reasonably be insisted here that someone who denies that beliefs
are ever justiﬁed owes us some account of why we universally think there is a
distinction between justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed, wise and foolish beliefs.
Second, it is said frequently that the sceptic achieves his paradoxical conclu-
sions by means of the verbal trick of deﬁning “knowledge” or “justiﬁed” in some
non-standard way so that indeed, in this non-standard sense, we have no justiﬁed
beliefs. This sceptical conclusion then is not paradoxical, since it is not the claim
that we have no justiﬁed beliefs in the sense in which we have always thought we
had them.
I will reply to the two points jointly. There is of course an established use of
“justiﬁed” and “unjustiﬁed,” but this ordinary use does not establish a different
sense or meaning, separate to that in which we use the term in our conclusion.
The difference in fact marked by the justiﬁed/unjustiﬁed distinction seems to me
to be this: a belief is labelled “justiﬁed” if it can be supported by beliefs which in
the context are currently not in question (by way of similarly unquestioned prin-
ciples of inference). Questions about justiﬁcation in general arise only when there
is doubt, and we only doubt a little bit of our corpus of beliefs at a time. Until
doubt arises, we assume we are justiﬁed in believing what we do believe. When
doubt does arise, it is settled by reference to that about which doubt has not
arisen. This is all very practical and sensible, and in ordinary life we would be
foolish to press doubts further than they have to be pressed.
Now if all we mean by “justiﬁed belief” is a belief which can be derived from
the currently undoubted, then of course there are justiﬁed beliefs. But in fact no-
one means this by “justiﬁed belief.” Everyone acknowledges that what is cur-
rently undoubted may not be itself justiﬁed (while believing of course that it
probably is), and that because of this, what is derived from it may not be justiﬁed
either. The ordinary use of the term is not a use of it in a different sense to that in
which I have used it. It is convenient—perhaps all we need, as well as all we can,
if I am right, hope for—to distinguish that which can be derived from the cur-
rently undoubted from that which cannot. But no-one, once the distinction is
articulated, would want to say that this is the same as the difference between
justiﬁed and unjustiﬁed.
Lastly, the above discussion provides the basis for a suitable rejoinder to the
“AN ARGUMENT . . . JUSTIFIED BELIEFS”
385

critic who would turn the conclusion against itself, remarking that if it is true, we
cannot be justiﬁed in believing it, or indeed the premises from which it is drawn.
The convinced sceptic will of course embrace this conclusion, kicking away his
ladder along with everything else. But in any case, I will regard my current pur-
pose as fulﬁlled if my reader accepts that the conclusion is derivable from the
currently unquestioned.6
Notes
1
This was ﬁrst pointed out to me by Mr. F.C. Jackson of La Trobe University.
2
A.J. Ayer, “Knowledge, Belief, and Evidence” in A.J. Ayer, Metaphysics and
Common Sense (London: Macmillan, 1969), p. 121.
3
Hans Reichenbach, “Are Phenomenal Reports Absolutely Certain?”, Philo-
sophical Review 61 (1952): 147–59.
4
For recent discussions of coherence, see, e.g., Anthony Quinton, The Nature of
Things (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973), Ch. 8; Roderick Firth,
“Coherence, Certainty and Epistemic Priority,” Journal of Philosophy 61 (1964):
545–57; Nicholas Rescher, The Coherence Theory of Truth (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1973); and Keith Lehrer, Knowledge (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974).
5
I owe this point to Mr. Robert Waldie.
6
I have been greatly helped by comments on earlier drafts of this paper made by a
large number of people, in particular Dr. R.M. Sainsbury of Oxford University and
Mr. F.C. Jackson of La Trobe University. Earlier drafts were read at Dundee,
Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Warwick Universities.
QUESTIONS
1
What condition usually thought to be required for knowledge does Oakley say is
never satisﬁed?
2
Suppose I believe there is a white piece of paper in front of me, as a result of
seeing it. According to Oakley, what two other propositions does my belief
depend on for its justiﬁcation?
3
Oakley considers a case in which a person has beliefs p, q, r, and s, which
depend on each other for their justiﬁcation. He then suggests conjoining each of
those beliefs with another, unrelated proposition, t. What undesirable con-
sequence does he think results from this, and what theory is this supposed to
refute?
I.T. OAKLEY
386

Laurence BonJour, The Structure of
Empirical Knowledge
A basic problem for foundationalism
The fundamental concept of moderate foundationalism, as of empirical founda-
tionalism generally, is the concept of a basic empirical belief. It is by appeal to
basic beliefs that the threat of an inﬁnite regress is to be avoided and empirical
knowledge given a secure foundation. But a new problem now arises: how can
there be any empirical beliefs which are thus basic? For although this has often
been overlooked, the very idea of an epistemically basic empirical belief is more
than a little paradoxical. On what basis is such a belief supposed to be justiﬁed,
once any appeal to further empirical premises is ruled out? Chisholm’s theo-
logical analogy, cited earlier, is most appropriate: a basic empirical belief is in
effect an epistemological unmoved (or self-moved) mover. It is able to confer
justiﬁcation on other beliefs, but, in spite of being empirical and thus contingent,
apparently has no need to have justiﬁcation conferred on it. But is such a status
any easier to understand in epistemology than it is in theology? How can a
contingent, empirical belief impart epistemic “motion” to other empirical beliefs
unless it is itself in “motion”? (Or, even more paradoxically, how can such a
belief epistemically “move” itself?) Where does the noninferential justiﬁcation
for basic empirical beliefs come from?
This difﬁculty may be developed a bit by appealing to the account of the
general concept of epistemic justiﬁcation which was presented [earlier]. I argued
there that the fundamental role which the requirement of epistemic justiﬁcation
serves in the overall rationale of the concept of knowledge is that of a means to
truth; and accordingly that a basic constraint on any account of the standards of
justiﬁcation for empirical knowledge is that there be good reasons for thinking
that following those standards is at least likely to lead to truth. Thus if basic
beliefs are to provide a secure foundation for empirical knowledge, if inference
from them is to be the sole basis upon which other empirical beliefs are justiﬁed,
then that feature, whatever it may be, by virtue of which a particular belief
qualiﬁes as basic must also constitute a good reason for thinking that the belief is
true. If this were not so, moderate foundationalism would be unacceptable as an
account of epistemic justiﬁcation.
This crucial point may be formulated a bit more precisely, as follows. If we let
Laurence BonJour, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1985).
387

 represent the feature or characteristic, whatever it may be, which distinguishes
basic empirical beliefs from other empirical beliefs, then in an acceptable founda-
tionalist account a particular empirical belief B could qualify as basic only if the
premises of the following justiﬁcatory argument were adequately justiﬁed:
(1) B has feature .
(2) Beliefs having feature  are highly likely to be true.
Therefore, B is highly likely to be true.
If B is to actually be basic, then presumably premise (1) would have to be true as
well, but I am concerned here only with what would have to be so for it to be
reasonable to accept B as basic and use it to justify other beliefs.
Clearly it is possible that at least one of the two premises of the argument
might be justiﬁable on a purely a priori basis, depending on the particular choice
of . It does not seem possible, however, that both premises might be thus justiﬁ-
able. B is after all, ex hypothesi, an empirical belief, and it is hard to see how a
particular empirical belief could be justiﬁed on a purely a priori basis. Thus we
may conclude, at least provisionally, that for any acceptable moderate founda-
tionalist account, at least one of the two premises of the appropriate justifying
argument will itself be empirical.
The other issue to be considered is whether, in order for B to be justiﬁed for a
particular person A (at a particular time), it is necessary, not merely that a justiﬁ-
cation along the above lines exist in the abstract, but also that A himself be in
cognitive possession of that justiﬁcation, that is, that he believe the appropriate
premises of forms (1) and (2) and that these beliefs be justiﬁed for him. [Earlier,] I
argued tentatively that such cognitive possession by the person in question is
indeed necessary, on the grounds that he cannot be epistemically responsible in
accepting the belief unless he himself has access to the justiﬁcation; for otherwise,
he has no reason for thinking that the belief is at all likely to be true. No reason
for questioning this claim has so far emerged.
But if all this is correct, we get the disturbing result that B is not basic after all,
since its justiﬁcation depends on that of at least one other empirical belief. It
would follow that moderate foundationalism is untenable as a solution to the
regress problem—and an analogous argument would show weak foundational-
ism to be similarly untenable.
It will be helpful in the subsequent discussion to have available a slightly more
explicit statement of this basic antifoundationalist argument:
(1) Suppose that there are basic empirical beliefs, that is, empirical beliefs (a)
which are epistemically justiﬁed, and (b) whose justiﬁcation does not depend
on that of any further empirical beliefs.
(2) For a belief to be epistemically justiﬁed requires that there be a reason why it
is likely to be true.
(3) For a belief to be epistemically justiﬁed for a particular person requires that
this person be himself in cognitive possession of such a reason.
(4) The only way to be in cognitive possession of such a reason is to believe with
justiﬁcation the premises from which it follows that the belief is likely to be
true.
LAURENCE BONJOUR
388

(5) The premises of such a justifying argument for an empirical belief cannot be
entirely a priori; at least one such premise must be empirical.
Therefore, the justiﬁcation of a supposed basic empirical belief must depend on
the justiﬁcation of at least one other empirical belief, contradicting (1); it follows
that there can be no basic empirical beliefs. . . .
The elements of coherentism
The very idea of a coherence theory
In light of the failure of foundationalism, it is time to look again at the apparent
alternatives with regard to the structure of empirical justiﬁcation which were
distinguished in the discussion of the epistemic regress problem. If the regress of
empirical justiﬁcation does not terminate in basic empirical beliefs, then it must
either (1) terminate in unjustiﬁed beliefs, (2) go on inﬁnitely (without circular-
ity), or (3) circle back upon itself in some way. As discussed earlier, alternative
(1) is clearly a version of skepticism and as such may reasonably be set aside
until all other alternatives have been seen to fail. Alternative (2) may also be a
version of skepticism, though this is less clear. But the more basic problem with
alternative (2) is that no one has ever succeeded in amplifying it into a developed
position (indeed, it is not clear that anyone has even attempted to do so); nor do
I see any plausible way in which this might be done. Failing any such elabor-
ation which meets the objections tentatively developed earlier, alternative (2)
may also reasonably be set aside. This then leaves alternative (3) as apparently
the only remaining possibility for a nonskeptical account of empirical
knowledge.
We are thus led to a reconsideration of the possibility of a coherence theory of
empirical knowledge. If there is no way to justify empirical beliefs apart from an
appeal to other justiﬁed empirical beliefs, and if an inﬁnite sequence of distinct
justiﬁed beliefs is ruled out, then the presumably ﬁnite system of justiﬁed empir-
ical beliefs can only be justiﬁed from within, by virtue of the relations of its
component beliefs to each other—if, that is, it is justiﬁed at all. And the idea of
coherence should for the moment be taken merely to indicate whatever property
(or complex set of properties) is requisite for the justiﬁcation of such a system of
beliefs.
Obviously this rather ﬂimsy argument by elimination carries very little weight
by itself. The analogous argument in the case of foundationalism lead to an
untenable result; and that failure, when added to the already substantial prob-
lems with coherence theories which were brieﬂy noted above, makes the present
version even less compelling. At best it may motivate a more open-minded con-
sideration of coherence theories than they have usually been accorded, such the-
ories having usually been treated merely as dialectical bogeymen and only rarely
as serious epistemological alternatives.
It will be useful to begin by specifying more precisely just what sort of coher-
ence theory is at issue here. In the ﬁrst place, our concern is with coherence
theories of empirical justiﬁcation and not coherence theories of truth; the latter
hold that truth is to be simply identiﬁed with coherence (presumably coherence
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
389

with some speciﬁed sort of system). The classical idealist proponents of coherence
theories in fact generally held views of both these sorts and unfortunately failed
for the most part to distinguish clearly between them. And this sort of confusion
is abetted by views which use the phrase “theory of truth” to mean a theory of the
criteria of truth, that is, a theory of the standards or rules which should be
appealed to in deciding or judging whether or not something is true; if, as is
virtually always the case, such a theory is meant to be an account of the criteria
which can be used to arrive at a rational or warranted judgment of truth or
falsity, then a coherence theory of truth in that sense would seem to be indiscern-
ible from what is here called a coherence theory of justiﬁcation, and quite distinct
from a coherence theory of the very nature or meaning of truth. But if such
confusions are avoided, it is clear that coherence theories of empirical justiﬁca-
tion are both distinct from and initially a good deal more plausible than coher-
ence theories of empirical truth and moreover that there is no manifest absurdity
in combining a coherence theory of justiﬁcation with a correspondence theory of
truth. Whether such a combination is in the end dialectically defensible is of
course a further issue and one to which I will return in the ﬁnal chapter of this
book. . . .
Linear versus nonlinear justiﬁcation
The initial problem is whether and how a coherence theory constitutes even a
prima facie solution to the epistemic regress problem. Having rejected both
foundationalism and the actual-inﬁnite-regress position, a coherentist must
hold, as we have seen, that the regress of empirical justiﬁcation moves in a
circle—or, more plausibly, some more complicated and multidimensional
variety of closed curve. But this response to the regress will seem obviously and
utterly inadequate to one who approaches the issue with foundationalist pre-
conceptions. Surely, his argument will go, such a resort to circularity fails to
solve or even adequately confront the problem. Each step in the regress is a
justiﬁcatory argument whose premises must be justiﬁed before they can confer
justiﬁcation on the conclusion. To say that the regress moves in a circle is to say
that at some point one (or more) of the beliefs which ﬁgured earlier as a conclu-
sion is now appealed to as a justifying premise. And this response, far from
solving the problem, seems to yield the patently absurd result that the justiﬁca-
tion of such a belief depends, indirectly but still quite inescapably, on its own
logically prior justiﬁcation: it cannot be justiﬁed unless it is already justiﬁed.
And thus, assuming that it is not justiﬁed in some independent way, neither it
nor anything which depends upon it can be genuinely justiﬁed. Since empirical
justiﬁcation is always ultimately circular in this way according to coherence
theories, there can on such a view be in the end no empirical justiﬁcation and no
empirical knowledge.
The crucial, though tacit, assumption which underlies this seemingly devastat-
ing line of argument is the idea that inferential justiﬁcation is essentially linear in
character, that it involves a one-dimensional sequence of beliefs, ordered by the
relation of epistemic priority, along which epistemic justiﬁcation is passed from
the earlier to the later beliefs in the sequence via connections of inference. It is just
this linear conception of justiﬁcation which generates the regress problem in the
LAURENCE BONJOUR
390

ﬁrst place. So long as it remains unchallenged, the idea that justiﬁcation moves in
a circle will seem obviously untenable, and only moderate or strong foundation-
alism will be left as an alternative: even weak foundationalism cannot accept a
purely linear view of justiﬁcation, since its initially credible beliefs are not suf-
ﬁciently justiﬁed on that basis alone to serve as linear ﬁrst premises for everything
else. Thus the primary coherentist response to the regress problem cannot be
merely the idea that justiﬁcation moves in a circle, for this would be quite futile
by itself; rather such a position must repudiate the linear conception of justiﬁca-
tion in its entirety.
But what is the alternative? What might a nonlinear conception of justiﬁcation
amount to? As suggested brieﬂy [earlier], the main idea is that inferential justiﬁ-
cation, despite its linear appearance, is essentially systematic or holistic in char-
acter: beliefs are justiﬁed by being inferentially related to other beliefs in the
overall context of a coherent system.
The best way to clarify this view is to distinguish two importantly different
levels at which issues of empirical justiﬁcation can be raised. The epistemic issue
on a particular occasion will usually be merely the justiﬁcation of a single empir-
ical belief, or small set of such beliefs, within the context of a cognitive system
whose overall justiﬁcation is (more or less) taken for granted; we may call this the
local level of justiﬁcation. But it is also possible, at least in principle, to raise the
issue of the overall justiﬁcation of the entire system of empirical beliefs; we may
call this the global level of justiﬁcation. For the sort of coherence theory which
will be developed here—and indeed, I would argue, for any comprehensive, non-
skeptical epistemology—it is the issue of justiﬁcation as it arises at the latter,
global, level which is in the ﬁnal analysis decisive for the determination of empir-
ical justiﬁcation in general. This tends to be obscured in practice, I suggest,
because it is only issues of the former, local, sort which tend to be explicitly raised
in actual cases. (Indeed, it may well be that completely global issues are never in
fact raised outside the context of explicitly epistemological discussion; but I cannot
see that this in any way shows that there is something illegitimate about them.)
It is at the local level of justiﬁcation that inferential justiﬁcation appears linear.
A given justiﬁcandum belief is shown to be justiﬁed by citing other premise-
beliefs from which it correctly follows via some acceptable pattern of inference.
Such premise-beliefs may themselves be challenged, of course, with justiﬁcation
being offered for them in the same fashion. But there is no serious danger of an
inﬁnite regress at this level, since the justiﬁcation of the overall system of empir-
ical beliefs, and thus of most of its constituent beliefs, is ex hypothesi not at issue.
One quickly reaches premise-beliefs which are dialectically acceptable in that
particular context and which can thus function there rather like the foundational-
ist’s basic beliefs. (But these contextually basic beliefs, as they might be called, are
unlikely to be only or even primarily beliefs which would be classiﬁed as basic by
any plausible version of foundationalism.)
If, on the other hand, no dialectically acceptable stopping point were reached,
if the new premise-beliefs offered as justiﬁcation continued to be challenged in
turn, then (according to the sort of coherence theory with which I am concerned)
the epistemic dialogue would if ideally continued eventually circle back upon
itself, giving the appearance of a linear regress and in effect challenging the entire
system of empirical beliefs. At this global level, however, the previously harmless
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
391

illusion of linearity becomes a serious mistake. According to the envisaged coher-
ence theory, the relation between the various particular beliefs is correctly to be
conceived, not as one of linear dependence, but rather as one of mutual or
reciprocal support. There is no ultimate relation of epistemic priority among the
members of such a system and consequently no basis for a true regress. Rather
the component beliefs of such a coherent system will ideally be so related that
each can be justiﬁed in terms of the others, with the direction of argument on a
particular occasion of local justiﬁcation depending on which belief (or set of
beliefs) has actually been challenged in that particular situation. And hence, a
coherence theory will claim, the apparent circle of justiﬁcation is not in fact
vicious because it is not genuinely a circle: the justiﬁcation of a particular empiri-
cal belief ﬁnally depends, not on other particular beliefs as the linear conception
of justiﬁcation would have it, but instead on the overall system and its
coherence.
According to this conception, the fully explicit justiﬁcation of a particular
empirical belief would involve four distinct main steps or stages of argument, as
follows:
(1) The inferability of that particular belief from other particular beliefs and
further relations among particular empirical beliefs.
(2) The coherence of the overall system of empirical beliefs.
(3) The justiﬁcation of the overall system of empirical beliefs.
(4) The justiﬁcation of the particular belief in question, by virtue of its member-
ship in the system.
The claim of a coherence theory of empirical justiﬁcation is that each of these
steps depends on the ones which precede it. It is the neglecting of steps (2) and (3),
the ones pertaining explicitly to the overall cognitive system, that lends plausibil-
ity to the linear conception of justiﬁcation and thus generates the regress prob-
lem. And this is a very seductive mistake: since the very same inferential connec-
tions between particular empirical beliefs are involved in both step (1) and step
(4), and since the issues involved in the intervening steps are very rarely (if ever)
raised in practical contexts, it becomes much too easy to conﬂate steps (1) and
(4), thus leaving out any explicit reference to the cognitive system and its coher-
ence. The picture which results from such an omission is vastly more simple; but
the price of this simplicity, according to coherence theories, is a radical distortion
of the very concept of epistemic justiﬁcation—and also, in the end, skepticism or
something tantamount to it. . . .
Coherentist observation: an example
Consider then the following example of (putative) observational knowledge: As I
sit at my desk (or so I believe), I come to have the belief, among very many others,
that there is a red book on the desk. In fact, of course, the content of the belief is a
good deal more precise and speciﬁc than the formulation just given would sug-
gest: I do not believe simply that there is a red book on the desk, but rather that
there is a book of a certain approximate size, of an approximately rectangular
shape, which is a certain fairly speciﬁc shade of red, and so on. But what matters
LAURENCE BONJOUR
392

for the moment is that I do not infer that there is a red book on the desk, nor does
the belief result from any other sort of deliberative or ratiocinative process,
whether explicit or implicit. Rather it simply occurs to me, “strikes me,” in a
manner which is both involuntary and quite coercive; such a belief is, I will say,
cognitively spontaneous. It is cognitive spontaneity which marks the belief as
putatively observational, as what Sellars calls a “language-entry transition,” in a
way which can be recognized from within the system of beliefs.
At ﬁrst glance, such a belief represents as clear a paradigm of an observational
belief, indeed of observational knowledge, as one could want. How then is it
justiﬁed? It is reasonably obvious what the various foundationalist views which
were examined earlier and found wanting would say, but what might our envis-
aged coherentist account of observation offer as an alternative? How might the
justiﬁcation of such a belief, considered as an observation, depend on coherence
with or inferability from other beliefs in my overall system of beliefs, on the
availability of something like a justiﬁcatory argument?
There are several obvious but crucial facts (or at least things which I believe to
be facts) concerning the belief and its context which can plausibly serve as the
premises of a justiﬁcatory argument. Presumably these are things that I know, but
what matters for the moment is that I believe them—and that these further beliefs
are themselves justiﬁed in some manner or other.
First, the belief in question is a cognitively spontaneous belief of a certain,
reasonably deﬁnite kind K1, which we may specify, somewhat misleadingly, by
saying that it is a visual belief about the color and general classiﬁcation of a
“medium-sized physical object.” The reason that this is apt to be misleading is
that the term “visual” suggests a classiﬁcation in terms of causal etiology,
whereas what is intended here is a classiﬁcation concerned only with the intrinsic
character and content of the belief, however it may in fact have been caused.
Thus hallucinatory or dream beliefs of the right sort could qualify as visual in this
sense, despite having been caused in some way having no connection at all with
the physiological machinery of vision. We might better describe such beliefs as
“putatively visual” or “apparently visual,” but I will not bother with this
terminological reﬁnement here.
Second, the conditions of observation are of a speciﬁable sort C1: the lighting is
good, I am reasonably close to the apparent location of the object, my eyes are
functioning normally, and so on. It is common to speak of “standard condi-
tions,” but these may vary substantially for different sorts of cases; it will thus be
less confusing to assume an actual listing of the conditions, though I will not
attempt to give a complete one here.
Third, it is a true law of nature concerning me and a large, though indeﬁnite
class of relevantly similar observers (where a rough speciﬁcation of an appropri-
ate sort of observers can be taken to be part of the speciﬁed conditions) that our
cognitively spontaneous beliefs of that kind in conditions of the sort speciﬁed are
highly reliable, that is, very likely to be true.
Since I believe all of these things, I am in a position to offer the following
justiﬁcatory argument for the original belief:
(1) I have a cognitively spontaneous belief of kind K1 that there is a red
book on the desk.
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
393

(2) Conditions C1 obtain.
(3) Cognitively spontaneous visual beliefs of kind K1 in conditions C1 are
very likely to be true.
Therefore, my belief that there is a red book on the desk is very likely to be
true.
Therefore, (probably) there is a red book on the desk.
Obviously this is very far from the end of the matter: if my belief is to be genu-
inely justiﬁed by appeal to this argument, the premises of the argument must
themselves be justiﬁed; and if the resulting account of observation is to be genu-
inely coherentist, these further justiﬁcations must also make no appeal to basic
beliefs. . . . For the moment, the point is that the justiﬁcation of my original belief
is, on this account, not somehow intrinsic or primitive, as would be the case for
versions of foundationalism like Quinton’s, but is rather dependent on the back-
ground and context provided by my other beliefs. This is the basic claim which a
coherentist account of observation must make for all varieties of observation.
Answers to objections
Answers to standard objections (I) and (II)
The coherentist account of observation and introspection offered in the previous
chapter provides the last of the main ingredients needed for the formulation (as
opposed to the metajustiﬁcation) of a coherentist account of empirical justiﬁca-
tion. In the present chapter I will explore the shape of such a theory in more
detail, by considering whether and how it can meet various objections. I begin in
this section with a reconsideration of the ﬁrst two of the standard objections to
coherence theories which were formulated [earlier]; this will also yield a signiﬁ-
cant modiﬁcation in the theory itself. The second section will then formulate and
attempt to answer a number of additional objections which arise in connection
with the view in question, following which the ﬁnal section will summarize the
overall position which results and touch brieﬂy on the justiﬁcation of memory
knowledge.
It will prove convenient to consider ﬁrst objection (II), which alleges that
empirical justiﬁcation, as understood by a coherentist, involves no input from the
extratheoretic world. In light of the discussion of observation, we are already in a
position to see that at least part of this objection is mistaken. It need not be true,
as the objection alleges, that coherentist justiﬁcation is purely a matter of the
internal relations within the system of beliefs. For if the system in question con-
tains beliefs to the effect that recognizable kinds of cognitively spontaneous
beliefs are likely to be true, and if beliefs of these kinds indeed occur, then such
beliefs will be at least provisionally justiﬁed in a way which does not depend at all
on the relation between their assertive content and the rest of the system. They
can thus constitute input in at least the minimal sense of being new elements of
the system which are not merely derived inferentially from the earlier elements.
And such beliefs need not merely augment the system but may also force the
alteration or abandonment of parts of it: either because the (putative) obser-
vational belief is directly inconsistent with one or more of the previous beliefs in
LAURENCE BONJOUR
394

the system or because such alteration will, in light of the new beliefs, enhance the
overall coherence of the system. Of course the observational beliefs could them-
selves be rejected as a result of such conﬂict, though if this is done very often, the
law which speciﬁes the degree of reliability of that particular sort of obser-
vational belief will also have to be revised.
Thus any new observational belief which conﬂicts with other parts of the
system forces a choice between at least two alternative ways of revising the sys-
tem. The primary basis for making this choice is the relative coherence of the
alternatives, though there is another important constraint, of a rather different
sort, which will be mentioned momentarily. In this way a coherence theory
can allow for a system of beliefs to be tested against the results of (putative)
observation and revised accordingly.
There are, however, two important issues with respect to the foregoing sugges-
tion which need to be discussed. First, though such beliefs may constitute input in
the minimal sense just speciﬁed, is there any reason to think that they genuinely
constitute input in the full sense involved in the objection, that is, input from the
extratheoretic world? This question can, indeed must, be discussed on two differ-
ent levels. On an empirical level, operating within the cognitive system, the
standard explanation given for the occurrence of such beliefs is that they are
caused in regular ways by the world; and moreover, it is very hard to think of any
alternative explanation which could be offered at this level for the existence of
signiﬁcant numbers of cognitively spontaneous beliefs which are at least largely
in agreement with each other. Thus such beliefs will normally be at least claimed
within the system to constitute extratheoretic input. Of course it can still be asked
whether there is any reason to think that such a claim is true; but this is merely a
speciﬁc case of the general issue of whether coherentist justiﬁcation is truth-
conducive. Thus a complete answer to the input problem will, not surprisingly,
depend on the outcome of that later discussion.
The second issue, of more immediate concern, is whether a coherence theory of
empirical justiﬁcation, while perhaps allowing in the way just indicated for the
possibility of input into the system of beliefs, does not also permit there to be a
system of justiﬁed empirical beliefs which lacks such input. For suppose that a
particular system of beliefs simply fails to attribute a sufﬁcient degree of reliabil-
ity to enough kinds of cognitively spontaneous beliefs to yield a signiﬁcant degree
of input (or alternatively fails to attribute reliability to those introspective beliefs
which are essential for the reliable recognition of other kinds of reliable spon-
taneous beliefs). One might arbitrarily construct a system of beliefs with this
feature; or alternatively, it might be produced gradually (and perhaps
unintentionally) if conﬂicts between putative observations and other beliefs in the
system are always settled by rejecting the observations. Such a system would fail
to have any effective input from outside the system. But there seems to be no
reason why it might not still possess the highest possible degree of coherence and
hence be epistemically justiﬁed according to the coherentist account offered so
far. And this is surely a mistaken, even absurd result.
This point is, I believe, essentially sound. What it shows is that any adequate
account of empirical knowledge must require putative input into the cognitive
system, not merely allow for the possibility of such input. For, as was already
argued in the initial statement of objection (II), without input of some sort any
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
395

agreement which happened to exist between the cognitive system and the world
could only be accidental and hence not something which one could have any
good reason to expect. Thus, as a straightforward consequence of the idea that
epistemic justiﬁcation must be truth-conducive, a coherence theory of empirical
justiﬁcation must require that in order for the beliefs of a cognitive system to be
even candidates for empirical justiﬁcation, that system must contain laws attrib-
uting a high degree of reliability to a reasonable variety of cognitively spon-
taneous beliefs (including in particular those kinds of introspective beliefs which
are required for the recognition of other cognitively spontaneous beliefs).
This requirement, which I will refer to as the Observation Requirement, is
obviously quite vague, and I can see no way to make it very much more precise
without going into vastly more detail than is possible here. The underlying idea is
that any claim in the system which is not justiﬁed a priori should in principle be
capable of being observationally checked, either directly or indirectly, and
thereby either conﬁrmed or refuted. But whether or not this is so in a given system
depends not only on the modes of observation available in that system, but also
on the inferential interconnectedness of the system. In a fairly tight-knit system,
the Observation Requirement could thus be interpreted less stringently than
would be necessary in a looser system.
Notice that the Observation Requirement does not stipulate that the cogni-
tively spontaneous beliefs to which reliability is attributed must actually be reli-
able, even as judged from within the system. Nor does it place any restriction on
the sort of taxonomy which can be employed in specifying particular classes of
such beliefs. Obviously it is part of the background concept of observation that
observational beliefs are reliable and also at least implicitly that observational
beliefs will fall into something like natural kinds with each kind having a distinct-
ive causal etiology. But these conditions need not be built into the Observation
Requirement, since failure to satisfy them will virtually guarantee that the system
will not both remain coherent and continue to satisfy the Observation Require-
ment as stated, at least not in the long run. To attribute reliability to beliefs which
are not in fact reliable or to lump together beliefs of very different sorts (which
will be affected by different sorts of conditions) is almost certain to lead to
eventual incoherence. The Observation Requirement should, however, be under-
stood to include the requirement, common to all adequate theories of knowledge,
that a user of the system must make a reasonable effort to seek out relevant,
possibly conﬂicting observations, if his beliefs are to be justiﬁed.
Thus understood, the Observation Requirement effectively guarantees that a
cognitive system which satisﬁes it will receive at least apparent input from the
world and hence that empirical justiﬁcation will not depend merely on the
internal relations of a static belief system; it thus provides the basic answer to
objection (II).
It is important to understand clearly the status of the Observation Require-
ment within a coherentist position. The need for the requirement is a priori: it is,
for reasons already indicated in the original discussion of objection (II), an a
priori truth that empirical knowledge of an independent world is not possible
without input from that world; and it also seems to be true a priori, in light of my
earlier discussion of foundationalism, that such input can only be understood in
terms of something very close to Sellars’s idea of token credibility which does not
LAURENCE BONJOUR
396

derive from type credibility and hence in terms of cognitively spontaneous beliefs
which are justiﬁed, at least in part, in virtue of that status. Hence, according to a
coherence theory, it is an a priori truth that a cognitive system must attribute
reliability to some members of the general class of cognitively spontaneous
beliefs, to the extent indicated, if it is to contain empirical knowledge. But for a
given system, it is not an a priori truth that the antecedent of this conditional is
satisﬁed and hence also not an a priori truth that its consequent is satisﬁed—or
even that it epistemically ought to be satisﬁed. Whether any varieties of cogni-
tively spontaneous beliefs are in fact reliable and hence should be recognized as
such is an empirical issue to be decided, purely on the basis of coherence, within
the cognitive system. It is logically conceivable, relative to a particular system,
that no variety of cognitively spontaneous belief is in fact sufﬁciently reliable and
hence that this system will be unable to satisfy the Observation Requirement in
the long run while remaining coherent. The Observation Requirement says not
that such a situation could occur, but only that if it did occur, there would in
consequence be no empirical justiﬁcation and no empirical knowledge.
Thus the Observation Requirement, as it functions within a coherentist pos-
ition, might be described, perhaps a bit ponderously, as a regulative metaprinci-
ple, as opposed to a ﬁrst-level epistemic principle. It does not impinge directly on
issues of empirical justiﬁcation; these are decided entirely be appeal to coherence.
Rather the Observation Requirement provides a partial basis for categorizing or
classifying the results yielded by such a system. This is one difference between a
coherence theory of the present sort and that version of weak foundationalism
which attributes some degree of initial credibility to all cognitively spontaneous
beliefs. According to such a foundationalist view, it is true prior to any appeal to
coherence that cognitively spontaneous beliefs have this minimal degree of
credibility—for which no adequate justiﬁcation is or ever can be offered.
Whereas for a coherence theory, all epistemic justiﬁcation of empirical beliefs
depends on coherence.
What then would be the status of contingent and superﬁcially empirical beliefs
belonging to a coherent system of beliefs which violates the Observation
Requirement? I suggest that they be thought of as analogous to beliefs—or at
least belief-like states—which are a product of sheer imagination or which are the
mental correlate of literary ﬁction. It is a consequence of the holism which is part
and parcel of a coherence theory that the distinction between genuine empirical
description and these other categories of thought or discourse is not to be drawn
at the level of particular beliefs or statements but only at the level of systems. And
the empirical thrust of a cognitive system is precisely the implicit claim that its
component beliefs will agree, in general at least, with those classes of cognitively
spontaneous beliefs which it holds to be reliable; while one who presents or
regards a given body of propositions as purely imaginative or ﬁctional commits
himself to no such claim. (Thus the Observation Requirement might be viewed as
a kind of rough analogue of the old positivist veriﬁability criterion of empirical
meaningfulness, transmuted so as to apply to systems of beliefs rather than to
isolated beliefs or statements.)
We are now also in a position to offer an answer to objection (I), the alterna-
tive coherent systems objection. But once it is clear that a coherence theory can
allow for, indeed insist upon, the possibility that a cognitive system which is
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
397

coherent at one time may be rendered incoherent, and thereby in need of revision,
by subsequent observational input, this objection needs some major reformula-
tion. If it is to be interesting, the objection cannot be merely that at a given time
there may be many equally coherent but incompatible systems between which a
coherence theory provides no basis for decision. This claim is surely correct but
does not constitute an objection to coherence theories, since an analogous claim
would also hold for virtually any imaginable theory of knowledge, including all
of the standard foundationalist views: on any account of the standards of epi-
stemic justiﬁcation, it is quite possible, even likely, that there will be competing
sets of empirical claims which at a particular time are tied for the status of most
justiﬁed and between which those standards offer at that time no basis for deci-
sion. This is neither alarming nor particularly surprising. The most that it seems
reasonable to expect of an epistemological account is that it make it possible for
such ties to be broken in the long run.
Thus if it is to constitute a serious objection to a coherence theory of the sort in
question here, objection (I) must be interpreted to mean that even in the long run
and with the continued impact of (putative) observational beliefs, there will
always be multiple, equally coherent empirical systems between which a coher-
ence theory will be unable to decide. But once the possibility of observational
input is appreciated, it is no longer clear why this claim should be accepted, or at
least why it is thought to be any more plausible in relation to a coherence theory
than it is in relation to other theories of knowledge. The basic rationale for the
original version of the objection was that alternative coherent systems could, at
least in principle, be constructed arbitrarily. But such an arbitrarily constructed
system will not in general satisfy the Observation Requirement; and if one should
be so constructed as to initially satisfy that requirement, there is no reason to
think that it would remain coherent as (putative) observations accumulate, even
if it were coherent in the beginning. Thus the possibility of arbitrary invention
seems to provide no real support for the envisaged objection.
One useful way to put this point is to say that a coherence theory which
incorporates the indicated conception of observation bases justiﬁcation not on
the static coherence of a system of beliefs considered in the abstract but rather on
the dynamic coherence of an ongoing system of beliefs which someone actually
accepts. Only such an actually functioning system can contain cognitively spon-
taneous beliefs and thereby satisfy the Observation Requirement. For this reason,
the possibility of arbitrarily constructing a coherent system in the abstract has no
bearing on such a theory.
Once the possibility of arbitrary invention is set aside, is there any other reason
for thinking that the possibility of alternative coherent systems is a serious prob-
lem for this sort of coherence theory? I can think of only one further way of
pressing such an objection. According to a coherence theory of the sort in ques-
tion, the classiﬁcation of a given sort of cognitively spontaneous belief as reliable
and hence as a species of observation is not in any way an a priori matter but
rather depends entirely on the extent to which such a classiﬁcation yields a max-
imally coherent system. But suppose that relative to a given person’s cognitive
system there are two disjoint classes of cognitively spontaneous beliefs, such that:
if the beliefs in one class are classiﬁed as observational, one system results and
remains coherent in the long run; while if the beliefs in the second class are
LAURENCE BONJOUR
398

classiﬁed as observational, a different, incompatible system results which is
equally coherent and remains equally coherent in the long run; whereas if the
beliefs in both classes are classiﬁed as observational, a system with a much lower
degree of coherence, too low to meet the requirement for justiﬁcation, results.
(There could be more than two such classes, but I will neglect this possibility for
the sake of simplicity.) A coherence theory seems to provide no basis for choosing
between these two coherent systems. And this might not be so for some versions
of foundationalism, depending on just what kinds of cognitively spontaneous
beliefs are involved.
Is such a situation a genuine possibility? Could it perhaps be produced by a
Cartesian demon, if not in some more ordinary way? The issue is extremely
difﬁcult, and I have been unable to devise any really compelling argument in
either direction. But there is at least one consideration to be noted. For the
situation to work as described, it must be the case that the cognitively spon-
taneous beliefs in each of the two classes are, when taken separately, strongly in
agreement with each other and quite coherent. But then the internal agreement
and coherence of these two classes of beliefs are facts which must be explained by
any total view which such a person might adopt, on pain of serious anomaly and
hence greatly reduced coherence. As already brieﬂy suggested, the obvious
explanation of the internal agreement and coherence of such a class of beliefs is
that it is caused in such a way as to genuinely reﬂect an objective reality. But if
such an explanation is ruled out, as it must be for one of these two classes of
beliefs by either of the two cognitive systems in question, then some alternative
explanation must be found. And thus for the choice between the two cognitive
systems to be genuinely symmetrical in the way supposed by the objection, each
would have to have such an alternative, reasonably satisfactory explanation of
this sort for the agreement and coherence of the observation beliefs of the other,
and the two explanations would have to be equally good (other things being
equal). And while such a situation may still be a possibility, I can see no reason to
think that it is likely enough to constitute a serious objection to our proposed
coherence theory.
We have, in any case, obviously come very far from the original version of
objection (I). Instead of the claim that there will always be indeﬁnitely many
equally coherent and incompatible cognitive systems, between which a coherence
theory provides no basis for decision, we have now the claim that there might
possibly be two (or, an even more questionable possibility, more than two) such
systems between which a coherence theory could not decide (but for which some
foundationalist views might provide a basis for decision). This is a very weak
objection, if indeed it is still an objection at all.
Thus the ﬁrst two of the standard and supposedly fatal objections to coherence
theories have little real force against a version of coherentism which incorporates
the proposed account of observation. This does not mean, of course, that such a
position is ﬁnally defensible. There remains the third of the standard objections,
the problem of truth. But before considering that objection, there are several
other serious objections which need to be formulated and assessed.
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
399

Some further objections
The ﬁrst three objections concern the proper classiﬁcation of the view presented:
whether it is genuinely a version of coherentism, and its relation to
foundationalism.
Objection 1. The view presented is not genuinely a version of coherentism.
Rather it is a version of weak foundationalism in which the foundational beliefs
are the person’s metabeliefs about the composition of his own system of beliefs,
that is, those beliefs speciﬁed by the Doxastic Presumption.
Reply. It must be conceded that there is something to this objection. Indeed, I
have insisted at several points that one’s reﬂective grasp of the composition of
one’s own system of beliefs provides an essential starting point for this version, or
indeed for any plausible version, of coherentism. No nonexternalist appeal to
coherence is possible without a grasp of the system of beliefs relative to which
coherence is to be judged. This grasp may be, as I have suggested, in part defeas-
ible, but it is not dispensable. And there can be no real objection to characterizing
the central role which the metabeliefs that make up this grasp of one’s own
system of beliefs play for a coherentist position by saying that they constitute the
foundation of empirical knowledge for such a view, so long as it is clearly under-
stood that “foundation” here does not carry with it the implications which it
would possess within a standard foundationalist view. For no claim is being made
that these metabeliefs possess any sort of intrinsic or independent justiﬁcation or
warrant of any kind (nor would such a claim be defensible in light of the earlier
antifoundationalist arguments). Rather the approximate correctness of these
beliefs is an essential presupposition for coherentist justiﬁcation, and both such
justiﬁcation itself and any resulting claim of likelihood of truth must be under-
stood as relativized to this presupposition. In this respect, then, the present view
is fundamentally different from weak foundationalism in a way which makes it
only confusing to assimilate the two, in spite of the admitted parallels between
them.
Objection 2. The view presented is not genuinely a version of coherentism. It is
a version of weak foundationalism in which the initially credible foundational
beliefs are just the cognitively spontaneous beliefs. Such beliefs must be regarded
as having some small, defeasible degree of justiﬁcation if coherence with them is
to confer justiﬁcation on anything else; and the effect of the Observation
Requirement is to confer on them just such a status.
Reply. Though not entirely without merit, this objection has rather less to be
said for it than the preceding one. Obviously the status of cognitively spon-
taneous beliefs is very special for a view of the sort in question, and obviously
that status is conferred at least in part by the Observation Requirement. More-
over, it would be possible to formulate a version of weak foundationalism, or
something very close to weak foundationalism, in which cognitively spontaneous
beliefs were accorded some degree of initial or independent warrant, and such a
view would have fairly close structural similarities to the version of coherentism
suggested here.
But in spite of this, the main claims made in the objection are mistaken. First, it
is simply not necessary in order for such a view to yield justiﬁcation to suppose
that cognitively spontaneous beliefs have some degree of initial or independent
LAURENCE BONJOUR
400

credibility. One way to see this is to consider a parallel example taken, surpris-
ingly enough, from C.I. Lewis. Lewis’s account of memory knowledge is a
version of weak foundationalism: memory beliefs are claimed to have some ante-
cedent degree of warrant simply by virtue of being memory beliefs, and this is
then ampliﬁed by appeal to coherence (which Lewis, as we have seen, calls “con-
gruence”). In arguing for his account, Lewis considers the example of “relatively
unreliable witnesses who independently tell the same circumstantial story.” The
point of the example is that: “For any one of these reports, taken singly, the
extent to which it conﬁrms what is reported may be slight . . . But congruence of
the reports establishes a high probability of what they agree upon, by principles
of probability determination which are familiar: on any other hypothesis than
that of truthtelling, this agreement is highly unlikely; the story that any one false
witness might tell being one out of so very large a number of equally possible
choices.” And he adds that this result would still follow even if one of the wit-
nesses were to tell a different story. What Lewis does not see, however, is that his
own example shows quite convincingly that no antecedent degree of warrant or
credibility is required. For as long as we are conﬁdent that the reports of the
various witnesses are genuinely independent of each other, a high enough degree
of coherence among them will eventually dictate the hypothesis of truth telling as
the only available explanation of their agreement—even, indeed, if those indi-
vidual reports initially have a high degree of negative credibility, that is, are much
more likely to be false than true (for example, in the case where all of the wit-
nesses are known to be habitual liars). And by the same token, so long as appar-
ently cognitively spontaneous beliefs are genuinely independent of each other,
their agreement will eventually generate credibility, without the need for any
initial degree of warrant.
Secondly, there is no reason why the Observation Requirement should be
regarded as in fact conferring such an initial degree of warrant on cognitively
spontaneous beliefs. The main point is that it is quite consistent with the Obser-
vation Requirement, as explained above, that no cognitively spontaneous belief
of any kind might turn out to be warranted: this would be so, for example, if no
class of such beliefs turned out to be in internal agreement to any signiﬁcant
degree. But such a result would not seem to be possible for a weak foundational-
ist view, according to which the largest consistent (or coherent?) class of
basic beliefs will seemingly have to be justiﬁed to some degree, even if perhaps
not enough to satisfy the requirement for knowledge. There is thus a quite
fundamental distinction between the two views.
QUESTIONS
1
What is meant by a “basic belief”?
2
According to BonJour, what is required in order for a belief to be “justiﬁed”?
3
According to BonJour, what four steps are involved in the justiﬁcation of an
empirical belief?
4
What is a cognitively spontaneous belief?
5
Are cognitively spontaneous beliefs also basic beliefs, according to BonJour?
(Explain.)
THE STRUCTURE OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
401

William Alston, “Has Foundationalism
Been Refuted?”
The battle over foundationalism in epistemology has recently been escalated with
the publication of two works in which that position is subjected to detailed
criticism, Frederick L. Will’s Induction and Justiﬁcation1 and Keith Lehrer’s
Knowledge.2 In both cases, however, the attack is directed to features of the
position that are by no means essential to foundationalism and that do not appear
in its most defensible form, what I shall call “Minimal Foundationalism”. This
paper will be devoted to supporting this claim and to suggesting that if one wishes
to dispose of foundationalism he must concentrate his ﬁre on its strongest form.
1. Will’s criticism
Will formulates foundationalism as follows:
There is a class of claims, cognitions, that are known in a special direct,
certain, incorrigible way; and all epistemic authority resides in these. The
philosophical question of the epistemic status of any claim is always a
question of the relation of that claim to this class of ﬁrst cognitions. A claim
can be established to be a genuine example of knowledge, or at least a claim
worthy of some kind of reasonable adherence, only if it can be disclosed to
be, if not a ﬁrst cognition itself, in some degree authenticated by one or
more of such cognitions. It must be possible somehow, beginning with such
cognitions, by a ﬁnite set of steps in an acceptable procedure to arrive at the
claim in question as a conclusion and, by virtue of this, as a justiﬁed result.
(p. 142)
Elsewhere these “ﬁrst cognitions” are characterized as “infallible” (p. 203),
“indubitable” (p. 172), “self-justifying” (p. 190), and enjoying “logical
independence from every other possible cognition” (p. 200). Will’s objections to
the position are focused on the claims of independence and incorrigibility, the
latter understood as the impossibility of justiﬁed rejection or revision.
The doctrine advanced concerning these alleged ﬁrst steps in cognition, like
William Alston, “Has Foundationalism Been Refuted?” Philosophical Studies 29
(1976): 287–305.
402

that concerning consequent ones, is that . . . in discriminating a quality of
one’s own visual experience (e.g., the redness of the after-image) one is
participating in a practice that extends, and depends for its success upon
conditions which extend, far beyond the subject as an individual human
being. (p. 197)
And just because of this, one’s supposition that one’s sensation is of a certain
character is liable both to error and to revision.
If knowing any truth about a sensation, if indeed having a sensation of the
kind that is speciﬁed in that truth, involves the employment and sound
working of a vast array of equipment and resource extending far beyond
any individual and what can be conceived to be private to him, then the
possibility that this equipment and resource is not in place and working
soundly cannot be discounted in the philosophical understanding of the
knowledge of such truth. If the sound discrimination of the sensation of X,
in its character as X, can be made only by correctly utilizing something
further, say, Y, and if, in a case like this, discrimination of a sensation as X
can be made while yet, for some reason, Y is not being used correctly, then
a discrimination of X need not be a sound discrimination. (p. 203)
Will’s attack on incorrigibility and infallibility embodies a salutary emphasis on
the possibility and importance of failings other than error.
There are a variety of ways in which a discrimination may go wrong with-
out being mistaken, without yielding anything sufﬁciently close to a good
performance to be rightly called an error. And there are also a variety of
ways in which a discrimination can exhibit its corrigibility other than by
going wrong, by yielding somehow an unsuccessful individual perform-
ance. . . . Like every other mode of response, modes of sensory discrimin-
ation exhibit their liability to change, improvement, deterioration and
obsolescence in the dependence they exhibit at all points upon individual
and social needs and the conditions under which these needs are ﬁlled.
(p. 207)
If I were concerned in this paper with the soundness of Will’s criticism, there are a
number of matters into which I should have to go. For one thing, there is the
question of whether he thinks that the dependence of, for instance, sensory dis-
criminations, on social practices, itself contradicts a central tenet of foundation-
alism, or whether he makes this point only as a basis for showing corrigibility.
And this of course depends on how he interprets the independence he supposes
foundationalism to ascribe to ﬁrst cognitions. Although he is not as explicit about
this as one might wish, there are indications that he supposes foundationalism to
be committed to the view that he possibility of ﬁrst cognitions in no way depends
on the existence of anything outside one’s momentary state of mind (e.g., p. 203);
in that case the dependence he (surely correctly) alleges would be itself an argu-
ment against the position. Again it is not clear that his vigorous and penetrating
attack on incorrigibility really is based on the claim that all cognition depends on
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
403

social practices. Would not Will’s points about the inherent possibility of any
procedure’s being misused and about the liability of any conceptual scheme to be
scrapped for a better one apply even to a disembodied mind that is alone in the
universe (assuming, contra Wittgenstein and Will, that one can speak intelligibly
of a solipsistic mind as using procedures and conceptual schemes)? But my con-
cern in this paper is limited to showing that even if we freely grant the force of his
arguments, a signiﬁcant brand of foundationalism is left standing.
Let’s suppose, then, that Will has shown both that all cognition depends (not
just in fact but, as he claims, with a kind of theoretical necessity [pp. 198–99]) on
social practices, and that no cognitions are incorrigible. Does that dispose of
foundationalism? Hardly. Though foundationalists have often taken their foun-
dations to be incorrigible,3 they need not have done so in order to be distinctive
foundationalists. To ﬂesh out this claim I shall formulate a “Minimal Founda-
tionalism,” the weakest, and hence least vulnerable, doctrine that has enough
bite (of the right sort) to deserve that title.
It will be useful to build up to the formulation in several stages. In the most
unspeciﬁc terms a foundationalist is one who supposes that knowledge forms a
structure, most components of which are supported by a certain subset of com-
ponents that are not themselves supported by the former. To make this less meta-
phorical we have to specify the mode of support involved. Most contemporary
formulations (including those of our critics) employ some form of a justiﬁed-true-
belief conception of knowledge, in that they take something like S’s being justi-
ﬁed in truly believing that p as at least a necessary condition for S’s knowing that
p.4 In these terms we can specify the relevant mode of support as justiﬁcation.
The rest of knowledge is supported by the foundations and not vice versa, just in
that it depends on the foundations for the justiﬁcation of the beliefs involved, and
not vice versa. Two further considerations will enable us to make this formula-
tion more perspicuous.
(1) First a useful bit of terminology. Where what justiﬁes a belief includes5 the
believer’s possessing certain other justiﬁed beliefs (those that embody his evi-
dence or reasons for the initial belief), we may speak of mediately (indirectly)
justiﬁed belief. And where what justiﬁes a belief does not include any such thing
(any other justiﬁed belief of that person) we may speak of immediately (directly)
justiﬁed belief. Correspondingly, a case of knowledge in which the justiﬁcation
requirement is satisﬁed by mediate justiﬁcation may be called mediate (indirect)
knowledge; and a case in which the justiﬁcation requirement is satisﬁed by
immediate justiﬁcation will be called immediate (direct) knowledge.
(2) We should make more explicit just how mediate justiﬁcation is thought to
depend on immediately justiﬁed belief. The idea is that although the other beliefs
that are involved in the justiﬁcation of a given belief may themselves be mediately
justiﬁed, if we continue determining at each stage how the beliefs involved are
justiﬁed, we will arrive, sooner or later, at a set of beliefs each of which is
immediately justiﬁed. This will not, in general, be a single line of descent, for
typically the mediately justiﬁed belief with which we start will rest on several
beliefs, each of which in turn will rest on several beliefs. So the general picture is
that of multiple branching from the original belief.
Taking account of all this, we may formulate Minimal Foundationalism as
follows.
WILLIAM ALSTON
404

(I) Every mediately justiﬁed belief stands at the base of a (more or less)
multiply branching tree structure at the tip of each branch of which is an
immediately justiﬁed belief.
Knowledge seems to have been mislaid in the course of our discussion, but it is
easily relocated. Foundationalism is thought of as dealing with knowledge just
because one thinks of the justiﬁed beliefs in question as satisfying the other
requirements for knowledge. One can, if he likes, build into (I) an explicit
restriction to cases of knowledge.
(II) In every case of mediate knowledge the mediately justiﬁed belief
involved stands at the base of a (more or less) multiply branching tree
structure at the tip of each branch of which is an immediately justiﬁed
belief that satisﬁes the other requirements for knowledge.
The fact remains, however, that the structure deﬁnitive of foundationalism comes
into the picture via the justiﬁcation of belief. Hence (I) gives what is essential to
the position, and that is what I shall be discussing under the title of “Minimal
Foundationalism.”
There are certain differences between (I) and Will’s formulation that are not
directly relevant to our present concerns. For example, Will thinks of founda-
tionalism in terms of how one is to show that a nonbasic belief is justiﬁed,
whereas (I) is in terms of what it is for a nonbasic belief to be justiﬁed.6 But of
course it follows from (I) that the way to show that a nonbasic belief is justiﬁed is
roughly the way Will speciﬁes. Again, (I) is in terms of “belief,” whereas Will uses
terms like “claim” and “cognition.” It lies outside the purview of this paper to
argue that “belief” is the term we need, but I am conﬁdent it could be successfully
argued.
What is directly to the point is that the targets of Will’s criticism are not to be
found in Minimal Foundationalism. What that position requires of a foundation
is only that it be immediately justiﬁed, justiﬁed by something other than the
possession of other justiﬁed beliefs. And to say that a certain person is immedi-
ately justiﬁed in holding a certain belief is to say nothing as to whether it could be
shown defective by someone else or at some other time.7 Still less is it to say that it
enjoys the absolute independence opposed by Will. A minimal foundation is
independent of every other cognition in that it derives its justiﬁcation from none.
But that by no means implies that it is nomologically possible for such a belief to
occur without a supporting context of social practices. And it is the latter mode
of independence that Will rejects.
Will attempts to show that “absolute” independence and incorrigibility, as
well as infallibility, are required if a cognition is to serve as a foundation.
The crucial aspect of the alleged ﬁrst cognitions that are taken to be
expressed in basic empirical propositions is their logical independence from
every other possible cognition. This character of epistemic atoms is essen-
tial to them, essential to their role as self-justifying grounds for other
claims. If they are not logically independent, other cognitions may serve as
grounds for them; and this is incompatible with their role as members of the
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
405

justiﬁcation sequence with which the sequence of questions must stop,
because no more can possibly be asked. From this independence follows
their incorrigibility, and given this incorrigibility . . . they will have to be
certain in a very strong sense that implies infallibility. (pp. 200–201)
Ten pages earlier there is a similar line of argument, starting from the basic
demand for a foundation that it “can be established in utter independence from
other claims” (p. 190), which I take to be roughly equivalent to being “members
of the justiﬁcation sequence with which the sequence of questions must stop”.
Thus we have a chain of alleged implications that runs–can be established
without dependence on other claims→independence from every other
cognition→incorrigibility→infallibility.
As against this I would suggest that neither the starting point nor any of the
succeeding links in the chain have been shown to be required by foundationalism.
It may look as if “can be established in utter independence from other claims”
is just precisely what we have said Minimal Foundationalism requires of its foun-
dations. However, there is a subtle but highly signiﬁcant difference between “is
justiﬁed without dependence on other claims” and “can be established without
dependence on other claims.” I might well be immediately justiﬁed in believing,
for example, that I feel depressed, without being able to “establish” this (i.e.,
show that it is true), either with or without dependence on other “claims.” In fact
it is not at all clear what would count as such a showing; perhaps the strongest
candidate would be my showing that I am justiﬁed in believing that I feel
depressed. But of course to do that requires far more conceptual and dialectical
sophistication than would normally be possessed by those who are justiﬁed in
holding such beliefs. In view of that, it is fortunate that Minimal Foundational-
ism does not require one to be able to show that his foundations have the
required status, but only that they do have them.8
In the quotation above “logical independence” is said to be entailed by the
capability of being established without reliance on other claims. Perhaps it is, but
only in the sense in which a contradiction entails everything. I don’t see what
sense can be attached to showing or establishing p without adducing some
grounds q, not identical with p. If when asked to show that p I simply reiterate
my assertion that p, I have clearly not shown that p; this follows just from the
concept of showing. Even if my belief is self-justifying, so that nothing outside the
belief is required to justify me in holding it, what follows from that, if anything
follows concerning showing, is that there is no need for me to show that p is true;
it certainly does not follow that I can show that p just by asserting that p. So the
requirement that it be possible to establish that p without dependence on other
cognitions is a self-contradictory one. And the more sensible requirement that we
have seen to be intrinsic to foundationalism, that the claim be justiﬁed otherwise
than by relation to other cognitions, does not entail that the claim is “logically
independent of all other possible cognitions.” Indeed it is not at all clear what is
meant by the latter, but let’s take its denial to involve what Will says it involves,
viz., that other cognitions may serve as grounds. Does this prevent the putative
foundation from being immediately justiﬁed? Will thinks so. “Claims are said to
be self-justifying ones only when they alone, and no other claims whatever, may
be advanced in their support.” (p. 201).9 But I see no merit in this. To say that a
WILLIAM ALSTON
406

belief is immediately justiﬁed is just to say that there are conditions sufﬁcient for
its justiﬁcation that do not involve any other justiﬁed beliefs of that believer. This
condition could be satisﬁed even if the believer has other justiﬁed beliefs that
could serve as grounds. Overdetermination is an epistemic as well as a causal
phenomenon. What ﬁts a belief to serve as a foundation is simply that it doesn’t
need other justiﬁed beliefs in order to be justiﬁed itself. It can be accepted
whether or not there are grounds. Clearly the existence of grounds does not
prevent its having that status.
As for the next link in the chain, I suppose that if foundations were “logically
independent” of other claims in such a way as to render them insusceptible of
mediate justiﬁcation, it would follow by the same token that they could not be
shown mistaken on the basis of other claims. But since we have seen no reason to
attribute the former to foundations, we are left with no basis for the attribution
of incorrigibility. Will elsewhere gives other arguments for incorrigibility, but
they also involve features that go beyond Minimal Foundationalism. For
example, “incorrigibility derives from the assignment of certain claims to the
position of ﬁxed and absolute beginnings in the justiﬁcation process” (p. 191).10
And if we require maximal stability for the structure of justiﬁcation, we shall
indeed have to rule out the possibility that any foundation loses its credentials.
But all that is required by Minimal Foundationalism is that the mediately justiﬁed
beliefs a person has at any moment rest (at that moment) on certain immediately
justiﬁed beliefs. This in no way implies that the set of immediately justiﬁed beliefs
changes from moment to moment only by adding new members. Items can also
drop out, whether by refutation or otherwise. That will only mean that mediately
justiﬁed beliefs that essentially depended on those delinquents will drop out as
well.
We may, ﬁnally, note that the derivation of infallibility from incorrigibility
fares no better.
Since incorrigibility without truth is a dubious merit for any set of truth
claims to have, since incorrigible error is of the worst kind, and since the
aspiration to truth of any item in the corpus of human knowledge is taken
to depend upon these alleged incorrigible claims, they must, in their splen-
did isolation, be incorrigibly true. Infallibility as a requirement derives in
the theory from incorrigibility. (p. 190)
This may indicate why infallibility is attractive to foundationalists (or any other
seeker after truth), but it does nothing to show that a claim cannot be incorrigible
without being infallible; indeed by acknowledging the conceivability of incor-
rigible error Will acquiesces in the denial of that.1 Nor does it do anything to
show that only infallible claims can play the foundational role. No doubt, in
order to be a foundation a belief must carry a strong presumption of truth; this it
enjoys just by virtue of being justiﬁed. But that is quite different from impossibil-
ity of falsity.12
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
407

II. Lehrer’s criticism
Lehrer’s formulation of foundationalism runs as follows:
It is possible to give a more precise characterization of foundation theories
by specifying the conditions that must be met for a belief to be basic. The
ﬁrst is that a basic statement must be self-justiﬁed and must not be justiﬁed
by any non-basic belief. Second, a basic belief must either be irrefutable, or,
if refutable at all, it must only be refutable by other basic beliefs. Third,
beliefs must be such that all other beliefs that are justiﬁed or refuted are
justiﬁed or refuted by basic beliefs. A theory of justiﬁcation having these
features is one in which there are basic beliefs which are self-justiﬁed and
neither refutable nor justiﬁable by non-basic beliefs and which justify and
refute all non-basic beliefs that are justiﬁed or refuted. These basic beliefs
constitute the foundation of all justiﬁcation. (pp. 76–77)
This, like Minimal Foundationalism, is (appears to be) in terms of what it is to be
justiﬁed, rather than what it takes to show justiﬁcation; but, like Will, Lehrer
tacks on a requirement of incorrigibility (here interpreted as impossibility of
error). As noted in notes 10 and 11, Lehrer claims, like Will, that incorrigibility
and infallibility are required for foundations, and devotes a longish chapter
(chapter 4) to arguing that there are not nearly enough incorrigible beliefs to
serve as foundations for others. In spite of that he goes on in the following
chapter to acknowledge the conceivability of a theory built on corrigible founda-
tions. Our task here will be to determine whether his objections against this latter
form of the theory tell against Minimal Foundationalism.
Lehrer attacks the theory both on the basic and the nonbasic level. As for the
former, he considers whether the beliefs that we need for foundations are “self-
justiﬁed.” After arguing that “independent information” is required for the justi-
ﬁcation of perceptual beliefs. Lehrer admits that for the justiﬁcation of some
beliefs, for instance, those concerning one’s own current states of consciousness,
no “information” is required over and above “semantic information” that is
needed for understanding the meaning of the statement, and hence that they may
be self-justiﬁed (p. 111). But how is this possible? In particular, “What defence
can be given of this epistemological principle telling us that beliefs of this sort are
self-justiﬁed?” (p. 112). There is a lengthy and, to my mind, persuasive argument
against the common position that such principles are true by virtue of the mean-
ings of terms (pp. 112–19). The other alternatives he considers are that “the
belief that the principle is true is basic” (p. 121), and that by taking such beliefs to
be self-justiﬁed we will be able to explain how other beliefs are justiﬁed (p. 121).
The objection to the ﬁrst of these alternatives is that: “This manoeuvre, though
logically consistent, opens the door to the most rampant forms of speculation.
Anyone wishing to argue that he knows anything whatever can then claim that
what he knows is a basic belief. When asked to defend this claim, he can again
retort that it is a basic belief that this belief is basic, and so on.” (p. 152). The
second alternative is rejected on the basis of the argument considered below,
which seeks to show that foundationalism cannot account for the justiﬁcation of
nonbasic empirical beliefs.
WILLIAM ALSTON
408

How damaging is this criticism to Minimal Foundationalism? Taking it à pied
de la lettre, not at all. Minimal Foundationalism does not require that any belief
be self-justiﬁed, but only that some beliefs be immediately justiﬁed; and the for-
mer is only one possible form of the latter. A belief is self-justiﬁed, in a literal
sense, if it is justiﬁed just by virtue of being held, just by virtue of being the sort of
belief it is (e.g., a belief by a person that he is currently thinking so-and-so). But
that is by no means the only kind of immediate justiﬁcation. The following also
constitute live possibilities for the justiﬁcation of, for example, a belief by a
person that he currently feels depressed.
(1) Justiﬁed by its truth, in other words by the fact that makes it true, the fact
that he does now feel depressed.13
(2) Justiﬁed by the believer’s awareness of his feeling depressed, where this is a
nonpropositional kind of awareness that does not necessarily involve any
belief or judgment, justiﬁed or otherwise.14
(3) Justiﬁed by being formed, or being held, in certain kinds of circumstances,
for instance, being wide awake, alert, in full possession of one’s faculties.
If what it takes to justify my belief that I am feeling depressed is what is speciﬁed
by (1), (2), or (3), then more is required than the mere existence of the belief.15
But although it is an extremely important point that immediate justiﬁcation is
not conﬁned to self-justiﬁcation, this is too easy a way with Lehrer’s argument.
For whatever mode of immediate justiﬁcation we think attaches to beliefs about
one’s current states of consciousness, the question can still be raised as to what
defense can be given of the epistemological principle that beliefs of this sort are
justiﬁed under these conditions. This is a profound and difﬁcult problem that
must certainly be faced by foundationalism, and I cannot hope to go into it
properly here. I shall have to content myself with arguing that Lehrer has not
shown this to be a fatal difﬁculty for Minimal Foundationalism.
First let us note that this is a problem for any epistemology, foundationalist or
otherwise, that employs the concept of epistemic justiﬁcation. It is incumbent on
any such epistemology to specify the grounds for principles that lay down condi-
tions for beliefs of a certain sort to count as justiﬁed. I believe that a sober
assessment of the situation would reveal that no epistemology has been con-
spicuously successful at this job. Before using this demand as a weapon against
foundationalism the critic should show us that the position he favors does a
better job.16
Rather than spend more time on these legalistic “burden of proof” consider-
ations, I should like to turn to a point that is more directly relevant to my interest
in revealing gratuitous accretions to Minimal Foundationalism. My own view as
to how foundationalism (or any other epistemology) should test a principle of
justiﬁcation is that it should use empirical evidence to determine whether beliefs
approved by the principle are reliable, that is, can be depended on to be (at least
usually) correct. I suspect that Lehrer, along with most of my readers, would react
to this by saying that whatever the merits of this suggestion for other epistemol-
ogies, it is obviously unavailable for foundationalism. Since it is deﬁnitive of that
position to insist that a foundation does not depend on any other belief for its
justiﬁcation, how can a foundationalist countenance the deployment of empirical
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
409

evidence to validate the foundations? Well, to see how this is possible we have to
uncover a distinction closely analogous to the one mentioned earlier between a
basic belief’s being justiﬁed and being established (or shown to be justiﬁed). The
distinction in question is that between (a) knowing (being justiﬁed in believing)
that I am depressed (when that is a basic belief), and (b) knowing (being justiﬁed
in believing) that I immediately know (am justiﬁed in believing) that I feel
depressed. Clearly it is deﬁnitive of foundationalism to hold that (a) does not
depend on any other beliefs’ being justiﬁed, but it is in no way essential to foun-
dationalism to deny that (b) is so dependent. Minimal Foundationalism would be
committed to the latter denial only if one could not be immediately justiﬁed in
believing that p without also being immediately justiﬁed in believing that he is
immediately justiﬁed in believing that p. But why suppose that? Even if justiﬁca-
tion on the lower level necessarily carries with it justiﬁcation of the belief that one
is so justiﬁed, it would not follow that the justiﬁcation of the higher level belief is
immediate. It could be, rather, that being justiﬁed in believing that p automatic-
ally puts one in possession of the evidence he needs for being mediately justiﬁed
in believing that he is immediately justiﬁed in believing that p. And in any event,
why suppose that being justiﬁed in believing that p necessarily carries with it
being justiﬁed in believing that one is so justiﬁed? It would seem that those who
have not attained the level of epistemological reﬂection have no justiﬁcation for
believing anything about their being epistemically justiﬁed. And when one does
come to be justiﬁed in accepting some higher level epistemic belief, is this not
typically on the basis of ratiocination? In particular it may be, as Lehrer in effect
suggests, that I will have to formulate some general principle of justiﬁcation and
ﬁnd adequate reasons for accepting it before I can become justiﬁed in believing
that I am immediately justiﬁed in believing that p. And in that case perhaps
empirical evidence for the reliability of beliefs that satisfy this principle will be the
crucial reason in support of the principle.17
Let’s return to Lehrer’s argument that foundationalism can provide no
adequate reason for accepting a principle that declares beliefs concerning one’s
own current conscious states to be immediately justiﬁed in some way, for
example, to be self-justiﬁed. The burden of the last paragraph is that this argu-
ment will work only if Lehrer can exclude the possibility of a foundationalist’s
providing adequate empirical support for such principles. And he can do this only
by saddling foundationalism with the gratuitous demand that in addition to basic
beliefs’ being immediately justiﬁed, one must be immediately justiﬁed in taking
them to be immediately justiﬁed. Once again the argument tells only against a
position that makes claims it need not make in order to be a foundationalism.
On the level of nonbasic beliefs Lehrer’s argument proceeds from what he
terms “the fundamental doctrine of foundation theories”, viz., that “justiﬁcation,
whether it is the self-justiﬁcation of basic beliefs, or the derivative justiﬁcation of
non-basic beliefs, guarantees truth” (pp. 78–79). When we consider the justiﬁca-
tion of nonbasic beliefs by evidence, “The consequence which follows is that
evidence never completely justiﬁes a belief in such a way as to guarantee the truth
of the belief unless the probability of the statement on the basis of the evidence is
equal to one” (p. 149). Indeed, we can apply the same considerations to basic
beliefs. “If we now consider the question of how probable a belief must be in
order to be self-justiﬁed, an analogous argument shows that the belief must have
WILLIAM ALSTON
410

an initial probability of one” (p. 150). And this implies that practically no con-
tingent beliefs could be justiﬁed. “For any strictly coherent probability function,
no statement has an initial probability of one unless it is a logical truth and in
inﬁnite languages no non-general statement has an initial probability of one
unless it is a logical truth. Hence, with the exception of certain general statements
in inﬁnite languages, completely justiﬁed basic beliefs would have to be restricted
to logical truths, and completely justiﬁed non-basic beliefs would have to be
restricted to logical consequences of completely justiﬁed basic beliefs . . . We
would be locked out of the realm of the contingent, and skepticism would reign
supreme there.” (p. 151).
I will not have time to go into the way Lehrer derives these conclusions from
the “fundamental doctrine.” Again I shall have to restrict myself to considering
whether the argument, if valid, is damaging to Minimal Foundationalism. And
here that reduces to the question whether Minimal Foundationalism holds that
“justiﬁcation guarantees truth.”
Unfortunately it is not at all clear what this is supposed to mean. A natural
interpretation would be that justiﬁcation necessitates truth, that it is impossible
for a justiﬁed belief to be false. And that seems to be what Lehrer means ini-
tially. In the paragraph in which he introduces the “fundamental doctrine,” he
says, “Basic beliefs are basic because they cannot be false; their truth is guaran-
teed” (78). But when in the next chapter he comes to recognize the possibility of
basic beliefs that are corrigible, he analogizes the epistemic guarantee of truth to
a manufacturer’s guarantee of soundness, and points out that in neither case is
the existence of the guarantee incompatible with the absence of what is guaran-
teed. (p. 102). But then hasn’t the “fundamental doctrine” become vacuous? On
any (sensible) conception of justiﬁcation it carries at least a strong presumption
of truth. And isn’t that as much of a guarantee as a manufacturer’s guarantee? It
looks at this point as if “guarantee of truth” has become indistinguishable from
“justiﬁcation.” But then in chapter 6, where the argument currently under con-
sideration occurs, Lehrer seems to have drifted into a conception midway
between “necessitates truth” and “carries a strong presumption of truth,” but
without telling us just what this is. Indeed the only real clue we have is the claim
quoted above, that a belief must have a probability of one if its justiﬁcation is to
guarantee its truth. Perhaps it is something like this: to say that the justiﬁcation
of a belief guarantees its truth is to say that it comes as close as possible to
necessitating the truth of the belief. But whether or not that is just the way to
put it, it is clear that so long as “justiﬁcation guarantees truth” has the con-
sequence for both basic and nonbasic beliefs alleged by Lehrer in the present
argument, that doctrine is no part of Minimal Foundationalism. It is quite pos-
sible for some beliefs to be immediately justiﬁed and for other beliefs to be
mediately justiﬁed on the basis of the former, without any of them receiving a
probability of one. At least there is nothing in the general notions of immediate
and mediate justiﬁcation to support any such requirement. No doubt, the higher
the probability the stronger the justiﬁcation, but why should a foundationalist
have to insist on a maximally strong justiﬁcation? What is there about founda-
tionalism, as contrasted with rival orientations, that necessitates such a
demand? The distinctive thing about foundationalism is the structure of justiﬁ-
cation it asserts; and this structure can be imposed on justiﬁcations of varying
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
411

degrees of strength. Once more a band of camp followers has been mistaken for
the main garrison.
III. The status of minimal foundationalism
One may grant that Minimal Foundationalism is untouched by the criticisms we
have been discussing and yet feel that this is of little import, just because that
position is so minimal as to have lost the features that give foundationalism its
distinctive contours. My answer to that is simply to point out that when we
formulate the main argument for foundationalism, the regress argument, in the
only form in which it gives any support to that position, the version that emerges
is precisely what I have been calling Minimal Foundationalism. The regress
argument may be formulated as follows.
Suppose we are trying to determine whether S is mediately justiﬁed in
believing that p. To be so justiﬁed he has to be justiﬁed in believing certain
other propositions, q, r, . . ., that are suitably related to p (so as to consti-
tute adequate grounds for p). Let’s say we have identiﬁed a set of such
propositions each of which S believes. Then he is justiﬁed in believing that p
only if he is justiﬁed in believing each of these propositions. And for each of
these propositions, q, r, . . . that he is not immediately justiﬁed in believing,
he is justiﬁed in believing it only if he is justiﬁed in believing some other
propositions that are suitably related to it. And for each of these latter
propositions. . . .
Thus in attempting to give a deﬁnitive answer to the original question we
are led to construct a more or less extensive tree structure, in which the
original belief and every other putatively mediately justiﬁed belief forms a
node from which one or more branches issue, in such a way that every
branch is a part of some branch that issues from the original belief. Now
the question is: what form must be assumed by the structure in order that S
be mediately justiﬁed in believing that p? There are the following conceiv-
able forms for a given branch.
(A) It terminates in an immediately justiﬁed belief.
(B) It terminates in an unjustiﬁed belief.
(C) The belief that p occurs at some point (past the origin), so that the
branch forms a loop.
(D) The branch continues inﬁnitely.
Of course some branches might assume one form and others another.
The argument is that the original belief will be mediately justiﬁed only if
every branch assumes form (A). Positively it is argued that on this condition
the necessary conditions for the original belief’s being mediately justiﬁed
are satisﬁed, and negatively it is argued that if any branch assumes any
other form, they are not.
(A) Where every branch has form (A), each branch terminates in an
immediately justiﬁed belief that is justiﬁed without the necessity for
further justiﬁed beliefs. Hence justiﬁcation is transferred along each
branch right back to the original belief.
WILLIAM ALSTON
412

(B) For any branch that exhibits form (B), no element, including the origin,
is justiﬁed, at least by this structure. Since the terminus is not justiﬁed,
the prior element, which is justiﬁed only if the terminus is, is not justi-
ﬁed. And since it is not justiﬁed, its predecessor, which is justiﬁed only
if it is, is not justiﬁed either. And so on, right back to the origin, which
therefore itself fails to be justiﬁed.
(C) Where we have a branch that forms a closed loop, again nothing on
that branch, including the origin, is justiﬁed, so far as its justiﬁcation
depends on this tree structure. For what the branch “says” is that the
belief that p is justiﬁed only if the belief that r is justiﬁed, and that belief
is justiﬁed only if . . . , and the belief just before the looping back is
justiﬁed only if the belief that p is justiﬁed. So what this chain of neces-
sary conditions tells us is that the belief that p is justiﬁed only if the
belief that p is justiﬁed. True enough, but that still leaves it open
whether the belief that p is justiﬁed.
(D) If there is a branch with no terminus, that means that no matter how
far we extend the branch, the last element is still a belief that is medi-
ately justiﬁed if at all. Thus as far as this structure goes, wherever we
stop adding elements, we still have not shown that the conditions for
the mediate justiﬁcation of the original belief are satisﬁed. Thus the
structure does not exhibit the original belief as mediately justiﬁed.
Hence the original belief is mediately justiﬁed only if every branch in the tree
structure terminates in an immediately justiﬁed belief. Hence every mediately
justiﬁed belief stands at the base of a (more or less) multiply branching tree
structure at the tip of each branch of which is an immediately justiﬁed belief.
I do not claim that this argument is conclusive; I believe it to be open to objection
in ways I will not be able to go into here. But I do feel that it gives stronger
support to foundationalism than any other regress argument. And clearly it
yields, at most, Minimal Foundationalism. All that it takes to avoid the three
alternatives deemed unacceptable by this argument is a belief at the tip of each
branch that is in fact immediately justiﬁed. These beliefs do not have to incor-
rigible, infallible, or indubitable to perform this function. Their justiﬁcation does
not have to “guarantee” their truth in any sense in which that goes beyond just
being justiﬁed. They do not have to be incapable of mediate justiﬁcation. They do
not even have to be true, though if they were generally false, the structure they
support would be of little interest. Their occurrence can depend on various
external conditions. They do not have to be self-justiﬁed, in a strict sense, as
contrasted with other modes of direct justiﬁcation. Nor is it necessary that the
believer can show them to be immediately justiﬁed; still less is it necessary that he
immediately know that they are immediately justiﬁed. All that is needed to satify
the demands of the argument is that a belief that is immediately justiﬁed in some
way or other terminate each chain of mediate justiﬁcation. Since Minimal
Foundationalism does guarantee this, it can hardly be maintained that it lacks the
distinctive epistemological force characteristic of foundationalism.
Within the conﬁnes of this paper I cannot properly support my claim that the
above is the only version of the regress argument that supports any form of
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
413

foundationalism; to do so would involve examining them all. I will, however, say
a word about a version that one frequently encounters in both friend and foe,
including Will and Lehrer. This is the version that, ignoring the ﬁne print, differs
from the above version only in being concerned with showing justiﬁcation rather
than with being justiﬁed.18 In this second version the argument is that if we start
with a mediately justiﬁed belief and proceed to show it to be justiﬁed by citing its
grounds, and then showing them to be justiﬁed, and . . . , then again the only
alternative to circularity, inﬁnite regress or ending in something not shown to be
justiﬁed, is to arrive, along each strand of justiﬁcation, at some belief that can be
shown to be justiﬁed in some way that does not involve adducing other beliefs.
This form of the argument does indeed have a conclusion markedly stronger than
Minimal Foundationalism, but unfortunately, as pointed out above in another
connection, this conclusion is logically incoherent. It is conceptually impossible
to show that a belief is justiﬁed, or show that anything else, without citing pro-
positions we take ourselves to be justiﬁed in believing. Hence this form of the
argument does not support any form of foundationalism, or any other position.
IV. Conclusion
Will and Lehrer are to be commended for providing, in their different ways,
important insights into some possible ways of developing a nonfoundationalist
epistemology. Nevertheless if foundationalism is to be successfully disposed of, it
must be attacked in its most defensible, not in its most vulnerable, form.
Although Will and Lehrer reveal weaknesses in historically important forms of
foundationalism, it has been my aim in this paper to show that their arguments
leave untouched the more modest and less vulnerable form I have called “Min-
imal Foundationalism,” a form approximated to by the most prominent con-
temporary versions of the position.19 It is to be hoped that those who are inter-
ested in clearing the decks for an epistemology without foundations will turn
their critical weapons against such modest and careful foundationalists as
Chisholm, Danto, and Quinton.
Notes
1 Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1974.
2 Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974.
3 The case of independence is more complicated. See below for some discussion
of this.
4 It often goes unnoticed that the seventeenth-century foundationalists often
taken as paradigmatic, Descartes and Locke, were not working with any such
conception of knowledge, and hence that they did not envisage the structure of
knowledge as a structure of justiﬁcation of belief.
5 Only “includes” because other requirements are also commonly imposed in
these cases, e.g., that the ﬁrst belief be “based” on the others, and, sometimes,
that the believer realize that these other beliefs do constitute adequate grounds
for the ﬁrst.
6 Talk of a belief “being justiﬁed” or the “justiﬁcation” of a belief is ambiguous.
The justiﬁcation of a belief might be the process of showing it to be justiﬁed, or it
WILLIAM ALSTON
414

might be the status that it is thereby shown to have. Likewise “his belief is
justiﬁed” might mean that it has been shown to have the status in question, or it
might just mean that it does have that status. This ambiguity typically makes it
difﬁcult to interpret discussions of epistemic justiﬁcation. In this paper I shall
restrict “. . . is justiﬁed” to the latter meaning—having the epistemically desir-
able status. I shall use “. . . is shown to be justiﬁed” to express the other
concept.
7 Will also argues, in essentially the same way, against the supposition that
derived claims can be incorrigible. I take it to be even more obvious that founda-
tionalism need not attribute incorrigibility to nonbasic beliefs, even if it should
require basic beliefs to be incorrigible. For the principles of mediate justiﬁcation
might countenance logical connections (e.g., of an inductive sort) that do not
transfer incorrigibility.
8 Will’s adherence to the stronger requirement is no doubt connected with the fact
that he, along with many foundationalists, construes the regress argument in
terms of a regress of showing justiﬁcation rather than a regress of being justi-
ﬁed. See below.
9 Another difﬁculty with the argument under consideration is the incorrect identiﬁ-
cation of “immediately justiﬁed” (not by relation to other cognitions) and “self-
justiﬁed.” We shall let that pass for now, returning to it in connection with Lehrer
where it plays a larger role in the argument.
10 Cf. Lehrer: “If basic beliefs were refutable by non-basic ones, then all that was
justiﬁed by basic beliefs might be undone if those basic beliefs themselves were
refuted. In this case, we would be lacking a foundation for justiﬁcation” (p. 79).
Lehrer cannot be whole-hearted in his advocacy of this argument, for he later
acknowledges the possibility of corrigible foundations.
11 Lehrer argues that incorrigibility does entail infallibility; more speciﬁcally he
argues for the contrapositive: “. . . if the justiﬁcation of basic beliefs did not
guarantee their truth, then such beliefs would be open to refutation on the
grounds that, though they are self-justiﬁed, they are in fact false” (p. 79). It
remains, however, to be shown that the mere possibility of being false necessar-
ily carries with it the possibility that we should be able to show that it is false.
12 Elsewhere Will appeals to Chisholm’s notion that what renders a foundation
justiﬁed is simply the fact that makes is true (p. 201, fn. 5). Where a belief is
justiﬁed in this way, it cannot be justiﬁed without being true. But that is not to say
that no such belief can be false. And in any event that is only one possible form
of immediate justiﬁcation. (See below.)
For an illuminating critique of other arguments designed to show that founda-
tions must be incorrigible or infallible; see A.M. Quinton, The Nature of Things
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973), chap. 6.
13 See Sydney Shoemaker, Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity (Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1963), p. 216; and R.M. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1966), pp. 26–27.
14 See B. Russell, Problems of Philosophy (London: Oxford University Press, 1912),
p. 77; and G.E. Moore, “The Refutation of Idealism,” in Philosophical Studies
(London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1922), pp. 24–25, and “The Nature and
Reality of Objects of Perception,” in ibid., pp. 70–71.
15 “Self-justiﬁed” is often used in an undiscriminating way, to range over more or
“HAS FOUNDATIONALISM BEEN REFUTED?”
415

less of the terrain of immediate justiﬁcation. Lehrer himself, just after stressing
the requirement that basic beliefs be “self-justiﬁed,” says that “Empiricists think
that experience can guarantee the truth of the basic beliefs” (p. 78). That
sounds more like (2).
16 No doubt Lehrer takes himself to have shown this in the exposition of his own
position in chap. 8. I cannot discuss that in this paper.
17 In [the previous essay] I explore the differences between Minimal Foundational-
ism and a kind that requires, for each basic belief, that one also be immediately
justiﬁed in believing that one is immediately justiﬁed in believing it.
It is very common in discussions of foundationalism to state the position so
as only to require immediate justiﬁcation or knowledge at the ﬁrst level, but then
to glide into the stronger requirement. Will’s formulation of the position quoted
above embodies no requirement that one have immediate knowledge of the
epistemic status of “ﬁrst cognitions”. But still we ﬁnd him saying things like
“beginning items of knowledge . . . whose philosophical validation as knowledge
must be capable of being made out in complete independence of the institution
and the instruments of criticism and evaluation that the institution provides” (p.
160) and “. . . a level of foundational items in knowledge, items the status of
which as knowledge is in a special way not subject to challenge” (p. 175). In
these latter passages he is representing foundationalism as requiring that the
epistemic status of the foundations be knowable without dependence on other
cognitions.
18 Because of the ambiguity pointed out in n. 6, it is often unclear which version is
being expounded. But our two authors are unmistakably dealing with the second
version. Will indeed, explicitly distinguishes these versions on p. 178, and his
criticisms on pp. 183–84 are clearly directed against the second version. For
Lehrer’s discussion see pp. 15–16 and pp. 155–57.
19 The closest approximation is found in Quinton, The Nature of Things. The ver-
sions of Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, and Arthur Danto, Analytical Philosophy
of Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968), are also much
closer to Minimal Foundationalism than to the positions attacked by Will and
Lehrer.
QUESTIONS
1
What is an “immediately justiﬁed belief”?
2
According to Alston, can immediately justiﬁed beliefs be supported by other
beliefs?
3
Can an immediately justiﬁed belief be false?
4
Can an immediately justiﬁed belief later be refuted?
5
Must immediately justiﬁed beliefs be “self-justiﬁed”?
6
According to Alston, has foundationalism been refuted?
WILLIAM ALSTON
416

Susan Haack, “A Foundherentist Theory
of Empirical Justiﬁcation”1
Let us remember how common the folly is, of going from one faulty extreme
into the opposite.2
Does the evidence presented establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant did it? Given the evidence recently discovered by space scientists, am I
justiﬁed in believing there was once bacterial life on Mars? Is scientiﬁc evidence
especially authoritative, and if so, why? Should we take those advertisements
claiming that the Holocaust never happened seriously, and if not, why not? . . .
Questions about what makes evidence better or worse, about what makes inquiry
better or worse conducted, about disinterestedness and partiality, are of real,
daily—and sometimes of life-and-death—consequence.
Of late, however, cynicism about the very legitimacy of such questions has
become the familiar philosophical theme of a whole chorus of voices, from
enthusiasts of the latest developments in neuroscience, to radical self-styled neo-
pragmatists, radical feminists and multiculturalists, and followers of (by now
somewhat dated) Paris fashions.
This cynicism is unwarranted; but dealing with it requires something a bit
more radical than epistemological business-as-usual. Evidence is often messy,
ambiguous, misleading; inquiry is often untidy, inconclusive, biased by the
inquirers’ interests; but it doesn’t follow, as the cynics apparently suppose, that
standards of good evidence and well-conducted inquiry are local, conventional,
or mythical. And an even half-way adequate understanding of the complexities of
real-life evidence and the untidiness of real-life inquiry requires a re-examination
of some of those comfortably familiar dichotomies on which recent epistemology
has relied—the logical versus the causal, internalism versus externalism,
apriorism versus naturalism, foundationalism versus coherentism.
Although the other dichotomies will also come under scrutiny, the main theme
here will be that foundationalism and coherentism—the traditionally rival
theories of justiﬁed belief—do not exhaust the options, and that an intermediate
theory is more plausible than either. I call it “foundherentism.”
Susan Haack, The Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn, ed. Louis Pojman (Belman, Calif.:
Wadsworth, 1998), pp. 283–93.
417

The case for foundherentism
Foundationalist theories of empirical justiﬁcation hold that an empirical belief
is justiﬁed if and only if it is either a basic belief justiﬁed by the subject’s
experience,3 or else a derived belief justiﬁed, directly or indirectly, by the support
of basic beliefs. Coherentist theories of empirical justiﬁcation hold that a belief is
justiﬁed if and only if it belongs to a coherent set of beliefs. In short, foundation-
alism requires a distinction of basic versus derived beliefs and an essentially
one-directional notion of evidential support, while coherentism holds that beliefs
can be justiﬁed only by mutual support among themselves.
The merit of foundationalism is that it acknowledges that a person’s
experience—what he sees, hears, etc.—is relevant to how justiﬁed he is in his
beliefs about the world; its drawback is that it requires a privileged class of basic
beliefs justiﬁed by experience alone but capable of supporting the rest of our
justiﬁed beliefs, and ignores the pervasive interdependence among a person’s
beliefs. The merit of coherentism is that it acknowledges that pervasive inter-
dependence, and requires no distinction of basic and derived beliefs; its drawback
is that it allows no role for the subject’s experience.
Foundationalists, naturally, are keenly aware of the problems with coherent-
ism. How could one possibly be justiﬁed in believing that there is a dog in the
yard, they ask, if what one sees, hears, smells, etc., plays no role? And isn’t the
coherentist’s talk of mutual support among beliefs just a euphemism for what is
really a vicious circle in which what supposedly justiﬁes the belief that p is the
belief that q, and what justiﬁes the belief that q the belief that r, . . . and what
justiﬁes the belief that z is the belief that p?
Coherentists, naturally, are no less keenly aware of the problems with founda-
tionalism. What sense does it make to suppose that someone could have a justi-
ﬁed belief that there is a dog in the yard, they ask, except in the context of the rest
of his beliefs about dogs, etc.? Besides, why should we suppose that there are any
beliefs both justiﬁed by experience alone and capable of supporting the rest of
our justiﬁed beliefs? After all, foundationalists can’t even agree among them-
selves whether the basic beliefs are about observable physical objects, along the
lines of “there is a dog,” or are about the subject’s experience, along the lines of
“it now seems to me that I see what looks like a dog” or “I am appeared to
brownly.” And anyway, only propositions, not events, can stand in logical rela-
tions to other propositions; so how could a subject’s experience justify those
supposedly basic beliefs?
As the two styles of theory have evolved, with each party trying to overcome
the difﬁculties the other thinks insuperable, they have come closer together.
Strong foundationalism requires that basic beliefs be fully justiﬁed by the sub-
ject’s experience; pure foundationalism requires that derived beliefs be justiﬁed
exclusively by the support, direct or indirect, of basic beliefs. But weak founda-
tionalism requires only that basic beliefs be justiﬁed to some degree by experi-
ence; and impure foundationalism, though requiring all derived beliefs to get
some support from basic beliefs, allows mutual support among derived beliefs to
raise their degree of justiﬁcation.
Uncompromisingly egalitarian forms of coherentism hold that only overall
coherence matters, so that every belief in a coherent set is equally justiﬁed. But
SUSAN HAACK
418

moderated, inegalitarian forms of coherentism give a subject’s beliefs about his
present experience a distinguished initial status, or give a special standing to
beliefs that are spontaneous rather than inferential in origin.
In a way, these moderated forms of foundationalism and coherentism lean in
the right direction. But the leaning destabilizes them.
Weak foundationalism concedes that basic beliefs need not be fully justiﬁed by
experience alone; but then what reason remains to deny that they could get more
(or less) justiﬁed by virtue of their relations to other beliefs? Impure foundational-
ism concedes that there can be mutual support among derived beliefs; but then
what reason remains to insist that more pervasive mutual support is unaccept-
able? And weak, impure foundationalism allows both that basic beliefs are less
than fully justiﬁed by experience, and that derived beliefs may be mutually sup-
portive; but now the insistence that derived beliefs can give no support to basic
beliefs looks arbitrary, and the distinction of basic and derived beliefs pointless.4
Moderated, inegalitarian coherentism concedes that some beliefs are dis-
tinguished by their perceptual content or “spontaneous” origin; but isn’t this
implicitly to concede that justiﬁcation is not after all a relation exclusively among
beliefs, that input from experience is essential?
Not surprisingly, these fancier forms of foundationalism and compromising
kinds of coherentism, though more sophisticated than their simpler ancestors, tend
to be ambiguous and unstable. On the foundationalist side, for example, under
pressure of just the kinds of difﬁculty my analysis identiﬁes, C.I. Lewis moves from
a pure to an impure foundationalism and then, brieﬂy, to a kind of proto-
foundherentism.5 And on the coherentist side, under pressure of just the kind of
difﬁculty my analysis identiﬁes, BonJour tries to guarantee experiential input by
adding an “Observation Requirement”—which, however, is ambiguous; on one
interpretation it is genuinely coherentist, but doesn’t allow the relevance of experi-
ence, and on the other it allows the relevance of experience, but isn’t genuinely
coherentist.6 (BonJour now acknowledges that, after all, coherentism won’t do.)7
Neither of the traditionally rival theories can be made satisfactory without
sacriﬁcing its distinctive character. The obvious conclusion—although those still
wedded to the old dichotomy will doubtless continue to resist it—is that we need
a new approach which allows the relevance of experience to empirical justiﬁca-
tion, but without postulating any privileged class of basic beliefs or requiring
that relations of support be essentially one-directional: in other words, a
foundherentist theory.
Explication of foundherentism
The details get complicated, but the main ideas are simple.
A foundherentist account will acknowledge (like foundationalism) that how
justiﬁed a person is in an empirical belief must depend in part on his experience—
my version will give a role both to sensory experience, and to introspective
awareness of one’s own mental states. As coherentists point out, although experi-
ence can stand in causal relations to beliefs, it can’t stand in logical relations to
propositions. But what this shows is not that experience is irrelevant to empirical
justiﬁcation, but that justiﬁcation is a double-aspect concept, partly causal as
well as partly logical in character.
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
419

A foundherentist account will acknowledge (like coherentism) that there is
pervasive mutual support among a person’s justiﬁed beliefs. As foundationalists
point out, a belief can’t be justiﬁed by a vicious circle of reasons. But what this
shows is not that mutual support is illegitimate, but that we need a better under-
standing of the difference between legitimate mutual support and vicious
circularity—my version will rely on an analogy between the structure of evidence
and a crossword puzzle.
Of course, the viability of the foundherentist approach does not depend on my
being completely successful in articulating it. No doubt there could be other
versions of foundherentism falling within these general contours but differing in
their details.
I take as my starting point the following vague, but very plausible, formula-
tion: “A is more/less justiﬁed, at t, in believing that p, depending on how good his
evidence is.”
By starting from here I take for granted, ﬁrst, that justiﬁcation comes in
degrees: a person may be more or less justiﬁed in believing something. (I also
assume that a person may be more justiﬁed in believing some things than he is in
believing others.)
I also take for granted, second, that the concepts of evidence and justiﬁcation
are internally connected: how justiﬁed a person is in believing something depends
on the quality of his evidence with respect to that belief.
I assume, third, that justiﬁcation is personal: one person may be more justiﬁed
in believing something than another is in believing the same thing—because one
person’s evidence may be better than another’s. (But although justiﬁcation is
personal, it is not subjective. How justiﬁed A is in believing that p depends on
how good his, A’s, evidence is. But how justiﬁed A is in believing that p doesn’t
depend on how good A thinks his evidence is; and anyone who believed the same
thing on the same evidence would be justiﬁed to the same degree.)
And I assume, fourth, that justiﬁcation is relative to a time: a person may be
more justiﬁed in believing something at one time than at another—because his
evidence at one time may be better than his evidence at another.
“A is more/less justiﬁed, at t, in believing that p, depending on how good his
evidence is.” The main tasks, obviously, are to explain “his evidence” and “how
good.” The double-aspect character of the concept of justiﬁcation is already in
play; for “his,” in “his evidence,” is a causal notion, while “how good” is logical,
or quasi-logical, in character.
The concept of justiﬁcation is causal as well as logical across the board8—its
causal aspect is not restricted to experiential evidence alone. Quite generally, how
justiﬁed someone is in believing something depends not only on what he believes,
but on why he believes it. For example: if two people both believe the accused is
innocent, one because he has evidence that she was a hundred miles from the scene
of the crime at the relevant time, the other because he thinks she has an honest
face, the former is more justiﬁed than the latter. In short, degree of justiﬁcation
depends on the quality of the evidence that actually causes the belief in question.
The word “belief” is ambiguous: sometimes it refers to a mental state, some-
one’s believing something [an S-belief];9 sometimes it refers to the content of
what is believed, a proposition [a C-belief]. “A’s evidence” needs to be tied
SUSAN HAACK
420

somehow to what causes A’s S-belief, but must also be capable of standing in
logical or quasi-logical relations to the C-belief, the proposition believed.
The idea is to begin by characterizing A’s S-evidence with respect to p—this
will be a set of states of A causally related to his S-belief that p; and then to use
this as the starting point of a characterization of A’s C-evidence with respect to
p—this will be a set of propositions capable of standing in logical or quasi-logical
relations to the C-belief that p.
If A initially came to believe that the rock-rabbit is the closest surviving relative
of the elephant because a fellow tourist told him he read this somewhere, and
later still believes it, but now because he has learned all the relevant biological
details, he is more justiﬁed at the later time than at the earlier. So, if they are
different, “A’s S-evidence with respect to p” should relate to the causes of A’s
S-belief that p at the time in question rather than to what prompted it in the
ﬁrst place.
What goes on in people’s heads is very complicated. There will likely be some
factors inclining A towards believing that p, and others pulling against it. Per-
haps, e.g., A believes that Tom Grabit stole the book because his seeing Grabit
leave the library with a shifty expression and a suspicious bulge under his sweater
exerts a stronger positive pull than his belief that it is possible that Tom Grabit
has a light-ﬁngered identical twin exerts in the opposite direction. Both sustain-
ing and inhibiting factors are relevant to degree of justiﬁcation, so both will
included in A’s S-evidence.
In this vector of forces [the causal nexus of A’s S-belief that p], besides A’s
present experience and present memory traces of his past experience, and other
S-beliefs of his, such factors as his wishes, hopes, and fears will often play a role.
But A’s desire not to believe ill of his students, say, or his being under the inﬂu-
ence of alcohol, although they may affect whether or with what degree of con-
ﬁdence he believes that Grabit stole the book, are not themselves part of his
evidence with respect to that proposition.
So “A’s S-evidence with respect to p” will refer to those experiential and belief-
states of A’s which belong, at the time in question, to the causal nexus of A’s
S-belief that p. The phrase “with respect to” signals the inclusion of both positive,
sustaining, and negative, inhibiting, evidence [respectively, A’s S-evidence for p,
and A’s S-evidence against p]. A’s S-evidence with respect to p will include other
beliefs of his [A’s S-reasons with respect to p]; and his perceptions, his intro-
spective awareness of his own mental goings-on, and memory traces of his earlier
perceptual and introspective states [A’s experiential S-evidence with respect to p].
The part about memory needs amplifying. A’s experiential S-evidence may
include present memory traces of past experience—such as his remembering see-
ing his car-keys on the dresser. This corresponds to the way we talk of A’s
remembering seeing, hearing, reading, etc.,. . . . We also talk of A’s remembering
that p, meaning that he earlier came to believe that p and has not forgotten it.
How justiﬁed A is in such persisting beliefs will depend on how good his evidence
is—his evidence at the time in question, that is. A person’s evidence for persisting
beliefs will normally include memory traces of past perceptual experience; my
belief that my high-school English teacher’s name was “Miss Wright,” for
instance, is now sustained by my remembering hearing and seeing the name used
by myself and others.
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
421

Testimonial evidence, in a broad sense—what a person reads, what others tell
him—enters the picture by way of his hearing or seeing, or remembering hearing
or seeing, what someone else says or writes. Of course, A’s hearing B say that p
will not contribute to his, A’s, believing that p, unless A understands B’s lan-
guage. But if A believes that p in part because B told him that p, how justiﬁed A is
in believing that p will depend in part on how justiﬁed A is in thinking B honest
and reliable. But I anticipate.
A’s S-evidence with respect to p is a set of states of A causally related to his
S-belief that p. But in the part of the theory that explains what makes evidence
better or worse, “evidence” will have to mean “C-evidence,” and refer to a set of
propositions. The two aspects interlock: A’s C-evidence with respect to p will be
a set of propositions, and how good it is will depend on those propositions’
logical or quasi-logical relations to p; but which propositions A’s C-evidence
with respect to p consists of, depends on which of A’s S-beliefs and perceptual,
etc., states belong to the causal nexus of the S-belief in question.
A’s C-reasons with respect to p, obviously enough, should be the C-beliefs, i.e.,
the propositions, which are the contents of his S-reasons. For example, if one of
A’s S-reasons with respect to p is his S-belief that female cardinal birds are
brown, the corresponding C-reason will be the proposition that female cardinal
birds are brown.
But what about A’s experiential C-evidence? My proposal is that “A’s
experiential C-evidence with respect to p” refer to propositions to the effect that
A is in the perceptual/introspective/memory states that constitute his experiential
S-evidence with respect to p. Since a perceptual, etc., state can not be part of the
causal nexus of A’s S-belief that p unless A is in that state, these propositions are
all true. But they need not be propositions that A believes.10
So A’s experiential C-evidence has a distinctive status. A’s C-reasons may be
true or may be false, and A may be more or less justiﬁed, or not justiﬁed at all, in
believing them. But A’s experiential C-evidence consists of propositions all of
which are, ex hypothesi, true, and with respect to which the question of justiﬁca-
tion doesn’t arise. (This is the foundherentist way of acknowledging that the
ultimate evidence for empirical beliefs is experience—very different from the
forced and unnatural way in which foundationalism tries to acknowledge it, by
requiring basic beliefs justiﬁed by experience alone.)
In line with the way we ordinarily talk about the evidence of the senses—
“Why do I think there’s a cardinal in the oak tree? Well, I can see the thing; that
distinctive proﬁle is clear, although the light’s not too good, and it’s quite far
away, so I can’t really see the color”—I suggest a characterization of A’s
experiential C-evidence in terms of propositions to the effect that A is in the sort
of perceptual state a normal subject would be in when seeing this or that in these
or those circumstances. For example, if A’s experiential S-evidence with respect
to p is his perceptual state, its looking to him as it would to a normal observer
seeing a female cardinal bird at a distance of 40 feet in poor light, the correspond-
ing experiential C-evidence will be a proposition to the effect that A is in the kind
of perceptual state a normal observer would be in when looking at a female
cardinal bird in those circumstances.
Built into my account of experiential evidence is a conception of perception as,
SUSAN HAACK
422

in a certain sense, direct. This is not to deny that perception involves complicated
neurophysiological goings-on. Nor is it to deny that the judgments causally
sustained by the subject’s experience are interpretive, that they depend on his
background beliefs as well—which, on the contrary, is a key foundherentist
thought. It is only to assert that in normal perception we interact with physical
things and events around us, which look a certain way to all normal observers
under the same circumstances.
You may be wondering why I include the subject’s sensory and introspective
experience as evidence, but not, say, his extrasensory perceptual experience.
Well, the task here is descriptive—to articulate explicitly what is implicit when
we say that A has excellent reasons for believing that p, that B is guilty of wishful
thinking, that C has jumped to an unjustiﬁed conclusion, and so on. As those
phrases “excellent reasons” and “guilty of wishful thinking,” indicate, his other
beliefs should be included as part of a subject’s evidence, but his wishes should
not. Actually, I think it most unlikely there is such a thing as ESP; but it is
excluded because—unlike sensory experience, for which we even have the phrase
“the evidence of the senses”—it has no role in the implicit conception of evidence
I am trying to make explicit.
The concepts of better and worse evidence, of more and less justiﬁed belief, are
evaluative; so, after the descriptive task of explication, there will be the ratiﬁca-
tory question, whether our standards of better and worse evidence really are, as
we hope and believe they are, indicative of truth. But that comes later.
The present task is to explicate “how good” in “how good A’s C-evidence is.”
What factors raise, and what lower, degree of justiﬁcation?
Foundationalists often think of the structure of evidence on the model of a
mathematical proof—a model which, understandably, makes them leery of the
idea of mutual support. My approach will be informed by the analogy of a
crossword puzzle—where, undeniably, there is pervasive mutual support among
entries, but, equally undeniably, no vicious circle. The clues are the analogue
of experiential evidence, already completed intersecting entries the analogue of
reasons. As how reasonable a crossword entry is depends both on the clues and
on other intersecting entries, the idea is, so how justiﬁed an empirical belief is
depends on experiential evidence and reasons working together.
Perhaps needless to say, an analogy is only an analogy, not an argument. Its
role is only to suggest ideas, which then have to stand on their own feet. And
there are always disanalogies; there will be nothing in my theory analogous to the
solution to today’s crossword that appears in tomorrow’s newspaper, for
instance, nor any analogue of the designer of a crossword.
But the analogy does suggests a very plausible multi-dimensional answer to the
question: what makes a belief more or less justiﬁed? How reasonable a crossword
entry is depends on how well it is supported by the clue and any already completed
intersecting entries; how reasonable those other entries are, independent of the
entry in question; and how much of the crossword has been completed. How justi-
ﬁed A is in believing that p, analogously, depends on how well the belief in question
is supported by his experiential evidence and reasons [supportiveness]; how justi-
ﬁed his reasons are, independent of the belief in question [independent security];
and how much of the relevant evidence his evidence includes [comprehensiveness].
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
423

On the ﬁrst dimension, A’s C-evidence may be conclusive for p, conclusive
against p, supportive-but-not-conclusive of p, undermining-but-not-conclusive
against p, or indifferent with respect to p/with respect to not-p.
Foundationalists often take for granted that evidence is conclusive just in case
it deductively implies the proposition in question; but this is not quite right.
Inconsistent premisses deductively imply any proposition whatever; but inconsis-
tent evidence is not conclusive evidence for anything—let alone conclusive evi-
dence for everything! Think, for example, of a detective whose evidence is: the
murder was committed by a left-handed person; either Smith or Brown did it;
Smith is right-handed; Brown is right-handed. Although this deductively implies
that Smith did it, it certainly is not conclusive evidence for that belief (let alone
conclusive evidence for the belief that Smith did it and conclusive evidence for the
belief that Brown did it and conclusive evidence for the belief that extra-
terrestrials did it!).
Deductive implication is necessary but not sufﬁcient for conclusiveness.
Evidence E is conclusive for p just in case the result of adding p to E [the
p-extrapolation of E] is consistent, and the result of adding not-p to E [the not-p-
extrapolation of E] is inconsistent. E is conclusive against p just in case its
p-extrapolation is inconsistent and its not-p-extrapolation consistent. But if E
itself is inconsistent, both its p-extrapolation and its not-p-extrapolation are also
inconsistent, so E is indifferent with respect to p.
Often, though, evidence is not conclusive either way, nor yet inconsistent and
hence indifferent, but supports the belief in question, or its negation, to some
degree. Suppose the detective’s evidence is: the murder was committed by a left-
handed person; either Smith or Brown did it; Smith is left-handed; Brown is left-
handed; Smith recently saw the victim, Mrs. Smith, in a romantic restaurant
holding hands with Brown. Though not conclusive, this evidence is supportive to
some degree of the belief that Smith did it—for, if he did, we have some explan-
ation of why.
The example suggests that supportiveness depends on whether and how much
adding p to E makes a better explanatory story. But a better explanatory story than
what? Conclusiveness is a matter of the superiority of p over its negation with
respect to consistency. But if p is potentially explanatory of E or some component
of E, it is not to be expected that not-p will be too. So I construe supportiveness as
depending on the superiority of p over its rivals with respect to explanatory
integration; where a rival of p is any proposition adding which to E improves its
explanatory integration to some degree, and which, given E, is incompatible with p.
The word “integration” was chosen to indicate that E may support p either
because p explains E or some component of E, or vice versa—that there is
“mutual reinforcement between an explanation and what it explains.”11 (So the
concept of explanatory integration is closer kin to the coherentist concept of
explanatory coherence than to the foundationalist concept of inference to the
best explanation.)
Usually, as conclusiveness of evidence is taken to be the province of deductive
logic, supportiveness of evidence is taken to be the province of inductive logic.
But at least if “logic” is taken in its now-usual narrow sense, as depending on
form alone, this looks to be a mistake. Explanation requires generality, kinds,
laws—a motive for the murder, a mechanism whereby smoking causes cancer,
SUSAN HAACK
424

and so forth. If so, explanatoriness, and hence supportiveness, requires a vocabu-
lary that classiﬁes things into real kinds; and hence depends on content, not on
form alone. (Hempel drew the moral, many years ago now, from the “grue”
paradox.)12 But there is supportive-but-not-conclusive evidence, even if there is
no formal inductive logic.
Supportiveness alone does not determine degree of justiﬁcation, which also
depends on independent security and comprehensiveness. Suppose our detective’s
evidence is: the murder was committed by a left-handed person; either Smith or
Brown did it; Smith is right-handed, but Brown left-handed. The detective’s evi-
dence is conclusive that Brown did it; nevertheless, he is not well justiﬁed in
believing this unless, among other things, he is justiﬁed in believing that the
murder was committed by a left-handed person, that either Smith or Brown did
it, etc.
The idea of independent security is easiest to grasp in the context of the cross-
word analogy. In a crossword, how reasonable an entry is depends in part on its
ﬁt with intersecting entries, and hence on how reasonable those entries are,
independently of the entry in question. Similarly, how justiﬁed a person is in
believing something depends in part on how well it is supported by his other
beliefs, and hence on how justiﬁed he is in believing those reasons, independently
of the belief in question.
It is that last phrase—in my theory as with a crossword puzzle—that averts the
danger of a vicious circle. The reasonableness of the entry for 3 down may
depend in part on the reasonableness of the intersecting entry for 5 across—
independent of the support given to the entry for 5 across by the entry for 3
down. Similarly, how justiﬁed A is in believing that p may depend in part on how
justiﬁed he is in believing that q—independent of the support given his belief that
q by his belief that p.
And, though “justiﬁed” appears on the right-hand side of the independent
security clause, there is no danger of an inﬁnite regress—any more than with a
crossword puzzle. As in the case of a crossword eventually we reach the clues, so
with empirical justiﬁcation eventually we reach experiential evidence. And
experiential C-evidence does not consist of other C-beliefs of the subject, but of
propositions all of which are, ex hypothesi, true, and with respect to which the
question of justiﬁcation does not arise. This is not to deny that, as crossword
clues may be cryptic, experiential evidence may be ambiguous or misleading; on
the contrary, my account of experiential C-evidence is intended to recognize that
it often is. It is only to say that the question of justiﬁcation arises with respect to a
person’s beliefs, but not with respect to his experiences.
As how reasonable a crossword entry is depends not only on how well it is
supported by the clue and other intersecting entries, and on how reasonable those
other entries are, but also on how much of the crossword has been completed, so
degree of justiﬁcation depends not only on supportiveness and independent
security, but also on comprehensiveness—on how much of the relevant evidence
the subject’s evidence includes.
Comprehensiveness promises to be even tougher to spell out than supportive-
ness and independent security; the crossword analogy isn’t much help here, and
neither is the nearest analogue in the literature, the total evidence requirement
on inductions, which refers, not to the totality of relevant evidence, but to the
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
425

totality of relevant available evidence—and then there is the further problem that
relevance itself comes in degrees.
I am assuming, however, that (degree of) relevance is an objective matter.
Naturally, whether I think your handwriting is relevant to your trustworthiness
depends on whether I believe in graphology; but whether it is relevant depends on
whether graphology is true.
As this reveals, although relevance, and hence comprehensiveness, is objective,
judgments of relevance, and hence judgments of comprehensiveness, are per-
spectival, i.e., they depend on the background beliefs of the person making them.
The same goes for judgments of supportiveness and independent security. How
supportive you or I judge E to be with respect to p, for example, will depend on
what rivals of p we happen to be able to think of; but how supportive E is of p
does not. Quality of evidence is objective, but judgments of quality of evidence
are perspectival.
Because quality of evidence is multi-dimensional, we should not necessarily
expect a linear ordering of degrees of justiﬁcation; e.g., A’s evidence with respect
to p might be strongly supportive but weak on comprehensiveness, while his
evidence with respect to q might be strong on comprehensiveness but only weakly
supportive. Nor, a fortiori, does it look realistic to aspire to anything as ambi-
tious as a numerical scale of degrees of justiﬁcation. But something can be said
about what is required for A to be justiﬁed to any degree in believing that p.
One necessary condition is that there be such a thing as A’s C-evidence with
respect to p. If A’s S-belief that p is caused simply by a blow to the head, or by one
of those belief-inducing pills philosophers are fond of imagining, A is not justiﬁed
to any degree in believing that p. Since it is the justiﬁcation of empirical beliefs
that is at issue, another necessary condition is that A’s C-evidence should include
some experiential C-evidence—present experiential evidence, or memory traces
of what he earlier saw, heard, read, etc. This is my analogue of BonJour’s Obser-
vation Requirement, obviously much more at home in foundherentism than his
requirement was in his coherentist theory. (It is not meant to rule out the possibil-
ity that some of a person’s beliefs may not be sustained directly by experiential
evidence, not even by memory traces, but rely on other beliefs and their experien-
tial evidence—as in an unconventional crossword some entries might have no
clues of their own but rely on other entries and their clues.)13 A third necessary
condition is that A’s C-evidence with respect to p should meet minimal condi-
tions of supportiveness, independent security, and comprehensiveness; e.g., it
should be better than indifferent in terms of supportiveness. Jointly, these
necessary conditions look to be sufﬁcient.
What about the upper end of the scale? Our ordinary use of phrases like “A is
completely justiﬁed in believing that p” is vague and context dependent, depend-
ing inter alia on whether it is A’s particular business to know whether p, and how
important it is to be right about whether p; perhaps it also runs together strictly
epistemological with ethical concerns. This vague concept [complete justiﬁca-
tion] is useful for practical purposes—and for the statement of Gettier-type para-
doxes. In other philosophical contexts, however, “A is completely justiﬁed in
believing that p” is used in a context-neutralized, optimizing way, requiring
conclusiveness, maximal independent security, and full comprehensiveness of
evidence [COMPLETE justiﬁcation].
SUSAN HAACK
426

The account sketched here has been personal, i.e., focused ﬁrmly on our friend
A. But this is not to deny that in even the most ordinary of our everyday beliefs
we rely extensively on testimonial evidence. And where the sciences are con-
cerned, reliance on others’ evidence—and hence on the interpretation of others’
words and judgments of others’ reliability—is absolutely pervasive. (This reveals
that not only the social sciences but also the natural sciences presuppose the
possibility of interpreting others’ utterances: think, e.g., of an astronomer’s
reliance on others’ reports of observations.)
Anyhow, thinking about evidence in the sciences prompts me to ask whether it
is possible to extrapolate from my account of “A is more/less justiﬁed in believing
that p” to a concept of justiﬁcation applicable to groups of people. It might be
feasible to do this by starting with the degree of justiﬁcation of a hypothetical
subject whose evidence includes all the evidence of each member of the group,
and then discount this by some measure of the degree to which each member of
the group is justiﬁed in believing that other members are competent and honest.
The ratiﬁcation of foundherentism
Thus far the task has been to articulate our standards of better and worse evi-
dence, of more and less justiﬁed belief. But what do I mean by “our”? And what
assurance can I give that a belief’s being justiﬁed, by those standards, is any
indication that it is true?
When I speak of “our” standards of better and worse evidence, I emphatically
do not mean to suggest that these standards are local or parochial, accepted in
“our,” as opposed to “their,” community. Rather, I see these standards—
essentially, how well a belief is anchored in experience and how tightly it is
woven into an explanatory mesh of beliefs—as rooted in human nature, in the
cognitive capacities and limitations of all normal human beings.
It is sure to be objected that the evidential standards of different times,
cultures, communities, or scientiﬁc paradigms differ radically. But I think this
supposed variability is at least an exaggeration, and quite possibly altogether an
illusion, the result of mistaking the perspectival character of judgments of
evidential quality for radical divergence in standards of better and worse
evidence.
Because judgments of the quality of evidence are perspectival, people with
radically different background beliefs can be expected to differ signiﬁcantly in
their judgments of degree of justiﬁcation. It doesn’t follow that there are no
shared standards of evidence. If we think of the constraints of experiential
anchoring and explanatory integration rather than of speciﬁc judgments of the
relevance, supportiveness, etc., of this or that evidence, I believe we will ﬁnd
commonality rather than divergence.
Again, the point is easier to see in the context of the crossword analogy.
Suppose you and I are both doing the same crossword puzzle, and have ﬁlled in
some long central entry differently. You think, given your solution to that long
central entry, that the fact that 14 down ends in a “T” is evidence in its favor; I
think, given my solution to that long central entry, that the fact that it ends in an
“D” is evidence in its favor. Nevertheless, we are both trying to ﬁt the entry to its
clue and to other already completed entries. Now suppose you and I are both on
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
427

an appointments committee. You think the way this candidate writes his “g”s
indicates that he is not to be trusted; I think graphology is bunk and scoff at your
“evidence.” Because of a disagreement in background beliefs, we disagree about
what evidence is relevant. Nevertheless, we are both trying to assess the sup-
portiveness, independent security, and comprehensiveness of the evidence with
respect to the proposition that the candidate is trustworthy.
But even if I am wrong about this, even if there really are radically divergent
standards of evidential quality, it wouldn’t follow that there are no objective
indications of truth; variability of standards does not, in and of itself, imply
relativity of standards.14 So those epistemic relativists who have inferred that,
since judgments of justiﬁcation vary from community to community, there can be
no objectively correct standards of better and worse evidence, have committed a
non sequitur as well as relying on a dubious premiss.
As for those who have succumbed to epistemic relativism because they have
given up on the concept of truth, I have room here only to say that theirs seems to
me an entirely factitious despair.15 In any case, all that will be required of the
concept of truth in what follows is that a proposition or statement is true just in
case things are as it says.
Supposing—as I believe, and so do you—that we humans are fallible, limited
but inquiring creatures who live in a world which is largely independent of us and
what we believe about it, but in which there are kinds, laws, regularities; and
supposing—as I believe, and so do you—that our senses are a source, though by
no means an infallible source, of information about things and events in the
world around us, and introspection a source, though by no means an infallible
source, of information about our own mental goings-on; then, if any indication
of how things are is possible for us, how well our beliefs are anchored in our
experience and knit into an explanatory mesh is such an indication. (And
supposing—as I believe, and so, probably, do you—we have no other sources of
information about the world and ourselves, no ESP or clairvoyance or etc., then
this is the only indication we can have of how things are.)
That last paragraph was nothing like an a priori ratiﬁcation of foundherent-
ism; for those “supposing” clauses are empirical in character. Assumptions about
human cognitive capacities and limitations are built into our standards of eviden-
tial quality; so the truth-indicativeness of those standards depends on the truth of
those empirical assumptions. But neither was that last paragraph much like the
appeals to psychology or cognitive science on which some epistemological natur-
alists of a more extreme stripe than mine propose to rely; for the assumptions
referred to in my “supposing” clauses, though empirical, are of such generality as
to be rather philosophical than scientiﬁc in character.
Those assumptions would surely be presupposed by any conceivable scientiﬁc
experiment. But they are well integrated with what the sciences of cognition have
to tell us about the mechanisms of perception and introspection, and of when and
why they are more or less reliable, and with what the theory of evolution suggests
about how we came to have the sort of information-detecting apparatus we do.
As one would hope, the epistemological part of my crossword—the part where
the entries are themselves about crosswords—interlocks snugly with other parts.
But what am I to say to those readers familiar with Descartes’ failed attempt to
prove “what I clearly and distinctly perceive is true,” who are bound to suspect
SUSAN HAACK
428

that I must be arguing in a circle? After pointing out that I have not offered a
ratiﬁcatory argument in which some premiss turns out to be identical with the
conclusion, nor an argument relying on a certain mode of inference to arrive at
the conclusion that this very mode of inference is a good one—only that, to
borrow Peirce’s words, by now “the reader will, I trust, be too well-grounded in
logic to mistake mutual support for a vicious circle of reasoning.”16
And what am I to say to readers worried about the Evil Demon, who are
bound to object that I have not ruled out the possibility that our senses are not a
source of information about the external world at all? After pointing out that
since, ex hypothesi, his machinations would be absolutely undetectable, if there
were an Evil Demon no truth-indication would be possible for us—only that my
claim is a conditional one: that, if any truth-indication is possible for us, the
foundherentist criteria are truth-indicative. (I could discharge the antecedent, and
arrive at a categorical conclusion, by adopting a deﬁnition of truth along Peircean
lines, as the opinion that would survive all possible experiential evidence and the
fullest logical scrutiny; but I prefer the more cautious, and more realist, strategy.)
Determined skeptics won’t be persuaded; but determined skeptics never are!
And the rest of you may notice that foundherentism enables us to sidestep
another dichotomy which has—if you’ll pardon the pun—bedeviled recent
epistemology: either a hopeless obsession with hyperbolic skepticism, or a hope-
less relativism or tribalism preoccupied with “our (local, parochial) epistemic
practices.” Foundherentism, I believe, provides a more realistic picture of our
epistemic condition—a robustly fallibilist picture which, without sacriﬁcing
objectivity, acknowledges something of how complex and confusing evidence
can be.
Notes
1 This brief statement of foundherentism is based primarily on my Evidence and
Inquiry: Towards Reconstruction in Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), espe-
cially chapters 1, 4, and 10. I have also drawn on material from earlier articles of
mine, especially “Theories of Knowledge: An Analytic Framework,” Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society 83 (1982–3): 143–57 (where foundherentism was
ﬁrst introduced); “C.I. Lewis” in American Philosophy, ed. Marcus Singer, Royal
Institute of Philosophy Lecture Series, 19 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1985), pp. 215–39; and “Rebuilding the Ship While Sailing on the Water”
in Perspectives on Quine, ed. R. Barrett and R. Gibson (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990),
pp. 111–27 (where some of the key ideas of foundherentism were developed). I
have drawn as well on material from the symposium on Evidence and Inquiry
published in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 56 (1996): 611–57,
and from my “Reply to BonJour,” Synthese 112 (1997): 25–35.
2 Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers (1785) in R.E. Beanblossom and
K. Lehrer, eds., Thomas Reid’s Inquiry and Essays (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett,
1983), VI.4.
3 I restrict my attention here to experientialist forms of foundationalism, ignoring,
e.g., foundationalist theories of a priori knowledge.
4 My characterization of foundationalism is quite standard; cf. for example,
Alston’s in E. Sosa and J. Dancy, eds, Companion to Epistemology (Oxford:
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
429

Blackwell, 1992), p. 144, or Sosa’s in “The Raft and the Pyramid,” Midwest
Studies in Philosophy 5 (1980): 23–4. But matters have been confused because,
in “Can Empirical Knowledge Have a Foundation?”, American Philosophical Quar-
terly 15 (1978): 1–13, and The Structure of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986), p. 28, BonJour uses “weak foundational-
ism” to refer a style of theory that is both weak and impure, in my sense, and in
addition allows mutual support among basic beliefs and—apparently—allows
“basic” beliefs to get support from “derived” beliefs. As my scare quotes indi-
cate, once one-directionality has been so completely abandoned it is unclear
that the theory really qualiﬁes as foundationalist at all; certainly the basic/
derived distinction has become purely pro forma. See also Haack, “Reply to
BonJour,” Synthese 112 (1997): 25–35.
5 See Evidence and Inquiry, chapter 2 for details.
6 See Evidence and Inquiry, chapter 3 for details.
7 Laurence BonJour, “Haack on Justiﬁcation and Experience,” Synthese 112
(1997): 13–15.
8 An idea I ﬁrst began to work out in “Epistemology With a Knowing Subject,”
Review of Metaphysics 33 (1979): 309–36.
9 Expressions introduced in square brackets are my new, technical terms, or spe-
cial, technical uses of familiar terms.
10 So my theory is not straightforwardly externalist, since A’s S-evidence must
consist of states of A—states, furthermore, of which A can be aware; but neither
is it straightforwardly internalist, since A’s experiential C-evidence consists of
propositions A need not believe or even conceive.
11 Quine, W.V. and Ullian, J., The Web of Belief (New York: Random House, 1970),
p. 79.
12 Goodman, N., “The New Riddle of Induction” (1953) in Fact, Fiction and Forecast,
2nd edn (Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965), pp. 59–83; Hempel, C.G.,
“Postscript on Conﬁrmation” (1964) in Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation (New
York: Free Press, 1965), pp. 47–52.
13 In case a desperate foundationalist is tempted to try seizing on this in hopes of
salvaging the derived/basic distinction, let me point out that beliefs without
direct experiential evidence could contribute to the support of beliefs with direct
experiential evidence; and that this maneuver would identify no plausible kind of
belief as basic/as derived—think, e.g., of a scientist whose belief that electrons
are composed thus and so is sustained by what he sees in the bubble chamber.
14 See also Haack, “Reﬂections on Relativism: From Momentous Tautology to
Seductive Contradiction,” Noûs, Supplement (1996): 297–315; also in James E.
Tomberlin, ed., Philosophical Perspectives, 10: Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell,
1996), pp. 297–315; reprinted in Haack, Manifesto of a Passionate Moderate:
Unfashionable Essays (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), pp. 149–66.
15 I have more to say in “Confessions of an Old-Fashioned Prig” in Manifesto of a
Passionate Moderate, pp. 7–30.
16 C.S. Peirce, Collected Papers, ed. C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, and A. Burks
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931–58), 6.315.
SUSAN HAACK
430

QUESTIONS
1
According to Haack, what do foundationalists believe?
2
What do coherentists believe?
3
What sort of propositions are included in a person’s “C-evidence”?
4
What three factors determine how good A’s C-evidence for p is?
FURTHER READING ON THE
ARCHITECTURE OF KNOWLEDGE
Alcoff, Linda, Real Knowing: New Versions of Coherence Theory (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1996).
Alston, William, Epistemic Justiﬁcation (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1989).
Audi, Robert, The Structure of Justiﬁcation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1993).
BonJour, Laurence, “The Dialectic of Foundationalism and Coherentism,” in The
Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, ed. John Greco and Ernest Sosa (Oxford: Black-
well, 1999), pp. 117–42.
Chisholm, Roderick, The Foundations of Knowing (Minneapolis, Minn.: University of
Minnesota Press, 1982).
Davidson, Donald, “A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge,” in Reading Rorty,
ed. Alan Malachowski (Cambridge, Mass.: Basil Blackwell, 1990), pp. 120–38.
Descartes, René, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, ed. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1984).
Fales, Evan, A Defense of the Given (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1986).
Fumerton, Richard, “Foundationalism, Conceptual Regress, and Reliabilism,”
Analysis 48 (1988): 178–84.
Haack, Susan, Evidence and Inquiry (Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell, 1993).
Howard-Snyder, Daniel, “BonJour’s ‘Basic Antifoundationalist Argument’ and the
Doctrine of the Given,” Southern Journal of Philosophy 36 (1998): 163–77.
Huemer, Michael, “Probability and Coherence Justiﬁcation,” Southern Journal of
Philosophy 35 (1997): 463–72.
Klein, Peter, “Human Knowledge and the Inﬁnite Regress of Reasons,” Philosophical
Perspectives 13 (1999): 297–325.
Moser, Paul, Empirical Knowledge, 2nd edn (Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld,
1996).
Pollock, John and Joseph Cruz, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, 2nd edn
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1999).
Sellars, Wilfred, Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1997).
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991).
Williams, Michael, Unnatural Doubts (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991).
“A FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION”
431


PART III
THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF
JUSTIFICATION AND
KNOWLEDGE


8
1. THE ANALYSIS OF “KNOWLEDGE”
Analyzing the concept of knowledge has commonly been taken to be one of the
central tasks, if not the central task, of epistemology. There are several different
uses of “know” (as in “I know John,” “I know how to drive,” and “I know your
phone number”), but the sense that epistemologists have focused on is the sense
that refers to propositional knowledge, or factual knowledge. This is the sense
involved in “I know that 2 + 2 = 4” and “Does John know that the game has been
delayed?”
Our question, then, is this: under what conditions does a subject, S, know that p
(where p is some proposition)? There is a general agreement among epistemologists
on two basic conditions, with disagreements on what further conditions are required.
The core of agreement is that in order for a person to count as knowing that p, the
person must at least believe that p, and it must be true that p.
But certainly these two conditions are not enough. Take the example of the
imprudent gambler, who believes that red is going to come up on the next spin of the
roulette wheel, because he just has a hunch. Assume that the gambler does not have
ESP and has no reason to believe that he has ESP; however, as chance would have it,
the ball does land on red. Did he really know that it was going to land on red? No. He
believed it, and what he believed was true, but it was just a lucky guess, not know-
ledge. This sort of case shows the need for at least some third element of know-
ledge. Traditionally, epistemologists have said that the problem is that the gambler
lacks good evidence, or reasons, for believing that the ball will land on red. Thus, the
traditional analysis of knowledge, known as the “justiﬁed, true belief” theory, is this:
S knows that p = df
(i) S at least believes that p,
(ii) p is true, and
(iii) S is justiﬁed in believing that p.
A.J. Ayer is sometimes read (he is so read by Gettier) as defending the justiﬁed,
true belief theory or something close to it, though in place of (iii) above Ayer would say
“S has the right to be sure that p.” In fact, however, Ayer’s notion of having the right to
be sure differs signiﬁcantly from the traditional conception of “justiﬁcation.” When
Ayer says that S, in order to count as knowing p, must have “the right” to be sure that
p, what Ayer means is that we, the people attributing knowledge to S, are thereby
expressing a sort of attitude of approval towards S’s belief. This ﬁts in with Ayer’s
emotivist view of the meaning of evaluative terms generally, which we mentioned in
Chapter 3. (To see this, review the paragraph in the text that includes the remark,
435

“The difference is that to say that he knows is to concede to him the right to be
sure . . .”)
Edmund Gettier famously refuted the justiﬁed, true belief theory by means of a
type of counter-example now referred to as a “Gettier case.” There are two possible
kinds of counter-example to a deﬁnition. The ﬁrst kind is one that would show the
deﬁnition to be too broad; in this case, this would mean an example of something
that in fact is not knowledge, but that the deﬁnition would count as knowledge. (The
above gambler example is a counter-example of this kind to the bare “true belief”
analysis.) The other kind is that which would show the deﬁnition to be too narrow; in
this case, an example of something that in fact is knowledge but that the deﬁnition
would fail to classify as knowledge. Gettier’s counter-examples are of the ﬁrst kind; in
other words, they show that justiﬁed, true belief is not sufﬁcient for knowledge.
Essentially, Gettier uses cases in which a person has a justiﬁed, but mistaken, belief
that q and they validly infer another proposition, p, which just happens to be true
(even though their reason for believing it was mistaken). In such a case, the person
does not really know p to be true, even though it is true, they believe it, and they have
justiﬁcation for believing it.
Thus, suppose that Smith is adequately justiﬁed in believing that Jones owns a
Ford (he has seen Jones driving the Ford, has heard Jones talk about his Ford, has
seen the title, etc.). Smith validly infers from this that “Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is
in Barcelona.” Smith has no idea where Brown actually is—he picked Barcelona at
random—but since he believes the ﬁrst disjunct of that proposition, he thinks the
proposition as a whole is true. Now suppose that, improbably enough, Jones actually
does not own a Ford (perhaps he just sold it, or it was destroyed, etc.), but, as chance
would have it, Brown actually is in Barcelona. In this case, intuitively, Smith does not
know the proposition, “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona,” even though he
believes it, it is true, and he is justiﬁed in believing it.
Gettier’s refutation started a cottage industry of knowledge-analyzers. Some epis-
temologists decided that what was needed was simply a fourth condition to be added
onto the justiﬁed, true belief theory. Others decided instead to replace the third
(justiﬁcation) condition with something else entirely.
The ﬁrst new proposal was Michael Clark’s proposal to add the condition that S’s
belief that p should be “fully grounded,” which means that there are no false beliefs
in the chain of reasons S has leading to p. This effectively eliminates the Gettier
cases, that is, it explains why they are not cases of knowledge. Smith’s belief that
“Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona” is not fully grounded, since it is inferred
from the false belief that Jones owns a Ford.
Lehrer and Paxson propose a more complicated fourth condition, the condition
that there should be no defeaters for S’s justiﬁcation for p. A “defeater” for S’s
justiﬁcation for believing p means, roughly, a true proposition that, if added to S’s
evidence, would render S no longer justiﬁed in believing p. Notice how this would
account for the Gettier example discussed above: the proposition “Jones does not
own a Ford” would be a defeater for Smith’s belief “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in
Barcelona,” since it is true that Jones does not own a Ford and if Smith added the
proposition that Jones does not own a Ford to his beliefs, Smith would no longer be
justiﬁed in believing “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona.” Deﬁnitions of
knowledge that use a condition generally along these lines are called “defeasibility
theories.”
PART III: NATURE AND SCOPE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
436

The above account of defeaters isn’t quite right, however; Lehrer and Paxson
discuss some hypothetical examples that raise the possibility of what are now called
“misleading defeaters.” Suppose I see Tom Grabit steal a book from the library.
Unbeknownst to me, Tom’s mother, Mrs. Grabit, has been going around saying that
Tom has an identical twin brother who is a kleptomaniac. If there is such a twin, then,
intuitively, I do not know (unless I could somehow prove that the person whom I saw
was not the twin) that Tom stole the book. But suppose that in fact there is no such
twin, and Mrs. Grabit is merely crazy or lying. In this case, intuitively, I do have
knowledge that Tom stole the book; Mrs. Grabit’s false assertions should not defeat
this. The proposition “Mrs. Grabit has said that Tom has an identical twin brother who
is a kleptomaniac” is a misleading defeater (it is a true proposition that, if added to
my evidence, makes me no longer justiﬁed in believing that Tom stole the book, but,
intuitively, it should not count as undermining my knowledge that Tom stole the
book). Defeasibility theorists have tried various different ways of deﬁning “misleading
defeaters.” Lehrer and Paxson’s approach is to reﬁne the deﬁnition of a defeater as
follows:
If e is S’s justiﬁcation for p, d is a defeater for this justiﬁcation if and only if
(i) d is true, (ii) (e & d) does not justify p, (iii) S is justiﬁed in believing ∼d,
and (iv) if c is any logical consequence of d such that (c and e) does not
justify h, then S is justiﬁed in believing ∼c.1
Conditions (i) and (ii) are equivalent to the original, rough deﬁnition of defeaters given
in the preceding paragraph; conditions (iii) and (iv) are technical qualiﬁcations
needed to meet the counter-examples involving misleading defeaters.
Clark’s analysis and the defeasibility analysis are both examples of efforts to ﬁx
up the traditional analysis of knowledge by adding a fourth condition. In contrast,
authors such as Goldman and Nozick propose to replace the traditional “justiﬁca-
tion” condition with something else (theories that do this are sometimes called
“externalist” theories of knowledge). In Goldman’s analysis, the something else is
the requirement that there be a “causal connection” between S’s belief and the fact
that makes the belief true. Goldman’s causal theory is most intuitive for the case of
perceptual knowledge: I know that there is a table here, because the actual presence
of the table causes me to have a certain sort of (table-representing) sensory experi-
ence, which in turn causes me to believe there is a table here. Thus, my belief is
causally connected to the fact that makes it true (namely, the fact that a table is
here). Goldman also allows more complicated sorts of “causal connections” (note
that being “causally connected” to a belief does not simply mean causing the belief).
He allows cases in which the fact that makes my belief true causes evidence for the
belief to be present, and that evidence, in conjunction with background knowledge I
already have, causes my belief. He also allows cases in which my belief that p and
the fact that p both have a common cause, as cases of there being an appropriate
“causal connection” (this is needed in order to secure knowledge based on induc-
tion). One problem for the causal theory, however, is that it is unclear how it can
account for a priori knowledge (see Chapter 3); for example, is our knowledge of
mathematics explained by our causal relations to mathematical objects?
Robert Nozick’s analysis of knowledge starts from the intuitive idea that know-
ledge “tracks the truth” (as an analogy, imagine a camera that tracks the movement
THE ANALYSIS OF “KNOWLEDGE”
437

of a ball: as the ball moves to the left, the camera turns to the left; as the ball moves
to the right, the camera swings right). His proposal is that S knows that p when
(i)
S believes that p,
(ii)
p is true,
(iii) if p were false, S would not believe that p, and
(iv) if p were true, S would believe that p.
This account explains why the Gettier cases are not cases of knowledge: in the
“Jones owns a Ford” example, if the proposition “Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in
Barcelona” were false, Smith would likely still believe it. Why? Because if the prop-
osition were false, it would be false because of Brown not being in Barcelona. But if
Brown were not in Barcelona, Smith would still have believed “Jones owns a Ford or
Brown is in Barcelona,” since Smith’s belief was caused purely by his belief in the
ﬁrst disjunct; Smith did not have any idea where Brown was in the ﬁrst place, so
moving Brown around would not have any effect on Smith’s belief. In this case,
Smith’s belief fails to track the truth; speciﬁcally, it fails to satisfy condition (iii)
above.
One surprising and much-discussed consequence of Nozick’s analysis is the fail-
ure of the closure principle for knowledge. The closure principle states that if a
person knows that p, and p entails q, then he is in a position to know q (in technical
language, we say that the set of propositions one is in a position to know is “closed
under entailment”). Many people consider this principle intuitively obvious, but
Nozick rejects it. The key to understanding why is the way he treats condition (iii)
above, so it is worth spending a little time to understanding that.
In Nozick’s view (and the view of a great many contemporary philosophers), the
way one evaluates a statement like “If A were the case, B would be the case” is
something like this: imagine a world pretty much like this one, except that A is true in
it; then ask whether B is also true in such a world. Thus, when asked, “What would
happen if I were to drop this pen?”, we should imagine a world in which I drop the pen
and other things about the world (e.g., the law of gravity, the presence of the Earth,
etc.) are pretty much the same. In such a world, the pen falls. We should not answer
the question by imagining, for example, a world in which I am ﬂoating out in space
when I drop the pen, in which the law of gravity is absent or is radically different in
form, etc. Another way to put the point is this: we look at the “nearby” possible worlds
(that is, the scenarios that are otherwise similar to the actual world) in which A is
true. If B is also true in such worlds, then we say that “if A were true, B would be true.”
Thus, consider another example. I now believe that I have two hands. If I did not
have two hands, would I still believe that I did? The answer is no. If you imagine a
world that is otherwise like the way things are now, except that I lack two hands
(perhaps because I had one amputated, or whatever), in such a world I would not now
believe I have two hands (because I would just see a stump here, or something like
that). Thus, I satisfy condition (iii) for knowing that I have two hands.
Now, consider a science ﬁction scenario: I am a brain being kept alive in a vat of
nutrients, and scientists are stimulating my sensory cortex to produce the illusion of
a physical world (something like this happens in the popular movie The Matrix, except
that there the whole human body is in the vat, rather than just the brain). I now believe
that I am not in fact in such a situation; I think I am a normal human being. However, if
PART III: NATURE AND SCOPE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
438

the brain-in-a-vat scenario obtained, I would still think that it did not (in fact, all of my
beliefs would be the same). Therefore, according to Nozick’s analysis, I do not know
that I am not a brain in a vat, because I fail to satisfy condition (iii) with respect to the
proposition “I am not a brain in a vat.”
This example shows that, if Nozick’s theory is correct, the closure principle is
false. “I have two hands” entails “I am not a brain in a vat.” (A mere brain has no
hands.) But while I know I have two hands, I do not know, according to Nozick, that I
am not a brain in a vat.
All of the above accounts of the meaning of “know” are invariantist accounts: they
hold that there is a ﬁxed set of conditions that a person must satisfy in order to count
as “knowing” something; in other words, that the meaning of “know” is invariant. In
contrast, Keith DeRose defends contextualism, which holds that the conditions
required for someone to count as “knowing” a proposition vary depending on the
situation of the person attributing knowledge; in other words, the meaning of the
word “know” varies with the context in which it is used. This is similar to the way in
which the meaning of an expression such as “this room” varies depending on the
speaker’s context—it refers to different rooms, depending on where the person
using the expression is located at the time. Because of this, it is possible for a
person to say, “This room is yellow,” and for another person or the same person at
another time to say, “This room is grey,” without the two statements contradicting
each other. If the meaning of “know” is contextual, then it is also possible for one
person to say, “S knew that p” and for another person, or the same person at a
different time, to say, “S did not know that p” (where both are referring to the same
person and the same proposition and are speaking of the same time), without genu-
inely contradicting each other. Both statements could be true, because the context of
the second utterance might be different in such a way that the standards for counting
as “knowing” are higher in the latter context.
DeRose does not go into detail concerning the contextual factors that affect the
standards for knowledge, but he mentions a few factors that contextualists com-
monly cite. First, it is often thought, among contextualists, that the importance of
being right about something can affect the standards for knowledge—if it is very
important to be right about whether p, then one must have very strong evidence, and
must rule out even very improbable alternatives, in order to be truthfully said to
“know” p. Second, if a certain alternative to p has actually been mentioned in a
conversation, then (many contextualists think) a person must be able to rule out that
alternative in order to count as “knowing” p. Third, it might be thought (although
DeRose is skeptical of this one) that if a particular person is thinking about a certain
alternative to p, then his use of “know” will be such that to “know” p requires ruling
out that alternative.
The contextualist viewpoint has interesting implications for how one should
respond to philosophical skepticism (see Chapter 9). Contextualists generally
believe that arguments for skepticism depend upon manipulating the conversational
context in such a way that the standards for “knowing” are raised to a level much
higher than the standards that apply for ordinary, everyday uses of “know.”
Note
1
This is my paraphrase of their deﬁnition at the end of their section II. I have altered
the variables used for the sake of clarity and consistency with this introduction.
THE ANALYSIS OF “KNOWLEDGE”
439

A.J. Ayer, “Knowing as Having the Right
to be Sure”
The answers which we have found for the questions we have so far been discuss-
ing have not yet put us in a position to give a complete account of what it is to
know that something is the case. The ﬁrst requirement is that what is known
should be true, but this is not sufﬁcient; not even if we add to it the further
condition that one must be completely sure of what one knows. For it is possible
to be completely sure of something which is in fact true, but yet not to know it.
The circumstances may be such that one is not entitled to be sure. For instance, a
superstitious person who had inadvertently walked under a ladder might be con-
vinced as a result that he was about to suffer some misfortune; and he might in
fact be right. But it would not be correct to say that he knew that this was going
to be so. He arrived at his belief by a process of reasoning which would not be
generally reliable; so, although his prediction came true, it was not a case of
knowledge. Again, if someone were fully persuaded of a mathematical prop-
osition by a proof which could be shown to be invalid, he would not, without
further evidence, be said to know the proposition, even though it was true. But
while it is not hard to ﬁnd examples of true and fully conﬁdent beliefs which in
some ways fail to meet the standards required for knowledge, it is not at all easy
to determine exactly what these standards are.
One way of trying to discover them would be to consider what would count as
satisfactory answers to the question How do you know? Thus people may be
credited with knowing truths of mathematics or logic if they are able to give a
valid proof of them, or even if, without themselves being able to set out such a
proof, they have obtained this information from someone who can. Claims to
know empirical statements may be upheld by a reference to perception, or to
memory, or to testimony, or to historical records, or to scientiﬁc laws. But such
backing is not always strong enough for knowledge. Whether it is so or not
depends upon the circumstances of the particular case. If I were asked how I
knew that a physical object of a certain sort was in such and such a place, it
would, in general, be a sufﬁcient answer for me to say that I could see it; but if my
eyesight were bad and the light were dim, this answer might not be sufﬁcient.
Even though I was right, it might still be said that I did not really know that
the object was there. If I have a poor memory and the event which I claim to
A.J. Ayer, “Knowing as Having the Right to be Sure,” The Problem of Knowledge
(London: Macmillan, 1956).
440

remember is remote, my memory of it may still not amount to knowledge, even
though in this instance it does not fail me. If a witness is unreliable, his unsup-
ported evidence may not enable us to know that what he says is true, even in a
case where we completely trust him and he is not in fact deceiving us. In a given
instance it is possible to decide whether the backing is strong enough to justify a
claim to knowledge. But to say in general how strong it has to be would require
our drawing up a list of the conditions under which perception, or memory, or
testimony, or other forms of evidence are reliable. And this would be a very
complicated matter, if indeed it could be done at all.
Moreover, we cannot assume that, even in particular instances, an answer to
the question How do you know? will always be forthcoming. There may very
well be cases in which one knows that something is so without its being possible
to say how one knows it. I am not so much thinking now of claims to know facts
of immediate experience, statements like “I know that I feel pain,” which raise
problems of their own. In cases of this sort it may be argued that the question
how one knows does not arise. But even when it clearly does arise, it may not ﬁnd
an answer. Suppose that someone were consistently successful in predicting
events of a certain kind, events, let us say, which are not ordinarily thought to be
predictable, like the results of a lottery. If his run of successes were sufﬁciently
impressive, we might very well come to say that he knew which number would
win, even though he did not reach this conclusion by any rational method, or
indeed by any method at all. We might say that he knew it by intuition, but this
would be to assert no more than that he did know it but that we could not say
how. In the same way, if someone were consistently successful in reading the
minds of others without having any of the usual sort of evidence, we might say
that he knew these things telepathically. But in default of any further explanation
this would come down to saying merely that he did know them, but not by any
ordinary means. Words like “intuition” and “telepathy” are brought in just to
disguise the fact that no explanation has been found.
But if we allow this sort of knowledge to be even theoretically possible, what
becomes of the distinction between knowledge and true belief? How does our
man who knows what the results of the lottery will be differ from one who only
makes a series of lucky guesses? The answer is that, so far as the man himself is
concerned, there need not be any difference. His procedure and his state of mind,
when he is said to know what will happen, may be exactly the same as when it is
said that he is only guessing. The difference is that to say that he knows is to
concede to him the right to be sure, while to say that he is only guessing is to
withhold it. Whether we make this concession will depend upon the view which
we take of his performance. Normally we do not say that people know things
unless they have followed one of the accredited routes to knowledge. If someone
reaches a true conclusion without appearing to have any adequate basis for it, we
are likely to say that he does not really know it. But if he were repeatedly success-
ful in a given domain, we might very well come to say that he knew the facts in
question, even though we could not explain how he knew them. We should grant
him the right to be sure, simply on the basis of his success. This is, indeed, a point
on which people’s views might be expected to differ. Not everyone would regard
a successful run of predictions, however long sustained, as being by itself a suf-
ﬁcient backing for a claim to knowledge. And here there can be no question of
“KNOWING AS HAVING THE RIGHT TO BE SURE”
441

proving that this attitude is mistaken. Where there are recognized criteria for
deciding when one has the right to be sure, anyone who insists that their being
satisﬁed is still not enough for knowledge may be accused, for what the charge is
worth, of misusing the verb “to know.” But it is possible to ﬁnd, or at any rate to
devise, examples which are not covered in this respect by any established rule of
usage. Whether they are to count as instances of knowledge is then a question
which we are left free to decide.
It does not, however, matter very greatly which decision we take. The main
problem is to state and assess the grounds on which these claims to knowledge
are made, to settle, as it were, the candidate’s marks. It is a relatively unimportant
question what titles we then bestow upon them. So long as we agree about the
marking, it is of no great consequence where we draw the line between pass and
failure, or between the different levels of distinction. If we choose to set a very
high standard, we may ﬁnd ourselves committed to saying that some of what
ordinarily passes for knowledge ought rather to be described as probable opin-
ion. And some critics will then take us to task for ﬂouting ordinary usage. But the
question is purely one of terminology. It is to be decided, if at all, on grounds of
practical convenience.
One must not confuse this case, where the markings are agreed upon, and
what is in dispute is only the bestowal of honours, with the case where it is the
markings themselves that are put in question. For this second case is philosophic-
ally important, in a way in which the other is not. The sceptic who asserts that we
do not know all that we think we know, or even perhaps that we do not strictly
know anything at all, is not suggesting that we are mistaken when we conclude
that the recognized criteria for knowing have been satisﬁed. Nor is he primarily
concerned with getting us to revise our usage of the verb “to know,” any more
than one who challenges our standards of value is trying to make us revise our
usage of the word “good.” The disagreement is about the application of the
word, rather than its meaning. What the sceptic contends is that our markings are
too high; that the grounds on which we are normally ready to concede the right
to be sure are worth less than we think; he may even go so far as to say that they
are not worth anything at all. The attack is directed, not against the way in which
we apply our standards of proof, but against these standards themselves. It has,
as we shall see, to be taken seriously because of the arguments by which it is
supported.
I conclude then that the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for knowing that
something is the case are ﬁrst that what one is said to know be true, secondly that
one be sure of it, and thirdly that one should have the right to be sure. This right
may be earned in various ways; but even if one could give a complete description
of them it would be a mistake to try to build it into the deﬁnition of knowledge,
just as it would be a mistake to try to incorporate our actual standards of good-
ness into a deﬁnition of good. And this being so, it turns out that the questions
which philosophers raise about the possibility of knowledge are not all to be
settled by discovering what knowledge is. For many of them reappear as
questions about the legitimacy of the title to be sure. They need to be severally
examined; and this is the main concern of what is called the theory of knowledge.
A.J. AYER
442

QUESTIONS
1
According to Ayer, what three conditions are required in order for a person, S, to
know a proposition, p?
2
According to Ayer, what do philosophical skeptics believe? Do they seek to
change our use of the word “know”?
“KNOWING AS HAVING THE RIGHT TO BE SURE”
443

Edmund Gettier, “Is Justiﬁed True
Belief Knowledge?”
Various attempts have been made in recent years to state necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions for someone’s knowing a given proposition. The attempts have often
been such that they can be stated in a form similar to the following.1
For example, Chisholm has held that the following gives the necessary and
sufﬁcient conditions for knowledge:2
Ayer has stated the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for knowledge as follows:3
I shall argue that (a) is false in that the conditions stated therein do not constitute
a sufﬁcient condition for the truth of the proposition that S knows that P. The
same argument will show that (b) and (c) fail if “has adequate evidence for” or
“has the right to be sure that” is substituted for “is justiﬁed in believing that”
throughout.
I shall begin by noting two points. First, in that sense of “justiﬁed” in which
S’s being justiﬁed in believing P is a necessary condition of S’s knowing that P, it
is possible for a person to be justiﬁed in believing a proposition that is in fact
false. Secondly, for any proposition P, if S is justiﬁed in believing P, and P entails
Q, and S deduces Q from P and accepts Q as a result of this deduction, then S is
justiﬁed in believing Q. Keeping these two points in mind, I shall now present
two cases in which the conditions stated in (a) are true for some proposition,
(a)
S knows that P
IFF
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
P is true,
S believes that P, 
and
S is justiﬁed in believing that P.
(b)
S knows that P
IFF
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
S accepts P,
S has adequate evidence for P,
and
P is true.
(c)
S knows that P
IFF
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
P is true,
S is sure that P is true, 
and
S has the right to be sure that P
is true.
Edmund Gettier, “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23 (1963): 121–3.
444

though it is at the same time false that the person in question knows that
proposition.
Case I
Suppose that Smith and Jones have applied for a certain job. And suppose that
Smith has strong evidence for the following conjunctive proposition:
(d) Jones is the man who will get the job, and Jones has ten coins in his
pocket.
Smith’s evidence for (d) might be that the president of the company assured him
that Jones would in the end be selected, and that he, Smith, had counted the coins
in Jones’s pocket ten minutes ago. Proposition (d) entails:
(e) The man who will get the job has ten coins in his pocket.
Let us suppose that Smith sees the entailment from (d) to (e), and accepts (e) on
the grounds of (d), for which he has strong evidence. In this case, Smith is clearly
justiﬁed in believing that (e) is true.
But imagine, further, that unknown to Smith, he himself, not Jones, will get the
job. And, also, unknown to Smith, he himself has ten coins in his pocket. Prop-
osition (e) is then true, though proposition (d), from which Smith inferred (e), is
false. In our example, then, all of the following are true: (i) (e) is true, (ii) Smith
believes that (e) is true, and (iii) Smith is justiﬁed in believing that (e) is true. But it
is equally clear that Smith does not know that (e) is true; for (e) is true in virtue of
the number of coins in Smith’s pocket, while Smith does not know how many
coins are in Smith’s pocket, and bases his belief in (e) on a count of the coins in
Jones’s pocket, whom he falsely believes to be the man who will get the job.
Case II
Let us suppose that Smith has strong evidence for the following proposition:
(f) Jones owns a Ford.
Smith’s evidence might be that Jones has at all times in the past within Smith’s
memory owned a car, and always a Ford, and that Jones has just offered Smith a
ride while driving a Ford. Let us imagine, now, that Smith has another friend,
Brown, of whose whereabouts he is totally ignorant. Smith selects three place-
names quite at random, and constructs the following three propositions:
(g) Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in Boston;
(h) Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in Barcelona;
(i) Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in Brest-Litovsk.
Each of these propositions is entailed by (f). Imagine that Smith realizes the
entailment of each of these propositions he has constructed by (f), and proceeds
“IS JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF KNOWLEDGE?”
445

to accept (g), (h), and (i) on the basis of (f). Smith has correctly inferred (g), (h),
and (i) from a proposition for which he has strong evidence. Smith is therefore
completely justiﬁed in believing each of these three propositions. Smith, of
course, has no idea where Brown is.
But imagine now that two further conditions hold. First, Jones does not own a
Ford, but is at present driving a rented car. And secondly, by the sheerest coinci-
dence, and entirely unknown to Smith, the place mentioned in proposition (h)
happens really to be the place where Brown is. If these two conditions hold then
Smith does not know that (h) is true, even though (i) (h) is true, (ii) Smith does
believe that (h) is true, and (iii) Smith is justiﬁed in believing that (h) is true.
These two examples show that deﬁnition (a) does not state a sufﬁcient condi-
tion for someone’s knowing a given proposition. The same cases, with appropri-
ate changes, will sufﬁce to show that neither deﬁnition (b) nor deﬁnition (c) do so
either.
Notes
1
Plato seems to be considering some such deﬁnition at Theaetetus 201, and
perhaps accepting one at Meno 98.
2
Roderick M. Chisholm, Perceiving: a Philosophical Study (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1957),  p. 16.
3
A.J. Ayer, The Problem of Knowledge (London: Macmillan, 1956), p. 34.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Gettier, is justiﬁed true belief knowledge?
2
What two points about “justiﬁcation” does Gettier’s argument rely on?
3
In Gettier’s two examples, what true propositions did Smith not know?
EDMUND GETTIER
446

Michael Clark, “Knowledge and Grounds: A
Comment on Mr. Gettier’s Paper”
In his paper “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?” (Analysis 23.6, June 1963) Mr.
Gettier provides two counter-examples which show that it need not be. In each
case a proposition which is in fact true is believed on grounds which are in fact
false. Since the grounding proposition in each case entails the proposition it
justiﬁes (the conclusion), and the grounding proposition, although false, is justi-
ﬁably believed, the conclusion is also justiﬁably believed.
Gettier’s examples are stronger than they need have been to prove his point.
Grounds need not of course entail their conclusions in order to be good grounds.
Cases can be devised in which true justiﬁed belief fails to be knowledge because
a non-deductive ground is false. To adapt Gettier’s second case, take the
proposition
(1) Jones owns a Ford.
Smith believes this because his friend Brown, whom he knows to be reliable and
honest, has told him that Jones always has owned one, etc. Now as it happens
Brown, despite his general reliability, has made an unusual slip: he has mixed
Jones up with someone else. Jones never did have a Ford. However, he just
happens to have bought one. So Smith truly believes that he owns one, but he
cannot be said to know this since he believes it on false grounds. He is none
the less justiﬁed both in accepting the grounds and in accepting Jones’ past
ownership etc. as grounds for the (non-deductive) inference to present ownership.
It is not enough, however, to add the truth of the grounds to a version of the
deﬁnitions Gettier criticises as a further necessary condition of knowing a prop-
osition. The following deﬁnition of knowledge still fails to give conditions which
are jointly sufﬁcient:
S knows that p IFF (i)
p is true,
(ii) S believes that p,
(iii) S is justiﬁed in believing that p, and
(iv) it is on true grounds that S believes that p.
For consider this further adaptation of the example. It is true that Jones always
Michael Clark, “Knowledge and Grounds: A Comment on Mr. Gettier’s Paper,”
Analysis 24 (1963): 46–8.
447

owned a Ford and he still does. Brown, who is known by Smith to be generally
reliable and honest, tells Smith that Jones has always owned one. But, in fact,
Brown knows nothing about Jones or his Ford; he has just invented what he tells
Smith (an act quite out of character), and he happens by chance to be right. Now
Smith’s belief is not only true and justiﬁed, but the grounds on which he holds his
belief are true. Yet Brown’s wild guess can hardly be regarded as providing Smith
with knowledge merely because it happens to be right. In this case, then, the
grounds on which Smith believes (1) are true, but the grounds on which he
accepts these grounds, viz. that Brown knows them, are false; but Brown’s
general reliability and honesty justify his believing it to be true.
Very often we can go on for quite a long time asking why, asking for the
grounds for the grounds, for the grounds for these second-order grounds, and so
on, but eventually the question will become logically odd. For example,
(2) “What are your grounds for saying Jones owns a Ford?”
(3) “Brown told me he always has owned one.”
(4) “What are your grounds for claiming Brown knows this?”
(5) “He is generally reliable and honest.”
(6) “What are your grounds for saying Brown is reliable and honest?”
(7) “I am nearly always with him and I seem to remember no unreliable or
dishonest act on his part.”
It would clearly be out of order to ask for Smith’s grounds for saying he seems to
remember. (We might question the reliability of his memory. In this example I
assume that we may take his memory to be reliable so that I may avoid having too
long a chain of reasons.) If any ground in this chain, that is, either (3) or (5) or
(7), is false, we may properly deny that Smith knows that Jones owns a Ford. If
each ground in this chain is true, then I will say that the belief is “fully
grounded”. We may now modify the deﬁnition under consideration by changing
(iv), so that it reads:
(iv)′ S’s belief that p is fully grounded,
in which form (i)–(iv)′ jointly will give the necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for
knowing that p.
It might be thought that the addition of (iv)′ would enable us to drop (iii). For
surely, if p is fully grounded in the sense speciﬁed, then S is justiﬁed in believing
that p. Yet he might believe all the grounds, and they might be good grounds
without his seeing that they were good grounds; he might be sure of what be
believed but not appreciate how the evidence he had for it really justiﬁed his
belief. (Cf. Cohen, “Claims to Knowledge”, Proc. Arist. Soc., Suppl. Vol. 1962,
p. 35 ff.) In such a case we might want to deny that S was fully justiﬁed in his
belief, and, if so, we need to retain (iii).
I think that the revised deﬁnition illuminates the issue as to whether so-called
incorrigible knowledge is to be counted as knowledge at all. If I can’t (logically)
be wrong, for example, as to whether I am in pain, then, it is claimed, it is not
properly a question of knowledge. For knowing entails having found out, and
ﬁnding out is something which I may fail to do. If I say I am in pain and you ask
MICHAEL CLARK
448

me how I found out, you have asked an obviously silly question. Now it might be
thought that this argument could be met by denying that knowing entails having
found out: might I not be born having certain concepts and knowing certain
truths? But the need for condition (iv)′ in any deﬁnition of knowledge shows that
where the question “How did you ﬁnd out?” is inappropriate the term “know” is
also inappropriate. For it is usually just as odd to ask, “On what grounds do you
say you are in pain?” Where one knows in virtue of having grounds, it seems
plausible to say that it is a case of ﬁnding out. To talk of knowledge in the cases in
question precludes a unitary deﬁnition of knowing, for we should have to say
that condition (iv)′ was inapplicable in these cases.
In particular, the question “If I know that p, does it follow that I know that I
know that p?” is seen to be odd (unless it is a question about my having the
concept of knowing). For, among other things, it asks whether my belief that I
know that p is fully grounded. And, among other things, this question asks
whether the belief’s being fully grounded is itself fully grounded, that is, whether
the grounds for saying that the complete chain of grounds for p do actually
constitute grounds for p, are true. Thus, if p is “He is running away” and my
grounds for believing that p are that I am watching him (in this case the chain has
only one link), the question is “Why is your watching him a ground for saying
what he is doing?” Now this question is very odd; special circumstances might be
devised for giving it point, but generally there is no question as to the grounds for
this being a good ground which is not silly or of a special, philosophical nature.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Clark, what four conditions are required in order for S to know that
p?
2
Which of those conditions is not satisﬁed in Gettier’s examples?
3
What does it mean for a belief to be “fully grounded”?
“KNOWLEDGE AND GROUNDS: A COMMENT . . . ”
449

Alvin Goldman, “A Causal Theory
of Knowing”
Since Edmund L. Gettier reminded us recently of a certain important inadequacy
of the traditional analysis of “S knows that p,” several attempts have been made
to correct that analysis.1 In this paper I shall offer still another analysis (or a
sketch of an analysis) of “S knows that p,” one which will avert Gettier’s prob-
lem. My concern will be with knowledge of empirical propositions only, since I
think that the traditional analysis is adequate for knowledge of nonempirical
truths.
Consider an abbreviated version of Gettier’s second counterexample to the
traditional analysis. Smith believes
(q) Jones owns a Ford
and has very strong evidence for it. Smith’s evidence might be that Jones has
owned a Ford for many years and that Jones has just offered Smith a ride while
driving a Ford. Smith has another friend, Brown, of whose whereabouts he is
totally ignorant. Choosing a town quite at random, however, Smith constructs
the proposition
(p) Either Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona.
Seeing that q entails p, Smith infers that p is true. Since he has adequate evidence
for q, he also has adequate evidence for p. But now suppose that Jones does not
own a Ford (he was driving a rented car when he offered Smith a ride), but, quite
by coincidence, Brown happens to be in Barcelona. This means that p is true, that
Smith believes p, and that Smith has adequate evidence for p. But Smith does not
know p.
A variety of hypotheses might be made to account for Smith’s not knowing p.
Michael Clark, for example, points to the fact that q is false, and suggests this as
the reason why Smith cannot be said to know p. Generalizing from this case,
Clark argues that, for S to know a proposition, each of S’s grounds for it must be
true, as well as his grounds for his grounds, etc.2 I shall make another hypothesis
to account for the fact that Smith cannot be said to know p, and I shall generalize
this into a new analysis of “S knows that p.”
Alvin Goldman, “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” The Journal of Philosophy 64,
(1967): 357–72.
450

Notice that what makes p true is the fact that Brown is in Barcelona, but that
this fact has nothing to do with Smith’s believing p. That is, there is no causal
connection between the fact that Brown is in Barcelona and Smith’s believing p. If
Smith had come to believe p by reading a letter from Brown postmarked in
Barcelona, then we might say that Smith knew p. Alternatively, if Jones did own a
Ford, and his owning the Ford was manifested by his offer of a ride to Smith, and
this in turn resulted in Smith’s believing p, then we would say that Smith knew p.
Thus, one thing that seems to be missing in this example is a causal connection
between the fact that makes p true [or simply: the fact that p] and Smith’s belief
of p. The requirement of such a causal connection is what I wish to add to the
traditional analysis.
To see that this requirement is satisﬁed in all cases of (empirical) knowledge, we
must examine a variety of such causal connections. Clearly, only a sketch of the
important kinds of cases is possible here.
Perhaps the simplest case of a causal chain connecting some fact p with some-
one’s belief of p is that of perception. I wish to espouse a version of the causal
theory of perception, in essence that defended by H.P. Grice.3 Suppose that S sees
that there is a vase in front of him. How is this to be analyzed? I shall not attempt
a complete analysis of this, but a necessary condition of S’s seeing that there is a
vase in front of him is that there be a certain kind of causal connection between
the presence of the vase and S’s believing that a vase is present. I shall not attempt
to describe this causal process in detail. Indeed, to a large extent, a description of
this process must be regarded as a problem for the special sciences, not for phil-
osophy. But a certain causal process—viz. that which standardly takes place
when we say that so-and-so sees such-and-such—must occur. That our ordinary
concept of sight (i.e., knowledge acquired by sight) includes a causal requirement
is shown by the fact that if the relevant causal process is absent we would with-
hold the assertion that so-and-so saw such-and-such. Suppose that, although a
vase is directly in front of S, a laser photograph4 is interposed between it and S,
thereby blocking it from S’s view. The photograph, however, is one of a vase (a
different vase), and when it is illuminated by light waves from a laser, it looks to S
exactly like a real vase. When the photograph is illuminated, S forms the belief
that there is a vase in front of him. Here we would deny that S sees that there is a
vase in front of him, for his view of the real vase is completely blocked, so that it
has no causal role in the formation of his belief. Of course, S might know that
there was a vase in front of him even if the photograph is blocking his view.
Someone else, in a position to see the vase, might tell S that there is a vase in front
of him. Here the presence of the vase might be a causal ancestor of S’s belief, but
the causal process would not be a (purely) perceptual one. S could not be said to
see that there is a vase in front of him. For this to be true, there must be a causal
process, but one of a very special sort, connecting the presence of the vase with S’s
belief.
I shall here assume that perceptual knowledge of facts is noninferential. This is
merely a simplifying procedure, and not essential to my account. Certainly a
percipient does not infer facts about physical objects from the state of his brain or
from the stimulation of his sense organs. He need not know about these goings-
on at all. But some epistemologists maintain that we directly perceive only sense
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
451

data and that we infer physical-object facts from them. This view could be
accommodated within my analysis. I could say that physical-object facts cause
sense data, that people directly perceive sense data, and that they infer the phys-
ical object facts from the sense data. This kind of process would be fully
accredited by my analysis, which will allow for knowledge based on inference.
But for purposes of exposition it will be convenient to regard perceptual
knowledge of external facts as independent of any inference.
Here the question arises about the scope of perceptual knowledge. By percep-
tion I can know noninferentially that there is a vase in front of me. But can I
know noninferentially that the painting I am viewing is a Picasso? It is unneces-
sary to settle such issues here. Whether the knowledge of such facts is to be
classed as inferential or noninferential, my analysis can account for it. So the
scope of non-inferential knowledge may be left indeterminate.
I turn next to memory, i.e., knowledge that is based, in part, on memory.
Remembering, like perceiving, must be regarded as a causal process. S remembers
p at time t only if S’s believing p at an earlier time is a cause of his believing p at t.
Of course, not every causal connection between an earlier belief and a later one is
a case of remembering. As in the case of perception, however, I shall not try to
describe this process in detail. This is a job mainly for the scientist. Instead, the
kind of causal process in question is to be identiﬁed simply by example, by
“pointing” to paradigm cases of remembering. Whenever causal processes are of
that kind—whatever that kind is, precisely—they are cases of remembering.5
A causal connection between earlier belief (or knowledge) of p and later belief
(knowledge) of p is certainly a necessary ingredient in memory.6 To remember a
fact is not simply to believe it at t0 and also to believe it at t1. Nor does someone’s
knowing a fact at t0 and his knowing it at t1 entail that he remembers it at t1. He
may have perceived the fact at t0, forgotten it, and then relearned it at t1 by
someone’s telling it to him. Nor does the inclusion of a memory “impression”—a
feeling of remembering—ensure that one really remembers. Suppose S perceives p
at t0, but forgets it at t1. At t2 he begins to believe p again because someone tells
him p, but at t2 he has no memory impression of p. At t3 we artiﬁcially stimulate
in S a memory impression of p. It does not follow that S remembers p at t3. The
description of the case suggests that his believing p at t0 has no causal effect
whatever on his believing p at t3, and if we accepted this fact, we would deny that
he remembers p at t3.
Knowledge can be acquired by a combination of perception and memory. At
t0, the fact p causes S to believe p, by perception. S’s believing p at t0 results, via
memory, in S’s believing p at t1. Thus, the fact p is a cause of S’s believing p at t1,
and S can be said to know p at t1. But not all knowledge results from perception
and memory alone. In particular, much knowledge is based on inference.
As I shall use the term “inference”, to say that S knows p by “inference” does not
entail that S went through an explicit, conscious process of reasoning. It is not
necessary that he have “talked to himself,” saying something like “Since such-
and-such is true, p must also be true.” My belief that there is a ﬁre in the neigh-
borhood is based on, or inferred from, my belief that I hear a ﬁre engine. But I
have not gone through a process of explicit reasoning, saying “There’s a ﬁre
engine; therefore there must be a ﬁre.” Perhaps the word “inference” is ordinarily
ALVIN GOLDMAN
452

used only where explicit reasoning occurs; if so, my use of the term will be
somewhat broader than its ordinary use.
Suppose S perceives that there is solidiﬁed lava in various parts of the country-
side. On the basis of this belief, plus various “background” beliefs about the
production of lava, S concludes that a nearby mountain erupted many centuries
ago. Let us assume that this is a highly warranted inductive inference, one which
gives S adequate evidence for believing that the mountain did erupt many centur-
ies ago. Assuming this proposition is true, does S know it? This depends on the
nature of the causal process that induced his belief. If there is a continuous causal
chain of the sort he envisages connecting the fact that the mountain erupted with
his belief of this fact, then S knows it. If there is no such causal chain, however, S
does not know that proposition.
Suppose that the mountain erupts, leaving lava around the countryside. The
lava remains there until S perceives it and infers that the mountain erupted. Then
S does know that the mountain erupted. But now suppose that, after the moun-
tain has erupted, a man somehow removes all the lava. A century later, a different
man (not knowing of the real volcano) decides to make it look as if there had
been a volcano, and therefore puts lava in appropriate places. Still later, S comes
across this lava and concludes that the mountain erupted centuries ago. In this
case, S cannot be said to know the proposition. This is because the fact that the
mountain did erupt is not a cause of S’s believing that it erupted. A necessary
condition of S’s knowing p is that his believing p be connected with p by a causal
chain.
In the ﬁrst case, where S knows p, the causal connection may be diagrammed
as in Figure 1. (p) is the fact that the mountain erupted at such-and-such a time.
(q) is the fact that lava is (now) present around the countryside. “B” stands for a
belief, the expression in parentheses indicating the proposition believed, and the
subscript designating the believer. (r) is a “background” proposition, describing
the ways in which lava is produced and how it solidiﬁes. Solid arrows in the
diagram represent causal connections; dotted arrows represent inferences. Notice
that, in Figure 1, there is not only an arrow connecting (q) with S’s belief of (q),
but also an arrow connecting (p) with (q). In the suggested variant of the lava
case, the latter arrow would be missing, showing that there is no continuous
causal chain connecting (p) with S’s belief of (p). Therefore, in that variant case, S
could not be said to know (p)
I have said that p is causally connected to S’s belief of p, in the case dia-
grammed in Figure 1. This raises the question, however, of whether the inferential
part of the chain is itself a causal chain. In other words, is S’s belief of q a cause of
his believing p? This is a question to which I shall not try to give a deﬁnitive
answer here. I am inclined to say that inference is a causal process, that is, that
when someone bases his belief of one proposition on his belief of a set of other
Figure 1
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
453

propositions, then his belief of the latter propositions can be considered a cause
of his belief of the former proposition. But I do not wish to rest my thesis on this
claim. All I do claim is that, if a chain of inferences is “added” to a causal chain,
then the entire chain is causal. In terms of our diagram, a chain consisting of solid
arrows plus dotted arrows is to be considered a causal chain, though I shall not
take a position on the question of whether the dotted arrows represent causal
connections. Thus, in Figure 1, p is a cause of S’s belief of p, whether or not we
regard S’s belief of q a cause of his belief of p.7
Consider next a case of knowledge based on “testimony.” This too can be
analyzed causally. p causes a person T to believe p, by perception. T’s belief of p
gives rise to (causes) his asserting p. T’s asserting p causes S, by auditory percep-
tion, to believe that T is asserting p. S infers that T believes p, and from this, in
turn, he infers that p is a fact. There is a continuous causal chain from p to S’s
believing p, and thus, assuming that each of S’s inferences is warranted, S can be
said to know p.
This causal chain is represented in Figure 2. ‘A’ refers to an act of asserting a
proposition, the expression in parentheses indicating the proposition asserted
and the subscript designating the agent. (q), (r), (u), and (v) are background
propositions. (q) and (r), for example, pertain to T’s sincerity; they help S
conclude, from the fact that T asserted p, that T really believes p.
In this case, as in the lava case, S knows p because he has correctly
reconstructed the causal chain leading from p to the evidence for p that S per-
ceives, in this case, T’s asserting (p). This correct reconstruction is shown in the
diagram by S’s inference “mirroring” the rest of the causal chain. Such a correct
reconstruction is a necessary condition of knowledge based on inference. To see
this, consider the following example. A newspaper reporter observes p and
reports it to his newspaper. When printed, however, the story contains a typo-
graphical error so that it asserts not-p. When reading the paper, however, S fails
to see the word “not,” and takes the paper to have asserted p. Trusting the
newspaper, he infers that p is true. Here we have a continuous causal chain
leading from p to S’s believing p; yet S does not know p. S thinks that p resulted in
a report to the newspaper about p and that this report resulted in its printing the
statement p. Thus, his reconstruction of the causal chain is mistaken. But, if he is
to know p, his reconstruction must contain no mistakes. Though he need not
reconstruct every detail of the causal chain, he must reconstruct all the important
links.8 An additional requirement for knowledge based on inference is that the
knower’s inferences be warranted. That is, the propositions on which he bases his
belief of p must genuinely conﬁrm p very highly, whether deductively or induct-
Figure 2
ALVIN GOLDMAN
454

ively. Reconstructing a causal chain merely by lucky guesses does not yield
knowledge.
With the help of our diagrams, we can contrast the traditional analysis of
knowing with Clark’s analysis (op. cit.) and contrast each of these with my own
analysis. The traditional analysis makes reference to just three features of the
diagrams. First, it requires that p be true; i.e., that (p) appear in the diagram.
Secondly, it requires that S believe p; i.e., that S’s belief of p appear in the dia-
gram. Thirdly, it requires that S’s inferences, if any, be warranted; i.e., that the
sets of beliefs that are at the tail of a dotted arrow must jointly highly conﬁrm the
belief at the head of these arrows. Clark proposes a further requirement for
knowledge. He requires that each of the beliefs in S’s chain of inference be true. In
other words, whereas the traditional analysis requires a fact to correspond to S’s
belief of p, Clark requires that a fact correspond to each of S’s beliefs on which he
based his belief of p. Thus, corresponding to each belief on the right side of
the diagram there must be a fact on the left side. (My diagrams omit facts
corresponding to the “background” beliefs.)
As Clark’s analysis stands, it seems to omit an element of the diagrams that my
analysis requires, viz., the arrows indicating causal connections. Now Clark
might reformulate his analysis so as to make implicit reference to these causal
connections. If he required that the knower’s beliefs include causal beliefs (of the
relevant sort), then his requirement that these beliefs be true would amount to the
requirement that there be causal chains of the sort I require. This interpretation
of Clark’s analysis would make it almost equivalent to mine, and would enable
him to avoid some objections that have been raised against him. But he has not
explicitly formulated his analysis this way, and it therefore remains deﬁcient in
this respect.
Before turning to the problems facing Clark’s analysis, more must be said about
my own analysis. So far, my examples may have suggested that, if S knows p, the
fact that p is a cause of his belief of p. This would clearly be wrong, however. Let
us grant that I can know facts about the future. Then, if we required that the
known fact cause the knower’s belief, we would have to countenance “back-
ward” causation. My analysis, however, does not face this dilemma. The analysis
requires that there be a causal connection between p and S’s belief, not necessar-
ily that p be a cause of S’s belief. p and S’s belief of p can also be causally
connected in a way that yields knowledge if both p and S’s belief of p have a
common cause. This can be illustrated as follows.
T intends to go downtown on Monday. On Sunday, T tells S of his intention.
Hearing T say he will go downtown, S infers that T really does intend to go
downtown. And from this S concludes that T will go downtown on Monday.
Now suppose that T fulﬁlls his intention by going downtown on Monday. Can S
be said to know that he would go downtown? If we ever can be said to have
knowledge of the future, this is a reasonable candidate for it. So let us say S did
know that proposition. How can my analysis account for S’s knowledge? T’s
going downtown on Monday clearly cannot be a cause of S’s believing, on Sun-
day, that he would go downtown. But there is a fact that is the common cause of
T’s going downtown and of S’s belief that he would go downtown, viz., T’s
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
455

intending (on Sunday) to go downtown. This intention resulted in his going
downtown and also resulted in S’s believing that he would go downtown. This
causal connection between S’s belief and the fact believed allows us to say that S
knew that T would go downtown.
The example is diagrammed in Figure 3. (p) = T’s going downtown on Mon-
day. (q) = T’s intending (on Sunday) to go downtown on Monday. (r) = T’s telling
S (on Sunday) that he will go downtown on Monday. (u) and (v) are relevant
background propositions pertaining to T’s honesty, resoluteness, etc. The dia-
gram reveals that q is a cause both of p and of S’s belief of p. Cases of this kind I
shall call Pattern 2 cases of knowledge. Figures 1 and 2 exemplify Pattern 1 cases
of knowledge.
Notice that the causal connection between q and p is an essential part of S’s
knowing p. Suppose, for example, that T’s intending (on Sunday) to go down-
town does not result in, or cause, T’s going downtown on Monday. Suppose that
T, after telling S that he would go downtown, changes his mind. Nevertheless, on
Monday he is kidnapped and forced, at the point of a gun, to go downtown. Here
both q and p actually occur, but they are not causally related. The diagram in
Figure 3 would have to be amended by deleting the arrow connecting (q) with (p).
But if the rest of the facts of the original case remain the same, S could not be said
to know p. It would be false to say that S knew, on Sunday, that T would go
downtown on Monday.
Pattern 2 cases of knowledge are not restricted to knowledge of the future. I
know that smoke was coming out of my chimney last night. I know this because I
remember perceiving a ﬁre in my ﬁreplace last night, and I infer that the ﬁre
caused smoke to rise out of the chimney. This case exempliﬁes Pattern 2. The
smoke’s rising out of the chimney is not a causal factor of my belief. But the fact
that there was a ﬁre in the ﬁreplace was a cause both of my belief that smoke was
coming out of the chimney and of the fact that smoke was coming out of the
chimney. If we supplement this case slightly, we can make my knowledge
exemplify both Pattern 1 and Pattern 2. Suppose that a friend tells me today that
he perceived smoke coming out of my chimney last night and I base my continued
belief of this fact on his testimony. Then the fact was a cause of my current belief
of it, as well as an effect of another fact that caused my belief. In general, numer-
ous and diverse kinds of causal connections can obtain between a given fact and a
given person’s belief of that fact.
Let us now examine some objections to Clark’s analysis and see how the analysis
Figure 3
ALVIN GOLDMAN
456

presented here fares against them. John Turk Saunders and Narayan Champawat
have raised the following counterexample to Clark’s analysis:10
Suppose that Smith believes
(p) Jones owns a Ford
because his friend Brown whom he knows to be generally reliable and
honest yesterday told Smith that Jones had always owned a Ford. Brown’s
information was correct, but today Jones sells his Ford and replaces it with
a Volkswagen. An hour later Jones is pleased to ﬁnd that he is the proud
owner of two cars: he has been lucky enough to win a Ford in a rafﬂe.
Smith’s belief in p is not only justiﬁed and true, but is fully grounded, e.g.,
we suppose that each link in the . . . chain of Smith’s grounds is true (8).
Clearly Smith does not know p; yet he seems to satisfy Clark’s analysis of knowing.
Smith’s lack of knowledge can be accounted for in terms of my analysis. Smith
does not know p because his believing p is not causally related to p, Jones’s
owning a Ford now. This can be seen by examining Figure 4. In the diagram, (p) =
Jones’s owning a Ford now; (q) = Jones’s having always owned a Ford (until
yesterday); (r) = Jones’s winning a Ford in a rafﬂe today. (t), (u), and (v) are
background propositions. (v), for example, deals with the likelihood of some-
one’s continuing to own the same car today that he owned yesterday. The sub-
script “B” designates Brown, and the subscript “S” designates Smith. Notice the
absence of an arrow connecting (p) with (q). The absence of this arrow represents
the absence of a causal relation between (q) and (p). Jones’s owning a Ford in the
past (until yesterday) is not a cause of his owning one now. Had he continued
owning the same Ford today that he owned yesterday, there would be a causal
connection between q and p and, therefore, a causal connection between p and
Smith’s believing p. This causal connection would exemplify Pattern 2. But, as it
happened, it is purely a coincidence that Jones owns a Ford today as well as
yesterday. Thus, Smith’s belief of p is not connected with p by Pattern 2, nor is
there any Pattern 1 connection between them. Hence, Smith does not know p.
If we supplement Clark’s analysis as suggested above, it can be saved from this
counterexample. Though Saunders and Champawat fail to mention this
explicitly, presumably it is one of Smith’s beliefs that Jones’s owning a Ford
yesterday would result in Jones’s owning a Ford now. This was undoubtedly one
of his grounds for believing that Jones owns a Ford now. (A complete diagram of
S’s beliefs relevant to p would include this belief.) Since this belief is false, how-
ever, Clark’s analysis would yield the correct consequence that Smith does not
know p. Unfortunately, Clark himself seems not to have noticed this point, since
Saunders and Champawat’s putative counterexample has been allowed to stand.
Figure 4
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
457

Another sort of counterexample to Clark’s analysis has been given by Saunders
and Champawat and also by Keith Lehrer. This is a counterexample from which
his analysis cannot escape. I shall give Lehrer’s example (op. cit.) of this sort of
difﬁculty. Suppose Smith bases his belief of
(p) Someone in his ofﬁce owns a Ford
on his belief of four propositions
(q) Jones owns a Ford
(r) Jones works in his ofﬁce
(s) Brown owns a Ford
(t) Brown works in his ofﬁce
In fact, Smith knows q, r, and t, but he does not know s because s is false. Since s
is false, not all of Smith’s grounds for p are true, and, therefore, on Clark’s
analysis, Smith does not know p. Yet clearly Smith does know p. Thus, Clark’s
analysis is too strong.
Having seen the importance of a causal chain for knowing, it is fairly obvious
how to amend Clark’s requirements without making them too weak. We need
not require, as Clark does, that all of S’s grounds be true. What is required is that
enough of them be true to ensure the existence of at least one causal connection
between p and S’s belief of p. In Lehrer’s example, Smith thinks that there are two
ways in which he knows p: via his knowledge of the conjunction of q and r, and
via his knowledge of the conjunction of s and t. He does not know p via the
conjunction of s and t, since s is false. But there is a causal connection, via q and r,
between p and Smith’s belief of p. And this connection is enough.
Another sort of case in which one of S’s grounds for p may be false without
preventing him from knowing p is where the false proposition is a dispensable
background assumption. Suppose S bases his belief of p on 17 background
assumptions, but only 16 of these are true. If these 16 are strong enough to
conﬁrm p, then the 17th is dispensable. S can be said to know p though one of his
grounds is false.
Our discussion of Lehrer’s example calls attention to the necessity of a further
clariﬁcation of the notion of a “causal chain.” I said earlier that causal chains
with admixtures of inferences are causal chains. Now I wish to add that causal
chains with admixtures of logical connections are causal chains. Unless we allow
this interpretation, it is hard to see how facts like “Someone in the ofﬁce owns a
Ford” or “All men are mortal” could be causally connected with belief thereof.
The following principle will be useful: If x is logically related to y and if y is a
cause of z, then x is a cause of z. Thus, suppose that q causes S’s belief of q and
that r causes S’s belief of r. Next suppose that S infers q & r from his belief of q
and of r. Then the facts q and r are causes of S’s believing q & r. But the fact q & r
is logically related to the fact q and to the fact r. Therefore, using the principle
enunciated above, the fact q & r is a cause of S’s believing q & r.
In Lehrer’s case another logical connection is involved: a connection between
an existential fact and an instance thereof. Lehrer’s case is diagrammed in Figure
ALVIN GOLDMAN
458

5. In addition to the usual conventions, logical relationships are represented by
double solid lines. As the diagram shows, the fact p—someone in Smith’s ofﬁce
owning a Ford —is logically related to the fact q & r—Jones’s owning a Ford and
Jones’s working in Smith’s ofﬁce. The fact q & r is, in turn, logically related to the
fact q and to the fact r. q causes S’s belief of q and, by inference, his belief of q & r
and of p. Similarly, r is a cause of S’s belief of p. Hence, by the above principle, p
is a cause of S’s belief of p. Since Smith’s inferences are warranted, even setting
aside his belief of s & t, he knows p.
In a similar way, universal facts may be causes of beliefs thereof. The fact that
all men are mortal is logically related to its instances: John’s being mortal,
George’s being mortal, Oscar’s being mortal, etc. Now suppose that S perceives
George, John, Oscar, etc. to be mortal (by seeing them die). He infers from these
facts that all men are mortal, an inference which, I assume, is warranted. Since
each of the facts, John is mortal, George is mortal, Oscar is mortal, etc., is a cause
of S’s believing that fact, each is also a cause of S’s believing that all men are
mortal. Moreover, since the universal fact that all men are mortal is logically
related to each of these particular facts, this universal fact is a cause of S’s belief
of it. Hence, S can be said to know that all men are mortal. In analogous fashions,
S can know various other logically compound propositions.
We can now formulate the analysis of knowing as follows:
S knows that p if and only if
the fact p is causally connected in an “appropriate” way with S’s believing
p.
“Appropriate,” knowledge-producing causal processes include the following:
(1) perception
(2) memory
(3) a causal chain, exemplifying either Pattern 1 or 2, which is correctly
reconstructed by inferences, each of which is warranted (background
propositions help warrant an inference only if they are true)11
(4) combinations of (1), (2), and (3)
We have seen that this analysis is stronger than the traditional analysis in
certain respects: the causal requirement and the correct-reconstruction require-
ment are absent from the older analysis. These additional requirements enable
Figure 5
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
459

my analysis to circumvent Gettier’s counterexamples to the traditional one. But
my analysis is weaker than the traditional analysis in another respect. In at least
one popular interpretation of the traditional analysis, a knower must be able to
justify or give evidence for any proposition he knows. For S to know p at t, S must
be able, at t, to state his justiﬁcation for believing p, or his grounds for p. My
analysis makes no such requirement, and the absence of this requirement enables
me to account for cases of knowledge that would wrongly be excluded by the
traditional analysis.
I know now, for example, that Abraham Lincoln was born in 1809.12 I origin-
ally came to know this fact, let us suppose, by reading an encyclopedia article. I
believed that this encyclopedia was trustworthy and that its saying Lincoln was
born in 1809 must have resulted from the fact that Lincoln was indeed born in
1809. Thus, my original knowledge of this fact was founded on a warranted
inference. But now I no longer remember this inference. I remember that Lincoln
was born in 1809, but not that this is stated in a certain encyclopedia. I no longer
have any pertinent beliefs that highly conﬁrm the proposition that Lincoln was
born in 1809. Nevertheless, I know this proposition now. My original knowledge
of it was preserved until now by the causal process of memory.
Defenders of the traditional analysis would doubtlessly deny that I really do
know Lincoln’s birth year. This denial, however, stems from a desire to protect
their analysis. It seems clear that many things we know were originally learned
in a way that we no longer remember. The range of our knowledge would be
drastically reduced if these items were denied the status of knowledge.
Other species of knowledge without explicit evidence could also be admitted
by my analysis. Notice that I have not closed the list of “appropriate” causal
processes. Leaving the list open is desirable, because there may be some presently
controversial causal processes that we may later deem “appropriate” and, there-
fore, knowledge-producing. Many people now doubt the legitimacy of claims to
extrasensory perception. But if conclusive evidence were to establish the exist-
ence of causal processes connecting physical facts with certain persons’ beliefs
without the help of standard perceptual processes, we might decide to call such
beliefs items of knowledge. This would be another species of knowledge in which
the knower might be unable to justify or defend his belief. My analysis allows for
the possibility of such knowledge, though it doesn’t commit one to it.
Special comments are in order about knowledge of our own mental states. This
is a very difﬁcult and controversial topic, so I hesitate to discuss it, but something
must be said about it. Probably there are some mental states that are clearly
distinct from the subject’s belief that he is in such a state. If so, then there is
presumably a causal process connecting the existence of such states with the
subject’s belief thereof. We may add this kind of process to the list of “appropri-
ate” causal processes. The more difﬁcult cases are those in which the state is
hardly distinguishable from the subject’s believing that he is in that state. My
being in pain and my believing that I am in pain are hardly distinct states of
affairs. If there is no distinction here between the believing and the believed, how
can there be a causal connection between them? For the purposes of the present
analysis, we may regard identity as a “limiting” or “degenerate” case of a causal
connection, just as zero may be regarded as a “limiting” or “degenerate” case of
a number. It is not surprising that knowledge of one’s own mental state should
ALVIN GOLDMAN
460

turn out to be a limiting or degenerate case of knowledge. Philosophers have long
recognized its peculiar status. While some philosophers have regarded it as a
paradigm case of knowledge, others have claimed that we have no “knowledge”
of our mental states at all. A theory of knowledge that makes knowledge of one’s
own mental states rather different from garden-variety species of knowledge is, in
so far forth, acceptable and even welcome.
In conclusion, let me answer some possible objections to my analysis. It might be
doubted whether a causal analysis adequately provides the meaning of the word
“knows” or of the sentence (-schema) “S knows p.” But I am not interested in
giving the meaning of “S knows p”; only its truth conditions. I claim to have
given one correct set of truth conditions for “S knows p.” Truth conditions of a
sentence do not always provide its meaning. Consider, for example, the following
truth-conditions statement: “The sentence ‘Team T wins the baseball game’ is
true if and only if team T has more runs at the end of the game than the opposing
team.” This statement fails to provide the meaning of the sentence “Team T wins
the baseball game”, for it fails to indicate an essential part of the meaning of that
sentence, viz., that to win a game is to achieve the presumed goal of playing it.
Someone might fully understand the truth conditions given above and yet fail to
understand the meaning of the sentence because he has no understanding of the
notion of “winning” in general.
Truth conditions should not be confused with veriﬁcation conditions. My
analysis of “S knows p” does not purport to give procedures for ﬁnding out
whether a person (including oneself) knows a given proposition. No doubt, we
sometimes do know that people know certain propositions, for we sometimes
know that their beliefs are causally connected (in appropriate ways) with the
facts believed. On the other hand, it may often be difﬁcult or even impossible to
ﬁnd out whether this condition holds for a given proposition and a given person.
For example, it may be difﬁcult for me to ﬁnd out whether I really do remember a
certain fact that I seem to remember. The difﬁculties that exist for ﬁnding out
whether someone knows a given proposition do not constitute difﬁculties for my
analysis, however.
In the same vein it should be noted that I have made no attempt to answer
skeptical problems. My analysis gives no answer to the skeptic who asks that I
start from the content of my own experience and then prove that I know there is a
material world, a past, etc. I do not take this to be one of the jobs of giving truth
conditions for “S knows that p.”
The analysis presented here ﬂies in the face of a well-established tradition in
epistemology, the view that epistemological questions are questions of logic or
justiﬁcation, not causal or genetic questions. This traditional view, however, must
not go unquestioned. Indeed, I think my analysis shows that the question of
whether someone knows a certain proposition is, in part, a causal question,
although, of course, the question of what the correct analysis is of “S knows that
p” is not a causal question.
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
461

Notes
1 “Is True Justiﬁed Belief Knowledge?” Analysis (1963): 121–3. I say “reminded”
because essentially the same point was made by Russell in 1912. Cf. The
Problems of Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 1912), ch. XIII, pp. 132 ff. New
analyses have been proposed by Michael Clark, “Knowledge and Grounds: A
Comment on Mr. Gettier’s Paper,” Analysis 24 (1963): 40–48; Ernest Sosa,
“The Analysis of ‘Knowledge that p’,” ibid., 25 (1964): 1–3; and Keith Lehrer,
“Knowledge, Truth, and Evidence,” ibid., 25 (1965): 168–175.
2 Op. cit. Criticisms of Clark’s analysis will be discussed below.
3 “The Causal Theory of Perception,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp.
vol. 35 (1961).
4 If a laser photograph (hologram) is illuminated by light waves, especially waves
from a laser, the effect of the hologram on the viewer is exactly as if the object
were being seen. It preserves three-dimensionality completely, and even gives
appropriate parallax effects as the viewer moves relative to it. Cf. E.N. Leith
and J. Upatnieks, “Photography by Laser,” Scientiﬁc American 212 (June
1965): 24.
5 For further defense of this kind of procedure, with attention to perception, cf.
Grice, op. cit.
6 Causal connections can hold between states of affairs, such as believings, as
well as between events. If a given event or state, in conjunction with other events
or states, “leads to” or “results in” another event or state (or the same state
obtaining at a later time), it will be called a “cause” of the latter. I shall also
speak of “facts” being causes.
7 A fact can be a cause of a belief even if it does not initiate the belief. Suppose I
believe that there is a lake in a certain locale, this belief having started in a
manner quite unconnected with the existence of the lake. Continuing to have the
belief, I go to the locale and perceive the lake. At this juncture, the existence of
the lake becomes a cause of my believing that there is a lake there. This is
analogous to a table top that is supported by four legs. When a ﬁfth leg is
inserted ﬂush beneath the table top, it too becomes a cause of the table top’s
not falling. It has a causal role in the support of the table top even though, before
it was inserted, the table top was adequately supported.
8 Clearly we cannot require someone to reconstruct every detail, since this would
involve knowledge of minute physical phenomena, for example, of which ordinary
people are unaware. On the other hand, it is difﬁcult to give criteria to identify
which details, in general, are “important.” This will vary substantially from case
to case.
10 “Mr. Clark’s Deﬁnition of ‘Knowledge’,” Analysis 25 (1964): 8–9.
11 Perhaps background propositions that help warrant S’s inference must be known
by S, as well as true. This requirement could be added without making our
analysis of “S knows that p” circular. For these propositions would not include p.
In other words, the analysis of knowledge could be regarded as recursive.
12 This kind of case is drawn from an unpublished manuscript of Gilbert Harman.
ALVIN GOLDMAN
462

QUESTIONS
1
Goldman discusses a case in which S believes that a volcano erupted in a
certain area, because he sees lava on the ground. In fact, a volcano did erupt
there, but the lava was later removed; still later, someone else came and placed
new lava on the ground. In this example, does S know that a volcano erupted
there, according to Goldman? Why or why not?
2
Facts about the future cannot cause our present beliefs. Does this mean that, on
Goldman’s analysis, we cannot presently know any future fact? Why or why not?
3
According to Goldman, if S knows that p, does it follow that S knows that he
knows that p?
“A CAUSAL THEORY OF KNOWING”
463

Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson, “Knowledge:
Undefeated Justiﬁed True Belief”
If a man knows that a statement is true even though there is no other statement
that justiﬁes his belief, then his knowledge is basic. Basic knowledge is completely
justiﬁed true belief. On the other hand, if a man knows that a statement is true
because there is some other statement that justiﬁes his belief, then his knowledge
is nonbasic. Nonbasic knowledge requires something in addition to completely
justiﬁed true belief; for, though a statement completely justiﬁes a man in his
belief, there may be some true statement that defeats his justiﬁcation. So, we must
add the condition that his justiﬁcation is not defeated. Nonbasic knowledge is
undefeated justiﬁed true belief. These analyses will be elaborated below and
subsequently defended against various alternative analyses.1
I
We propose the following analysis of basic knowledge: S has basic knowledge
that h if and only if (i) h is true, (ii) S believes that h, (iii) S is completely justiﬁed
in believing that h, and (iv) the satisfaction of condition (iii) does not depend on
any evidence p justifying S in believing that h. The third condition is used in such
a way that it entails neither the second condition nor the ﬁrst. A person can be
completely justiﬁed in believing that h, even though, irrationally, he does not; and
a person can be completely justiﬁed in believing that h, even though,
unfortunately, he is mistaken.2 Furthermore, the third condition does not entail
that there is any statement or belief that justiﬁes S in believing that h. The analy-
sis, then, is in keeping with the characterization of basic knowledge given above.
In basic knowledge, S is completely justiﬁed in believing that h even if it is not the
case that there is any statement or belief that justiﬁes his believing that h.
There are cases in which a person has some, perhaps mysterious, way of being
right about matters of a certain sort with such consistency that philosophers and
others have said that the person knows whereof he speaks. Consider, for
example, the crystal-ball-gazing gypsy who is almost always right in his predic-
tions of speciﬁc events. Peter Unger suggests a special case of this.3 His gypsy is
always right, but has no evidence to this effect and, in fact, believes that he is
usually wrong. With respect to each speciﬁc prediction, however, the gypsy
Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson, “Knowledge: Undefeated Justiﬁed True Belief,” The
Journal of Philosophy (1969): 225–37.
464

impulsively believes it to be true (as indeed it is). Whether or not the predictive
beliefs of the ordinary gypsy and Unger’s gypsy are cases of knowledge depends,
we contend, on whether they are cases of basic knowledge. This in turn depends
on whether the gypsies are completely justiﬁed in their beliefs. It is plausible to
suggest that these are cases of knowledge, but this is only because it is also
plausible to think that the gypsies in question have some way of being right that
completely justiﬁes their prognostications. We neither afﬁrm nor deny that these
are cases of knowledge, but maintain that, if they are cases of knowledge, then
they are cases of basic knowledge.
It is consistent with our analysis of knowledge to admit that a man knows
something even though no statement constitutes evidence that completely
justiﬁes his believing it. Philosophers have suggested that certain memory and
perceptual beliefs are completely justiﬁed in the absence of such evidential state-
ments. We choose to remain agnostic with respect to any claim of this sort, but
such proposals are not excluded by our analysis.
II
Not all knowledge that p is basic knowledge that p, because sometimes justifying
evidence is essential. Consider the following analysis of nonbasic knowledge: (i) h
is true, (ii) S believes that h, and (iii*) p completely justiﬁes S in believing that
h. In this analysis, p is that (statement) which makes S completely justiﬁed in
believing that h. Note that (iii*), like (iii), does not entail (ii) or (i).
This analysis of nonbasic knowledge is, of course, defective. As Edmund Get-
tier has shown, there are examples in which some false statement p entails and
hence completely justiﬁes S in believing that h, and such that, though S correctly
believes that h, his being correct is mostly a matter of luck.4 Consequently, S lacks
knowledge, contrary to the above analysis. Other examples illustrate that the
false statement which creates the difﬁculty need not entail h. Consider, for
example, the case of the pyromaniac described by Skyrms.5 The pyromaniac has
found that Sure-Fire matches have always ignited when struck. On the basis of
this evidence, the pyromaniac is completely justiﬁed in believing that the match
he now holds will ignite upon his striking it. However, unbeknownst to the
pyromaniac, this match happens to contain impurities that raise its combustion
temperature above that which can be produced by the friction. Imagine that a
burst of Q-radiation ignites the match just as he strikes it. His belief that the
match will ignite upon his striking it is true and completely justiﬁed by the evi-
dence. But this is not a case of knowledge, because it is not the striking that will
cause the match to ignite.
Roderick Chisholm has pointed out that justiﬁcations are defeasible.6 In the
examples referred to above, there is some true statement that would defeat any
justiﬁcation of S for believing that h. In the case of the pyromaniac, his justiﬁca-
tion is defeated by the true statement that striking the match will not cause it to
ignite. This defeats his justiﬁcation for believing that the match will ignite upon
his striking it.
Thus we propose the following analysis of nonbasic knowledge: S has nonba-
sic knowledge that h if and only if (i) h is true, (ii) S believes that h, and (iii) there
is some statement p that completely justiﬁes S in believing that h and no other
“KNOWLEDGE: UNDEFEATED JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF”
465

statement defeats this justiﬁcation. The question we must now answer is—what
does it mean to say that a statement defeats a justiﬁcation? Adopting a suggestion
of Chisholm’s, we might try the following: when p completely justiﬁes S in believ-
ing that h, this justiﬁcation is defeated by q if and only if (i) q is true, and (ii) the
conjunction of p and q does not completely justify S in believing that h.7 This
deﬁnition is strong enough to rule out the example of the pyromaniac as a case of
knowledge. The statement that the striking of a match will not cause it to ignite,
which is true, is such that when it is conjoined to any statement that completely
justiﬁes the pyromaniac in believing that the match will ignite, the resultant
conjunction will fail to so justify him in that belief. Given this deﬁnition of
defeasibility, the analysis of nonbasic knowledge would require that a man who
has nonbasic knowledge that h must have some justiﬁcation for his belief that is
not defeated by any true statement.
However, this requirement is somewhat unrealistic. To see that the deﬁnition
of defeasibility under consideration makes the analysis of nonbasic knowledge
excessively restrictive, we need only notice that there can be true statements that
are misleading. Suppose I see a man walk into the library and remove a book
from the library by concealing it beneath his coat. Since I am sure the man is Tom
Grabit, whom I have often seen before when he attended my classes, I report that
I know that Tom Grabit has removed the book. However, suppose further that
Mrs. Grabit, the mother of Tom, has averred that on the day in question Tom was
not in the library, indeed, was thousands of miles away, and that Tom’s identical
twin brother, John Grabit, was in the library. Imagine, moreover, that I am
entirely ignorant of the fact that Mrs. Grabit has said these things. The statement
that she has said these things would defeat any justiﬁcation I have for believing
that Tom Grabit removed the book, according to our present deﬁnition of defeas-
ibility. Thus, I could not be said to have nonbasic knowledge that Tom Grabit
removed the book.
The preceding might seem acceptable until we ﬁnish the story by adding that
Mrs. Grabit is a compulsive and pathological liar, that John Grabit is a ﬁction of
her demented mind, and that Tom Grabit took the book as I believed. Once this is
added, it should be apparent that I did know that Tom Grabit removed the book,
and, since the knowledge must be nonbasic, I must have nonbasic knowledge of
that fact. Consequently, the deﬁnition of defeasibility must be amended. The fact
that Mrs. Grabit said what she did should not be allowed to defeat any justiﬁca-
tion I have for believing that Tom Grabit removed the book, because I neither
entertained any beliefs concerning Mrs. Grabit nor would I have been justiﬁed in
doing so. More speciﬁcally, my justiﬁcation does not depend on my being com-
pletely justiﬁed in believing that Mrs. Grabit did not say the things in question.
To understand how the deﬁnition of defeasibility must be amended to deal
with the preceding example, let us consider an example from the literature in
which a justiﬁcation deserves to be defeated. Suppose that I have excellent evi-
dence that completely justiﬁes my believing that a student in my class, Mr. Nogot,
owns a Ford, the evidence consisting in my having seen him driving it, hearing
him say he owns it, and so forth. Since Mr. Nogot is a student in my class who
owns a Ford, someone in my class owns a Ford, and, consequently, I am com-
pletely justiﬁed in believing that someone in my class owns a Ford. Imagine that,
contrary to the evidence, Mr. Nogot does not own a Ford, that I have been
KEITH LEHRER AND THOMAS PAXSON
466

deceived, but that unknown to me Mr. Havit, who is also in my class, does own a
Ford. Though I have a completely justiﬁed true belief, I do not know that some-
one in my class owns a Ford. The reason is that my sole justiﬁcation for believing
that someone in my class does own a Ford is and should be defeated by the true
statement that Mr. Nogot does not own a Ford.
In the case of Tom Grabit, the true statement that Mrs. Grabit said Tom was
not in the library and so forth, should not be allowed to defeat my justiﬁcation
for believing that Tom removed the book, whereas in the case of Mr. Nogot, the
true statement that Mr. Nogot does not own a Ford, should defeat my justiﬁca-
tion for believing that someone in my class owns a Ford. Why should one true
statement but not the other be allowed to defeat my justiﬁcation? The answer is
that in one case my justiﬁcation depends on my being completely justiﬁed in
believing the true statement to be false while in the other it does not. My justiﬁca-
tion for believing that Tom removed the book does not depend on my being
completely justiﬁed in believing it to be false that Mrs. Grabit said Tom was not
in the library and so forth. But my justiﬁcation for believing that someone in my
class owns a Ford does depend on my being completely justiﬁed in believing it to
be false that Mr. Nogot does not own a Ford. Thus, a defeating statement must be
one which, though true, is such that the subject is completely justiﬁed in believing
it to be false.8
The following deﬁnition of defeasibility incorporates this proposal: when p
completely justiﬁes S in believing that h, this justiﬁcation is defeated by q if and
only if (i) q is true, (ii) S is completely justiﬁed in believing q to be false, and (iii)
the conjunction of p and q does not completely justify S in believing that h.
This deﬁnition of defeasibility, though basically correct, requires one last
modiﬁcation to meet a technical problem. Suppose that there is some statement h
of which S has nonbasic knowledge. Let us again consider the example in which I
know that Tom Grabit removed the book. Now imagine that there is some true
statement which is completely irrelevant to this knowledge and which I happen to
be completely justiﬁed in believing to be false, for example, the statement that I
was born in St. Paul. Since I am completely justiﬁed in believing it to be false that
I was born in St. Paul, I am also completely justiﬁed in believing to be false the
conjunctive statement that I was born in St. Paul and that q, whatever q is,
because I am completely justiﬁed in believing any conjunction to be false if I am
completely justiﬁed in believing a conjunct of it to be false. Therefore, I am
completely justiﬁed in believing to be false the conjunctive statement that I was
born in St. Paul and Mrs. Grabit said that Tom Grabit was not in the library and
so forth. Moreover, this conjunctive statement is true, and is such that, when it is
conjoined in turn to any evidential statement that justiﬁes me in believing that
Tom Grabit removed the book, the resultant extended conjunction will not com-
pletely justify me in believing that Tom Grabit removed the book. Hence, any
such justiﬁcation will be defeated.9 Once again, it turns out that I do not have
nonbasic knowledge of the fact that Tom is the culprit.
In a logical nut, the problem is that the current deﬁnition of defeasibility
reduces to the preceding one. Suppose there is a true statement q such that, for
any p that completely justiﬁes S in believing h, the conjunction of p and q does
not completely justify me in believing that h. Moreover, suppose that I am not
completely justiﬁed in believing q to be false, so that, given our current deﬁnition
“KNOWLEDGE: UNDEFEATED JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF”
467

of defeasibility, q does not count as defeating. Nevertheless, if there is any true
statement r, irrelevant to both p and q, which I am completely justiﬁed in believ-
ing to be false, then we can indirectly use q to defeat my justiﬁcation for believing
h. For I shall be completely justiﬁed in believing the conjunction of r and q to be
false, though in fact it is true, because I am completely justiﬁed in believing r to be
false. If the conjunction of q and p does not completely justify me in believing that
h, then, given the irrelevance of r, neither would the conjunction of r, q and p
justify me in believing that h. Hence, my justiﬁcations for believing h would be
defeated by the conjunction r and q on the current deﬁnition of defeasibility as
surely as they were by q alone on the preceding deﬁnition.
The defect is not difﬁcult to repair. Though S is completely justiﬁed in believing
the conjunction of r and q to be false, one consequence of the conjunction, q,
undermines my justiﬁcation but is not something I am completely justiﬁed in
believing to be false, while another consequence, r, is one that I am completely
justiﬁed in believing to be false but is irrelevant to my justiﬁcation. To return to
our example, I am completely justiﬁed in believing to be false the conjunctive
statement that I was born in St. Paul and that Mrs. Grabit said that Tom was not
in the library and so forth. One consequence of this conjunction, that Mrs. Grabit
said that Tom was not in the library and so forth, undermines my justiﬁcation but
is not something I am completely justiﬁed in believing to be false, while the other
consequence, that I was born in St. Paul, is something I am completely justiﬁed in
believing to be false but is irrelevant to my justiﬁcation. The needed restriction is
that those consequences of a defeating statement which undermine a justiﬁcation
must themselves be statements that the subject is completely justiﬁed in believing
to be false.
We propose the following deﬁnition of defeasibility: if p completely justiﬁes S
in believing that h, then this justiﬁcation is defeated by q if and only if (i) q is true,
(ii) the conjunction of p and q does not completely justify S in believing that h,
(iii) S is completely justiﬁed in believing q to be false, and (iv) if c is a logical
consequence of q such that the conjunction of c and p does not completely justify
S in believing that h, then S is completely justiﬁed in believing c to be false.
With this deﬁnition of defeasibility, we complete our analysis of nonbasic
knowledge. We have deﬁned nonbasic knowledge as true belief for which some
statement provides a complete and undefeated justiﬁcation. We previously
deﬁned basic knowledge as true belief for which there was complete justiﬁcation
that did not depend on any justifying statement. We deﬁne as knowledge
anything that is either basic or nonbasic knowledge. Thus, S knows that h if and
only if S has either basic or nonbasic knowledge that h. Having completed our
analysis, we shall compare it with other goods in the epistemic marketplace to
demonstrate the superiority of our ware.
III
The analysis offered above resembles two recent analyses formulated by Brian
Skyrms and R. M. Chisholm. Both philosophers distinguish between basic and
nonbasic knowledge, and both analyze knowledge in terms of justiﬁcation.
Moreover, these analyses are sufﬁciently restrictive so as to avoid yielding the
result that a person has nonbasic knowledge when his justiﬁcation is defeated by
KEITH LEHRER AND THOMAS PAXSON
468

some false statement. However, we shall argue that both of these analyses are
excessively restrictive and consequently lead to skeptical conclusions that are
unwarranted.
Skyrms says that a man has nonbasic knowledge that p if and only if he has
either derivative or nonderivative knowledge that p. He analyzes the latter two
kinds of knowledge as follows:
Derivative Knowledge: X has derivative knowledge that p if and only if there
is a statement “e” such that:
(i) X knows that e
(ii) X knows that “e” entails “p”
(iii) X believes that p on the basis of the knowledge referred to in (i) and (ii)
Nonderivative Knowledge: X has nonderivative knowledge that p if and only
if there is a statement “e” such that:
(i) X knows that e
(ii) X knows that “e” is good evidence for “p”
(iii) X believes that p on the basis of the knowledge referred to in (i) and (ii)
(iv) “p” is true
(v) There is no statement “q” (other than “p”) such that:
(a) X knows that “e” is good evidence of “q”
(b) X knows that “q” entails “p”
(c) X believes that “p” on the basis of the knowledge referred to in (a)
and (b) (op. cit., 381)
Later in his paper, Skyrms points out a defect in his analysis of nonderivative
knowledge, namely, that the words, “There is a statement ‘e’ such that . . .” must
be replaced by some such expression as “There is some statement ‘e’ consisting of
the total evidence of X relevant to p such that . . .” or else the analysis will lead to
trouble (387).
We shall now show why this analysis is unsatisfactory. According to Skyrms, a
man who knows that a disjunction is true without knowing any speciﬁc disjunct
to be true, has nonderivative knowledge of the disjunction (380). Indeed, his
analysis of nonderivative knowledge is simply a generalization of his analysis of
knowledge with respect to such disjunctions. But his analysis is overrestrictive in
the case of our knowledge of disjunctions. Suppose I know that a business
acquaintance of mine, Mr. Romeo, arrived in Rochester from Atlanta on either
one of two ﬂights, either AA 107 or AA 204. My evidence is that these are the
only two ﬂights into Rochester from Atlanta, that Mr. Romeo telephoned earlier
from Atlanta to say he would be arriving on one of these two ﬂights, that he is
now in Rochester, and that no other ﬂight to Rochester or nearby would enable
Mr. Romeo to be in Rochester at the present time. On the basis of this evidence, I
may on Skyrms’ analysis be said to have nonderivative knowledge that Mr.
Romeo arrived on either AA 107 or AA 204. So far so good.
However, suppose that we add to my evidence that, when I meet Mr. Romeo at
the airport shortly after the arrival of AA 204 (the later ﬂight), he tells me that he
just arrived on AA 204. By Skyrms’ analysis I now lack nonderivative knowledge
that Mr. Romeo arrived on either AA 107 or AA 204. The reason is that condi-
tion (v) of his analysis of nonderivative knowledge is no longer satisﬁed with
“KNOWLEDGE: UNDEFEATED JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF”
469

respect to that disjunction. I now have good evidence that Mr. Romeo arrived on
AA 204, and I believe that disjunction on the basis of my knowledge that this
evidence is good evidence for the statement “Mr. Romeo arrived on AA 204” and
this statement entails “Mr. Romeo arrived on either AA 107 and AA 204.” Thus,
there is a statement ‘q’ that satisﬁes condition (a), (b), and (c) under (v) where ‘p’
is the disjunction.
The consequence that I now lack nonderivative knowledge that Mr. Romeo
arrived on either AA 107 or AA 204 would not be fatal if it could be argued that I
have derivative knowledge of that disjunction because I know that Mr. Romeo
arrived on AA 204. But there is an unmentioned twist of romance in our tale. In
fact, Mr. Romeo arrived on the earlier ﬂight, AA 107, and, having entertained his
secret love, deceitfully told me he arrived on the later ﬂight. Thus, I do not know
that Mr. Romeo arrived on AA 204, because he did not so arrive. By Skyrms’
analyses, I have neither derivative nor nonderivative knowledge that Mr. Romeo
arrived on either AA 107 or AA 204, and, therefore, I lack nonbasic knowledge
of that disjunction. So, as Skyrms would have it, I do not know that Mr. Romeo
arrived on either of those ﬂights. However, although there is much of interest that
I do not know in this case, I surely do know, on the basis of my original evidence
which I may yet brandish with epistemic righteousness, that Mr. Romeo must
have arrived on either AA 107 or AA 204. He did so arrive, and my evidence
completely justiﬁes me in believing that he did, regardless of the fact that
Mr. Romeo spoke with a crooked tongue. Since I do have knowledge of the
disjunction, Skyrms’ analyses must be rejected.
Chisholm’s analysis of knowledge is very similar to ours except for the condi-
tion intended to deal with situations in which, though a man has completely
justiﬁed true belief, his justiﬁcation is undermined by some false statement. In the
sort of cases we have been considering, Chisholm’s analysis requires, among
other conditions, that if a person knows that h, then there is a proposition p such
that p justiﬁes h but p does not justify any false statement.10 However, it seems
reasonable to suppose that every statement, whatever epistemic virtues it might
have, completely justiﬁes at least one false statement. This supposition is sup-
ported by the fact that justiﬁcation in Chisholm’s system need not be deductive
justiﬁcation. Any nondeductive justiﬁcation may fail to be truth-preserving; that
is, the conclusion may be false though the premise be true. Thus, though our
analysis is in a number of ways indebted to Chisholm’s proposals, the foregoing
argument is our reason for concluding that Chisholm’s analysis would lead to
some form of skepticism, that is, to the conclusion that people do not know some
things they would generally and reasonably be said to know.
IV
Having indicated our reasons for rejecting those analyses which are most similar
to our own, we shall now turn to some analyses that differ from ours in more
fundamental ways. Peter Unger has analyzed knowledge as follows: For any
sentential value of p, (at a time t) a man knows that p if and only if (at t) it is not
at all accidental that the man is right about its being the case that p.11 Unger
nowhere rules out the possibility that there are some cases in which it is not at all
accidental that a man is right simply because he has justiﬁcation for believing
KEITH LEHRER AND THOMAS PAXSON
470

what he does. So it could be that any case that satisﬁes our conditions for know-
ledge would satisfy his as well. But there are cases that satisfy his analysis though
they fail to satisfy ours.
Let us consider an example. A hologram, or laser photograph, when illumin-
ated by laser light looks three-dimensional even with respect to parallax effects
when the viewer shifts his position. Imagine that holography has been so per-
fected that a laser-illuminated hologram of an object can, under certain obser-
vational conditions, be indistinguishable from the real thing.12 More particularly,
suppose that a man, Mr. Promoter, seeking to demonstrate the remarkable prop-
erties of laser photography, constructs a boxlike device which contains a vase, a
laser photograph of the vase, and a laser source by which the photograph may be
illuminated. The device is so constructed that Mr. Promoter by turning a knob
may show a viewer the vase or the illuminated laser photograph of the vase, and
the visual experience of the viewer when he sees the vase will be indistinguishable
from his visual experience when confronted with the photograph. Of course, the
very purpose of constructing the device is to arrange things so that people will be
completely deceived by the photograph. Now suppose I walk up to the viewer,
innocent as the fool who stones the water to destroy his twin, and peer in at the
illuminated photograph. Blissfully ignorant of the technical ﬁnesse being used to
dupe me, I take what I see to be a vase. I believe that the box contains a vase. I am
right, there is a vase in the box, and it is not at all accidental that I am right. For
Mr. Promoter has constructed the device in such a way that, though I do not see
the vase, I will believe quite correctly that there is one there. On Unger’s analysis,
I know that there is a vase in the box when I see the illuminated laser photograph.
However, it is perfectly apparent that I know nothing of the sort. Any justiﬁca-
tion I have for believing that there is a vase in the box is defeated by the fact that I
do not see a vase in the box but merely a photograph of one. On our analysis it
would follow that I do not know there is a vase in the box, and that result is the
correct one.
Unger might object that it is to some extent accidental that I am right in
thinking there is a vase in the box, because I might have had the same visual
experiences even if there had been no vase in the box. Hence his analysis yields
the same result as ours in this case. But this objection, if taken seriously, would
lead us to reject Unger as a skeptic. To see why, imagine that, contrary to the
preceding example, Mr. Promoter turns off his device for the day, leaving the
knob set so that when I enter the room the vase is before my eyes. I could reach
out and touch it if I wished, but good manners restrain me. Nevertheless, there is
nothing between me and the vase; I see it and know that it is before my eyes in
just the way that I see and know that countless other objects sit untouched before
me. However, the statement—I might have had the same visual experience even if
there had been no vase in the box—is true in this case as in the former one where I
was deceived by the photograph. If this truth shows that my being right in the
former case was to some extent accidental, then it would also show that my being
right in the present case was to some extent accidental. Therefore, either Unger
must agree that the truth of this statement fails to show that my being right in the
former case was accidental, in which case his analysis would yield the result that I
know when in fact I am ignorant; or he must maintain that its truth shows that
my being right in the present case was accidental, in which case his analysis yields
“KNOWLEDGE: UNDEFEATED JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF”
471

the result that I am ignorant when in fact I know. Thus, his analysis is
unsatisfactory.
Finally, we wish to consider another kind of theory suggested by Alvin Gold-
man. His analysis is as follows: S knows that p if and only if the fact that p is
causally connected in an “appropriate” way with S’s believing that p (op. cit.,
369). We wish to assert, in opposition to Goldman, that the causal etiology of
belief may be utterly irrelevant to the question of what a man knows. Consider
yet a third round between Mr. Promoter and me. This time I imagine that I enter
as in the ﬁrst example, where the photograph is illuminated, and become com-
pletely and thoroughly convinced that there is a vase in the box. Now imagine
that Mr. Promoter, amused with his easy success, tells me that I am quite right in
thinking there is a vase in the box, but he then goes on to show me how the device
is constructed, removing parts and lecturing about lasers from smirk-twisted lips.
With respect to the etiology of my belief that there was a vase in the box, it is
possible that my belief was ﬁxed from the time I ﬁrst looked at the photograph
and, moreover, was so ﬁrmly and unequivocally ﬁxed that the subsequent revela-
tions neither altered nor reinforced it. This belief is to be causally explained by
my mistakenly believing that I was seeing a vase when I ﬁrst entered the room and
by the facts about the illuminated laser photograph that caused that erroneous
belief. There is no “appropriate” causal connection between the fact that there is
a vase in the box and my belief that p; so, according to Goldman’s analysis, I did
not know that there was a vase in the box.
There is something to recommend this result. When I ﬁrst looked into the
device, I did not see the vase, and, consequently, I did not then know that there
was a vase in the box then. However, after Mr. Promoter’s revelations, when I do
really see the vase, I do then know that there is a vase in the box. This is not due
to any change in the causal etiology of my belief that there is a vase in the box. So,
according to Goldman, I still do not know. But Goldman is wrong. I do sub-
sequently know that there is a vase in the box, not because of any change in the
causal etiology of the belief, but because I then have some justiﬁcation for the
belief that I formerly lacked. The justiﬁcation consists of what I learned from Mr.
Promoter’s demonstration about the box and its contents. In short, there is no
reason to suppose that all new evidence that a man could appeal to in order to
justify a belief changes the causal etiology of that belief. And such evidence may
make the difference between true belief and knowledge.
V
We have contended that our analysis of knowledge in terms of undefeated justi-
ﬁed true belief has various advantages over competing analyses. Unlike some of
our competitors, we do not presuppose any one theory of justiﬁcation rather than
another. Since current theories of justiﬁcation are highly controversial, we have
employed a notion of justiﬁcation that is consistent with diverse theories on this
subject. By so doing, we hope to have presented a satisfactory analysis of know-
ledge without waiting for the development of an equally satisfactory theory of
justiﬁcation.
Moreover, the problems that confront a theory of justiﬁcation can be formu-
lated in terms of the locutions we have introduced in our analysis. For example,
KEITH LEHRER AND THOMAS PAXSON
472

Chisholm has maintained that some statements are self-justifying, and, in our
terminology this amounts to answering afﬁrmatively the question whether it is
ever the case that some statement h completely justiﬁes a person in believing that
h.13 Some philosophers have afﬁrmed that all justiﬁcation must be either induct-
ive or deductive; others have denied this and afﬁrmed that there are other forms
of justiﬁcation as well. In our terminology, this question may be formulated as
the question whether, when a statement p completely justiﬁes a person in believ-
ing h, the justiﬁed statement must be deduced or induced from the justifying
statement or whether there are other alternatives. Finally, philosophers have dis-
agreed about the kind of statement that may justify a man in believing something:
whether those statements must be known, or whether they need not be, whether
they must include all of a man’s evidence, or whether they might exclude some of
his evidence, and so forth. We have avoided dogmatically assuming one or the
other of these alternatives.
Nevertheless, it may be found that only one theory of justiﬁcation is suitable to
supplement our analysis. Our claim is that, on any satisfactory theory of justiﬁca-
tion, some knowledge must be undefeated completely justiﬁed true belief, and the
rest is basic.
Notes
1 This analysis of knowledge is a modiﬁcation of an earlier analysis proposed by
Keith Lehrer, “Knowledge, Truth, and Evidence,” Analysis 25 (1965): 168–175. It
is intended to cope with objections to that article raised by Gilbert H. Harman in
“Lehrer on Knowledge,” Journal of Philosophy 63 (1966): 241–247, and by Alvin
Goldman, Brian Skyrms, and others. Criticisms of various alternative analyses of
knowledge are given in Lehrer’s earlier article, and the reader is referred to that
article; such discussion will not be repeated here. The distinction between basic
and nonbasic knowledge that is elaborated here was suggested by Arthur Danto
in “Freedom and Forebearance,” in Freedom and Determinism (New York:
Random House, 1965), pp. 45–63.
2 Harman’s criticism of Lehrer’s earlier article rested on his interpreting Lehrer as
saying that a person can be completely justiﬁed in believing something only if he
does believe it. This interpretation leads to problems and is repudiated here.
3 “Experience and Factual Knowledge,” Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967):
152–173, esp. pp. 165–167; see also his “An Analysis of Factual Knowledge,”
Journal of Philosophy 65 (1968): 157–170, esp. pp. 163–164.
4 “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?”, Analysis 33 (1963): 121–123.
5 “The Explication of ‘X knows that p’,” Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967): 373–389.
6 Theory of Knowledge (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1966), p. 48.
7 Chisholm, “The Ethics of Requirement,” American Philosophical Quarterly 1
(1964): 147–153. This deﬁnition of defeasibility would make our analysis of
nonbasic knowledge very similar to one Harman derives from Lehrer’s analysis
and also one proposed by Marshall Swain in “The Analysis of Non-Basic
Knowledge” (unpublished).
8 In Skyrms’ example of the pyromaniac cited earlier, the defeating statement is
not one which the pyromaniac need believe; Skyrms suggests that the pyro-
maniac neither believes nor disbelieves that striking the match will cause it to
“KNOWLEDGE: UNDEFEATED JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF”
473

ignite. Nevertheless, the pyromaniac would be completely justiﬁed in believing
that striking the Sure-Fire match will cause it to ignite. Hence the statement that
striking the match will not cause it to light is defeating.
9 A similar objection to Lehrer’s earlier analysis is raised by Harman, p. 243.
10 Chisholm; see footnote at end of chap. I, Theory of Knowledge, p. 23.
11 “An Analysis of Factual Knowledge,” p. 158.
12 Cf. Alvin Goldman, “A Causal Theory of Knowing,” Journal of Philosophy 64
(1967): 357–372; p. 359.
13 R.M. Chisholm and others, Philosophy (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall,
1964), pp. 263–277.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Lehrer and Paxson, under what conditions does S have basic
knowledge that h?
2
According to Lehrer and Paxson, under what conditions does q defeat S’s justiﬁ-
cation for believing h?
3
According to Lehrer and Paxson, under what conditions does S have non-basic
knowledge that h?
KEITH LEHRER AND THOMAS PAXSON
474

Robert Nozick, “Knowledge”
Conditions for knowledge
Our task is to formulate further conditions to go alongside
(1) p is true
(2) S believes that p.
We would like each condition to be necessary for knowledge, so any case that
fails to satisfy it will not be an instance of knowledge. Furthermore, we would
like the conditions to be jointly sufﬁcient for knowledge, so any case that satisﬁes
all of them will be an instance of knowledge. We ﬁrst shall formulate conditions
that seem to handle ordinary cases correctly, classifying as knowledge cases
which are knowledge, and as nonknowledge cases which are not; then we shall
check to see how these conditions handle some difﬁcult cases discussed in the
literature.
The causal condition on knowledge, previously mentioned, provides an
inhospitable environment for mathematical and ethical knowledge; also there are
well-known difﬁculties in specifying the type of causal connection. If someone
ﬂoating in a tank oblivious to everything around him is given (by direct electrical
and chemical stimulation of the brain) the belief that he is ﬂoating in a tank with
his brain being stimulated, then even though that fact is part of the cause of his
belief, still he does not know that it is true.
Let us consider a different third condition:
(3) If p weren’t true, S wouldn’t believe that p.
Throughout this work, let us write the subjunctive “if-then” by an arrow, and the
negation of a sentence by prefacing “not-” to it. The above condition thus is
rewritten as:
(3) not-p → not-(S believes that p).
This subjunctive condition is not unrelated to the causal condition. Often when
Robert Nozick, “Knowledge,” Philosophical Explanations (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981).
475

the fact that p (partially) causes someone to believe that p, the fact also will be
causally necessary for his having the belief—without the cause, the effect would
not occur. In that case, the subjunctive condition 3 also will be satisﬁed. Yet this
condition is not equivalent to the causal condition. For the causal condition will
be satisﬁed in cases of causal overdetermination, where either two sufﬁcient
causes of the effect actually operate, or a back-up cause (of the same effect)
would operate if the ﬁrst one didn’t; whereas the subjunctive condition need not
hold for these cases. When the two conditions do agree, causality indicates
knowledge because it acts in a manner that makes the subjunctive 3 true.
The subjunctive condition 3 serves to exclude cases of the sort ﬁrst described
by Edward Gettier, such as the following. Two other people are in my ofﬁce and I
am justiﬁed on the basis of much evidence in believing the ﬁrst owns a Ford car;
though he (now) does not, the second person (a stranger to me) owns one. I
believe truly and justiﬁably that someone (or other) in my ofﬁce owns a Ford car,
but I do not know someone does. Concluded Gettier, knowledge is not simply
justiﬁed true belief.
The following subjunctive, which speciﬁes condition 3 for this Gettier case, is
not satisﬁed: if no one in my ofﬁce owned a Ford car, I wouldn’t believe that
someone did. The situation that would obtain if no one in my ofﬁce owned a
Ford is one where the stranger does not (or where he is not in the ofﬁce); and in
that situation I still would believe, as before, that someone in my ofﬁce does own
a Ford, namely, the ﬁrst person. So the subjunctive condition 3 excludes this
Gettier case as a case of knowledge.
The subjunctive condition is powerful and intuitive, not so easy to satisfy, yet
not so powerful as to rule out everything as an instance of knowledge. A sub-
junctive conditional “if p were true, q would be true”, p →q, does not say that p
entails q or that it is logically impossible that p yet not-q. It says that in the
situation that would obtain if p were true, q also would be true. This point is
brought out especially clearly in recent “possible-worlds” accounts of sub-
junctives: the subjunctive is true when (roughly) in all those worlds in which p
holds true that are closest to the actual world, q also is true. (Examine those
worlds in which p holds true closest to the actual world, and see if q holds true in
all these.) Whether or not q is true in p worlds that are still farther away from the
actual world is irrelevant to the truth of the subjunctive. I do not mean to endorse
any particular possible-worlds account of subjunctives, nor am I committed to
this type of account. I sometimes shall use it, though, when it illustrates points in
an especially clear way.1
The subjunctive condition 3 also handles nicely cases that cause difﬁculties for
the view that you know that p when you can rule out the relevant alternatives to p
in the context. For, as Gail Stine writes, “what makes an alternative relevant in
one context and not another? . . . if on the basis of visual appearances obtained
under optimum conditions while driving through the countryside Henry identi-
ﬁes an object as a barn, normally we say that Henry knows that it is a barn. Let us
suppose, however, that unknown to Henry, the region is full of expertly made
papier-mâché facsimiles of barns. In that case, we would not say that Henry
knows that the object is a barn, unless he has evidence against it being a papier-
mâché facsimile, which is now a relevant alternative. So much is clear, but what if
no such facsimiles exist in Henry’s surroundings, although they once did? Are
ROBERT NOZICK
476

either of these circumstances sufﬁcient to make the hypothesis (that it’s a papier-
mâché object) relevant? Probably not, but the situation is not so clear.” Let p be
the statement that the object in the ﬁeld is a (real) barn, and q the one that the
object in the ﬁeld is a papier-mâché barn. When papier-mâché barns are scattered
through the area, if p were false, q would be true or might be. Since in this case
(we are supposing) the person still would believe p, the subjunctive
(3) not-p → not-(S believes that p)
is not satisﬁed, and so he doesn’t know that p. However, when papier-mâché
barns are or were scattered around another country, even if p were false q
wouldn’t be true, and so (for all we have been told) the person may well know
that p. A hypothesis q contrary to p clearly is relevant when if p weren’t true, q
would be true; when not-p →q. It clearly is irrelevant when if p weren’t true, q
also would not be true; when not-p → not-q. The remaining possibility is that
neither of these opposed subjunctives holds; q might (or might not) be true if p
weren’t true. In this case, q also will be relevant, according to an account of
knowledge incorporating condition 3 and treating subjunctives along the lines
sketched above. Thus, condition 3 handles cases that befuddle the “relevant
alternatives” account; though that account can adopt the above subjunctive cri-
terion for when an alternative is relevant, it then becomes merely an alternate and
longer way of stating condition 3.
Despite the power and intuitive force of the condition that if p weren’t true the
person would not believe it, this condition does not (in conjunction with the ﬁrst
two conditions) rule out every problem case. There remains, for example, the
case of the person in the tank who is brought to believe, by direct electrical and
chemical stimulation of his brain, that he is in the tank and is being brought to
believe things in this way; he does not know this is true. However, the subjunctive
condition is satisﬁed: if he weren’t ﬂoating in the tank, he wouldn’t believe he
was.
The person in the tank does not know he is there, because his belief is not
sensitive to the truth. Although it is caused by the fact that is its content, it is not
sensitive to that fact. The operators of the tank could have produced any belief,
including the false belief that he wasn’t in the tank; if they had, he would have
believed that. Perfect sensitivity would involve beliefs and facts varying together.
We already have one portion of that variation, subjunctively at least: if p were
false he wouldn’t believe it. This sensitivity as speciﬁed by a subjunctive does not
have the belief vary with the truth or falsity of p in all possible situations, merely
in the ones that would or might obtain if p were false.
The subjunctive condition
(3) not-p → not-(S believes that p)
tells us only half the story about how his belief is sensitive to the truth-value of p.
It tells us how his belief state is sensitive to p’s falsity, but not how it is sensitive to
p’s truth; it tells us what his belief state would be if p were false, but not what it
would be if p were true.
To be sure, conditions 1 and 2 tell us that p is true and he does believe it, but it
“KNOWLEDGE”
477

does not follow that his believing p is sensitive to p’s being true. This additional
sensitivity is given to us by a further subjunctive: if p were true, he would believe
it.
(4) p → S believes that p.
Not only is p true and S believes it, but if it were true he would believe it.
Compare: not only was the photon emitted and did it go to the left, but (it was
then true that): if it were emitted it would go to the left. The truth of antecedent
and consequent is not alone sufﬁcient for the truth of a subjunctive; 4 says more
than 1 and 2. Thus, we presuppose some (or another) suitable account of sub-
junctives. According to the suggestion tentatively made above, 4 holds true if not
only does he actually truly believe p, but in the “close” worlds where p is true, he
also believes it. He believes that p for some distance out in the p neighborhood of
the actual world; similarly, condition 3 speaks not of the whole not-p neighbor-
hood of the actual world, but only of the ﬁrst portion of it. (If, as is likely, these
explanations do not help, please use your own intuitive understanding of the
subjunctives 3 and 4.)
The person in the tank does not satisfy the subjunctive condition 4. Imagine as
actual a world in which he is in the tank and is stimulated to believe he is, and
consider what subjunctives are true in that world. It is not true of him there that if
he were in the tank he would believe it; for in the close world (or situation) to his
own where he is in the tank but they don’t give him the belief that he is (much less
instill the belief that he isn’t) he doesn’t believe he is in the tank. Of the person
actually in the tank and believing it, it is not true to make the further statement
that if he were in the tank he would believe it—so he does not know he is in the
tank.
The subjunctive condition 4 also handles a case presented by Gilbert Harman.
The dictator of a country is killed; in their ﬁrst edition, newspapers print the
story, but later all the country’s newspapers and other media deny the story,
falsely. Everyone who encounters the denial believes it (or does not know what to
believe and so suspends judgment). Only one person in the country fails to hear
any denial and he continues to believe the truth. He satisﬁes conditions 1 through
3 (and the causal condition about belief) yet we are reluctant to say he knows the
truth. The reason is that if he had heard the denials, he too would have believed
them, just like everyone else. His belief is not sensitively tuned to the truth, he
doesn’t satisfy the condition that if it were true he would believe it. Condition 4 is
not satisﬁed.
There is a pleasing symmetry about how this account of knowledge relates
conditions 3 and 4, and connects them to the ﬁrst two conditions. The account
has the following form.
(1)
(2)
(3) not-1 → not-2
(4) 1 → 2
I am not inclined, however, to make too much of this symmetry, for I found also
ROBERT NOZICK
478

that with other conditions experimented with as a possible fourth condition there
was some way to construe the resulting third and fourth conditions as symmetrical
answers to some symmetrical looking questions, so that they appeared to arise in
parallel fashion from similar questions about the components of true belief.
Symmetry, it seems, is a feature of a mode of presentation, not of the contents
presented. A uniform transformation of symmetrical statements can leave the
results nonsymmetrical. But if symmetry attaches to mode of presentation, how
can it possibly be a deep feature of, for instance, laws of nature that they exhibit
symmetry? (One of my favorite examples of symmetry is due to Groucho Marx.
On his radio program he spoofed a commercial, and ended, “And if you are not
completely satisﬁed, return the unused portion of our product and we will return
the unused portion of your money.”) Still, to present our subject symmetrically
makes the connection of knowledge to true belief especially perspicuous. It seems
to me that a symmetrical formulation is a sign of our understanding, rather than
a mark of truth. If we cannot understand an asymmetry as arising from an under-
lying symmetry through the operation of a particular factor, we will not
understand why that asymmetry exists in that direction. (But do we also need to
understand why the underlying asymmetrical factor holds instead of its
opposite?)
A person knows that p when he not only does truly believe it, but also would
truly believe it and wouldn’t falsely believe it. He not only actually has a true
belief, he subjunctively has one. It is true that p and he believes it; if it weren’t true
he wouldn’t believe it, and if it were true he would believe it. To know that p is to
be someone who would believe it if it were true, and who wouldn’t believe it if it
were false.
It will be useful to have a term for this situation when a person’s belief is thus
subjunctively connected to the fact. Let us say of a person who believes that p,
which is true, that when 3 and 4 hold, his belief tracks the truth that p. To know
is to have a belief that tracks the truth. Knowledge is a particular way of being
connected to the world, having a speciﬁc real factual connection to the world:
tracking it.
One reﬁnement is needed in condition 4. It may be possible for someone to
have contradictory beliefs, to believe p and also believe not-p. We do not mean
such a person to easily satisfy 4, and in any case we want his belief-state, sensitive
to the truth of p, to focus upon p. So let us rewrite our fourth condition as:
(4) p → S believes that p and not-(S believes that not-p).
As you might have expected, this account of knowledge as tracking requires
some reﬁnements and epicycles. Readers who ﬁnd themselves (or me) bogged
down in these reﬁnements should move on directly to this essay’s second part, on
skepticism, where the pace picks up. . . .
Skeptical possibilities
The skeptic often refers to possibilities in which a person would believe some-
thing even though it was false: really, the person is cleverly deceived by others,
perhaps by an evil demon, or the person is dreaming or he is ﬂoating in a tank
“KNOWLEDGE”
479

near Alpha Centauri with his brain being stimulated. In each case, the p he
believes is false, and he believes it even though it is false.
How do these possibilities adduced by the skeptic show that someone does not
know that p? Suppose that someone is you; how do these possibilities count
against your knowing that p? One way might be the following. (I shall consider
other ways later.) If there is a possible situation where p is false yet you believe
that p, then in that situation you believe that p even though it is false. So it
appears you do not satisfy condition 3 for knowledge.
(3) If p were false, S wouldn’t believe that p.
For a situation has been described in which you do believe that p even though p is
false. How then can it also be true that if p were false, you wouldn’t believe it? If
the skeptic’s possible situation shows that 3 is false, and if 3 is a necessary
condition for knowledge, then the skeptic’s possible situation shows that there
isn’t knowledge.
So construed, the skeptic’s argument plays on condition 3; it aims to show that
condition 3 is not satisﬁed. The skeptic may seem to be putting forth
R: Even if p were false, S still would believe p.
This conditional, with the same antecedent as 3 and the contradictory con-
sequent, is incompatible with the truth of 3. If 3 is true, then R is not. However, R
is stronger than the skeptic needs in order to show 3 is false. For 3 is false when if
p were false, S might believe that p. This last conditional is weaker than R, and is
merely 3’s denial:
T: not-[not-p → not-(S believes that p)].
Whereas R does not simply deny 3, it asserts an opposing subjunctive of its own.
Perhaps the possibility the skeptic adduces is not enough to show that R is true,
but it appears at least to establish the weaker T; since this T denies 3, the skeptic’s
possibility appears to show that 3 is false.
However, the truth of 3 is not incompatible with the existence of a possible
situation where the person believes p though it is false. The subjunctive
(3) not-p → not-(S believes p)
does not talk of all possible situations in which p is false (in which not-p is true).
It does not say that in all possible situations where not-p holds, S doesn’t believe
p. To say there is no possible situation in which not-p yet S believes p, would be to
say that not-p entails not-(S believes p), or logically implies it. But subjunctive
conditionals differ from entailments; the subjunctive 3 is not a statement of
entailment. So the existence of a possible situation in which p is false yet S
believes p does not show that 3 is false; 3 can be true even though there is a
possible situation where not-p and S believes that p.
What the subjunctive 3 speaks of is the situation that would hold if p were
false. Not every possible situation in which p is false is the situation that would
ROBERT NOZICK
480

hold if p were false. To fall into possible worlds talk, the subjunctive 3 speaks of
the not-p world that is closest to the actual world, or of those not-p worlds that
are closest to the actual world, or more strongly (according to my suggestion) of
the not-p neighborhood of the actual world. And it is of this or these not-p
worlds that it says (in them) S does not believe that p. What happens in yet other
more distant not-p worlds is no concern of the subjunctive 3.
The skeptic’s possibilities (let us refer to them as SK), of the person’s being
deceived by a demon or dreaming or ﬂoating in a tank, count against the
subjunctive
(3) if p were false then S wouldn’t believe that p
only if (one of) these possibilities would or might obtain if p were false; only if
one of these possibilities is in the not-p neighborhood of the actual world. Condi-
tion 3 says: if p were false, S still would not believe p. And this can hold even
though there is some situation SK described by the skeptic in which p is false and
S believes p. If p were false S still would not believe p, even though there is a
situation SK in which p is false and S does believe p, provided that this situation
SK wouldn’t obtain if p were false. If the skeptic describes a situation SK which
would not hold even if p were false then this situation SK doesn’t show that 3 is
false and so does not (in this way at least) undercut knowledge. Condition C acts
to rule out skeptical hypotheses.
C: not-p → SK does not obtain.
Any skeptical situation SK which satisﬁes condition C is ruled out. For a skeptical
situation SK to show that we don’t know that p, it must fail to satisfy C which
excludes it; instead it must be a situation that might obtain if p did not, and so
satisfy C’s denial:
not-(not-p → SK doesn’t obtain).
Although the skeptic’s imagined situations appear to show that 3 is false, they do
not; they satisfy condition C and so are excluded.
The skeptic might go on to ask whether we know that his imagined situations
SK are excluded by condition C, whether we know that if p were false SK would
not obtain. However, typically he asks something stronger: do we know that his
imagined situation SK does not actually obtain? Do we know that we are not
being deceived by a demon, dreaming, or ﬂoating in a tank? And if we do not
know this, how can we know that p? Thus we are led to the second way his
imagined situations might show that we do not know that p.
Skeptical results
According to our account of knowledge, S knows that the skeptic’s situation SK
doesn’t hold if and only if
(1) SK doesn’t hold
“KNOWLEDGE”
481

(2) S believes that SK doesn’t hold
(3) If SK were to hold, S would not believe that SK doesn’t hold
(4) If SK were not to hold, S would believe it does not.
Let us focus on the third of these conditions. The skeptic has carefully chosen his
situations SK so that if they held we (still) would believe they did not. We would
believe we weren’t dreaming, weren’t being deceived, and so on, even if we were.
He has chosen situations SK such that if SK were to hold, S would (still) believe
that SK doesn’t hold—and this is incompatible with the truth of 3.
Since condition 3 is a necessary condition for knowledge, it follows that we do
not know that SK doesn’t hold. If it were true that an evil demon was deceiving
us, if we were having a particular dream, if we were ﬂoating in a tank with our
brains stimulated in a speciﬁed way, we would still believe we were not. So, we
do not know we’re not being deceived by an evil demon, we do not know we’re
not in that tank, and we do not know we’re not having that dream. So says the
skeptic, and so says our account. And also so we say—don’t we? For how could
we know we are not being deceived that way, dreaming that dream? If those
things were happening to us, everything would seem the same to us. There is no
way we can know it is not happening for there is no way we could tell if it were
happening; and if it were happening we would believe exactly what we do now—
in particular, we still would believe that it was not. For this reason, we feel, and
correctly, that we don’t know—how could we?—that it is not happening to us. It
is a virtue of our account that it yields, and explains, this result.
The skeptic asserts we do not know his possibilities don’t obtain, and he is
right. Attempts to avoid skepticism by claiming we do know these things are
bound to fail. The skeptic’s possibilities make us uneasy because, as we deeply
realize, we do not know they don’t obtain; it is not surprising that attempts to
show we do know these things leave us suspicious, strike us even as bad faith.2
Nor has the skeptic merely pointed out something obvious and trivial. It comes as
a surprise to realize that we do not know his possibilities don’t obtain. It is
startling, shocking. For we would have thought, before the skeptic got us to focus
on it, that we did know those things, that we did know we were not being
deceived by a demon, or dreaming that dream, or stimulated that way in that
tank. The skeptic has pointed out that we do not know things we would have
conﬁdently said we knew. And if we don’t know these things, what can we know?
So much for the supposed obviousness of what the skeptic tells us.
Let us say that a situation (or world) is doxically identical for S to the actual
situation when if S were in that situation, he would have exactly the beliefs
(doxa) he actually does have. More generally, two situations are doxically identi-
cal for S if and only if he would have exactly the same beliefs in them. It might be
merely a curiosity to be told there are nonactual situations doxically identical to
the actual one. The skeptic, however, describes worlds doxically identical to the
actual world in which almost everything believed is false.3
Such worlds are possible because we know mediately, not directly. This leaves
room for a divergence between our beliefs and the truth. It is as though we
possessed only two-dimensional plane projections of three-dimensional objects.
Different three-dimensional objects, oriented appropriately, have the same two-
dimensional plane projection. Similarly, different situations or worlds will lead to
ROBERT NOZICK
482

our having the very same beliefs. What is surprising is how very different the
doxically identical world can be—different enough for almost everything
believed in it to be false. Whether or not the mere fact that knowledge is mediated
always makes room for such a very different doxically identical world, it does so
in our case, as the skeptic’s possibilities show. To be shown this is nontrivial,
especially when we recall that we do not know the skeptic’s possibility doesn’t
obtain: we do not know that we are not living in a doxically identical world
wherein almost everything we believe is false.
What more could the skeptic ask for or hope to show? Even readers who
sympathized with my desire not to dismiss the skeptic too quickly may feel this
has gone too far, that we have not merely acknowledged the force of the skeptic’s
position but have succumbed to it.
The skeptic maintains that we know almost none of what we think we know.
He has shown, much to our initial surprise, that we do not know his (nontrivial)
possibility SK doesn’t obtain. Thus, he has shown of one thing we thought we
knew, that we didn’t and don’t. To the conclusion that we know almost nothing,
it appears but a short step. For if we do not know we are not dreaming or being
deceived by a demon or ﬂoating in a tank, then how can I know, for example, that
I am sitting before a page writing with a pen, and how can you know that you are
reading a page of a book?
However, although our account of knowledge agrees with the skeptic in saying
that we do not know that not-SK, it places no formidable barriers before my
knowing that I am writing on a page with a pen. It is true that I am, I believe I am,
if I weren’t I wouldn’t believe I was, and if I were, I would believe it. (I leave out
the reference to method.) Also, it is true that you are reading a page (please, don’t
stop now!), you believe you are, if you weren’t reading a page you wouldn’t
believe you were, and if you were reading a page you would believe you were. So
according to the account, I do know that I am writing on a page with a pen, and
you do know that you are reading a page. The account does not lead to any
general skepticism.
Yet we must grant that it appears that if the skeptic is right that we don’t know
we are not dreaming or being deceived or ﬂoating in the tank, then it cannot be
that I know I am writing with a pen or that you know you are reading a page. So
we must scrutinize with special care the skeptic’s “short step” to the conclusion
that we don’t know these things, for either this step cannot be taken or our
account of knowledge is incoherent.
Nonclosure
In taking the “short step”, the skeptic assumes that if S knows that p and he
knows that “p entails q” then he also knows that q. In the terminology of the
logicians, the skeptic assumes that knowledge is closed under known logical
implication; that the operation of moving from something known to something
else known to be entailed by it does not take us outside of the (closed) area of
knowledge. He intends, of course, to work things backwards, arguing that since
the person does not know that q, assuming (at least for the purposes of argument)
that he does know that p entails q, it follows that he does not know that p. For if
he did know that p, he would also know that q, which he doesn’t.
The details of different skeptical arguments vary in their structure, but each
“KNOWLEDGE”
483

one will assume some variant of the principle that knowledge is closed under
known logical implication. If we abbreviate “knowledge that p” by
“Kp” and abbreviate “entails” by the ﬁshhook sign “

”, we can write
this principle of closure as the subjunctive principle
P: K(p

q) & Kp → Kq.
If a person were to know that p entails q and he were to know that p then he
would know that q. The statement that q follows by modus ponens from the
other two stated as known in the antecedent of the subjunctive principle P; this
principle counts on the person to draw the inference to q.
You know that your being in a tank on Alpha Centauri entails your not being
in place X where you are. (I assume here a limited readership.) And you know
also the contrapositive, that your being at place X entails that you are not then in
a tank on Alpha Centauri. If you knew you were at X you would know you’re not
in a tank (of a speciﬁed sort) at Alpha Centauri. But you do not know this last
fact (the skeptic has argued and we have agreed) and so (he argues) you don’t
know the ﬁrst. Another intuitive way of putting the skeptic’s argument is as
follows. If you know that two statements are incompatible and you know the ﬁrst
is true then you know the denial of the second. You know that your being at X
and your being in a tank on Alpha Centauri are incompatible; so if you knew
you were at X you would know you were not in the (speciﬁed) tank on Alpha
Centauri. Since you do not know the second, you don’t know the ﬁrst.
No doubt, it is possible to argue over the details of principle P, to point out it is
incorrect as it stands. Perhaps, though Kp, the person does not know that he
knows  that  p  (that is,  not-KKp)  and  so does  not  draw  the  inference  to  q.
Or perhaps he doesn’t draw the inference because not-KK(p

q). Other
similar principles face their own difﬁculties: for example, the principle that
K(p → q) → (Kp → Kq) fails if Kp stops p →q from being true, that is, if
Kp → not-(p → q); the principle that K(p

q) → K(Kp → Kq) faces difﬁcul-
ties if Kp makes the person forget that (p

q) and so he fails to draw the
inference to q. We seem forced to pile K upon K until we reach something
like KK(p

q) & KKp → Kq; this involves strengthening considerably
the antecedent of P and so is not useful for the skeptic’s argument that p is not
known. (From a principle altered thus, it would follow at best that it is not
known that p is known.)
We would be ill-advised, however, to quibble over the details of P. Although
these details are difﬁcult to get straight, it will continue to appear that something
like P is correct. If S knows that “p entails q” and he knows that p and knows that
“(p and p entails q) entails q” (shades of the Lewis Carroll puzzle we discuss
below!) and he does draw the inference to q from all this and believes q via the
process of drawing this inference, then will he not know that q? And what is
wrong with simplifying this mass of detail by writing merely principle P, provided
we apply it only to cases where the mass of detail holds, as it surely does in the
skeptical cases under consideration? For example, I do realize that my being in
the Van Leer Foundation Building in Jerusalem entails that I am not in a tank on
Alpha Centauri; I am capable of drawing inferences now; I do believe I am not in
a tank on Alpha Centauri (though not solely via this inference, surely); and so
ROBERT NOZICK
484

forth. Won’t this satisfy the correctly detailed principle, and shouldn’t it follow
that I know I am not (in that tank) on Alpha Centauri? The skeptic agrees it
should follow; so he concludes from the fact that I don’t know I am not ﬂoating
in the tank on Alpha Centauri that I don’t know I am in Jerusalem. Uncovering
difﬁculties in the details of particular formulations of P will not weaken the
principle’s intuitive appeal; such quibbling will seem at best like a wasp attacking
a steamroller, at worst like an effort in bad faith to avoid being pulled along by
the skeptic’s argument.
Principle P is wrong, however, and not merely in detail. Knowledge is not
closed under known logical implication. S knows that p when S has a true belief
that p, and S wouldn’t have a false belief that p (condition 3) and S would have a
true belief that p (condition 4). Neither of these latter two conditions is closed
under known logical implication.
Let us begin with condition
(3) if p were false, S wouldn’t believe that p.
When S knows that p, his belief that p is contingent on the truth of p, contingent
in the way the subjunctive condition 3 describes. Now it might be that p entails q
(and S knows this), that S’s belief that p is subjunctively contingent on the truth
of p, that S believes q, yet his belief that q is not subjunctively dependent on the
truth of q, in that it (or he) does not satisfy:
(3′) if q were false, S wouldn’t believe that q.
For 3′ talks of what S would believe if q were false, and this may be a very
different situation than the one that would hold if p were false, even though p
entails q. That you were born in a certain city entails that you were born on
earth.4 Yet contemplating what (actually) would be the situation if you were not
born in that city is very different from contemplating what situation would hold
if you weren’t born on earth. Just as those possibilities are very different, so what
is believed in them may be very different. When p entails q (and not the other way
around) p will be a stronger statement than q, and so not-q (which is the ante-
cedent of 3′) will be a stronger statement than not-p (which is the antecedent of
3). There is no reason to assume you will have the same beliefs in these two cases,
under these suppositions of differing strengths.
There is no reason to assume the (closest) not-p world and the (closest) not-q
world are doxically identical for you, and no reason to assume, even though p
entails q, that your beliefs in one of these worlds would be a (proper) subset of
your beliefs in the other.
Consider now the two statements:
p = I am awake and sitting on a chair in Jerusalem;
q = I am not ﬂoating in a tank on Alpha Centauri being stimulated by
electrochemical means to believe that p.
The ﬁrst one entails the second: p entails q. Also, I know that p entails q; and I
know that p. If p were false, I would be standing or lying down in the same city,
“KNOWLEDGE”
485

or perhaps sleeping there, or perhaps in a neighboring city or town. If q were
false, I would be ﬂoating in a tank on Alpha Centauri. Clearly these are very
different situations, leading to great differences in what I then would believe. If p
were false, if I weren’t awake and sitting on a chair in Jerusalem, I would not
believe that p. Yet if q were false, if I was ﬂoating in a tank on Alpha Centauri, I
would believe that q, that I was not in the tank, and indeed, in that case, I would
still believe that p. According to our account of knowledge, I know that p yet I do
not know that q, even though (I know) p entails q.
This failure of knowledge to be closed under known logical implication stems
from the fact that condition 3 is not closed under known logical implication;
condition 3 can hold of one statement believed while not of another known to be
entailed by the ﬁrst. It is clear that any account that includes as a necessary
condition for knowledge the subjunctive condition 3, not-p → not-(S believes
that p), will have the consequence that knowledge is not closed under known
logical implication.
When p entails q and you believe each of them, if you do not have a false belief
that p (since p is true) then you do not have a false belief that q. However, if you
are to know something not only don’t you have a false belief about it, but also
you wouldn’t have a false belief about it. Yet, we have seen how it may be that p
entails q and you believe each and you wouldn’t have a false belief that p yet you
might have a false belief that q (that is, it is not the case that you wouldn’t have
one). Knowledge is not closed under the known logical implication because
“wouldn’t have a false belief that” is not closed under known logical implication.
If knowledge were the same as (simply) true belief then it would be closed
under known logical implication (provided the implied statements were
believed). Knowledge is not simply true belief, however; additional conditions
are needed. These further conditions will make knowledge open under known
logical implication, even when the entailed statement is believed, when at least
one of the further conditions itself is open. Knowledge stays closed (only) if all of
the additional conditions are closed. I lack a general nontrivial characterization
of those conditions that are closed under known logical implication; possessing
such an illuminating characterization, one might attempt to prove that no add-
itional conditions of that sort could provide an adequate analysis of knowledge.
Still, we can say the following. A belief that p is knowledge that p only if it
somehow varies with the truth of p. The causal condition for knowledge speciﬁed
that the belief was “produced by” the fact, but that condition did not provide the
right sort of varying with the fact. The subjunctive conditions 3 and 4 are our
attempt to specify that varying. But however an account spells this out, it will
hold that whether a belief that p is knowledge partly depends on what goes on
with the belief in some situations when p is false. An account that says nothing
about what is believed in any situation when p is false cannot give us any mode of
varying with the fact.
Because what is preserved under logical implication is truth, any condition that
is preserved under known logical implication is most likely to speak only of what
happens when p, and q, are true, without speaking at all of what happens when
either one is false. Such a condition is incapable of providing “varies with”; so
adding only such conditions to true belief cannot yield an adequate account of
knowledge.
ROBERT NOZICK
486

A belief’s somehow varying with the truth of what is believed is not closed
under known logical implication. Since knowledge that p involves such variation,
knowledge also is not closed under known logical implication. The skeptic can-
not easily deny that knowledge involves such variation, for his argument that we
don’t know that we’re not ﬂoating in that tank, for example, uses the fact that
knowledge does involve variation. (“If you were ﬂoating in the tank you would
still think you weren’t, so you don’t know that you’re not.”) Yet, though one part
of his argument uses that fact that knowledge involves such variation, another
part of his argument presupposes that knowledge does not involve any such
variation. This latter is the part that depends upon knowledge being closed under
known logical implication, as when the skeptic argues that since you don’t know
that not-SK, you don’t know you are not ﬂoating in the tank, then you also don’t
know, for example, that you are now reading a book. That closure can hold only
if the variation does not. The skeptic cannot be right both times. According to
our view he is right when he holds that knowledge involves such variation and so
concludes that we don’t know, for example, that we are not ﬂoating in that tank;
but he is wrong when he assumes knowledge is closed under known logical
implication and concludes that we know hardly anything.
Knowledge is a real factual relation, subjunctively speciﬁable, whose structure
admits our standing in this relation, tracking, to p without standing in it to some
q which we know p to entail. Any relation embodying some variation of belief
with the fact, with the truth (value), will exhibit this structural feature. The
skeptic is right that we don’t track some particular truths—the ones stating that
his skeptical possibilities SK don’t hold—but wrong that we don’t stand in the
real knowledge-relation of tracking to many other truths, including ones that
entail these ﬁrst mentioned truths we believe but don’t know.
The literature on skepticism contains writers who endorse these skeptical
arguments (or similar narrower ones), but confess their inability to maintain their
skeptical beliefs at times when they are not focusing explicitly on the reasoning
that led them to skeptical conclusions. The most notable example of this is
Hume:
I am ready to reject all belief and reasoning, and can look upon no opinion
even as more probable or likely than another . . . Most fortunately it hap-
pens that since reason is incapable of dispelling these clouds, nature herself
sufﬁces to that purpose, and cures me of this philosophical melancholy and
delirium, either by relaxing this bent of mind, or by some avocation, and
lively impression of my senses, which obliterate all these chimeras. I dine, I
play a game of backgammon, I converse, and am merry with my friends;
and when after three or four hours’ amusement, I would return to these
speculations, they appear so cold, and strained, and ridiculous, that I can-
not ﬁnd in my heart to enter into them any farther. (A Treatise of Human
Nature, Book I, Part IV, section VII)
The great subverter of Pyrrhonism or the excessive principles of skepticism
is action, and employment, and the occupations of common life. These
principles may ﬂourish and triumph in the schools; where it is, indeed,
difﬁcult, if not impossible, to refute them. But as soon as they leave the
“KNOWLEDGE”
487

shade, and by the presence of the real objects, which actuate our passions
and sentiments, are put in opposition to the more powerful principles of
our nature, they vanish like smoke, and leave the most determined skeptic
in the same condition as other mortals . . . And though a Pyrrhonian may
throw himself or others into a momentary amazement and confusion by his
profound reasonings; the ﬁrst and most trivial event in life will put to ﬂight
all his doubts and scruples, and leave him the same, in every point of action
and speculation, with the philosophers of every other sect, or with those
who never concerned themselves in any philosophical researches. When he
awakes from his dream, he will be the ﬁrst to join in the laugh against
himself, and to confess that all his objections are mere amusement. (An
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Section XII, Part II)
The theory of knowledge we have presented explains why skeptics of various
sorts have had such difﬁculties in sticking to their far-reaching skeptical conclu-
sions “outside the study,” or even inside it when they are not thinking speciﬁcally
about skeptical arguments and possibilities SK.
The skeptic’s arguments do show (but show only) that we don’t know the
skeptic’s possibilities SK do not hold; and he is right that we don’t track the fact
that SK does not hold. (If it were to hold, we would still think it didn’t.) However,
the skeptic’s arguments don’t show we do not know other facts (including facts
that entail not-SK) for we do track these other facts (and knowledge is not closed
under known logical entailment.) Since we do track these other facts—you, for
example, the fact that you are reading a book; I, the fact that I am writing on a
page—and the skeptic tracks such facts too, it is not surprising that when he
focuses on them, on his relationship to such facts, the skeptic ﬁnds it hard to
remember or maintain his view that he does not know those facts. Only by
shifting his attention back to his relationship to the (different) fact that not-SK,
which relationship is not tracking, can he revive his skeptical belief and make it
salient. However, this skeptical triumph is evanescent, it vanishes when his atten-
tion turns to other facts. Only by ﬁxating on the skeptical possibilities SK can he
maintain his skeptical virtue; otherwise, unsurprisingly, he is forced to confess to
sins of credulity.
Notes
1
If the possible-worlds formalism is used to represent counterfactuals and sub-
junctives, the relevant worlds are not those p worlds that are closest or most
similar to the actual world, unless the measure of closeness or similarity is:
what would obtain if p were true. Clearly, this cannot be used to explain when
subjunctives hold true, but it can be used to represent them. Compare utility
theory which represents preferences but does not explain them. Still, it is not a
trivial fact that preferences are so structured that they can be represented by a
real-valued function, unique up to a positive linear transformation, even though
the representation (by itself) does not explain these preferences. Similarly,
it would be of interest to know what properties hold of distance metrics
which serve to represent subjunctives, and to know how subjunctives must
be structured and interrelated so that they can be given a possible worlds
representation. (With the same one space serving for all subjunctives?)
ROBERT NOZICK
488

One further word on this point. Imagine a library where a cataloguer assigns
call numbers based on facts of sort F. Someone, perhaps the cataloguer, then
places each book on the shelf by looking at its call number, and inserting it
between the two books whose call numbers are most nearly adjacent to its own.
The call number is derivative from facts of type F, yet it plays some explanatory
role, not merely a representational one. “Why is this book located precisely
there? Because of its number.” Imagine next another library where the person
who places books on the shelves directly considers facts of type F, using them to
order the books and to interweave new ones. Someone else might notice that
this ordering can be represented by an assignment of numbers, numbers from
which other information can be derived as well, for example, the ﬁrst letter of the
last name of the principal author. But such an assigned number is no explan-
ation of why a book in this library is located between two others (or why its
author’s last name begins with a certain letter). I have assumed that utility
numbers stand to preferences, and closeness or similarity measures stand to
subjunctives, as the call numbers do to the books, and to the facts of type F they
exhibit, in the second library.
2
Descartes presumably would refute the tank hypothesis as he did the demon
hypothesis, through a proof of the existence of a good God who would not
allow anyone, demon or psychologist, permanently to deceive us. The philo-
sophical literature has concentrated on the question of whether Descartes
can prove this (without begging the question against the demon hypothesis).
The literature has not discussed whether even a successful proof of the
existence of a good God can help Descartes to conclude he is not almost
always mistaken. Might not a good God have his own reasons for deceiving
us; might he not deceive us temporarily—a period which includes all of our
life thus far (but not an afterlife)? To the question of why God did not create
us so that we never would make any errors, Descartes answers that the
motives of God are inscrutable to us. Do we know that such an inscrutable
God could not be motivated to allow another powerful “demon” to deceive
and dominate us?
Alternatively, could not such a good God be motivated to deceive itself tem-
porarily, even if not another? (Compare the various Indian doctrines designed to
explain our ignorance of our own true nature, that is, Atman–Brahman’s or, on
another theory, the purusha’s nature.) Whether from playfulness or whatever
motive, such a good God would temporarily deceive itself, perhaps even into
thinking it is a human being living in a material realm. Can we know, via
Descartes’ argument, that this is not our situation? And so forth.
These possibilities, and others similar, are so obvious that some other
explanation, I mean the single-minded desire to refute skepticism, must be given
for why they are not noticed and discussed.
Similarly, one could rescrutinize the cogito argument. Can “I think” only be
produced by something that exists? Suppose Shakespeare had written for
Hamlet the line, “I think, therefore I am”, or a ﬁction is written in which a char-
acter named Descartes says this, or suppose a character in a dream of mine
says this; does it follow that they exist? Can someone use the cogito argument
to prove he himself is not a ﬁctional or dream character? Descartes asked how
he could know he wasn’t dreaming; he also should have asked how he could
“KNOWLEDGE”
489

know he wasn’t dreamed. See further my fable “Fiction”, Ploughshares, Vol. 6,
no. 3, Oct. 1980.
3
I say almost everything, because there still could be some true beliefs such as “I
exist.” More limited skeptical possibilities present worlds doxically identical to
the actual world in which almost every belief of a certain sort is false, for
example, about the past, or about other people’s mental states. See the discus-
sion below in the section on narrower skepticisms.
4
Here again I assume a limited readership, and ignore possibilities such as those
described in James Blish, Cities in Flight.
QUESTIONS
1
According to Nozick, under what conditions does S know that p?
2
According to Nozick, do you know that SK is false? Why or why not?
3
What is the closure principle, and does Nozick agree with it?
ROBERT NOZICK
490

Keith DeRose, “Contextualism and
Knowledge Attributions”
I. Contextualism: initial exposition
Consider the following cases.
Bank Case A. My wife and I are driving home on a Friday afternoon. We
plan to stop at the bank on the way home to deposit our paychecks. But as
we drive past the bank, we notice that the lines inside are very long, as they
often are on Friday afternoons. Although we generally like to deposit our
paychecks as soon as possible, it is not especially important in this case that
they be deposited right away, so I suggest that we drive straight home and
deposit our paychecks on Saturday morning. My wife says, “Maybe the
bank won’t be open tomorrow. Lots of banks are closed on Saturdays.”
I reply, “No, I know it’ll be open. I was just there two weeks ago on
Saturday. It’s open until noon.”
Bank Case B. My wife and I drive past the bank on a Friday afternoon, as in
Case A, and notice the long lines. I again suggest that we deposit our
paychecks on Saturday morning, explaining that I was at the bank on Sat-
urday morning only two weeks ago and discovered that it was open until
noon. But in this case, we have just written a very large and very important
check. If our paychecks are not deposited into our checking account before
Monday morning, the important check we wrote will bounce, leaving us in
a very bad situation. And, of course, the bank is not open on Sunday. My
wife reminds me of these facts. She then says, “Banks do change their
hours. Do you know the bank will be open tomorrow?” Remaining as
conﬁdent as I was before that the bank will be open then, still, I reply,
“Well, no. I’d better go in and make sure.”
Assume that in both cases the bank will be open on Saturday and that there is
nothing unusual about either case that has not been included in my description of
it. It seems to me that (I) when I claim to know that the bank will be open on
Saturday in case A, I am saying something true. But it also seems that (2) I am
saying something true in Case B when I concede that I don’t know that the bank
Keith DeRose, “Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions,” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 52 (1992): 913–29.
491

will be open on Saturday. Yet I seem to be in no better position to know in Case A
than in Case B. It is quite natural to say that (3) If I know that the bank will be
open on Saturday in Case A, then I also know that it will be in Case B.
Is there any conﬂict here among (1), (2), and (3)? I hope not, because I want to
investigate and defend a view according to which all three of them are true. Of
course, it would be inconsistent to claim that (1) and (2) are true, and also hold
that (4) If what I say in Case A in claiming to know that the bank will be open on
Saturday is true, then what I say in Case B in conceding that I don’t know that the
bank will be open on Saturday is false. But there is a big difference between (3)
and (4), and this difference is crucial to the view I want to investigate and defend.
We may, following Peter Unger, call the view I want to investigate a “con-
textual”1 theory of knowledge attributions: it is a theory according to which the
truth conditions of sentences of the form “S knows that p” or “S does not know
that p” vary in certain ways according to the context in which the sentences are
uttered.2 The contextualist can deny (4) even while admitting that I am in no
better position to know in Case A than in Case B. The contexts of my utterances
in the two cases make it easier for a knowledge attribution to be true in Case A
than in Case B.
There are important contextual differences between Case A and Case B which
one might think are relevant. First, there is the importance of being right. In Case
B, a lot hinges on whether or not the bank will be open on Saturday, while in
Case A it is not nearly as important that I be right. One might think that
requirements for making a knowledge attribution true go up as the stakes go up.3
Second, there is the mentioning of a possibility. In Case B my wife raises the
possibility that the bank may have changed its hours in the last two weeks. One
might think that if this possibility has been mentioned, I cannot truly claim to
know that the bank will be open on Saturday on the ground that two weeks ago it
was open on Saturday unless I can rule out the possibility that the bank’s hours
have changed since then. On the other hand, perhaps I don’t have to be able to
rule out this possibility in order to truly say I know if, as in Case A, no such
possibility has not been suggested.4
Third, there is the consideration of a possibility. Since my wife raised the
possibility of the bank changing its hours in Case B, I have that possibility in
mind when I utter my sentence. Perhaps, since I am considering this possibility, I
must be able to rule it out in order to truthfully claim to know that the bank will
be open on Saturday. On the other hand, in Case A I am not considering the
possibility, so perhaps I do not have to be able to rule it out in order to truthfully
say that I know that the bank will be open on Saturday.5 (Of course, it must still
be true that the bank will be open on Saturday in order for me to know that it will
be.)
Again following Unger, we may call someone who denies that the types of
contextual factors we have just looked at affect the truth conditions of know-
ledge attributions an “invariantist.” According to the invariantist, such features
of an utterance of a knowledge attribution do not affect how good an epistemic
position the putative knower must be in for the attribution to be true. In consider-
ing the Bank Cases, for instance, the invariantist will assert (4), which seems very
plausible, and will therefore deny either (1) or (2). Typically, the invariantist will
deny (1). In fact, Unger uses the term “invariantism” to denote the position that
KEITH DEROSE
492

the standards for true knowledge attributions remain constant and very high—as
high as they can possibly be. This position I will call “sceptical invariantism,”
leaving the more general term “invariantism” to denote any position according to
which the truth conditions for knowledge attribution do not vary in the way the
contextualist claims they do, whether or not the standards are said to be very
high. I will then use “non-sceptical invariantism” to refer to a position according
to which the standards are held to be constant but relatively low.6 The sceptical
invariantist will deny (1). She may admit that I am warranted in asserting that I
know in Case A or that it is useful for me to say that I know, but will insist that
what I say in claiming that I know is, strictly speaking, false. On the other hand,
similar maneuvers can be used by the non-sceptical invariantist to deny (2). A
non-sceptical invariantist may admit that I should not say that I know in Case B,
because my wife mistakenly thinks that I must be able to rule out the possibility
that the bank has changed its hours in order to know that the bank will be open
on Saturday, and saying that I know will lead her to believe that I can rule out
that possibility. Still, my wife is mistaken about this requirement, and if I were to
say that I knew, I would be saying something that is, though misleading, true.
Thus, it is useful for me to assert that I don’t know. But for all its usefulness, my
assertion is, strictly speaking, false.
Contextualists, of course, can disagree about what types of features of the
context of utterance really do affect the truth conditions of knowledge attribu-
tions and to what extent they do so. I will not here enter into this thorny issue,
although I have a preference for the more “objective” features—like the import-
ance of being right and what has been said in the conversation—and tend to
discount as relevant to truth conditions such “subjective” features as what possi-
bilities the speaker is considering.7 In this paper I address some general issues that
confront any contextualist. In Part II, I distinguish between contextualism and a
very prominent theory of knowledge which has been called the “relevant alterna-
tives” theory (RA), and in Part III, I respond to an important objection to which
any form of contextualism seems vulnerable.
By thus isolating and defending contextualism, I will do much to clear the way
for contextualist resolutions to sceptical arguments. Contextual theories of
knowledge attributions have almost invariably been developed with an eye
towards providing some kind of answer to philosophical scepticism. For some
sceptical arguments threaten to show, not only that we fail to meet very high
requirements for knowledge of interest to philosophers seeking absolute cer-
tainty, but also that we don’t meet the truth conditions of ordinary, out-on-the-
street claims to know. They thus threaten to establish the startling result that we
never, or almost never, truly ascribe knowledge to ourselves or to other human
beings. According to contextual analysis, when the sceptic presents her argu-
ments, she manipulates various conversational mechanisms that raise the seman-
tic standards for knowledge, and thereby creates a context in which she can truly
say that we know nothing or very little. But the fact that the sceptic can thus
install very high standards which we don’t live up to has no tendency to show
that we don’t satisfy the more relaxed standards that are in place in ordinary
conversations. Thus, it is hoped, our ordinary claims to know will be safeguarded
from the apparently powerful attacks of the sceptic, while, at the same time, the
persuasiveness of the sceptical arguments is explained.8
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
493

Many ﬁnd such contextualist resolutions of sceptical arguments very attract-
ive, especially since their main competition is the sceptical invariantist resolutions
according to which the persuasiveness of various sceptical arguments is explained
in a way as alarming as it is simple: They seem persuasive because they are indeed
sound and successfully establish the startling conclusion that we never or almost
never truly ascribe knowledge.9 But many, while ﬁnding the contextualist resolu-
tions a preferable alternative to an unacceptably radical form of scepticism, at the
same time feel an initial resistance, closely related to the appeal of (4), to the
thought that contextual factors of the types I’ve mentioned can really affect
whether or not a subject knows.10 While many are willing to accept this thought
in order to avoid the sceptical conclusion, there remains a feeling that the con-
textualist is asking them to swallow pretty hard—although perhaps not quite so
hard as the sceptical invariantist would have them swallow. As contextualists
have rushed to apply their theories to the problem of scepticism, this initial
resistance has not yet been adequately addressed. I will address this resistance, as
well as some explicit objections to contextualism that have been raised in the
philosophical literature and which are based on the source of this resistance, in
Part III below. But ﬁrst, in Part II, we must carefully distinguish contextualism
from RA.
II. Contextualism and ‘relevant alternatives”
The most popular form of contextualism, I think it is fair to say, is what has been
called the “relevant alternatives” view of knowledge (RA). But we must be care-
ful here. As we shall see, it is a bit tricky to say just in what sense RA is a
contextualist view. According to RA, a claim to know that p is made within a
certain framework of relevant alternatives which are incompatible with p. To
know that p is to be able to distinguish p from these relevant alternatives, to be
able to rule out these relevant alternatives to p. But not every contrary of or
alternative to p is a relevant alternative.11 In an ordinary case of, say, claiming to
know that some animals in a zoo are zebras, to borrow an example introduced by
Fred Dretske,12 the alternative that they are cleverly painted mules is not a rele-
vant alternative, and one need not be able to rule it out in order truly to claim to
know that the animals are zebras. But in an extraordinary case, that alternative
might be relevant. How can it become relevant?
In one of the standard presentations of RA, Alvin Goldman (1976) presents
various factors which can affect the range of relevant alternatives. These factors
may be divided into two groups. First, there are features of the putative knower’s
situation; these I will call “subject factors.”13 A subject in an ordinary situation
can be truly said to know that what he sees up ahead is a barn even if he cannot
rule out the possibility that it is just a barn facade. But, Goldman points out, if
there are a lot of such facades in the putative knower’s vicinity, then the possibil-
ity that what the person is seeing is just a facade is a relevant alternative, and the
person does not know that he is seeing a barn, even if what he sees happens to be
an actual barn (pp. 772–73).
Second, there are features of the speaker’s situation, which I will call “attribu-
tor factors.” Goldman writes, “It is not only the circumstances of the putative
knower’s situation, however, that inﬂuence the choice of alternatives. The
KEITH DEROSE
494

speaker’s own linguistic and psychological context are also important.” Goldman
suggests that “if the speaker is in a class where Descartes’s evil demon has just
been discussed,” then certain alternatives may be relevant which ordinarily are
not (p. 776).
Insofar as a relevant alternatives theorist allows attributor factors to inﬂuence
which alternatives are relevant, he is a contextualist. An invariantist can be a
relevant alternatives theorist if he allows only subject factors to inﬂuence which
alternatives are relevant.14 Consider two situations in which Henry has a good,
clear look at what he takes to be—and what, in fact, is—a barn. In Case C there
are no barn facades around, but in Case D the area Henry ﬁnds himself in is
(unbeknownst to him) teeming with barn facades, although Henry is luckily
looking at the only actual barn in the area. This does not seem to be a pair of
cases in which Henry is in equally good positions to know that what he is seeing
is a barn; the conditional, If Henry knows in Case C, then he knows in Case D
does not seem to be true, so the invariantist can agree that a sentence attributing
knowledge to Henry in Case C can be true, while one attributing knowledge to
him in Case D is false. And he can use the idea of “relevant alternatives” to
explain the difference. Thus, although most versions of RA allow attributor fac-
tors to be relevant and are therefore contextualist views, an RA theorist need not
be a contextualist.
Of course, in ﬁrst-person present tense knowledge claims, the attributor of
knowledge and the putative subject of knowledge are in the same situation (they
are the same person at the same time). If Henry says, “I know that that’s a barn,”
there is no difference between the speaker and the putative knower. In this situ-
ation the invariantist RA theorist will allow only factors that attach to Henry qua
putative knower (e.g. the presence or lack of facades in his vicinity) to matter in
evaluating his claim for truth, while the contextualist will also allow factors that
attach to Henry qua attributor of knowledge (such as whether or not the issue of
facades has been raised in the conversation) to matter.15
Although Goldman draws the distinction between what I am calling subject
factors and attributor factors, he does not explain the importance of this distinc-
tion. I am stressing it because it is crucial to some of the important claims RA
theorists have wanted to make about the meanings of knowledge attributions.16
Gail Stine, for example, writes:
In Dretske’s zoo example, the animal’s being a mule painted to look like a
zebra is not a relevant alternative. So what one means when one says that
John knows the animal is a zebra, is that he knows it is a zebra, as opposed
to a gazelle, an antelope, or other animals one would normally expect to
ﬁnd in a zoo. If, however, being a mule painted to look like a zebra became
a relevant alternative, then one would literally mean something different in
saying that John knows that the animal is a zebra from what one meant
originally and that something else may well be false. (Stine (1976), p. 255)
But here we must be very careful. Much depends on how the animal’s being a
painted mule has become a relevant alternative. Suppose that it has become a
relevant alternative due to a change in subject factors: There has been a zebra
shortage and many zoos (even reputable zoos) have been using painted mules in
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
495

an attempt to fool the zoo-going public. This could come about without the
speaker’s knowing it. Would one then mean something different by saying that
John knows that the animal is a zebra? I think not.
The meaning of “meaning,” of course, is difﬁcult to get hold of. But there
seems to be a fairly straightforward and important sense in which one does mean
something different if the range of relevant alternatives has been changed by
attributor factors but does not mean something different if the range of relevant
alternatives has been changed only by subject factors. Stewart Cohen, whose
version of RA clearly is a contextualist one, writes that he
construes “knowledge” as an indexical. As such, one speaker may attribute
knowledge to a subject while another speaker denies knowledge to that
same subject, without contradiction. (Cohen (1988), p. 97)
This lack of contradiction is the key to the sense in which the knowledge attribu-
tor and the knowledge denier mean something different by “know.” It is similar
to the sense in which two people who think they are in the same room but are in
fact in different rooms and are talking to each over an intercom mean something
different by “this room” when one claims, “Frank is not in this room” and the
other insists, “Frank is in this room—I can see him!” There is an important sense
in which both do mean the same thing by “this room,” in which they are using
the phrase in the same sense. But there is also an important sense in which they do
not mean the same thing by the phrase; this is the sense by which we can explain
the lack of contradiction between what the two people are saying. To use David
Kaplan’s terminology, the phrase is being used with the same character, but with
different content.17 Similarly, in Bank Case B from Part I of this paper, when, in
the face of my wife’s doubt, I admit that I don’t know that the bank will be open
on Saturday, I don’t contradict an earlier claim to know that I might have made
before the doubt was raised and before the issue was so important because, in an
important sense, I don’t mean the same thing by “know” as I meant in the earlier
claim: While “know” is being used with the same character, it is not being used
with the same content. Or so the contextualist will claim.
But if the range of relevant alternatives is changed by subject factors, the
meaning of “know” is not in the same way changed. If very many nearby banks
have discontinued their Saturday hours in the last two weeks, then it seems that
my original claim to know may well have been false, and if I admit that I did not
know after this surprising fact about local banks is called to my attention, I will
be taking back and contradicting my earlier claim to have known.
Recall the two cases in which Henry has a good, clear look at what he takes to
be a barn. (In Case C, there are no barn facades around, but in Case D, the ﬁelds
are ﬁlled with barn facades, but Henry is luckily looking at the only actual barn
in the area.) In each case, insert two people in the back seat of the car Henry is
driving, and have the ﬁrst say to the second, “Henry knows that that is a barn.” It
seems that, in the sense under discussion, what the ﬁrst person means by
“knows” in each of the two cases is the same. In Case C what she is saying is true,
while in Case D it is false. The presence of the barn facades has changed the truth
value, but not the truth conditions or the meaning (content), of the ﬁrst person’s
knowledge attribution.
KEITH DEROSE
496

So attributor factors affect the truth values of knowledge attributions in a
different way than do subject factors: attributor factors working in such a way
that they affect the content of the attribution, but subject factors working in a
different way that does not affect its content. These different ways can be
explained as follows. Attributor factors set a certain standard the putative subject
of knowledge must live up to in order to make the knowledge attribution true:
They affect how good an epistemic position the putative knower must be in to
count as knowing. They thereby affect the truth conditions and the content or
meaning of the attribution. Subject factors, on the other hand, determine whether
or not the putative subject lives up to the standards that have been set, and
thereby can affect the truth value of the attribution without affecting its content:
They affect how good an epistemic position the putative knower actually is in.18
To make use of the character/content distinction, the “character” of “S knows
that p” is, roughly, that S has a true belief that p and is in a good enough
epistemic position with respect to p; this remains constant from attribution to
attribution. But how good is good enough? This is what varies with context.
What the context ﬁxes in determining the “content” of a knowledge attribution is
how good an epistemic position S must be in to count as knowing that p. The
mentioning of alternatives like painted mules, or barn facades, or changes in
banking hours, when there is no special reason for thinking such possibilities
likely, can be seen as raising the strength and changing the content of “know”
because the ability to rule out such alternatives would only be relevant if one
were after a strong form of knowledge (if one were requiring the putative knower
to be in a very good position in order to count as knowing).
Subject factors, then, are best construed, not as affecting the truth conditions
of knowledge attributions, but rather as affecting whether those truth conditions
are satisﬁed. This fact severely limits RA’s prospects for explaining variations in
the content of knowledge attributions. RA, for all I’ve said, may be a helpful tool
for determining or explaining why certain attributions of knowledge have the
truth values they have.19 Note, however, that for RA to be successful in this
capacity, it must allow subject factors to affect the range of relevant alternatives,
for, as Goldman’s barn cases (cases C and D) clearly show and as is evident in any
case, subject factors can affect these truth values.
But RA theorists have wanted to make claims about the meaning of knowledge
attributions20. Many of them have thought that the meaning of knowledge
attributions changes from case to case depending upon various factors, and they
have thought that this change in meaning amounts to a change in the range of
alternatives that are relevant.21 But we can now see that the content of a given
knowledge attribution cannot be speciﬁed by citing what the range of relevant
alternatives is, because that range is a function of subject factors (which do not
affect the content of the attribution) as well as attributor factors (which do).
There can be a drastic change in the range of relevant alternatives from one
attribution to another without there being any change in meaning between the
two attributions, then, because the change in the range of relevant alternatives
can, and often will, be the result of differences in subject factors, which will not
have any affect on the meaning of the attribution.22
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
497

III. The objection to contextualism
Having distinguished contextualism from RA, I will now seek to defend con-
textualism from a certain type of important objection. The obvious attraction of
contextualism, besides (and closely related to) the resolution of sceptical argu-
ments it purportedly provides, is that it seems to have the result that very many of
the knowledge attributions and denials uttered by speakers of English are true—
more than any form of invariantism can allow for, and certainly more than scep-
tical invariantism can allow for. Thus, recalling the Bank Cases, contextualism
allows us to assert both (1) and (2) and many of us will ﬁnd both (1) and (2)
compelling. Unfortunately, contextualism seems to be vulnerable to a certain
type of powerful objection which is closely related to the appeal of (4). Suppose,
to recall an example we’ve already considered, that two people see some zebras in
a zoo. Palle Yourgrau constructs the following conversation, and claims that
“something is amiss” in it:
A: Is that a zebra?
B: Yes, it is a zebra.
A: But can you rule out its being merely a cleverly painted mule?
B: No, I can’t.
A: So, you admit you didn’t know it was a zebra?
B: No, I did know then that it was a zebra. But after your question, I no
longer know.23
This absurd dialogue is aimed at contextualists who think that the mentioning of
a possibility incompatible with what one claims to know is enough to require that
one rule the possibility out before one can truly claim to know. But this type of
attack can work against other contextualists, also. Dialogues much like the above
dialogue but with the following last lines seem equally absurd:
B′: No, I did know then that it was a zebra. But now that it has become so
important that it be a zebra, I no longer know.
B″: No, I did know then that it was a zebra. But now that the possibility of
its being a painted mule has occurred to me, I no longer know.
The general point of the objection is that whether we know something or not
cannot depend on, to use Peter Unger’s words, “the contextual interests of
those happening to use the terms on a particular occasion” (Unger (1984),
p. 37).
How shall the contextualist respond? The objection as I have put it forward,
though it explains much of the initial resistance many feel toward contextualism,
is based on a mistake. The contextualist believes that certain aspects of the
context of an attribution or denial of knowledge attribution affect its content.
Knowledge claims, then, can be compared to other sentences containing other
context-sensitive words, like “here.” One hour ago, I was in my ofﬁce. Suppose I
truly said, “I am here.” Now I am in the word processing room. How can I truly
say where I was an hour ago? I cannot truly say, “I was here,” because I wasn’t
here; I was there. The meaning of “here” is ﬁxed by the relevant contextual
KEITH DEROSE
498

factors (in this case, my location) of the utterance, not by my location at the time
being talked about.
Similarly, the contextualist may admit that the mentioning of the painted
mules possibility affects the conditions under which one can truthfully say that
one knows an animal to be a zebra: one now must be able to rule out that
possibility, perhaps. But the contextualist need not, and should not, countenance
the above dialogue. If in the context of the conversation the possibility of painted
mules has been mentioned, and if the mere mention of this possibility has an
effect on the conditions under which someone can be truly said to “know,” then
any use of “know” (or its past tense) is so affected, even a use in which one
describes one’s past condition. B cannot truly say, “I did know then that it was a
zebra”; that would be like my saying, “I was here.” B can say, “My previous
knowledge claim was true,” just as I can say, “My previous location claim was
true.” Or so I believe. But saying these things would have a point only if one were
interested in the truth-value of the earlier claim, rather than in the question of
whether in the present contextually determined sense one knew and knows, or
didn’t and doesn’t.
Yourgrau writes of the zebra case, “Typically, when someone poses a question
regarding whether we really know that P obtains rather than some alternative to
P, if we cannot satisfactorily answer the question, we conclude that our earlier
claim to know was faulty” (p. 183). But do we? We do not stubbornly repeat
ourselves, to be sure: “Still, I know that it is a zebra!” We might even say, “I don’t
know” or “I didn’t know.” All of this the contextualist can handle. But do we (or
should we) admit that our earlier claim was false? I am on the witness stand being
questioned.
Lawyer: Were there any zebras in the zoo on April 23?
Me:
Yes.
L:
Do you know that?
M:
Yes.
L:
How do you know?
M:
I saw some there.
L:
So, you knew that they were zebras?
M:
Yes.
L:
Could you rule out the possibility that they were only cleverly
painted mules?
M:
No, I suppose not.
L:
So, did you really know that they were zebras?
M:
Is there any reason to think that they were painted mules, of all
things?
L:
Just answer the question!
Well, how should I answer the question? If there is no special reason to think they
were painted mules then I certainly wouldn’t want to admit that I didn’t know
they were zebras, but maybe I’m just being stubborn. Suppose I do admit it:
M:
I guess I didn’t know that they were zebras.
L:
Aha! The witness has contradicted his earlier claim. First he says
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
499

that he knew; now he says he didn’t. Now which is it, Mr.
DeRose?
Surely something is amiss in this dialogue; my lawyer should object. I haven’t
contradicted my earlier claim, as much as it looks as if I have. It would be as if the
following had occurred. While standing in a bright yellow room, I said, “This
room is yellow.” The lawyer then dragged me by the ear into a room in which all
was grey and got me to say, “This room is grey,” and now he is jumping all over
me: “First he says. ‘This room is yellow,’ then he says, ‘This room is grey.’ Which
is it?” The contextualist maintains that something very much like this has hap-
pened in my original dialogue with the lawyer. Of course, there is room for the
invariantist to deny this contextualist claim. But it is far from clear that in cases
like the one Yourgrau brings to our attention, we should admit that our earlier
claim was false or that our later claim contradicts it.
So, the objection that whether we know something or not does not depend on
contextual factors of the type we have been considering is based on a mistake.
But Unger does not make this mistake when he raises an objection similar to the
one we have been considering.24 He writes of “our belief that the semantics of
these expressions [“know” is one of the expressions being considered] is
appropriately independent, that the conditions do not depend on the contextual
interests of these happening to use the terms on a particular occasion” (Unger
(1984), p. 37). Insofar as we do have this belief, that the conditions for truly
saying that someone knows do not depend on the sorts of contextual factors we
have been discussing, then contextualism goes against at least one of our beliefs.
But it seems that much of the appeal of this belief derives from the plausibility of
the thesis (with which the contextualist can agree) that whether we know some-
thing or not does not depend on such factors. The answer to the question, “Does
she know?”, in whatever context it is asked, including a philosophy paper, is
determined by facts independent of contextual factors (or what I have been call-
ing attributor factors). These contextual or attributor factors affect the content of
the question, but once the question is asked with a speciﬁc content, its answer is
determined by subject factors, which are precisely the kinds of factors which can
very plausibly be thought to affect whether or not the subject knows. Going back
to our opening examples, the contextualist can afﬁrm (3) in any context in which
it is uttered: If I know in Case A, then I know in Case B. Of course, the con-
textualist must deny (4), and (4) sounds very plausible, but much of the appeal of
(4) comes from the plausibility of (3). And since we must give up either (1), (2), or
(4), those who, like me, ﬁnd (1) and (2) very plausible will be well-motivated to
give up (4), especially since (3) can still be afﬁrmed.
In general, then, when it looks as if the contextualist has to say something
strongly counter-intuitive, what he must say turns out to be, on the contrary,
something fairly theoretical concerning the truth conditions of certain sentences.
Do we really have strong intuitions about such things? At any rate, the con-
textualist can go along with the simple facts that we all recognize: that if I know
in Case A, then I know in Case B, and that whether we know something or not
does not typically depend on our current interests or on other such contextual
factors.25
KEITH DEROSE
500

Notes
1 I take the terms “contextualism” and “invariantism” from Unger (1984).
2 The importance of this theory will not be conﬁned to knowledge attributions. For
instance, in DeRose (1991) I argue that S’s assertion, “It is possible that P,”
where the embedded P is in the indicative mood, is true if and only if (1) no
member of the relevant community knows that P is false and (2) there is no
relevant way by which members of the relevant community can come to know
that P is false. As I there argue, there is a great deal of ﬂexibility in the matter of
who is and is not to be counted as a member of the relevant community and what
is and is not to be counted as a relevant way of coming to know: That these
matters are determined by aspects of the contexts in which the statement is
made. If, as I am here defending, there is a contextually-determined variation on
how good an epistemic position one must be in to count as knowing, then—
since epistemic possibilities have entirely to do with what is and is not known
and what can and cannot come to be known in certain ways—this variation will
affect the content of epistemic modal statements as well: As the standards for
knowledge go up, and it becomes harder and harder for a knowledge attribution
to be true, it will become easier and easier for an assertion of epistemic possibil-
ity to be true.
3 That the importance of being right is an important contextual factor is suggested
in Austin (1961), p. 76, fn. 1. Dretske denies the importance of this factor in
(1981a), pp. 375–76.
4 David Lewis (1979) stresses this contextual factor, presenting an interesting
account of how the mentioning of sceptical possibilities can affect the range of
relevant alternatives by means of what he calls a “rule of accommodation.” In
Chapter 3 (see especially section I) of DeRose (1990). I argue that Lewis’s
account is not complete, and I locate an independent mechanism of standard
changing which, I now believe, is at least as important (and probably consider-
ably more important) to the application of contextualism to the problem of scep-
ticism as is the mechanism Lewis has located.
5 Alvin I. Goldman (1976) stresses the importance of what possibilities the
speaker is considering.
6 While Unger does not even consider the view that the standards for true know-
ledge attributions don’t change but are held constant at a fairly low level, non-
sceptical invariantism is defended (at least conditionally) by Robert Hambourger
(1987). Hambourger argues that if the standards are constant (Hambourger
does not believe that this antecedent is true), then they must be fairly low (pp.
256–57). In the terminology I have introduced, Hambourger is arguing that if
some form of invariantism is correct, it must be a form of non-sceptical
invariantism.
7 My main reason for discounting as relevant to truth conditions the matter of what
the speaker is thinking, at least with respect to spoken interactions between
people, is that I don’t think that one should be able, merely by a private act of
one’s own thought to drastically “strengthen” the content of “know” in such a
way that one can truly say to someone who is quite certain that he is wearing
pants, “You don’t know you’re wearing pants,” without there having been any-
thing in the conversation to indicate that the strength of “know” has been raised.
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
501

There might yet be a fairly tight connection between what raises the truth condi-
tion standards and what speakers tend to think or perhaps what they should
think of the standards as being. Perhaps the truth condition standards are what
a typical speaker would take them to be or should take them to be, given what
has gone on in the conversation. But it seems unfair to one’s interlocutor for the
truth condition standards of a public, spoken knowledge attribution to be
changed by an idiosyncratic, private decision. It is far more plausible to suppose
that when one is thinking to one’s self about what is or is not “known,” the
content of “know” is directly tied to the strength the thinker intends.
8 While, as I’ve said, contextualist theories (including contextualist versions of RA)
are almost invariably developed with an eye towards philosophical scepticism,
the most thoroughly worked out contextualist attempts to resolve the problem of
scepticism that I am aware of are to be found in Unger (1986), Cohen (1988)
(see also Cohen (1987)), and DeRose (1990), especially Chapter 3. Fred
Dretske has also applied this type of theory of knowledge to the problem of
scepticism in several places. See Dretske (1970), (1971), (1981a), and
(1981b).
9 See Unger (1975).
10 A typical objection one meets in presenting contextualism, as I know from per-
sonal experience, is: “How can our context have anything to do with whether or
not Henry knows?”, where Henry is a character in an example and so is not
present in the room.
11 See Goldman (1976), p. 772 Stine (1976), p. 249; and Dretske (1970), p.
1022.
12 See Dretske (1970), pp. 1015–1016.
13 Please note that by “subject factors” I do not mean subjective (as opposed to
objective) factors. I rather mean factors having to do with the putative subject of
knowledge and her surroundings (as opposed to the attributor of knowledge).
14 Thus, what Goldman calls the “ﬁrst view” of RA, according to which “a complete
speciﬁcation” of the putative knower’s situation determines “a unique set of
relevant alternatives” (pp. 775–76), is an invariantist version of RA. Goldman
does not endorse this view; he says he is “attracted by the second view” (p.
777), which clearly is a contextualist version of RA.
15 Some factors, I believe, will both affect how good an epistemic position the
speaker/putative knower is in and (at least according to the contextualist) how
good a position he must be in to make his knowledge claims true. Thus, they will
be both subject and attributor factors.
16 I further discuss the importance of this distinction between subject factors and
attributor factors and the resulting contextualist view according to which content
varies in response to attributor factors in Chapter 1 of DeRose (1990). In par-
ticular, I there discuss, in addition to the issues treated in the present paper, the
advantages such a view according to which content varies over a range has over
theories like that put forward in Malcolm (1952) according to which there are two
distinct senses of “know”, a strong sense and a weak one.
17 See Kaplan (1989), esp. pp. 500–507.
18 Unger makes a similar division in (1986), where he distinguishes between the
“proﬁle of the context,” which corresponds roughly to how good a position the
putative knower must be in to count as knowing, and the “proﬁle of the facts,”
KEITH DEROSE
502

which corresponds roughly to how good a position the putative knower actually is
in (see esp. pp. 139–40). Unger does not there discuss RA, and so does not use
the distinction to distinguish contextualism from RA. He does, however, intro-
duce an important complication which I have ignored in this paper, since it has
little effect on the points I’m making here. Unger points out that there are many
different aspects of knowledge and that in different contexts, we may have dif-
ferent demands regarding various of these aspects. Thus, for example, in one
context, we may demand a very high degree of conﬁdence on the subject’s part
before we will count him as knowing while demanding relatively little in the way of
his belief being non-accidentally true. In a different context, on the other hand,
we may have very stringent standards for non-accidentality but relatively lax
standards for subject conﬁdence. As Unger points out, then, things are not quite
as simple as I make them out to be: Our standards are not just a matter of how
good an epistemic position the subject must be in, but rather of how good in
which respects. Stewart Cohen also suggests a related division, his more
closely aligned with the spirit of RA. See note 22 below.
19 Thus what I take to be RA’s basic idea—that to know that P, one must be able to
rule out all of the relevant alternatives to P—may be sound.
20 RA’s basic idea (see note 19, above) is not about contextual variations in mean-
ings. In deed, as I’ve pointed out, an RA theorist can be an invariantist. It is, then,
in going beyond this basic idea that RA theorists have, by my lights, gone wrong
by tying the meaning of a given attribution too closely to what the range of
relevant alternatives is.
21 In addition to the Stine passage we have looked at, see, for example, Goldman
(1976), pp. 775–77 (esp. p. 777), where Goldman seems to think that what
proposition is expressed by a given knowledge attribution is speciﬁed by what the
range of relevant alternatives is. Something similar seems to be suggested in
Lewis (1979), esp. pp. 354–55. Lewis seems to think of the “conversational
score” of a given context, with respect to knowledge attributions and epistemic
modal statements, to be something that can be speciﬁed by giving the range of
possibilities that are relevant in that context.
22 A different view which escapes this problem but is still well within the spirit of RA
is that the character of “S knows that p” is that S has a true belief that p and can
rule out all alternatives to p that are sufﬁciently probable. The context of utter-
ance can then be seen as ﬁxing the content by determining just how probable an
alternative must be to count as being sufﬁciently probable. Something like this
alternative view is suggested by Cohen (1988), according to whom context
determines “how probable an alternative must be in order to be relevant” (p.
96). (This view is only suggested by Cohen because he never says that this
probability level for alternative relevance is all that context ﬁxes in determining
the content of an attribution.) Expanding this idea, we might then take aspects of
the putative knower’s situation to affect how probable a given alternative is.
Instead of the meaning being speciﬁed by the range of alternatives that are
relevant, this view, more plausibly, has it speciﬁed by the standards (in terms of
probability) alternatives must meet to count as relevant. This still seems more
precise than my admittedly vague talk of how good an epistemic position one
must be in to count as knowing. I fear, however, that this precisiﬁcation will not
work. Among other reasons for doubting that the notion of probability can do all
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
503

the work assigned to it here is this: The complication Unger raises about the
many different aspects of knowledge (see note 18 above) shows that no single
measure like the probability an alternative must have to be relevant can capture
all that context does in ﬁxing the content of a knowledge attribution. This prob-
ability standard of alternative relevance can be, at best, one among several
aspects of knowledge the standards for which are ﬁxed by context.
23 Yourgrau (1983), p. 183. The absurdity of such a conversation, along with the
worry that it causes problems for theories of knowledge attributions like the one
I am investigating, was originally suggested to me by Rogers Albritton, who has
been making such suggestions since well before Yourgrau’s article came out.
24 Actually, Unger does make this mistake at one point, not about knowledge but
about ﬂatness. Throughout his epistemological writings, Unger compares know-
ledge attributions with claims about the ﬂatness of objects. In (1984). Unger
describes an invariantist semantics for “ﬂat” according to which an object must
be as ﬂat as possible in order for a sentence like “That is ﬂat” to be true of it, and
a contextualist semantics for “ﬂat” according to which how ﬂat something must
be in order for a sentence like. “That is ﬂat” to be true of it varies with context,
and he claims that there is no determinate fact as to which semantics is correct.
In attacking the contextualist semantics for “ﬂat,” Unger writes: “How can the
matter of whether a given surface is ﬂat, in contradistinction to, say, whether it is
suitable for our croquet game, depend upon the interests in that surface taken
by those who happen to converse about it? This appears to go against our better
judgement” ((1984), p. 39). But the contextualist need not and should not claim
that “the matter of whether or not a given surface is ﬂat” depends “upon the
interests in that surface taken by those who happen to converse about it,”
although the contextualist will say that the truth conditions for the sentence
“That is ﬂat” do depend upon such contextual interests. I believe that the above
passage is just a slip on Unger’s part; he is usually more careful in making his
attack on contextualism. But it is revealing that Unger makes this slip: It shows
how easy it is to confuse the claim (a) that whether or not something is ﬂat or is
known does not depend on contextual interests with the claim (b) that the truth
conditions for a sentence about ﬂatness or about knowledge do not depend on
contextual interests, which does not follow from (a).
25 I am indebted to Robert M. Adams, Rogers Albritton, Peter Unger, and an
anonymous referee for Philosophy and Phenomenological Research for com-
ments on previous drafts of this paper.
References
Austin, J. L., (1961) “Other Minds,” in J. L. Austin, Philosophical Papers (Oxford
University Press): 44–84.
Cohen, Stewart, (1987) “Knowledge, Context, and Social Standards,” Synthese 73:
3–26.
——, (1988) “How to be a Fallibilist,” Philosophical Perspectives 2: 91–123.
DeRose, Keith, (1990) “Knowledge, Epistemic Possibility, and Scepticism,” UCLA
doctoral dissertation.
——, (1991) “Epistemic Possibilities,” The Philosophical Review 100: 581–605.
Dretske, Fred, (1970) “Epistemic Operators,” Journal of Philosophy 67: 1007–1023.
KEITH DEROSE
504

——, (1971) “Conclusive Reasons,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49: 1–22.
——, (1981a) “The Pragmatic Dimension of Knowledge,” Philosophical Studies 40:
363–78.
——, (1981b) Knowledge and the Flow of Information (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press/Bradford Books).
Goldman, Alvin I., (1976) “Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledgé,” Journal of
Philosophy 73: 771–91.
Hambourger, Robert, (1987) “Justiﬁed Assertion and the Relativity of Knowledge,”
Philosophical Studies 51: 241–69.
Kaplan, David, (1989) “Demonstratives,” in J. Almog, J. Perry, H. Wettstein, ed.,
Themes from Kaplan (Oxford University Press): 481–563.
Lewis, David, (1979) “Scorekeeping in a Language Game,” Journal of Philosophical
Logic 8: 339–59.
Malcolm, Norman, (1952) “Knowledge and Belief,” Mind 51: 178–89.
Stine, Gail C., (1976) “Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and Deductive Closure,”
Philosophical Studies 29: 249–61.
Unger, Peter, (1975) Ignorance: A Case for Scepticism (Oxford University Press).
——, (1984) Philosophical Relativity (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press).
——, (1986) “The Cone Model of Knowledge,” Philosophical Topics 14: 125–78.
Yourgrau, Palle, (1983) “Knowledge and Relevant Alternatives,” Synthese 55:
175–90.
QUESTIONS
1
Of the following statements, which ones does DeRose agree with?
(1) In Bank Case A, the subject is correct in saying he knows the bank will be
open.
(2) In Bank Case B, the subject is correct in saying he doesn’t know the bank
will be open.
(3) If the subject knows the bank will be open in Case A, then he also knows in
Case B.
(4) If what the subject says in Case A is true, then what the subject says in Case
B is false.
2
What is the difference between “contextualism” and “invariantism”?
3
What is the difference between “subject factors” and “attributor factors”? Which
sort of factor does contextualism say is relevant to the truth of knowledge
attributions?
FURTHER READING ON THE ANALYSIS OF “KNOWLEDGE”
Annis, David, “A Contextualist Theory of Epistemic Justiﬁcation,” American Philo-
sophical Quarterly 15 (1978): 213–19.
Ayer, A.J., The Problem of Knowledge (London: Penguin Books, 1956).
“CONTEXTUALISM AND KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS”
505

Chisholm, Roderick, Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1989).
Ginet, Carl, “Contra Reliabilism,” The Monist 68 (1985): 175–87.
Goldman, Alvin, “What is Justiﬁed Belief?” pp. 1–23 in Justiﬁcation and Knowledge,
ed. George Pappas (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979).
Klein, Peter, “A Proposed Deﬁnition of Propositional Knowledge,” Journal of Phil-
osophy 68 (1971): 471–82.
Klein, Peter, “Misleading Evidence and the Restoration of Justiﬁcation,” Philosophical
Studies 37 (1980): 81–9.
Lehrer, Keith, Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974).
Lewis, David, “Elusive Knowledge,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (1996):
549–67.
Lucey, Kenneth (ed.) On Knowing and the Known (Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 1996).
Quine, W.V., “Epistemology Naturalized,” in Ontological Relativity and Other Essays
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1969).
Roth, Michael and Leon Galis (eds) Knowing: Essays on the Analysis of Knowledge
(New York: Random House, 1970).
Russell, Bertrand, “Fact, Belief, Truth, and Knowledge,” pp. 142–58 in Human Know-
ledge: Its Scope and Limits (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1948).
Shope, Robert K., The Analysis of Knowing: A Decade of Research (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1983).
KEITH DEROSE
506

9
SKEPTICISM
Most of the time, epistemologists take it for granted that people have a lot of
knowledge about the world around them. I know that the Earth orbits the sun, that
Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, that my cat likes milk, and so on. Philosophical
skeptics, however, argue that we don’t really know many of the things we normally
think we know. The most extreme skeptics say that nobody knows anything at all. A
slightly less extreme form of skepticism, external world skepticism, holds that
nobody knows anything about the external world (the world outside of one’s own
mind). According to this view, then, I don’t really know any of the things I just said I
did.
Often students fail to see the value in studying skepticism, partly because it
seems like such an outlandish and radical thesis. Indeed, very few epistemologists
endorse skepticism. Yet the discussion of philosophical skepticism occupies a highly
prominent place in the epistemological literature. Why is this? Brieﬂy, the reason is
because of the theoretical interest of the arguments for philosophical skepticism.
Philosophical skeptics frequently appear able to start from plausible, commonly held
assumptions about the nature of knowledge and deduce from these assumptions
that we really know little or nothing. Non-skeptical philosophers then face the task of
identifying the mistake in these otherwise plausible assumptions.
A case in point is the infamous “brain-in-a-vat” argument. As a bit of background,
keep in mind that all of your brain’s information about the world comes from electrical
impulses that your sense organs and nerves send to the brain. Now, imagine the
following scenario. Scientists in a technologically advanced society have ﬁgured out
how to keep a brain alive, ﬂoating in a vat. They have also developed technology for
directly stimulating a brain electrically in order to produce a complete set of experi-
ences as of normal life. This technology has been perfected to the point that a
person whose brain is so stimulated cannot tell the difference between the artiﬁcially
induced experiences and the experiences of normal life. All of this is theoretically
possible. Which leads us to the question: how do you know that this scenario is not
actually true, and that you are not, right now, a brain in a vat?
A strong argument can be made that you cannot know this. All of the evidence you
have for claims about the external world comes from your sensory experiences. But
in the brain-in-a-vat scenario, you would be having the same sort of sensory experi-
ences you are in fact having. Therefore, it seems, your actual sensory experiences
are not evidence against the brain-in-a-vat scenario. Therefore, you have no evidence
against the brain-in-a-vat scenario. And if you have no evidence against it, it seems to
follow that you do not know that the brain-in-a-vat scenario does not actually obtain.
507

Finally, it seems to follow from this that you do not actually know anything about the
character of the world around you.
The brain-in-a-vat argument is one instance of a type of skeptical argument some-
times called a “Cartesian skeptical argument” (after Descartes). Other arguments in
this family include the dream argument (how do you know you are not having a very
realistic and vivid dream right now?) and the deceiving God argument (how do you
know that God, or a clever demon, is not deceiving you by planting false sensory
images in your mind?). What these arguments have in common is that they each
employ a scenario in which most of your beliefs about the external world would be (or
might be) false but in which there is an explanation for why everything would appear
the way it does now.
René Descartes deployed this kind of argument in his ﬁrst Meditation, but note
that Descartes is not a philosophical skeptic. Rather, he is using skeptical arguments
(which he later tries to refute) in order to establish something about the structure of
our knowledge. Descartes thinks that the ultimate foundation of our knowledge
should be something that is absolutely indubitable—that is, something we cannot
have any grounds for doubting. He uses skeptical arguments to establish that claims
about the physical world do not satisfy this condition. Instead, he argues, the founda-
tion of one’s knowledge should be propositions about one’s own mind—i.e., the
propositions “I think,” “I exist” (where the “I” refers to my mind), and propositions
describing my present conscious mental states. The skeptical scenarios cannot cast
doubt on this sort of proposition, for a simple reason: that each of the skeptical
scenarios entails that I am conscious, that I exist, and that I am having the sort of
conscious mental states I am having (recall that a skeptical scenario must explain
why things appear to me the way they do). This line of thinking led Descartes to the
famous dictum, “I think, therefore I am.” Descartes argued that he knows that he
exists, despite any skeptical arguments that anyone might bring forward, since he
must exist in order to be thinking about the skeptical arguments.
In the later parts of his work, meditations 3–6 (not reprinted here), Descartes tries
to establish the existence of the physical world. Essentially, he ﬁrst tries to prove that
God exists, and that God, being perfect, cannot be a deceiver. If God had given me
inherently defective cognitive faculties (including the ﬁve senses, reason, and intu-
ition), with no way of correcting the error, then God would be a deceiver. It follows that
my faculties are not defective in this way, and therefore I can rule out the skeptical
scenarios.
Hilary Putnam uses a different strategy to refute the brain in a vat scenario. He
argues that the brain-in-a-vat scenario is self-refuting in a sense, because if it were
true, it would be impossible for us to entertain it. He arrives at this conclusion
through a consideration of the nature of intentionality. “Intentionality,” in philosophy,
is a technical term (note that it is not connected to the usual use of the word “inten-
tion” in English). Intentionality, in the technical sense, is the property of purportedly
being “about” something, or referring to or representing something. For instance,
language has intentionality (sentences are about something; words typically refer to
something), pictures have intentionality (they depict something), and our thoughts
have intentionality (thoughts are about something). Note that each of these things
can be intentional even if what they represent does not exist (for instance, a picture
of a unicorn has intentionality).
Putnam asks, under what conditions does one thing count as representing
PART III: NATURE AND SCOPE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
508

something else? Using a series of hypothetical examples, he tries to establish the
causal theory of reference: this theory holds that a necessary condition for A to
represent B is that A should be causally connected to B in an appropriate way, or at
least to things in terms of which B could be described. Typically, a person acquires a
concept, or learns the use of a word, by directly interacting with examples of the type
of thing it refers to (as, for example, when I see a tree). It is also possible to learn a
word/idea from other people, but then those other people must have interacted with
examples of the type of thing the word refers to. One can also acquire a concept
through an explicit deﬁnition (e.g., “A unicorn is a horse with a horn on its head”), but
then one must ﬁrst understand the terms in the deﬁnition, and ultimately a causal
connection to the world must come in at some point (e.g., people have seen horses
and horns).
Given the causal theory of reference, we can conclude that if there were a brain in a
vat, the brain could not refer to, or think about, brains or vats. The brain might think to
itself something like, “I wonder if I am a brain in a vat,” but its use of “brain” could not
possibly refer to brains, since it has never actually seen a brain, nor has it communi-
cated with anyone who has, nor has it perceived anything else in terms of which
“brain” might be deﬁned. Similarly, its use of “vat” could not refer to vats. Thus, a
brain in a vat cannot entertain the brain-in-a-vat scenario. And therefore, we can
conclude that if we are now entertaining the brain-in-a-vat scenario, then we are not
brains in vats.
Fred Dretske has proposed an answer to the brain-in-a-vat argument that does not
require refuting the skeptical scenario. As traditionally understood, the brain-in-a-vat
argument goes like this:
1.
In general, if I know p, and p entails q, then I can know q.
2.
I cannot know I am not a brain in a vat.
3.
Therefore, I do not know that I have two hands, that I perceive physical objects,
etc. (because these claims entail that I am not a brain in a vat).
Dretske argues that it is the ﬁrst premise (known as “the closure principle”) that is
mistaken. He arrives at this based on his “relevant alternatives” analysis of know-
ledge, which states that for S to know p requires that S be able to rule out certain
kinds of alternatives to p (the “relevant alternatives”), but not that S be able to rule
out all of the logically possible alternatives. For instance, in order to know that the bird
I am seeing is a Gadwall duck, I must be able to distinguish it from other kinds of bird
that actually exist and that could be in this area; but I do not need to be able to
distinguish it from some purely hypothetical kind of bird that someone thought up.
Notice that any view of this kind, in which the relevant alternatives include less than
all of the logically possible alternatives, implies that the closure principle (1) is false.
Peter Klein argues, in contrast, that the brain-in-a-vat skeptic has available a plaus-
ible defense of the closure principle, against Dretske’s criticism. The main reason
why the closure principle seems plausible is that, when I know p and p entails q, then
I can simply deduce q from p, and deducing a conclusion from a known premise
seems to be a good way of acquiring knowledge. Note that this means my ability to
know q would be a consequence, rather than a precondition, of my knowing p. How-
ever, Klein argues, the skeptic faces a dilemma: if the skeptic defends the closure
principle in this way, then he will have no way of defending the second premise (“I
SKEPTICISM
509

cannot know I’m not a brain in a vat”) without begging the question. In order to justify
his second premise, the skeptic would have to rule out every potential way in which I
might know (or be justiﬁed in believing) that I am not a brain in a vat. According to the
defense of the closure principle just suggested, one possible way of knowing this
would be if I knew I had two hands, and I deduced from this that I am not a brain in a
vat. So to show that I do not have that way, in particular, of knowing I am not a brain in
a vat, it would ﬁrst have to be established that I cannot know I have two hands. But
that is just the conclusion of the argument. So, if the skeptic uses the suggested
defense of the closure principle, then his argument will “virtually beg the question”—
that is, it will have a premise (2) that cannot be established unless one can ﬁrst
establish the conclusion.
The article by the editor that follows responds to both Klein and Dretske, ﬁnding
both of their replies to the skeptic implausible when compared with replies that might
be made in seemingly analogous cases. It argues that the brain-in-a-vat argument
has been mischaracterized and that instead of the closure principle, the skeptic
should be taken to be relying on the “preference principle.” This is the principle that a
person is justiﬁed in accepting a hypothesis based on some evidence only if they
have grounds for rejecting each incompatible alternative explanation of the evidence.
When the skeptic’s argument is reformulated using this principle, Dretske’s and
Klein’s responses no longer work. However, a new response to the brain-in-a-vat
argument becomes possible. This would be a response based on a direct realist
theory of perceptual knowledge. Direct realists believe that we have non-inferentially
justiﬁed beliefs about the physical world, as a result of perception (see Chapter 1,
this volume). A direct realist could accept the preference principle but deny that it had
any application to the case of our perceptual beliefs, since these beliefs are not
hypotheses inferred from some evidence, but are instead foundational. Although the
paper does not establish that direct realism is in fact true, it shows that the skeptic
has not refuted the possibility of knowledge of the external world, since the skeptic
has not ruled out direct realism; the skeptic has only ruled out an indirect realist
account of our knowledge of the external world.
Roderick Chisholm discusses a different sort of skeptical argument, the argument
based on “the problem of the criterion.” This argument in its essence originates
with the ancient Greek skeptics, who argued that since our senses sometimes
deceive us (as in illusions, hallucinations, mirages), in order for us to really know
anything, we must have a general rule, a criterion, for distinguishing the times
when our senses are deceiving us from the times when they may be trusted. The
skeptics went on to argue that we could not ever know such a criterion to be correct,
since we would have to rely on our senses in the course of trying to verify its
correctness.
Chisholm’s version of the problem is a bit different. Chisholm is concerned with
the relationship between our ordinary, common-sense judgments about which par-
ticular propositions people know (e.g., I think I know that Kennedy was assassinated
in 1963; that my friend knows my phone number, etc.), and our judgments about
what, in general, is required in order for someone to know something. He considers
three views one might take about this subject:
1.
Methodism: (Not to be confused with the sect of Christianity of the same name.)
This is the view that we should start from judgments about the general require-
PART III: NATURE AND SCOPE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
510

ments of knowledge—in other words, from a set of criteria of knowledge—and
use those to determine which particular knowledge claims are correct.
2.
Particularism: This is the view that we should start with our intuitive judgments
about which particular propositions particular people know, and use them to
construct a theory of the general requirements of knowledge. Such a theory
would be justiﬁed by its ability to correctly explain why we know the things that we
do.
3.
Skepticism: In the context of Chisholm’s article, this is the view that we cannot
have justiﬁed beliefs either about the general criteria of knowledge or about
which particular propositions we know. This is because we would have to ﬁrst
establish the correct criteria in order to know which particular propositions we
know, but we would ﬁrst have to determine what we know in order to establish
the correct criteria of knowledge. We cannot start from either, nor should we
engage in circular reasoning, so we must suspend judgment entirely.
Chisholm concedes that none of the above three positions can be established by a
non-question-begging argument. Nevertheless, he favors a particularist view, on the
grounds that only the particularist is able to recognize all the knowledge that we do in
fact have. (Methodists could in theory also do this, but in practice, most methodists
have had a very difﬁcult time explaining how we know most of the things we think we
know, and have usually been unconvincing when they try.)
We conclude with G.E. Moore’s famous defense of common sense against the
philosophical skeptics. While other philosophers (particularly indirect realists and
methodists) have gone to lengths trying to prove the existence of an external world,
Moore says that he can do it quite easily. How? He would hold up his hand and say,
while making a certain gesture, “Here is one hand.” Then he would hold up his other
hand, saying, “And here is another.” He would then deduce that there are (at least
two) external objects. This, as Moore points out, is analogous to many other proofs
that we commonly accept as being perfectly good, rigorous proofs. For instance,
suppose someone doubts whether space aliens exist. We might accept photographs
of ﬂying saucers, eyewitness reports, and so on as evidence for their existence,
though not conclusive evidence. But one thing that would surely count as proof of
their existence would be if someone brought us an actual space alien and allowed us
to examine him—that, it seems, would be the ideal kind of proof. Similarly, Moore
thinks, if someone doubts whether there are external objects, we can prove it to him
by simply producing an external object and showing it to him.
Moore’s argument would seem appropriate as a response to someone who merely
demands, out of the blue, “Prove to me that there are external objects.” But it does
not seem like much of a response to the speciﬁc arguments philosophical skeptics
have brought forward to try to show that we do not really know about the external
world. The second excerpt from Moore, taken from his article “Hume’s Theory Exam-
ined,” indicates how he would respond to those arguments. Suppose a philosopher
gives an argument from two premises, A and B, to a conclusion C. Suppose that the
argument is logically valid, so that if A and B are both true, then C must also be true.
Moore points out that it would also be valid to argue from A and ∼C (the denial of C) to
∼B, or from B and ∼C to ∼A. All three of these arguments are valid if and only if A, B,
and ∼C are jointly incompatible. Which argument is best depends upon which has the
more initially plausible premises. If ∼C is more initially plausible than either A or B, it
SKEPTICISM
511

would be irrational to accept the ﬁrst argument; instead, one should accept one of
the latter two. Moore thinks that the premises of any skeptical argument are less
plausible than the denial of its conclusion. That is, it is more initially plausible that I
know, for example, that there is a hand here, than it is that the premises of any given
skeptical argument are correct. Therefore, it is rational to reject the premises (that is,
to reject their conjunction; this requires only holding that at least one of them is
false) of a skeptical argument on the grounds that they lead to the (absurd) conclu-
sion that I don’t know there is a hand here. The reader should note the parallel
between Moore’s position and Chisholm’s particularism.
PART III: NATURE AND SCOPE OF JUSTIFICATION AND KNOWLEDGE
512

René Descartes, Meditations on
First Philosophy
Synopsis of the following six Meditations
In the First Meditation reasons are provided which give us possible grounds for
doubt about all things, especially material things, so long as we have no founda-
tions for the sciences other than those which we have had up till now. Although
the usefulness of such extensive doubt is not apparent at ﬁrst sight, its greatest
beneﬁt lies in freeing us from all our preconceived opinions, and providing the
easiest route by which the mind may be led away from the senses. The eventual
result of this doubt is to make it impossible for us to have any further doubts
about what we subsequently discover to be true.
In the Second Meditation, the mind uses its own freedom and supposes the
non-existence of all the things about whose existence it can have even the slight-
est doubt; and in so doing the mind notices that it is impossible that it should not
itself exist during this time. This exercise is also of the greatest beneﬁt, since it
enables the mind to distinguish without difﬁculty what belongs to itself, i.e. to an
intellectual nature, from what belongs to the body. But since some people may
perhaps expect arguments for the immortality of the soul in this section, I think
they should be warned here and now that I have tried not to put down anything
which I could not precisely demonstrate. Hence the only order which I could
follow was that normally employed by geometers, namely to set out all the prem-
ises on which a desired proposition depends, before drawing any conclusions
about it. Now the ﬁrst and most important prerequisite for knowledge of the
immortality of the soul is for us to form a concept of the soul which is as clear as
possible and is also quite distinct from every concept of body; and that is just
what has been done in this section. A further requirement is that we should know
that everything that we clearly and distinctly understand is true in a way which
corresponds exactly to our understanding of it; but it was not possible to prove
this before the Fourth Meditation. In addition we need to have a distinct concept
of corporeal nature, and this is developed partly in the Second Meditation itself,
and partly in the Fifth and Sixth Meditations. The inference to be drawn from
these results is that all the things that we clearly and distinctly conceive of as
different substances (as we do in the case of mind and body) are in fact substances
which are really distinct one from the other; and this conclusion is drawn in the
René Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy, trans. and ed. John Cottingham
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
513

Sixth Meditation. This conclusion is conﬁrmed in the same Meditation by the
fact that we cannot understand a body except as being divisible, while by contrast
we cannot understand a mind except as being indivisible. For we cannot conceive
of half of a mind, while we can always conceive of half of a body, however small;
and this leads us to recognize that the natures of mind and body are not only
different, but in some way opposite. But I have not pursued this topic any further
in this book, ﬁrst because these arguments are enough to show that the decay of
the body does not imply the destruction of the mind, and are hence enough to
give mortals the hope of an after-life, and secondly because the premises which
lead to the conclusion that the soul is immortal depend on an account of the
whole of physics. This is required for two reasons. First, we need to know that
absolutely all substances, or things which must be created by God in order to
exist, are by their nature incorruptible and cannot ever cease to exist unless they
are reduced to nothingness by God’s denying his concurrence1 to them. Secondly,
we need to recognize that body, taken in the general sense, is a substance, so that
it too never perishes. But the human body, in so far as it differs from other bodies,
is simply made up of a certain conﬁguration of limbs and other accidents2 of this
sort; whereas the human mind is not made up of any accidents in this way, but is
a pure substance. For even if all the accidents of the mind change, so that it has
different objects of the understanding and different desires and sensations, it does
not on that account become a different mind; whereas a human body loses its
identity merely as a result of a change in the shape of some of its parts. And it
follows from this that while the body can very easily perish, the mind is immortal
by its very nature.
In the Third Meditation I have explained quite fully enough, I think, my prin-
cipal argument for proving the existence of God. But in order to draw my
readers’ minds away from the senses as far as possible, I was not willing to use
any comparison taken from bodily things. So it may be that many obscurities
remain; but I hope they will be completely removed later, in my Replies to the
Objections. One such problem, among others, is how the idea of a supremely
perfect being, which is in us, possesses so much objective reality that it can come
only from a cause which is supremely perfect. In the Replies this is illustrated by
the comparison of a very perfect machine, the idea of which is in the mind of
some engineer. Just as the objective intricacy belonging to the idea must have
some cause, namely the scientiﬁc knowledge of the engineer, or of someone else
who passed the idea on to him, so the idea of God which is in us must have God
himself as its cause.
In the Fourth Meditation it is proved that everything that we clearly and
distinctly perceive is true, and I also explain what the nature of falsity consists in.
These results need to be known both in order to conﬁrm what has gone before
and also to make intelligible what is to come later. (But here it should be noted in
passing that I do not deal at all with sin, i.e. the error which is committed in
pursuing good and evil, but only with the error that occurs in distinguishing truth
from falsehood. And there is no discussion of matters pertaining to faith or the
conduct of life, but simply of speculative truths which are known solely by means
of the natural light.)3
In the Fifth Meditation, besides an account of corporeal nature taken in
general, there is a new argument demonstrating the existence of God. Again,
RENÉ DESCARTES
514

several difﬁculties may arise here, but these are resolved later in the Replies to the
Objections. Finally I explain the sense in which it is true that the certainty even of
geometrical demonstrations depends on the knowledge of God.
Lastly, in the Sixth Meditation, the intellect is distinguished from the imagin-
ation; the criteria for this distinction are explained; the mind is proved to be
really distinct from the body, but is shown, notwithstanding, to be so closely
joined to it that the mind and the body make up a kind of unit; there is a survey
of all the errors which commonly come from the senses, and an explanation of
how they may be avoided; and, lastly, there is a presentation of all the argu-
ments which enable the existence of material things to be inferred. The great
beneﬁt of these arguments is not, in my view, that they prove what they
establish—namely that there really is a world, and that human beings have
bodies and so on—since no sane person has ever seriously doubted these things.
The point is that in considering these arguments we come to realize that they are
not as solid or as transparent as the arguments which lead us to knowledge of
our own minds and of God, so that the latter are the most certain and evident of
all possible objects of knowledge for the human intellect. Indeed, this is the one
thing that I set myself to prove in these Meditations. And for that reason I will
not now go over the various other issues in the book which are dealt with as
they come up.
First Meditation: What can be called into doubt
Some years ago I was struck by the large number of falsehoods that I had
accepted as true in my childhood, and by the highly doubtful nature of the whole
ediﬁce that I had subsequently based on them. I realized that it was necessary,
once in the course of my life, to demolish everything completely and start again
right from the foundations if I wanted to establish anything at all in the sciences
that was stable and likely to last. But the task looked an enormous one, and I
began to wait until I should reach a mature enough age to ensure that no sub-
sequent time of life would be more suitable for tackling such inquiries. This led
me to put the project off for so long that I would now be to blame if by pondering
over it any further I wasted the time still left for carrying it out. So today I have
expressly rid my mind of all worries and arranged for myself a clear stretch of free
time. I am here quite alone, and at last I will devote myself sincerely and without
reservation to the general demolition of my opinions.
But to accomplish this, it will not be necessary for me to show that all my
opinions are false, which is something I could perhaps never manage. Reason
now leads me to think that I should hold back my assent from opinions which are
not completely certain and indubitable just as carefully as I do from those which
are patently false. So, for the purpose of rejecting all my opinions, it will be
enough if I ﬁnd in each of them at least some reason for doubt. And to do this I
will not need to run through them all individually, which would be an endless
task. Once the foundations of a building are undermined, anything built on them
collapses of its own accord; so I will go straight for the basic principles on which
all my former beliefs rested.
Whatever I have up till now accepted as most true I have acquired either from
the senses or through the senses. But from time to time I have found that the
MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
515

senses deceive, and it is prudent never to trust completely those who have
deceived us even once.
Yet although the senses occasionally deceive us with respect to objects which
are very small or in the distance, there are many other beliefs about which doubt
is quite impossible, even though they are derived from the senses—for example,
that I am here, sitting by the ﬁre, wearing a winter dressing-gown, holding this
piece of paper in my hands, and so on. Again, how could it be denied that these
hands or this whole body are mine? Unless perhaps I were to liken myself to
madmen, whose brains are so damaged by the persistent vapours of melancholia
that they ﬁrmly maintain they are kings when they are paupers, or say they are
dressed in purple when they are naked, or that their heads are made of earthen-
ware, or that they are pumpkins, or made of glass. But such people are insane,
and I would be thought equally mad if I took anything from them as a model for
myself.
A brilliant piece of reasoning! As if I were not a man who sleeps at night, and
regularly has all the same experiences while asleep as madmen do when awake—
indeed sometimes even more improbable ones. How often, asleep at night, am I
convinced of just such familiar events—that I am here in my dressing-gown,
sitting by the ﬁre—when in fact I am lying undressed in bed! Yet at the moment
my eyes are certainly wide awake when I look at this piece of paper; I shake my
head and it is not asleep; as I stretch out and feel my hand I do so deliberately,
and I know what I am doing. All this would not happen with such distinctness to
someone asleep. Indeed! As if I did not remember other occasions when I have
been tricked by exactly similar thoughts while asleep! As I think about this more
carefully, I see plainly that there are never any sure signs by means of which being
awake can be distinguished from being asleep. The result is that I begin to feel
dazed, and this very feeling only reinforces the notion that I may be asleep.
Suppose then that I am dreaming, and that these particulars—that my eyes are
open, that I am moving my head and stretching out my hands—are not true.
Perhaps, indeed, I do not even have such hands or such a body at all. Nonethe-
less, it must surely be admitted that the visions which come in sleep are like
paintings, which must have been fashioned in the likeness of things that are real,
and hence that at least these general kinds of things—eyes, head, hands and the
body as a whole—are things which are not imaginary but are real and exist. For
even when painters try to create sirens and satyrs with the most extraordinary
bodies, they cannot give them natures which are new in all respects; they simply
jumble up the limbs of different animals. Or if perhaps they manage to think up
something so new that nothing remotely similar has ever been seen before—
something which is therefore completely ﬁctitious and unreal—at least the col-
ours used in the composition must be real. By similar reasoning, although these
general kinds of things—eyes, head, hands and so on—could be imaginary, it
must at least be admitted that certain other even simpler and more universal
things are real. These are as it were the real colours from which we form all the
images of things, whether true or false, that occur in our thought.
This class appears to include corporeal nature in general, and its extension; the
shape of extended things; the quantity, or size and number of these things; the
place in which they may exist, the time through which they may endure, and so
on.
RENÉ DESCARTES
516

So a reasonable conclusion from this might be that physics, astronomy, medi-
cine, and all other disciplines which depend on the study of composite things, are
doubtful; while arithmetic, geometry and other subjects of this kind, which deal
only with the simplest and most general things, regardless of whether they really
exist in nature or not, contain something certain and indubitable. For whether I
am awake or asleep, two and three added together are ﬁve, and a square has no
more than four sides. It seems impossible that such transparent truths should
incur any suspicion of being false.
And yet ﬁrmly rooted in my mind is the long-standing opinion that there is an
omnipotent God who made me the kind of creature that I am. How do I know
that he has not brought it about that there is no earth, no sky, no extended thing,
no shape, no size, no place, while at the same time ensuring that all these things
appear to me to exist just as they do now? What is more, just as I consider that
others sometimes go astray in cases where they think they have the most perfect
knowledge, how do I know that God has not brought it about that I too go wrong
every time I add two and three or count the sides of a square, or in some even
simpler matter, if that is imaginable? But perhaps God would not have allowed
me to be deceived in this way, since he is said to be supremely good. But if it were
inconsistent with his goodness to have created me such that I am deceived all the
time, it would seem equally foreign to his goodness to allow me to be deceived
even occasionally; yet this last assertion cannot be made.
Perhaps there may be some who would prefer to deny the existence of so
powerful a God rather than believe that everything else is uncertain. Let us not
argue with them, but grant them that everything said about God is a ﬁction.
According to their supposition, then, I have arrived at my present state by fate or
chance or a continuous chain of events, or by some other means; yet since decep-
tion and error seem to be imperfections, the less powerful they make my original
cause, the more likely it is that I am so imperfect as to be deceived all the time. I
have no answer to these arguments, but am ﬁnally compelled to admit that there
is not one of my former beliefs about which a doubt may not properly be raised;
and this is not a ﬂippant or ill-considered conclusion, but is based on powerful
and well thought-out reasons. So in future I must withhold my assent from these
former beliefs just as carefully as I would from obvious falsehoods, if I want to
discover any certainty.
But it is not enough merely to have noticed this; I must make an effort to
remember it. My habitual opinions keep coming back, and, despite my wishes,
they capture my belief, which is as it were bound over to them as a result of long
occupation and the law of custom. I shall never get out of the habit of con-
ﬁdently assenting to these opinions, so long as I suppose them to be what in fact
they are, namely highly probable opinions—opinions which, despite the fact that
they are in a sense doubtful, as has just been shown, it is still much more reason-
able to believe than to deny. In view of this, I think it will be a good plan to turn
my will in completely the opposite direction and deceive myself, by pretending
for a time that these former opinions are utterly false and imaginary. I shall do
this until the weight of preconceived opinion is counter-balanced and the distort-
ing inﬂuence of habit no longer prevents my judgement from perceiving things
correctly. In the meantime, I know that no danger or error will result from my
plan, and that I cannot possibly go too far in my distrustful attitude. This is
MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
517

because the task now in hand does not involve action but merely the acquisition
of knowledge.
I will suppose therefore that not God, who is supremely good and the source of
truth, but rather some malicious demon of the utmost power and cunning has
employed all his energies in order to deceive me. I shall think that the sky, the air,
the earth, colours, shapes, sounds and all external things are merely the delusions
of dreams which he has devised to ensnare my judgement. I shall consider myself
as not having hands or eyes, or ﬂesh, or blood or senses, but as falsely believing
that I have all these things. I shall stubbornly and ﬁrmly persist in this meditation;
and, even if it is not in my power to know any truth, I shall at least do what is in
my power, that is, resolutely guard against assenting to any falsehoods, so that
the deceiver, however powerful and cunning he may be, will be unable to impose
on me in the slightest degree. But this is an arduous undertaking, and a kind of
laziness brings me back to normal life. I am like a prisoner who is enjoying an
imaginary freedom while asleep; as he begins to suspect that he is asleep, he
dreads being woken up, and goes along with the pleasant illusion as long as he
can. In the same way, I happily slide back into my old opinions and dread being
shaken out of them, for fear that my peaceful sleep may be followed by hard
labour when I wake, and that I shall have to toil not in the light, but amid the
inextricable darkness of the problems I have now raised.
Second Meditation: The nature of the human mind, and how it is better
known than the body
So serious are the doubts into which I have been thrown as a result of yesterday’s
meditation that I can neither put them out of my mind nor see any way of
resolving them. It feels as if I have fallen unexpectedly into a deep whirlpool
which tumbles me around so that I can neither stand on the bottom nor swim up
to the top. Nevertheless I will make an effort and once more attempt the same
path which I started on yesterday. Anything which admits of the slightest doubt I
will set aside just as if I had found it to be wholly false; and I will proceed in this
way until I recognize something certain, or, if nothing else, until I at least recog-
nize for certain that there is no certainty. Archimedes used to demand just one
ﬁrm and immovable point in order to shift the entire earth; so I too can hope for
great things if I manage to ﬁnd just one thing, however slight, that is certain and
unshakeable.
I will suppose then, that everything I see is spurious. I will believe that my
memory tells me lies, and that none of the things that it reports ever happened. I
have no senses. Body, shape, extension, movement and place are chimeras. So
what remains true? Perhaps just the one fact that nothing is certain.
Yet apart from everything I have just listed, how do I know that there is not
something else which does not allow even the slightest occasion for doubt? Is
there not a God, or whatever I may call him, who puts into me the thoughts I am
now having? But why do I think this, since I myself may perhaps be the author of
these thoughts? In that case am not I, at least, something? But I have just said that
I have no senses and no body. This is the sticking point: what follows from this?
Am I not so bound up with a body and with senses that I cannot exist without
them? But I have convinced myself that there is absolutely nothing in the world,
RENÉ DESCARTES
518

no sky, no earth, no minds, no bodies. Does it now follow that I too do not exist?
No: if I convinced myself of something then I certainly existed. But there is a
deceiver of supreme power and cunning who is deliberately and constantly
deceiving me. In that case I too undoubtedly exist, if he is deceiving me; and
let him deceive me as much as he can, he will never bring it about that I am
nothing so long as I think that I am something. So after considering everything
very thoroughly, I must ﬁnally conclude that this proposition, I am, I exist, is
necessarily true whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind.
But I do not yet have a sufﬁcient understanding of what this “I” is, that now
necessarily exists. So I must be on my guard against carelessly taking something
else to be this “I”, and so making a mistake in the very item of knowledge that I
maintain is the most certain and evident of all. I will therefore go back and
meditate on what I originally believed myself to be, before I embarked on this
present train of thought. I will then subtract anything capable of being weakened,
even minimally, by the arguments now introduced, so that what is left at the end
may be exactly and only what is certain and unshakeable.
What then did I formerly think I was? A man. But what is a man? Shall I say “a
rational animal”? No; for then I should have to inquire what an animal is, what
rationality is, and in this way one question would lead me down the slope to
other harder ones, and I do not now have the time to waste on subtleties of this
kind. Instead I propose to concentrate on what came into my thoughts spon-
taneously and quite naturally whenever I used to consider what I was. Well, the
ﬁrst thought to come to mind was that I had a face, hands, arms and the whole
mechanical structure of limbs which can be seen in a corpse, and which I called
the body. The next thought was that I was nourished, that I moved about, and
that I engaged in sense-perception and thinking; and these actions I attributed to
the soul. But as to the nature of this soul, either I did not think about this or else I
imagined it to be something tenuous, like a wind or ﬁre or ether, which permeated
my more solid parts. As to the body, however, I had no doubts about it, but
thought I knew its nature distinctly. If I had tried to describe the mental concep-
tion I had of it, I would have expressed it as follows: by a body I understand
whatever has a determinable shape and a deﬁnable location and can occupy a
space in such a way as to exclude any other body; it can be perceived by touch,
sight, hearing, taste or smell, and can be moved in various ways, not by itself but
by whatever else comes into contact with it. For, according to my judgement, the
power of self-movement, like the power of sensation or of thought, was quite
foreign to the nature of a body; indeed, it was a source of wonder to me that
certain bodies were found to contain faculties of this kind.
But what shall I now say that I am, when I am supposing that there is some
supremely powerful and, if it is permissible to say so, malicious deceiver, who is
deliberately trying to trick me in every way he can? Can I now assert that I
possess even the most insigniﬁcant of all the attributes which I have just said
belong to the nature of a body? I scrutinize them, think about them, go over them
again, but nothing suggests itself; it is tiresome and pointless to go through the
list once more. But what about the attributes I assigned to the soul? Nutrition or
movement? Since now I do not have a body, these are mere fabrications. Sense-
perception? This surely does not occur without a body, and besides, when asleep
I have appeared to perceive through the senses many things which I afterwards
MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
519

realized I did not perceive through the senses at all. Thinking? At last I have
discovered it—thought; this alone is inseparable from me. I am, I exist—that is
certain. But for how long? For as long as I am thinking. For it could be that were I
totally to cease from thinking, I should totally cease to exist. At present I am not
admitting anything except what is necessarily true. I am, then, in the strict sense
only a thing that thinks; that is, I am a mind, or intelligence, or intellect, or reason
– words whose meaning I have been ignorant of until now. But for all that I am a
thing which is real and which truly exists. But what kind of a thing? As I have just
said—a thinking thing.
What else am I? I will use my imagination. I am not that structure of limbs
which is called a human body. I am not even some thin vapour which permeates
the limbs—a wind, ﬁre, air, breath, or whatever I depict in my imagination; for
these are things which I have supposed to be nothing. Let this supposition stand;
for all that I am still something. And yet may it not perhaps be the case that these
very things which I am supposing to be nothing, because they are unknown to
me, are in reality identical with the “I” of which I am aware? I do not know, and
for the moment I shall not argue the point, since I can make judgements only
about things which are known to me. I know that I exist; the question is, what is
this “I” that I know? If the “I” is understood strictly as we have been taking it,
then it is quite certain that knowledge of it does not depend on things of whose
existence I am as yet unaware; so it cannot depend on any of the things which I
invent in my imagination. And this very word ‘invent’ shows me my mistake. It
would indeed be a case of ﬁctitious invention if I used my imagination to establish
that I was something or other; for imagining is simply contemplating the shape or
image of a corporeal thing. Yet now I know for certain both that I exist and at the
same time that all such images and, in general, everything relating to the nature of
body, could be mere dreams [and chimeras]. Once this point has been grasped, to
say “I will use my imagination to get to know more distinctly what I am” would
seem to be as silly as saying “I am now awake, and see some truth; but since my
vision is not yet clear enough, I will deliberately fall asleep so that my dreams may
provide a truer and clearer representation.” I thus realize that none of the things
that the imagination enables me to grasp is at all relevant to this knowledge of
myself which I possess, and that the mind must therefore be most carefully
diverted from such things if it is to perceive its own nature as distinctly as
possible.
But what then am I? A thing that thinks. What is that? A thing that doubts,
understands, afﬁrms, denies, is willing, is unwilling, and also imagines and has
sensory perceptions.
This is a considerable list, if everything on it belongs to me. But does it? Is it
not one and the same “I” who is now doubting almost everything, who nonethe-
less understands some things, who afﬁrms that this one thing is true, denies
everything else, desires to know more, is unwilling to be deceived, imagines many
things even involuntarily, and is aware of many things which apparently come
from the senses? Are not all these things just as true as the fact that I exist, even if
I am asleep all the time, and even if he who created me is doing all he can to
deceive me? Which of all these activities is distinct from my thinking? Which of
them can be said to be separate from myself? The fact that it is I who am doubting
and understanding and willing is so evident that I see no way of making it any
RENÉ DESCARTES
520

clearer. But it is also the case that the “I” who imagines is the same “I.” For even
if, as I have supposed, none of the objects of imagination are real, the power of
imagination is something which really exists and is part of my thinking. Lastly, it
is also the same “I” who has sensory perceptions, or is aware of bodily things as it
were through the senses. For example, I am now seeing light, hearing a noise,
feeling heat. But I am asleep, so all this is false. Yet I certainly seem to see, to hear,
and to be warmed. This cannot be false; what is called “having a sensory percep-
tion” is strictly just this, and in this restricted sense of the term it is simply
thinking.
From all this I am beginning to have a rather better understanding of what I
am. But it still appears—and I cannot stop thinking this—that the corporeal
things of which images are formed in my thought, and which the senses investi-
gate, are known with much more distinctness than this puzzling “I” which can-
not be pictured in the imagination. And yet it is surely surprising that I should
have a more distinct grasp of things which I realize are doubtful, unknown and
foreign to me, than I have of that which is true and known—my own self. But I
see what it is: my mind enjoys wandering off and will not yet submit to being
restrained within the bounds of truth. Very well then; just this once let us give it a
completely free rein, so that after a while, when it is time to tighten the reins, it
may more readily submit to being curbed.
Let us consider the things which people commonly think they understand most
distinctly of all; that is, the bodies which we touch and see. I do not mean bodies
in general—for general perceptions are apt to be somewhat more confused—but
one particular body. Let us take, for example, this piece of wax. It has just been
taken from the honeycomb; it has not yet quite lost the taste of the honey; it
retains some of the scent of the ﬂowers from which it was gathered; its colour,
shape and size are plain to see; it is hard, cold and can be handled without
difﬁculty; if you rap it with your knuckle it makes a sound. In short, it has
everything which appears necessary to enable a body to be known as distinctly as
possible. But even as I speak, I put the wax by the ﬁre, and look: the residual taste
is eliminated, the smell goes away, the colour changes, the shape is lost, the size
increases; it becomes liquid and hot; you can hardly touch it, and if you strike it,
it no longer makes a sound. But does the same wax remain? It must be admitted
that it does; no one denies it, no one thinks otherwise. So what was it in the wax
that I understood with such distinctness? Evidently none of the features which I
arrived at by means of the senses; for whatever came under taste, smell, sight,
touch or hearing has now altered—yet the wax remains.
Perhaps the answer lies in the thought which now comes to my mind; namely,
the wax was not after all the sweetness of the honey, or the fragrance of the
ﬂowers, or the whiteness, or the shape, or the sound, but was rather a body which
presented itself to me in these various forms a little while ago, but which now
exhibits different ones. But what exactly is it that I am now imagining? Let us
concentrate, take away everything which does not belong to the wax, and see
what is left: merely something extended, ﬂexible and changeable. But what is
meant here by “ﬂexible” and “changeable”? Is it what I picture in my imagin-
ation: that this piece of wax is capable of changing from a round shape to a
square shape, or from a square shape to a triangular shape? Not at all; for I can
grasp that the wax is capable of countless changes of this kind, yet I am unable to
MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
521

run through this immeasurable number of changes in my imagination, from
which it follows that it is not the faculty of imagination that gives me my grasp of
the wax as ﬂexible and changeable. And what is meant by “extended”? Is the
extension of the wax also unknown? For it increases if the wax melts, increases
again if it boils, and is greater still if the heat is increased. I would not be making a
correct judgement about the nature of wax unless I believed it capable of being
extended in many more different ways than I will ever encompass in my imagin-
ation. I must therefore admit that the nature of this piece of wax is in no way
revealed by my imagination, but is perceived by the mind alone. (I am speaking of
this particular piece of wax; the point is even clearer with regard to wax in
general.) But what is this wax which is perceived by the mind alone? It is of
course the same wax which I see, which I touch, which I picture in my imagin-
ation, in short the same wax which I thought it to be from the start. And yet, and
here is the point, the perception I have of it is a case not of vision or touch or
imagination—nor has it ever been, despite previous appearances—but of purely
mental scrutiny; and this can be imperfect and confused, as it was before, or clear
and distinct as it is now, depending on how carefully I concentrate on what the
wax consists in.
But as I reach this conclusion I am amazed at how [weak and] prone to error
my mind is. For although I am thinking about these matters within myself,
silently and without speaking, nonetheless the actual words bring me up short,
and I am almost tricked by ordinary ways of talking. We say that we see the wax
itself, if it is there before us, not that we judge it to be there from its colour or
shape; and this might lead me to conclude without more ado that knowledge of
the wax comes from what the eye sees, and not from the scrutiny of the mind
alone. But then if I look out of the window and see men crossing the square, as I
just happen to have done, I normally say that I see the men themselves, just as I
say that I see the wax. Yet do I see any more than hats and coats which could
conceal automatons? I judge that they are men. And so something which I
thought I was seeing with my eyes is in fact grasped solely by the faculty of
judgement which is in my mind.
However, one who wants to achieve knowledge above the ordinary level
should feel ashamed at having taken ordinary ways of talking as a basis for
doubt. So let us proceed, and consider on which occasion my perception of the
nature of the wax was more perfect and evident. Was it when I ﬁrst looked at it,
and believed I knew it by my external senses, or at least by what they call the
“common” sense—that is, the power of imagination? Or is my knowledge more
perfect now, after a more careful investigation of the nature of the wax and of the
means by which it is known? Any doubt on this issue would clearly be foolish; for
what distinctness was there in my earlier perception? Was there anything in it
which an animal could not possess? But when I distinguish the wax from its
outward forms—take the clothes off, as it were, and consider it naked—then
although my judgement may still contain errors, at least my perception now
requires a human mind.
But what am I to say about this mind, or about myself? (So far, remember, I am
not admitting that there is anything else in me except a mind.) What, I ask, is this
“I” which seems to perceive the wax so distinctly? Surely my awareness of my
own self is not merely much truer and more certain than my awareness of the
RENÉ DESCARTES
522

wax, but also much more distinct and evident. For if I judge that the wax exists
from the fact that I see it, clearly this same fact entails much more evidently that I
myself also exist. It is possible that what I see is not really the wax; it is possible
that I do not even have eyes with which to see anything. But when I see, or think I
see (I am not here distinguishing the two), it is simply not possible that I who am
now thinking am not something. By the same token, if I judge that the wax exists
from the fact that I touch it, the same result follows, namely that I exist. If I judge
that it exists from the fact that I imagine it, or for any other reason, exactly the
same thing follows. And the result that I have grasped in the case of the wax may
be applied to everything else located outside me. Moreover, if my perception of
the wax seemed more distinct after it was established not just by sight or touch
but by many other considerations, it must be admitted that I now know myself
even more distinctly. This is because every consideration whatsoever which con-
tributes to my perception of the wax, or of any other body, cannot but establish
even more effectively the nature of my own mind. But besides this, there is so
much else in the mind itself which can serve to make my knowledge of it more
distinct, that it scarcely seems worth going through the contributions made by
considering bodily things.
I see that without any effort I have now ﬁnally got back to where I wanted. I
now know that even bodies are not strictly perceived by the senses or the faculty
of imagination but by the intellect alone, and that this perception derives not
from their being touched or seen but from their being understood; and in view of
this I know plainly that I can achieve an easier and more evident perception of my
own mind than of anything else. But since the habit of holding on to old opinions
cannot be set aside so quickly, I should like to stop here and meditate for some
time on this new knowledge I have gained, so as to ﬁx it more deeply in my
memory.
Notes
1
The continuous divine action necessary to maintain things in existence.
2
Descartes here uses this scholastic term to refer to those features of a thing
which may alter, e.g. the particular size, shape etc. of a body, or the particular
thoughts, desires etc. of a mind.
3
Descartes added this passage on the advice of Arnauld (cf. AT vii 215; CSM II
151). He told Mersenne “Put the words between brackets so that it can be seen
that they have been added” (letter of 18 March 1641: AT III 335; CSMK 175).
QUESTIONS
1
When Descartes considers the possibility that he might be dreaming, what sort
of beliefs does this cast doubt on?
2
What does Descartes think he knows at the end of the Second Meditation?
3
What is the example of the wax supposed to show?
MEDITATIONS ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY
523

Hilary Putnam, “Brains in a Vat”
An ant is crawling on a patch of sand. As it crawls, it traces a line in the sand. By
pure chance the line that it traces curves and recrosses itself in such a way that it
ends up looking like a recognizable caricature of Winston Churchill. Has the ant
traced a picture of Winston Churchill, a picture that depicts Churchill?
Most people would say, on a little reﬂection, that it has not. The ant, after all,
has never seen Churchill, or even a picture of Churchill, and it had no intention of
depicting Churchill. It simply traced a line (and even that was unintentional), a
line that we can “see as” a picture of Churchill.
We can express this by saying that the line is not “in itself” a representation1 of
anything rather than anything else. Similarity (of a certain very complicated sort)
to the features of Winston Churchill is not sufﬁcient to make something represent
or refer to Churchill. Nor is it necessary: in our community the printed shape
“Winston Churchill,” the spoken words “Winston Churchill,” and many other
things are used to represent Churchill (though not pictorially), while not having
the sort of similarity to Churchill that a picture—even a line drawing—has. If
similarity is not necessary or sufﬁcient to make something represent something
else, how can anything be necessary or sufﬁcient for this purpose? How on earth
can one thing represent (or “stand for,” etc.) a different thing?
The answer may seem easy. Suppose the ant had seen Winston Churchill, and
suppose that it had the intelligence and skill to draw a picture of him. Suppose it
produced the caricature intentionally. Then the line would have represented
Churchill.
On the other hand, suppose the line had the shape WINSTON CHURCHILL.
And suppose this was just accident (ignoring the improbability involved). Then
the “printed shape” WINSTON CHURCHILL would not have represented
Churchill, although that printed shape does represent Churchill when it occurs in
almost any book today.
So it may seem that what is necessary for representation, or what is mainly
necessary for representation, is intention.
But to have the intention that anything, even private language (even the words
“Winston Churchill” spoken in my mind and not out loud), should represent
Churchill, I must have been able to think about Churchill in the ﬁrst place. If lines
in the sand, noises, etc., cannot “in themselves” represent anything, then how is it
Hilary Putnam, “Brains in a Vat,” Reason, Truth, and History (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981).
524

that thought forms can “in themselves” represent anything? Or can they? How
can thought reach out and “grasp” what is external?
Some philosophers have, in the past, leaped from this sort of consideration to
what they take to be a proof that the mind is essentially non-physical in nature.
The argument is simple; what we said about the ant’s curve applies to any phys-
ical object. No physical object can, in itself, refer to one thing rather than to
another; nevertheless, thoughts in the mind obviously do succeed in referring to
one thing rather than another. So thoughts (and hence the mind) are of an essen-
tially different nature than physical objects. Thoughts have the characteristic of
intentionality—they can refer to something else; nothing physical has “intention-
ality,” save as that intentionality is derivative from some employment of that
physical thing by a mind. Or so it is claimed. This is too quick; just postulating
mysterious powers of mind solves nothing. But the problem is very real. How is
intentionality, reference, possible?
Magical theories of reference
We saw that the ant’s “picture” has no necessary connection with Winston
Churchill. The mere fact that the “picture” bears a “resemblance” to Churchill
does not make it into a real picture, nor does it make it a representation of
Churchill. Unless the ant is an intelligent ant (which it isn’t) and knows about
Churchill (which it doesn’t), the curve it traced is not a picture or even a represen-
tation of anything. Some primitive people believe that some representations (in
particular, names) have a necessary connection with their bearers; that to know
the “true name” of someone or something gives one power over it. This power
comes from the magical connection between the name and the bearer of the
name; once one realizes that a name only has a contextual, contingent, con-
ventional connection with its bearer, it is hard to see why knowledge of the name
should have any mystical signiﬁcance.
What is important to realize is that what goes for physical pictures also goes
for mental images, and for mental representations in general; mental representa-
tions no more have a necessary connection with what they represent than phys-
ical representations do. The contrary supposition is a survival of magical
thinking.
Perhaps the point is easiest to grasp in the case of mental images. (Perhaps the
ﬁrst philosopher to grasp the enormous signiﬁcance of this point, even if he was
not the ﬁrst to actually make it, was Wittgenstein.) Suppose there is a planet
somewhere on which human beings have evolved (or been deposited by alien
spacemen, or what have you). Suppose these humans, although otherwise like us,
have never seen trees. Suppose they have never imagined trees (perhaps vegetable
life exists on their planet only in the form of molds). Suppose one day a picture of
a tree is accidentally dropped on their planet by a spaceship which passes on
without having other contact with them. Imagine them puzzling over the picture.
What in the world is this? All sorts of speculations occur to them: a building, a
canopy, even an animal of some kind. But suppose they never come close to the
truth.
For us the picture is a representation of a tree. For these humans the picture
only represents a strange object, nature and function unknown. Suppose one of
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
525

them has a mental image which is exactly like one of my mental images of a tree
as a result of having seen the picture. His mental image is not a representation of
a tree. It is only a representation of the strange object (whatever it is) that the
mysterious picture represents.
Still, someone might argue that the mental image is in fact a representation of a
tree, if only because the picture which caused this mental image was itself a
representation of a tree to begin with. There is a causal chain from actual trees to
the mental image even if it is a very strange one.
But even this causal chain can be imagined absent. Suppose the “picture of the
tree” that the spaceship dropped was not really a picture of a tree, but the acci-
dental result of some spilled paints. Even if it looked exactly like a picture of a
tree, it was, in truth, no more a picture of a tree than the ant’s “caricature” of
Churchill was a picture of Churchill. We can even imagine that the spaceship
which dropped the “picture” came from a planet which knew nothing of trees.
Then the humans would still have mental images qualitatively identical with my
image of a tree, but they would not be images which represented a tree any more
than anything else.
The same thing is true of words. A discourse on paper might seem to be a
perfect description of trees, but if it was produced by monkeys randomly hitting
keys on a typewriter for millions of years, then the words do not refer to any-
thing. If there were a person who memorized those words and said them in his
mind without understanding them, then they would not refer to anything when
thought in the mind, either.
Imagine the person who is saying those words in his mind has been hypno-
tized. Suppose the words are in Japanese, and the person has been told that he
understands Japanese. Suppose that as he thinks those words he has a “feeling of
understanding.” (Although if someone broke into his train of thought and asked
him what the words he was thinking meant, he would discover he couldn’t say.)
Perhaps the illusion would be so perfect that the person could even fool a Japa-
nese telepath! But if he couldn’t use the words in the right contexts, answer
questions about what he “thought,” etc., then he didn’t understand them.
By combining these science ﬁction stories I have been telling, we can contrive a
case in which someone thinks words which are in fact a description of trees in
some language and simultaneously has appropriate mental images, but neither
understands the words nor knows that a tree is. We can even imagine that the
mental images were caused by paint-spills (although the person has been hypno-
tized to think that they are images of something appropriate to his thought—
only, if he were asked, he wouldn’t be able to say of what). And we can imagine
that the language the person is thinking in is one neither the hypnotist nor the
person hypnotized has ever heard of—perhaps it is just coincidence that these
“nonsense sentences,” as the hypnotist supposes them to be, are a description of
trees in Japanese. In short, everything passing before the person’s mind might be
qualitatively identical with what was passing through the mind of a Japanese
speaker who was really thinking about trees—but none of it would refer to trees.
All of this is really impossible, of course, in the way that it is really impossible
that monkeys should by chance type out a copy of Hamlet. That is to say that the
probabilities against it are so high as to mean it will never really happen (we
think). But it is not logically impossible, or even physically impossible. It could
HILARY PUTNAM
526

happen (compatibly with physical law and, perhaps, compatibly with actual
conditions in the universe, if there are lots of intelligent beings on other planets).
And if it did happen, it would be a striking demonstration of an important
conceptual truth; that even a large and complex system of representations, both
verbal and visual, still does not have an intrinsic, built-in, magical connection
with what it represents—a connection independent of how it was caused and
what the dispositions of the speaker or thinker are. And this is true whether the
system of representations (words and images, in the case of the example) is phys-
ically realized—the words are written or spoken, and the pictures are physical
pictures—or only realized in the mind. Thought words and mental pictures do
not intrinsically represent what they are about.
The case of the brains in a vat
Here is a science ﬁction possibility discussed by philosophers: imagine that a
human being (you can imagine this to be yourself) has been subjected to an
operation by an evil scientist. The person’s brain (your brain) has been removed
from the body and placed in a vat of nutrients which keeps the brain alive. The
nerve endings have been connected to a super-scientiﬁc computer which causes
the person whose brain it is to have the illusion that everything is perfectly
normal. There seem to be people, objects, the sky, etc; but really all the person
(you) is experiencing is the result of electronic impulses travelling from the com-
puter to the nerve endings. The computer is so clever that if the person tries to
raise his hand, the feedback from the computer will cause him to “see” and “feel”
the hand being raised. Moreover, by varying the program, the evil scientist can
cause the victim to “experience” (or hallucinate) any situation or environment
the evil scientist wishes. He can also obliterate the memory of the brain oper-
ation, so that the victim will seem to himself to have always been in this environ-
ment. It can even seem to the victim that he is sitting and reading these very words
about the amusing but quite absurd supposition that there is an evil scientists
who removes people’s brains from their bodies and places them in a vat of nutri-
ents which keep the brain alive. The nerve endings are supposed to be connected
to a super-scientiﬁc computer which causes the person whose brain it is to have
the illusion that . . .
When this sort of possibility is mentioned in a lecture on the Theory of Know-
ledge, the purpose, of course, is to raise the classical problem of scepticism with
respect to the external world in a modern way. (How do you know you aren’t in
this predicament?) But this predicament is also a useful device for raising issues
about the mind/world relationship.
Instead of having just one brain in a vat, we could imagine that all human
beings (perhaps all sentient beings) are brains in a vat (or nervous systems in a vat
in case some beings with just a minimal nervous system already count as “sen-
tient”). Of course, the evil scientist would have to be outside—or would he?
Perhaps there is no evil scientist, perhaps (though this is absurd) the universe just
happens to consist of automatic machinery tending a vat full of brains and
nervous systems.
This time let us suppose that the automatic machinery is programmed to give
us all a collective hallucination, rather than a number of separate unrelated
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
527

hallucinations. Thus, when I seem to myself to be talking to you, you seem to
yourself to be hearing my words. Of course, it is not the case that my words
actually reach your ears—for you don’t have (real) ears, nor do I have a real
mouth and tongue. Rather, when I produce my words, what happens is that the
efferent impulses travel from my brain to the computer, which both causes me to
“hear” my own voice uttering those words and “feel” my tongue moving, etc.,
and causes you to “hear” my words, “see” me speaking, etc. In this case, we are,
in a sense, actually in communication. I am not mistaken about your real exist-
ence (only about the existence of your body and the “external world”, apart from
brains). From a certain point of view, it doesn’t even matter that “the whole
world” is a collective hallucination; for you do, after all, really hear my words
when I speak to you, even if the mechanism isn’t what we suppose it to be. (Of
course, if we were two lovers making love, rather than just two people carrying
on a conversation, then the suggestion that it was just two brains in a vat might
be disturbing.)
I want now to ask a question which will seem very silly and obvious (at least to
some people, including some very sophisticated philosophers), but which will
take us to real philosophical depths rather quickly. Suppose this whole story were
actually true. Could we, if we were brains in a vat in this way, say or think that
we were?
I am going to argue that the answer is “No, we couldn’t.” In fact, I am going to
argue that the supposition that we are actually brains in a vat, although it violates
no physical law, and is perfectly consistent with everything we have experienced,
cannot possibly be true. It cannot possibly be true, because it is, in a certain way,
self-refuting.
The argument I am going to present is an unusual one, and it took me several
years to convince myself that it is really right. But it is a correct argument. What
makes it seem so strange is that it is connected with some of the very deepest
issues in philosophy. (It ﬁrst occurred to me when I was thinking about a theorem
in modern logic, the “Skolem–Löwenheim Theorem”, and I suddenly saw a
connection between this theorem and some arguments in Wittgenstein’s
Philosophical Investigations.)
A “self-refuting supposition” is one whose truth implies its own falsity. For
example, consider the thesis that all general statements are false. This is a general
statement. So if it is true, then it must be false. Hence, it is false. Sometimes a
thesis is called “self-refuting” if it is the supposition that the thesis is entertained
or enunciated that implies its falsity. For example, “I do not exist” is self-refuting
if thought by me (for any “me”). So one can be certain that one oneself exists, if
one thinks about it (as Descartes argued).
What I shall show is that the supposition that we are brains in a vat has just
this property. If we can consider whether it is true or false, then it is not true (I
shall show). Hence it is not true.
Before I give the argument, let us consider why it seems so strange that such an
argument can be given (at least to philosophers who subscribe to a “copy” con-
ception of truth). We conceded that it is compatible with physical law that there
should be a world in which all sentient beings are brains in a vat. As philosophers
say, there is a “possible world” in which all sentient beings are brains in a vat.
(This “possible world” talk makes it sound as if there is a place where any absurd
HILARY PUTNAM
528

supposition is true, which is why it can be very misleading in philosophy.) The
humans in that possible world have exactly the same experiences that we do.
They think the same thoughts we do (at least, the same words, images, thought-
forms, etc., go through their minds). Yet, I am claiming that there is an argument
we can give that shows we are not brains in a vat. How can there be? And why
couldn’t the people in the possible world who really are brains in a vat give it too?
The answer is going to be (basically) this: although the people in that possible
world can think and “say” any words we can think and say, they cannot (I claim)
refer to what we can refer to. In particular, they cannot think or say that they are
brains in a vat (even by thinking “we are brains in a vat”).
Turing’s test
Suppose someone succeeds in inventing a computer which can actually carry on
an intelligent conversation with one (on as many subjects as an intelligent person
might). How can one decide if the computer is “conscious”?
The British logician Alan Turing proposed the following test:2 let someone
carry on a conversation with the computer and a conversation with a person
whom he does not know. If he cannot tell which is the computer and which is the
human being, then (assume the test to be repeated a sufﬁcient number of times
with different interlocutors) the computer is conscious. In short, a computing
machine is conscious if it can pass the “Turing Test”. (The conversations are not
to be carried on face to face, of course, since the interlocutor is not to know the
visual appearance of either of his two conversational partners. Nor is voice to be
used, since the mechanical voice might simply sound different from a human
voice. Imagine, rather, that the conversations are all carried on via electric type-
writer. The interlocutor types in his statements, questions, etc., and the two
partners—the machine and the person—respond via the electric keyboard. Also,
the machine may lie—asked “Are you a machine”, it might reply, “No, I’m an
assistant in the lab here.”)
The idea that this test is really a deﬁnitive test of consciousness has been
criticized by a number of authors (who are by no means hostile in principle to the
idea that a machine might be conscious). But this is not our topic at this time. I
wish to use the general idea of the Turing test, the general idea of a dialogic test of
competence, for a different purpose, the purpose of exploring the notion of
reference.
Imagine a situation in which the problem is not to determine if the partner is
really a person or a machine, but is rather to determine if the partner uses the
words to refer as we do. The obvious test is, again, to carry on a conversation,
and, if no problems arise, if the partner “passes” in the sense of being indis-
tinguishable from someone who is certiﬁed in advance to be speaking the same
language, referring to the usual sorts of objects, etc., to conclude that the partner
does refer to objects as we do. When the purpose of the Turing test is as just
described, that is, to determine the existence of (shared) reference, I shall refer to
the test as the Turing Test for Reference. And, just as philosophers have discussed
the question whether the original Turing test is a deﬁnitive test for consciousness,
i.e. the question of whether a machine which “passes” the test not just once but
regularly is necessarily conscious, so, in the same way, I wish to discuss the
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
529

question of whether the Turing Test for Reference just suggested is a deﬁnitive
test for shared reference.
The answer will turn out to be “No”. The Turing Test for Reference is not
deﬁnitive. It is certainly an excellent test in practice; but it is not logically impos-
sible (though it is certainly highly improbable) that someone could pass the
Turing Test for Reference and not be referring to anything. It follows from this, as
we shall see, that we can extend our observation that words (and whole texts and
discourses) do not have a necessary connection to their referents. Even if we
consider not words by themselves but rules deciding what words may appropri-
ately be produced in certain contexts—even if we consider, in computer jargon,
programs for using words—unless those programs themselves refer to something
extra-linguistic there is still no determinate reference that those words possess.
This will be a crucial step in the process of reaching the conclusion that the Brain-
in-a-Vat Worlders cannot refer to anything external at all (and hence cannot say
that they are Brain-in-a-Vat Worlders).
Suppose, for example, that I am in the Turing situation (playing the “Imitation
Game”, in Turing’s terminology) and my partner is actually a machine. Suppose
this machine is able to win the game (“passes” the test). Imagine the machine to
be programmed to produce beautiful responses in English to statements, ques-
tions, remarks, etc. in English, but that it has no sense organs (other than the
hookup to my electric typewriter), and no motor organs (other than the electric
typewriter). (As far as I can make out, Turing does not assume that the possession
of either sense organs or motor organs is necessary for consciousness or intelli-
gence.) Assume that not only does the machine lack electronic eyes and ears, etc.,
but that there are no provisions in the machine’s program, the program for
playing the Imitation Game, for incorporating inputs from such sense organs, or
for controlling a body. What should we say about such a machine?
To me, it seems evident that we cannot and should not attribute reference to
such a device. It is true that the machine can discourse beautifully about, say, the
scenery in New England. But it could not recognize an apple tree or an apple, a
mountain or a cow, a ﬁeld or a steeple, if it were in front of one.
What we have is a device for producing sentences in response to sentences. But
none of these sentences is at all connected to the real world. If one coupled two of
these machines and let them play the Imitation Game with each other, then they
would go on “fooling” each other forever, even if the rest of the world disap-
peared! There is no more reason to regard the machine’s talk of apples as refer-
ring to real world apples than there is to regard the ant’s “drawing” as referring
to Winston Churchill.
What produces the illusion of reference, meaning, intelligence, etc., here is the
fact that there is a convention of representation which we have under which the
machine’s discourse refers to apples, steeples, New England, etc. Similarly, there
is the illusion that the ant has caricatured Churchill, for the same reason. But we
are able to perceive, handle, deal with apples and ﬁelds. Our talk of apples and
ﬁelds is intimately connected with our non-verbal transactions with apples and
ﬁelds. There are “language entry rules” which take us from experiences of apples
to such utterances as “I see an apple”, and “language exit rules” which take us
from decisions expressed in linguistic form (“I am going to buy some apples”) to
actions other than speaking. Lacking either language entry rules or language exit
HILARY PUTNAM
530

rules, there is no reason to regard the conversation of the machine (or of the two
machines, in the case we envisaged of two machines playing the Imitation Game
with each other) as more than syntactic play. Syntactic play that resembles intel-
ligent discourse, to be sure; but only as (and no more than) the ant’s curve
resembles a biting caricature.
In the case of the ant, we could have argued that the ant would have drawn the
same curve even if Winston Churchill had never existed. In the case of the
machine, we cannot quite make the parallel argument; if apples, trees, steeples
and ﬁelds had not existed, then, presumably, the programmers would not have
produced that same program. Although the machine does not perceive apples,
ﬁelds, or steeples, its creator–designers did. There is some causal connection
between the machine and the real world apples, etc., via the perceptual experi-
ence and knowledge of the creator–designers. But such a weak connection can
hardly sufﬁce for reference. Not only is it logically possible, though fantastically
improbable, that the same machine could have existed even if apples, ﬁelds, and
steeples had not existed; more important, the machine is utterly insensitive to the
continued existence of apples, ﬁelds, steeples, etc. Even if all these things ceased
to exist, the machine would still discourse just as happily in the same way. That is
why the machine cannot be regarded as referring at all.
The point that is relevant for our discussion is that there is nothing in Turing’s
Test to rule out a machine which is programmed to do nothing but play the
Imitation Game, and that a machine which can do nothing but play the Imitation
Game is clearly not referring any more than a record player is.
Brains in a vat (again)
Let us compare the hypothetical “brains in a vat” with the machines just
described. There are obviously important differences. The brains in a vat do not
have sense organs, but they do have provision for sense organs; that is, there are
afferent nerve endings, there are inputs from these afferent nerve endings, and
these inputs ﬁgure in the “program” of the brains in the vat just as they do in the
program of our brains. The brains in a vat are brains; moreover, they are func-
tioning brains, and they function by the same rules as brains do in the actual
world. For these reasons, it would seem absurd to deny consciousness or intelli-
gence to them. But the fact that they are conscious and intelligent does not mean
that their words refer to what our words refer. The question we are interested in is
this: do their verbalizations containing, say, the word “tree” actually refer to
trees? More generally: can they refer to external objects at all? (As opposed to,
for example, objects in the image produced by the automatic machinery.)
To ﬁx our ideas, let us specify that the automatic machinery is supposed to
have come into existence by some kind of cosmic chance or coincidence (or,
perhaps, to have always existed). In this hypothetical world, the automatic
machinery itself is supposed to have no intelligent creator–designers. In fact, as
we said at the beginning of this chapter, we may imagine that all sentient beings
(however minimal their sentience) are inside the vat.
This assumption does not help. For there is no connection between the word
“tree” as used by these brains and actual trees. They would still use the word
“tree” just as they do, think just the thoughts they do, have just the images they
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
531

have, even if there were no actual trees. Their images, words, etc., are qualita-
tively identical with images, words, etc., which do represent trees in our world;
but we have already seen (the ant again!) that qualitative similarity to something
which represents an object (Winston Churchill or a tree) does not make a thing a
representation all by itself. In short, the brains in a vat are not thinking about real
trees when they think “there is a tree in front of me” because there is nothing by
virtue of which their thought “tree” represents actual trees.
If this seems hasty, reﬂect on the following: we have seen that the words do not
necessarily refer to trees even if they are arranged in a sequence which is identical
with a discourse which (were it to occur in one of our minds) would unquestion-
ably be about trees in the actual world. Nor does the “program”, in the sense of
the rules, practices, dispositions of the brains to verbal behavior, necessarily refer
to trees or bring about reference to trees through the connections it establishes
between words and words, or linguistic cues and linguistic responses. If these
brains think about, refer to, represent trees (real trees, outside the vat), then it
must be because of the way the “program” connects the system of language to
non-verbal input and outputs. There are indeed such non-verbal inputs and out-
puts in the Brain-in-a-Vat world (those efferent and afferent nerve endings
again!), but we also saw that the “sense-data” produced by the automatic
machinery do not represent trees (or anything external) even when they resemble
our tree-images exactly. Just as a splash of paint might resemble a tree picture
without being a tree picture, so, we saw, a “sense datum” might be qualitatively
identical with an “image of a tree” without being an image of a tree. How can the
fact that, in the case of the brains in a vat, the language is connected by the
program with sensory inputs which do not intrinsically or extrinsically represent
trees (or anything external) possibly bring it about that the whole system of
representations, the language-in-use, does refer to or represent trees or anything
external?
The answer is that it cannot. The whole system of sense-data, motor signals to
the efferent endings, and verbally or conceptually mediated thought connected by
“language entry rules” to the sense-data (or whatever) as inputs and by “lan-
guage exit rules” to the motor signals as outputs, has no more connection to trees
than the ant’s curve has to Winston Churchill. Once we see that the qualitative
similarity (amounting, if you like, to qualitative identity) between the thoughts of
the brains in a vat and the thoughts of someone in the actual world by no means
implies sameness of reference, it is not hard to see that there is no basis at all for
regarding the brain in a vat as referring to external things.
The premisses of the argument
I have now given the argument promised to show that the brains in a vat cannot
think or say that they are brains in a vat. It remains only to make it explicit and to
examine its structure.
By what was just said, when the brain in a vat (in the world where every
sentient being is and always was a brain in a vat) thinks “There is a tree in front
of me”, his thought does not refer to actual trees. On some theories that we shall
discuss it might refer to trees in the image, or to the electronic impulses that cause
tree experiences, or to the features of the program that are responsible for those
HILARY PUTNAM
532

electronic impulses. These theories are not ruled out by what was just said, for
there is a close causal connection between the use of the word “tree” in vat-
English and the presence of trees in the image, the presence of electronic impulses
of a certain kind, and the presence of certain features in the machine’s program.
On these theories the brain is right, not wrong in thinking “There is a tree in front
of me.” Given what “tree” refers to in vat-English and what “in front of” refers
to, assuming one of these theories is correct, then the truth-conditions for “There
is a tree in front of me” when it occurs in vat-English are simply that a tree in the
image be “in front of” the “me” in question—in the image—or, perhaps, that the
kind of electronic impulse that normally produces this experience be coming
from the automatic machinery, or, perhaps, that the feature of the machinery that
is supposed to produce the “tree in front of one” experience be operating. And
these truth-conditions are certainly fulﬁlled.
By the same argument, “vat” refers to vats in the image in vat-English, or
something related (electronic impulses or program features), but certainly not to
real vats, since the use of “vat” in vat-English has no causal connection to real
vats (apart from the connection that the brains in a vat wouldn’t be able to use
the word “vat”, if it were not for the presence of one particular vat—the vat they
are in; but this connection obtains between the use of every word in vat-English
and that one particular vat; it is not a special connection between the use of the
particular word “vat” and vats). Similarly, “nutrient ﬂuid” refers to a liquid in
the image in vat-English, or something related (electronic impulses or program
features). It follows that if their “possible world” is really the actual one, and we
are really the brains in a vat, then what we now mean by “we are brains in a vat”
is that we are brains in a vat in the image or something of that kind (if we mean
anything at all). But part of the hypothesis that we are brains in a vat is that we
aren’t brains in a vat in the image (i.e. what we are “hallucinating” isn’t that we
are brains in a vat). So, if we are brains in a vat, then the sentence “We are brains
in a vat” says something false (if it says anything). In short, if we are brains in a
vat, then “We are brains in a vat” is false. So it is (necessarily) false.
The supposition that such a possibility makes sense arises from a combination
of two errors: (1) taking physical possibility too seriously; and (2) unconsciously
operating with a magical theory of reference, a theory on which certain mental
representations necessarily refer to certain external things and kinds of things.
There is a “physically possible world” in which we are brains in a vat—what
does this mean except that there is a description of such a state of affairs which is
compatible with the laws of physics? Just as there is a tendency in our culture
(and has been since the seventeenth century) to take physics as our metaphysics,
that is, to view the exact sciences as the long-sought description of the “true and
ultimate furniture of the universe”, so there is, as an immediate consequence, a
tendency to take “physical possibility” as the very touchstone of what might
really actually be the case. Truth is physical truth; possibility physical possibility;
and necessity physical necessity, on such a view. But we have just seen, if only in
the case of a very contrived example so far, that this view is wrong. The existence
of a “physically possible world” in which we are brains in a vat (and always were
and will be) does not mean that we might really, actually, possibly be brains in a
vat. What rules out this possibility is not physics but philosophy.
Some philosophers, eager both to assert and minimize the claims of their
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
533

profession at the same time (the typical state of mind of Anglo-American phil-
osophy in the twentieth century), would say: “Sure. You have shown that some
things that seem to be physical possibilities are really conceptual impossibilities.
What’s so surprising about that?”
Well, to be sure, my argument can be described as a “conceptual” one. But to
describe philosophical activity as the search for “conceptual” truths makes it all
sound like inquiry about the meaning of words. And that is not at all what we
have been engaging in.
What we have been doing is considering the preconditions for thinking about,
representing, referring to, etc. We have investigated these preconditions not by
investigating the meaning of these words and phrases (as a linguist might, for
example) but by reasoning a priori. Not in the old “absolute” sense (since we
don’t claim that magical theories of reference are a priori wrong), but in the sense
of inquiring into what is reasonably possible assuming certain general premisses,
or making certain very broad theoretical assumptions. Such a procedure is nei-
ther “empirical” nor quite “a priori”, but has elements of both ways of investi-
gating. In spite of the fallibility of my procedure, and its dependence upon
assumptions which might be described as “empirical” (e.g. the assumption that
the mind has no access to external things or properties apart from that provided
by the senses), my procedure has a close relation to what Kant called a “tran-
scendental” investigation; for it is an investigation, I repeat, of the preconditions
of reference and hence of thought—preconditions built in to the nature of our
minds themselves, though not (as Kant hoped) wholly independent of empirical
assumptions.
One of the premisses of the argument is obvious: that magical theories of
reference are wrong, wrong for mental representations and not only for physical
ones. The other premiss is that one cannot refer to certain kinds of things, e.g.
trees, if one has no causal interaction at all with them,3 or with things in terms of
which they can be described. But why should we accept these premisses? Since
these constitute the broad framework within which I am arguing, it is time to
examine them more closely.
The reasons for denying necessary connections between
representations and their referents
I mentioned earlier that some philosophers (most famously, Brentano) have
ascribed to the mind a power, “intentionality”, which precisely enables it to refer.
Evidently, I have rejected this as no solution. But what gives me this right? Have I,
perhaps, been too hasty?
These philosophers did not claim that we can think about external things or
properties without using representations at all. And the argument I gave above
comparing visual sense data to the ant’s “picture” (the argument via the science
ﬁction story about the “picture” of a tree that came from a paint-splash and that
gave rise to sense data qualitatively similar to our “visual images of trees”, but
unaccompanied by any concept of a tree) would be accepted as showing that
images do not necessarily refer. If there are mental representations that necessar-
ily refer (to external things) they must be of the nature of concepts and not of the
nature of images. But what are concepts?
HILARY PUTNAM
534

When we introspect we do not perceive “concepts” ﬂowing through our minds
as such. Stop the stream of thought when or where we will, what we catch are
words, images, sensations, feelings. When I speak my thoughts out loud I do not
think them twice. I hear my words as you do. To be sure it feels different to me
when I utter words that I believe and when I utter words I do not believe (but
sometimes, when I am nervous, or in front of a hostile audience, it feels as if I am
lying when I know I am telling the truth); and it feels different when I utter words
I understand and when I utter words I do not understand. But I can imagine
without difﬁculty someone thinking just these words (in the sense of saying them
in his mind) and having just the feeling of understanding, asserting, etc., that I do,
and realizing a minute later (or on being awakened by a hypnotist) that he did not
understand what had just passed through his mind at all, that he did not even
understand the language these words are in. I don’t claim that this is very likely; I
simply mean that there is nothing at all unimaginable about this. And what this
shows is not that concepts are words (or images, sensations, etc.), but that to
attribute a “concept” or a “thought” to someone is quite different from attribut-
ing any mental “presentation”, any introspectible entity or event, to him. Con-
cepts are not mental presentations that intrinsically refer to external objects for
the very decisive reason that they are not mental presentations at all. Concepts
are signs used in a certain way; the signs may be public or private, mental entities
or physical entities, but even when the signs are “mental” and “private”, the sign
itself apart from its use is not the concept. And signs do not themselves
intrinsically refer.
We can see this by performing a very simple thought experiment. Suppose you
are like me and cannot tell an elm tree from a beech tree. We still say that the
reference of “elm” in my speech is the same as the reference of “elm” in anyone
else’s, viz. elm trees, and that the set of all beech trees is the extension of “beech”
(i.e. the set of things the word “beech” is truly predicated of) both in your speech
and my speech. Is it really credible that the difference between what “elm” refers
to and what “beech” refers to is brought about by a difference in our concepts?
My concept of an elm tree is exactly the same as my concept of a beech tree (I
blush to confess). (This shows that the determination of reference is social and
not individual, by the way; you and I both defer to experts who can tell elms from
beeches.) If someone heroically attempts to maintain that the difference between
the reference of “elm” and the reference of “beech” in my speech is explained by
a difference in my psychological state, then let him imagine a Twin Earth where
the words are switched. Twin Earth is very much like Earth; in fact, apart from
the fact that “elm” and “beech” are interchanged, the reader can suppose Twin
Earth is exactly like Earth. Suppose I have a Doppelganger on Twin Earth who is
molecule for molecule identical with me (in the sense in which two neckties can
be “identical”). If you are a dualist, then suppose my Doppelganger thinks the
same verbalized thoughts I do, has the same sense data, the same dispositions,
etc. It is absurd to think his psychological state is one bit different from mine: yet
his word “elm” represents beeches, and my word “elm” represents elms. (Simi-
larly, if the “water” on Twin Earth is a different liquid—say, XYZ and not
H2O—then “water” represents a different liquid when used on Twin Earth and
when used on Earth, etc.) Contrary to a doctrine that has been with us since the
seventeenth century, meanings just aren’t in the head.
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
535

We have seen that possessing a concept is not a matter of possessing images
(say, of trees – or even images, “visual” or “acoustic”, of sentences, or whole
discourses, for that matter) since one could possess any system of images you
please and not possess the ability to use the sentences in situationally appropriate
ways (considering both linguistic factors—what has been said before—and non-
linguistic factors as determining “situational appropriateness”). A man may have
all the images you please, and still be completely at a loss when one says to him
“point to a tree”, even if a lot of trees are present. He may even have the image of
what he is supposed to do, and still not know what he is supposed to do. For the
image, if not accompanied by the ability to act in a certain way, is just a picture,
and acting in accordance with a picture is itself an ability that one may or may
not have. (The man might picture himself pointing to a tree, but just for the sake
of contemplating something logically possible; himself pointing to a tree after
someone has produced the—to him meaningless—sequence of sounds “please
point to a tree”.) He would still not know that he was supposed to point to a tree,
and he would still not understand “point to a tree”.
I have considered the ability to use certain sentences to be the criterion for
possessing a full-blown concept, but this could easily be liberalized. We could
allow symbolism consisting of elements which are not words in a natural lan-
guage, for example, and we could allow such mental phenomena as images and
other types of internal events. What is essential is that these should have the
same complexity, ability to be combined with each other, etc., as sentences in a
natural language. For, although a particular presentation—say, a blue ﬂash—
might serve a particular mathematician as the inner expression of the whole
proof of the Prime Number Theorem, still there would be no temptation to say
this (and it would be false to say this) if that mathematician could not unpack his
“blue ﬂash” into separate steps and logical connections. But, no matter what
sort of inner phenomena we allow as possible expressions of thought, arguments
exactly similar to the foregoing will show that it is not the phenomena them-
selves that constitute understanding, but rather the ability of the thinker to
employ these phenomena, to produce the right phenomena in the right
circumstances.
The foregoing is a very abbreviated version of Wittgenstein’s argument in
Philosophical Investigations. If it is correct, then the attempt to understand
thought by what is called “phenomenological” investigation is fundamentally
misguided; for what the phenomenologists fail to see is that what they are
describing is the inner expression of thought, but that the understanding of that
expression—one’s understanding of one’s own thoughts— is not an occurrence
but an ability. Our example of a man pretending to think in Japanese (and
deceiving a Japanese telepath) already shows the futility of a phenomenological
approach to the problem of understanding. For even if there is some introspect-
ible quality which is present when and only when one really understands (this
seems false on introspection, in fact), still that quality is only correlated with
understanding, and it is still possible that the man fooling the Japanese telepath
have that quality too and still not understand a word of Japanese.
On the other hand, consider the perfectly possible man who does not have any
“interior monologue” at all. He speaks perfectly good English, and if asked what
his opinions are on a given subject, he will give them at length. But he never
HILARY PUTNAM
536

thinks (in words, images, etc.) when he is not speaking out loud; nor does
anything “go through his head”, except that (of course) he hears his own voice
speaking, and has the usual sense impressions from his surroundings, plus a
general “feeling of understanding”. (Perhaps he is in the habit of talking to him-
self.) When he types a letter or goes to the store, etc., he is not having an internal
“stream of thought”; but his actions are intelligent and purposeful, and if anyone
walks up and asks him “What are you doing?” he will give perfectly coherent
replies.
This man seems perfectly imaginable. No one would hesitate to say that he was
conscious, disliked rock and roll (if he frequently expressed a strong aversion to
rock and roll), etc., just because he did not think conscious thoughts except when
speaking out loud.
What follows from all this is that (a) no set of mental events— images or more
“abstract” mental happenings and qualities— constitutes understanding; and (b)
no set of mental events is necessary for understanding. In particular, concepts
cannot be identical with mental objects of any kind. For, assuming that by a
mental object we mean something introspectible, we have just seen that whatever
it is, it may be absent in a man who does understand the appropriate word (and
hence has the full blown concept), and present in a man who does not have the
concept at all.
Coming back now to our criticism of magical theories of reference (a topic
which also concerned Wittgenstein), we see that, on the one hand, those “mental
objects” we can introspectively detect—words, images, feelings, etc.—do not
intrinsically refer any more than the ant’s picture does (and for the same reasons),
while the attempts to postulate special mental objects, “concepts”, which do have
a necessary connection with their referents, and which only trained phenomen-
ologists can detect, commit a logical blunder; for concepts are (at least in part)
abilities and not occurrences. The doctrine that there are mental presentations
which necessarily refer to external things is not only bad natural science; it is also
bad phenomenology and conceptual confusion.
Notes
1
In this book the terms “representation” and “reference” always refer to a rela-
tion between a word (or other sort of sign, symbol, or representation) and some-
thing that actually exists (i.e. not just an “object of thought”). There is a sense of
“refer” in which I can “refer” to what does not exist; this is not the sense in
which “refer” is used here. An older word for what I call “representation” or
“reference” is denotation.
Secondly, I follow the custom of modern logicians and use “exist” to mean
“exist in the past, present, or future.” Thus Winston Churchill “exists,” and we
can “refer to” or “represent” Winston Churchill, even though he is no longer
alive.
2
A.M. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind 59 (1950): 433–60,
reprinted in A.R. Anderson (ed.), Minds and Machines (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall, 1964).
3
If the Brains in a Vat will have causal connection with, say, trees in the future,
then perhaps they can now refer to trees by the description “the things I will refer
“BRAINS IN A VAT”
537

to as ‘trees’ at such-and-such a future time”. But we are to imagine a case in
which the Brains in a Vat never get out of the vat, and hence never get into causal
connection with trees, etc.
QUESTIONS
1
What is “intentionality”?
2
When people on Twin Earth say “water,” what are they referring to, according to
Putnam?
3
What conclusion is the Twin Earth example supposed to support?
4
Why, according to Putnam, is the brain in the vat unable to refer to brains or vats?
HILARY PUTNAM
538

Fred Dretske, “The Pragmatic Dimension
of Knowledge”
Knowing that something is so, unlike being wealthy or reasonable, is not a matter
of degree. Two people can both be wealthy, yet one be wealthier than the other;
both be reasonable, yet one be more reasonable than the other. When talking
about people, places and topics (things rather than facts), it makes sense to say
that one person knows something better than another. He knows the city better
than we do, knows more Russian history than any of his colleagues, but doesn’t
know his wife as well as do his friends. But factual knowledge, the knowledge
that something is so, does not admit of such comparisons.1 If we both know that
today is Friday, it makes no sense to say that you know this better than I. A rich
man can become richer by acquiring more money, and a person’s belief (that
today is Saturday, for example) can be made more reasonable by the accumula-
tion of additional evidence, but if a person already knows that today is Friday,
there is nothing he can acquire that will make him know it better. Additional
evidence will not promote him to a loftier form of knowledge—though it may
make him more certain of something he already knew. You can boil water beyond
its boiling point (e.g., at 300°F) but you are not, thereby, boiling it better. You are
simply boiling it at a higher temperature.
In this respect factual knowledge is absolute. It is like being pregnant: an all or
nothing affair. One person cannot be more pregnant, or pregnant better than
someone else. Those who view knowledge as a form of justiﬁed (true) belief
typically acknowledge this fact by speaking, not simply of justiﬁcation, but of
full, complete, or adequate justiﬁcation. Those qualiﬁcations on the sort of justi-
ﬁcation required to know something constitute an admission that knowledge is,
whereas justiﬁcation is not, an absolute idea. For these qualiﬁers are meant to
reﬂect the fact that there is a certain threshold of justiﬁcation that must be
equalled or exceeded if knowledge is to be obtained, and equalling or exceeding
this threshold is, of course, an absolute idea. I can have a better justiﬁcation than
you, but my justiﬁcation cannot be more adequate (more sufﬁcient, more full)
than yours. If my justiﬁcation is complete in the intended sense, then your justiﬁ-
cation cannot be more complete.
Philosophers who view knowledge as some form of justiﬁed true belief are
generally reluctant to talk about this implied threshold of justiﬁcation. Just how
Fred Dretske, “The Pragmatic Dimension of Knowledge,” Philosophical Studies 40
(1981): 363–78.
539

much evidence or justiﬁcation, one wants to ask, is enough to qualify as an
adequate, a full, or a complete justiﬁcation? If the level or degree of justiﬁcation is
represented by real numbers between 0 and 1 (indicating the conditional prob-
ability of that for which one has evidence or justiﬁcation), any threshold less than
1 seems arbitrary. Why, for example, should a justiﬁcation of 0.95 be good
enough to know something when a justiﬁcation of 0.54 is not adequate? And if
one can know P because one’s justiﬁcation is 0.95 and know Q because one’s
justiﬁcation is similarly high, is one excluded from knowing P and Q because the
justiﬁcation for their joint occurrence has (in accordance with the multiplicative
rule in probability theory) dropped below 0.95?
Aside, though, from its arbitrariness, any threshold of justiﬁcation less than 1
seems to be too low. For examples can easily be given in which such thresholds
are exceeded without the justiﬁcation being good enough (by ordinary intuitive
standards) for knowledge. For example, if the threshold is set at 0.95, one need
only think of a bag with 96 white balls and 4 black balls in it. If someone draws
a ball at random from this bag, the justiﬁcation for believing it to be white
exceeds the 0.95 threshold. Yet, it seems clear (to me at least) that such a justiﬁ-
cation (for believing that a white ball has been drawn) is not good enough.
Someone who happened to draw a white ball, and believed they drew a white
ball on the basis of this justiﬁcation, would not know that they drew a white
ball.
Examples such as this suggest (though they do not, of course, prove) that the
absolute, non-comparative, character of knowledge derives from the absolute-
ness, or conclusiveness, of the justiﬁcation required to know. If I know that the
Russians invaded Afghanistan, you can’t know this better than I know it because
in order to know it I must already have an optimal, or conclusive justiﬁcation (a
justiﬁcation at the level of 1), and you can’t do better than that. I have explored
this possibility in other papers, and I do not intend to pursue it here.2 What I want
to develop in this paper is a different theme, one that (I hope) helps to illuminate
our concept of knowledge by showing how this absolute idea can, despite its
absoluteness, remain sensitive to the shifting interests, concerns and factors inﬂu-
encing its everyday application. In short, I want to explore the way, and the
extent to which, this absolute notion exhibits a degree of contextual relativity in
its ordinary use.
To do this it will be useful to brieﬂy recapitulate Peter Unger’s discussion of
absolute concepts.3 Although he misinterprets its signiﬁcance, Unger does, I
think, locate the important characteristic of this class of concepts. He illustrates
the point with the term ﬂat. This, he argues, is an absolute term in the sense that a
surface is ﬂat only if it is not at all bumpy or irregular. Any bumps or irregular-
ities, however small, and insigniﬁcant they may be (from a practical point of
view), mean that the surface on which they occur is not really ﬂat. It may be
almost ﬂat, or very nearly ﬂat, but (as both these expressions imply) it is not
really ﬂat. We do, it seems, compare surfaces with respect to their degree of
ﬂatness (e.g., West Texas is ﬂatter than Wisconsin), but Unger argues that this
must be understood as a comparison of the degree to which these surfaces
approximate ﬂatness. They cannot both be ﬂat and, yet, one be ﬂatter than the
other. Hence, if A is ﬂatter than B, then B (perhaps also A) is not really ﬂat.
Flatness does not admit of degrees although a surface’s nearness to being ﬂat
FRED DRETSKE
540

does, and it is this latter magnitude that we are comparing when we speak of one
surface being ﬂatter than another.
Unger concludes from this analysis that not many things are really ﬂat. For
under powerful enough magniﬁcation almost any surface will exhibit some
irregularities. Hence, contrary to what we commonly say (and, presumably,
believe), these surfaces are not really ﬂat. When we describe them as being
ﬂat, what we say is literally false. Probably nothing is really ﬂat. So be it. This,
according to Unger, is the price we pay for having absolute concepts.
If knowledge is absolute in this way, then there should be similar objections to
its widespread application to everyday situations. Powerful magniﬁcation (i.e.,
critical inquiry) should, and with the help of the skeptic has, revealed “bumps”
and “irregularities” in our evidential posture with respect to most of the things
we say we know. There are always, it seems, possibilities that our evidence is
powerless to eliminate, possibilities which, until eliminated, block the road to
knowledge. For if knowledge, being an absolute concept, requires the elimination
of all competing possibilities (possibilities that contrast with what is known),
then, clearly we seldom, if ever, satisfy the conditions for applying the concept.
This skeptical conclusion is unpalatable to most philosophers. Unger endorses
it. Knowledge, according to him, is an absolute concept that, like ﬂatness, has
very little application to our bumpy, irregular world.
I have in one respect already indicated my agreement with Unger. Knowledge is
an absolute concept (I disagree with him, however, about the source of this abso-
luteness; Unger ﬁnds it in the certainty required for knowledge; I ﬁnd it in the
justiﬁcation required for knowledge). Unlike Unger, though, I do not derive skep-
tical conclusions from this fact. I will happily admit that ﬂat is an absolute con-
cept, and absolute in roughly the way Unger says it is, but I do not think this
shows that nothing is really ﬂat. For although nothing can be ﬂat if it has any
bumps and irregularities, what counts as a bump or irregularity depends on the
type of surface being described. Something is empty (another absolute concept
according to Unger) if it has nothing in it, but this does not mean that an aban-
doned warehouse is not really empty because it has light bulbs or molecules in it.
Light bulbs and molecules do not count as things when determining the empti-
ness of warehouse. For purposes of determining the emptiness of a warehouse,
molecules (dust, light bulbs, etc.) are irrelevant. This isn’t to say that, if we
changed the way we used warehouses (e.g., if we started using, or trying to use,
warehouses as giant vacuum chambers), they still wouldn’t count. It is only to say
that, given the way they are now used, air molecules (dust particles, etc.) don’t
count.
Similarly, a road can be perfectly ﬂat even though one can feel and see
irregularities in its surface, irregularities which, were they to be found on the
surface of, say, a mirror would mean that the mirror’s surface was not really ﬂat.
Large mice are not large animals and ﬂat roads are not necessarily ﬂat surfaces.
The Flat Earth society is certainly an anachronism, but they are not denying the
existence of ant hills and gopher holes.
Absolute concepts depict a situation as being completely devoid of a certain
sort of thing: bumps in the case of ﬂatness and objects in the case of emptiness.
The fact that there can be nothing of this sort present for the concept to be
satisﬁed is what makes it an absolute concept. It is why if X is empty, Y cannot be
“THE PRAGMATIC DIMENSION OF KNOWLEDGE”
541

emptier. Nonetheless, when it comes to determining what counts as a thing of this
sort (a bump or an object), and hence what counts against a correct application
of the concept, we ﬁnd the criteria or standards peculiarly spongy and relative.
What counts as a thing for assessing the emptiness of my pocket may not count as
a thing for assessing the emptiness of a park, a warehouse, or a football stadium.
Such concepts, we might say, are relationally absolute; absolute, yes, but only
relative to a certain standard. We might put the point this way: to be empty is to
be devoid of all relevant things, thereby exhibiting, simultaneously, the absolute
(in the world “all”) and relative (in the word “relevant”) character of this
concept.
If, as I have suggested, knowledge is an absolute concept, we should expect it
to exhibit this kind of relationally absolute character. This, indeed, is the possibil-
ity I mean to explore in this paper. What I propose to do is to use what I have
called relationally absolute concepts as a model for understanding knowledge. In
accordance with this approach (and in harmony with an earlier suggestion) I
propose to think of knowledge as an evidential state in which all relevant alterna-
tives (to what is known) are eliminated. This makes knowledge an absolute con-
cept but the restriction to relevant alternatives makes it, like empty and ﬂat,
applicable to this epistemically bumpy world we live in.
Why do this? What are the advantages? A partial catalog of beneﬁts follows:
(1) A growing number of philosophers are able to ﬁnd, or so they claim, a
pragmatic, social, or communal dimension to knowledge.4 A variety of examples
indicate, or seem to these philosophers to indicate, that knowledge depends, not
just on the evidential status of the knower vis-à-vis what is known, but on such
factors as the general availability, and proximity, of (misleading) counter-
evidence, on the sorts of things that are commonly taken for granted by others in
the relevant community, on the interests and purposes of speaker (in claiming to
know) and listeners (in being told that someone knows), and the importance or
signiﬁcance of what is known or someone’s knowing it. I, personally, happen to
think that most of these examples show nothing of the kind. These factors affect,
not whether something is known, but whether it is reasonable to say you know or
to think you know. But, for the moment, I do not want to argue the point. I
merely wish to point out that in so far as knowledge is a function of such prag-
matic, social or communal factors, the present approach to its analysis can
absorb this relativity without compromising the absoluteness of knowledge itself.
The social or pragmatic dimension to knowledge, if it exists at all, has to do with
what counts as a relevant alternative, a possibility that must be evidentially
excluded, in order to have knowledge. It does not change the fact that to know
one must be in a position to exclude all such possibilities. It does not alter the fact
that one must have, in this sense, an optimal justiﬁcation—one that eliminates
every (relevant) possibility of being mistaken.
(2) Secondly, this approach to the analysis of knowledge helps to avoid the
proliferation of senses that sometimes threatens to engulf epistemological discus-
sions. We don’t have different senses of the verb “to know”—a strong sense here,
a weak sense there—but one sense with different applications. We don’t have two
senses of the word “empty”—one for pockets and one for warehouses. We have
one sense (or meaning) with a difference in what counts as a thing.
(3) Thirdly, we get a better perspective from which to understand the
FRED DRETSKE
542

persisting and undiminished appeal of skeptical arguments. Most philosophers
have experienced the futility of trying to convince a devoted skeptic, or just a
newly converted freshman, that we do know there are tables and chairs despite
the possibility of dreams, hallucinations, cunning demons and diabolical scien-
tists who might be toying with our brain on Alpha Centuri (Nozick’s example).
Somehow, in the end, we seem reduced to shrugging our shoulders and saying
that there are certain possibilities that are just too remote to worry about. Our
evidence isn’t good enough to eliminate these wilder hypotheses because, of
course, these wild hypotheses are carefully manufactured so as to neutralize our
evidence. But dismissing such hypotheses as too remote to worry about, as too
fanciful to have any impact on our ordinary use of the verb “to know,” is merely
another way of saying that for purposes of assessing someone’s knowledge that
this is a table, certain alternative possibilities are simply not relevant. We are
doing the same thing (or so I submit) as one who dismisses chalk dust as irrele-
vant, or too insigniﬁcant, to worry about in describing a classroom as empty.
What it is important to realize, especially in arguments with the skeptic, is that
the impatient dismissal of his fanciful hypotheses is not (as he will be quick to
suggest) a mere practical intolerance, and refusal to confront, decisive objections
to our ordinary way of talking. It is, rather, a half conscious attempt to exhibit
the relationally absolute character of our cognitive concepts.
(4) Finally, this approach to the analysis of knowledge gives us the kind of
machinery we need to handle the otherwise puzzling examples that are becoming
more frequent in the epistemological literature. Consider yet one more example
(one more because this one, I think, combines elements of several of the more
familiar examples). An amateur bird watcher spots a duck on his favorite Wis-
consin pond. He quickly notes its familiar silhouette and markings and makes a
mental note to tell his friends that he saw a Gadwall, a rather unusual bird in that
part of the midwest. Since the Gadwall has a distinctive set of markings (black
rump, white patch on the hind edge of the wing, etc.), markings that no other
North American duck exhibits, and these markings were all perfectly visible, it
seems reasonable enough to say that the bird-watcher knows that yonder bird is a
Gadwall. He can see that it is.
Nevertheless, a concerned ornithologist is poking around in the vicinity, not
far from where our bird-watcher spotted his Gadwall, looking for some trace of
Siberian Grebes. Grebes are duck-like water birds, and the Siberian version of
this creature is, when it is in the water, very hard to distinguish from a Gadwall
duck. Accurate identiﬁcation requires seeing the birds in ﬂight since the Gadwall
has a white belly and the Grebe a red belly—features that are not visible when
the birds are in the water. The ornithologist has a hypothesis that some Siberian
Grebes have been migrating to the midwest from their home in Siberia, and he
and his research assistants are combing the midwest in search of conﬁrmation.
Once we embellish our simple story in this way, intuitions start to diverge on
whether our amateur bird-watcher does indeed know that yonder bird is a Gad-
wall duck (we are assuming, of course, that it is a Gadwall). Most people
(I assume) would say that he did not know the bird to be a Gadwall if there
actually were Siberian Grebes in the vicinity. It certainly sounds strange to sup-
pose that he could give assurances to the ornithologist that the bird he saw was
not a Siberian Grebe (since he knew it to be a Gadwall duck). But what if the
“THE PRAGMATIC DIMENSION OF KNOWLEDGE”
543

ornithologist’s suspicions are unfounded. None of the Grebes have migrated.
Does the bird-watcher still not know what he takes himself to know. Is, then, the
simple presence of an ornithologist, with his false hypothesis, enough to rob the
bird-watcher of his knowledge that the bird on the pond is a Gadwall duck?
What if we suppose that the Siberian Grebes, because of certain geographical
barriers, cannot migrate. Or suppose that there really are no Siberian Grebes—
the existence of such a bird being a delusion of a crackpot ornithologist. We may
even suppose that, in addition to there being no grebes, there is no ornithologist
of the sort I described, but that people in the area believe that there is. Or some
people believe that there is. Or the bird-watcher’s wife believes that there is and,
as a result, expresses skepticism about his claim to know that what he saw was a
Gadwall duck. Or, ﬁnally, though no one believes any of this, some of the locals
are interested in whether or not our birdwatcher knows that there are no
look-alike migrant grebes in the area.
Somewhere in this progression philosophers, most of them anyway, will dig in
their heels and say that the bird-watcher really does know that the bird he sees is
a Gadwall, and that he knows this despite his inability to justiﬁably rule out
certain alternative possibilities. For example, if there are no look-alike grebes and
no ornithologist of the sort I described, but the bird-watcher’s wife believes that
there are (a rumour she heard from her hairdresser), this does not rob him of his
knowledge that the bird he saw as a Gadwall. He needn’t be able to rule out the
possibility that there are, somewhere in the world, look-alike grebes that have
migrated to the midwest in order to know that the bird he saw was a Gadwall
duck. These other possibilities are (whether the bird-watcher realizes it or not)
simply too remote.
Most philosophers will dig in their heels here because they realize that if they
don’t, they are on the slippery slope to skepticism with nothing left to hang onto.
If false rumours about look-alike grebes and ornithologists can rob an expert
bird-watcher of his knowledge that a bird seen in good light, and under ideal
conditions, is a Gadwall duck, then similarly false rumours, suspicions or even
conjectures about deceptive demons or possible tricks will rob everyone of almost
everything they know. One of the ways to prevent this slide into skepticism is
to acknowledge that although knowledge requires the evidential elimination of
all relevant alternatives (to what is known), there is a shifting, variable set of
relevant alternatives. It may be that our bird-watcher does know the bird is a
Gadwall under normal conditions (because look-alike grebes are not a relevant
alternative), but does not know this if there is a suspicion, however ill-founded it
may be, that there exist look-alike grebes within migrating range. This will (or
should) be no more unusual than acknowledging the fact that a refrigerator could
truly be described as empty to a person looking for something to eat, but not
truly described as empty to a person looking for spare refrigerator parts. In the
ﬁrst case “empty” implies having no food in it; in the second it implies having no
shelves, brackets and hardware in it.
These, then, are some of the advantages to be derived from this approach to
the analysis of knowledge. They are, however, advantages that can only be har-
vested if certain questions can be given reasonable answers: in particular (a) what
makes a possibility relevant? (b) If, in order to know, one must rule out all
relevant alternatives, how is this “elimination” to be understood? What does it
FRED DRETSKE
544

take, evidentially, to “rule out” an alternative? (c) Is it possible, as this type of
analysis suggests, for one to know something at one time and, later, not know it
(due to the introduction of another relevant alternative) without forgetting it? (c)
Can one make it easier to know things by remaining ignorant of what are, for
others, relevant possibilities?
These, and many more questions, need answers if this framework for the
analysis of knowledge is to be anything more than suggestive. Since I cannot here
(or anywhere else, for that matter) provide answers to all these questions, I will
try, in the time remaining, to ﬁll in some of the large gaps.
Call the Contrasting Set (CS) the class of situations that are necessarily elimin-
ated by what is known to be the case. That is, if S knows that P, then Q is in the
CS (of P) if and only if, given P, necessarily not-Q. In our bird-watcher’s
example, the bird’s being a Siberian Grebe (or any kind of grebe at all) is in the CS
of our bird-watcher’s knowledge, or putative knowledge, that it is a Gadwall
duck. So is its being an elephant, a hummingbird, a holographic image, or a
ﬁgment of his imagination. Furthermore, let us call the set of possible alternatives
that a person must be in an evidential position to exclude (when he knows that P)
the Relevancy Set (RS). In saying that he must be in a position to exclude these
possibilities I mean that his evidence or justiﬁcation for thinking these alterna-
tives are not the case must be good enough to say he knows they are not the case.
Items in the CS that are not in the RS I shall call irrelevant alternatives. These are
items which, though their existence is incompatible with what is known to be the
case, the knower need not (though he may) have a justiﬁcation for thinking do
not exist. Under normal conditions (the kind of conditions that I assume prevail
in the world today) the possibility of something’s being a look-alike grebe,
though it is a member of the contrasting set, is not a member of the relevancy set
of a bird-watcher’s knowledge that what he sees is a Gadwall duck (in the kind of
circumstances I described).5 On the other hand, its being an eagle, a Mallard, or a
Loon are members of the relevancy set since if the bird watcher could not elimin-
ate these possibilities (sufﬁcient unto knowing that it was not an eagle, a Mallard
or a loon) on the basis of the bird’s appearance and behavior, then he would not
know that it was a Gadwall.
What we are suggesting here is that the RS is always a proper subset of the CS
and, moreover, may not be the same RS from situation to situation even though
what is known remains the same. The situation can be diagrammed as follows:
The solid lines indicate a RS and the corresponding piece of evidence that would
be required to know with this RS. With a different RS (RS′), indicated by dotted
Figure 1
“THE PRAGMATIC DIMENSION OF KNOWLEDGE”
545

lines, different evidence would be required. If Siberian Grebes are in the Rele-
vancy Set, then additional, more elaborate, evidence is required to know that
yonder bird is a Gadwall than in the normal situation. Since the bellies are of
different color, one might, for example, be able to tell that it was a Gadwall by
watching it in ﬂight. The point, however, is that something more would be needed
than was available in the original, normal situation.
In terms of this kind of diagram, a skeptic could be represented as one who
took RS = CS in all cases. One’s evidence must be comprehensive enough to
eliminate all contrasting possibilities—there being no irrelevant alternatives.
Once the mistake is made of identifying RS with CS the pressure (on non-
skeptics) for lowering the standards of justiﬁcation (requisite for knowing)
becomes irresistible. For if in order to know that P one must be justiﬁed in
rejecting all members of the CS (not just all members of the RS), then one can no
longer expect very impressive levels of justiﬁcation for what people know to be
the case. If the evidence our bird watcher has for believing the bird to be a
Gadwall duck (wing markings, etc.) is also supposed to justify the proposition
that it is not a look-alike grebe, then, obviously, the justiﬁcation is nowhere near
conclusive. What some philosophers seem inclined to conclude from this is that
knowledge does not require conclusive evidence. The reasoning is simple: the
bird-watcher knows it is a Gadwall; he doesn’t have conclusive reasons (he can’t
exclude the possibility that it is a look-alike grebe); therefore knowledge does not
require conclusive reasons. But this, I submit, is a fallacy, a misunderstanding of
what needs to be conclusively excluded in order to know. Such reasoning is
analogous to arguing that to be empty an object can have a few hundred things in
it, and to conclude this on the basis of the undeniable fact that empty classrooms,
warehouses, and buildings generally have at least a hundred things in them.
But what determines the membership of a relevancy set? A relevancy set, you
will recall, is a set of situations each member of which contrasts with what is
known to be the case, and must be evidentially excluded if one is to know. Are
there criteria for membership in this set? I’m now going to stick my neck out by
saying what some of the considerations are that determine the membership of
these sets. I do not expect much agreement.
(1) The ﬁrst point has to do with the way we use contrastive focusing to
indicate the range of relevant alternatives. I have discussed this phenomenon in
another place, so let me give just one example to illustrate the sort of thing I have
in mind.6 Someone claiming to know that Clyde sold his typewriter to Alex is not
(necessarily) claiming the same thing as one who claims to know that Clyde sold
his typewriter to Alex. The sentence we use to express what they know is the
same, of course, but they reﬂect, and are designed to reﬂect, different relevancy
sets. A person who knows that Clyde sold his typewriter to Alex must be able to
rule out the possibility that he gave it to him, or that he loaned it to him, or
(perhaps) that he merely pretended to sell it to him. But he needs only a nominal
justiﬁcation, if he needs any justiﬁcation at all, for thinking it was Alex to whom
he sold it. He has to be right about its being Alex, of course, but he isn’t claiming
to have any special justiﬁcation for thinking it was Alex rather than, say, his twin
brother Albert. On the other hand, the person who knows that Clyde sold his
typewriter to Alex is claiming to know that it wasn’t Albert and is, therefore,
expected to be in possession of evidence bearing on the identity of the recipient.
FRED DRETSKE
546

But, in this second case, the knower needs only a nominal justiﬁcation for the
belief that Clyde sold him the typewriter rather than, say, loaned it to him. He
certainly needn’t be able to exclude the possibility that the entire transaction was
a sham designed to fool the IRS.
(2) A second point, related to the ﬁrst, is the way the subject term chosen to
give verbal expression to what is known often functions to restrict the range of
relevant alternatives.7 Once again, an example will have to sufﬁce. If I say that I
could tell that your sister was amused by my funny story, I do not thereby claim
to know that she is really your sister, really a human being (rather than a cleverly
contrived robot), or really the sort of creature that could experience amusement.
These possibilities, though certainly relevant to the truth of what I say in the
sense that if they were realized I would not know what I say I know are not
possibilities that I need be in an evidential position to exclude to know that your
sister was amused by my joke. I was, as it were, taking it for granted that she was
your sister (hence, a human being, a creature that could experience amusement),
and I was claiming to know something about the thing so referred to. On the
other hand, if I said that I could tell that the object in the corner (that happened to
be your sister) was amused by my funny story, the possibility that it is a robot
becomes a relevant alternative, one that I am (by this choice of words) accepting
epistemic responsibility for excluding.
(3) Thirdly, in saying that we know we often reveal, either directly or
indirectly, how we know. I could see that the tire was ﬂat, could tell (by the way
they behaved) that they were in love, heard them making plans to go, learned
(from the newspapers) that the auto workers went out on strike, and used my
pocket calculator to get the answer. The way we come to know, the channel (so to
speak) over which we obtain our information, is, I submit, always the locus of
irrelevant alternatives. Others can challenge the reliability of this channel (our
visual system, our auditory system, the newspapers, the pocket calculator), and if
it turns out unreliable in some way they will thereby have discredited our claim to
knowledge. But others cannot discredit our claim to knowledge merely by point-
ing out that the channel over which we received our information could be unreli-
able or that we do not know it to be reliable. Possible malfunctions in the channel
over which we receive information (combined with a resulting false message) are
members of the contrasting set but they are not members of the relevancy set. To
say that one can see, by the newspapers, that the auto workers are going on strike
is to advance a knowledge claim (that the auto workers are going on strike) on
the assumption of the newspapers reliability. If the newspapers are a reliable
source of such information, then the claimant does know what he says he knows,
and he knows it in the way he says he knows it. One cannot undermine this claim
by raising possibilities about deceptive newspaper stories or arguing that the
claimant does not know that the newspapers, or this newspaper, is reliable. He
never said he did know this. What he did say is that he knew the auto workers
were going out on strike while simultaneously disclosing what he was taking for
granted which, if true, allowed him to know this.
I take the same to be true about our sensory systems when we come to know
something by seeing, hearing, tasting and touching. This is the function of our
frequent indications (when advancing a knowledge claim) of the manner in
which we came to know. We are, by this device, tipping off our listeners, helping
“THE PRAGMATIC DIMENSION OF KNOWLEDGE”
547

them to identify which possibilities are irrelevant to what we are claiming to
know.
(4) Fourthly, some people, I am sure, would insist that a pertinent factor
inﬂuencing the size and membership of the relevancy set is the importance (for
speaker and listeners) of what is known or of someone’s knowing it. There is a
difference between driving by a string of gasoline stations and driving in the
middle of the desert. Running out of gas in the ﬁrst case may be merely an
inconvenience; in the latter case it may be a matter of life and death. This makes a
difference between knowing (by glancing at your fuel gauge) that you still have
some gas in your tank. The implications of being wrong in these two cases are
much different—so different (some would claim) that additional precautions
must be taken (to rule out certain possibilities) in the second case if one is to
know that one still has some gasoline. And there is even a bigger difference
between these cases and knowing that the coolant liquid surrounding the reactor
on Three Mile Island is at a safe level by glancing at a similar kind of gauge. The
fuel gauge (and associated mechanism) that sufﬁces for knowing that you still
have some gasoline (when driving in the city) is just not good enough for know-
ing that there is sufﬁcient liquid coolant surrounding the reactor. This somewhat
paradoxical fact (the fact, namely, that a particular instrument should be good
enough to give knowledge in one place, not good enough in another) is to be
explained, some would say, by the fact that as the stakes go up, the stakes associ-
ated with being right about what one purports to know, so does the size of the
relevancy set. There are more possibilities that must be eliminated in the nuclear
power plant than must be eliminated in the automobile. In particular, a malfunc-
tion in the instrument itself must be guarded against in the dangerous situation. If
it isn’t, one doesn’t know.
There is, I admit, some appeal to this point, but I think it mistaken. I see no
reason why a standard automobile gauge, transplanted from the automobile to
the nuclear power plant, functioning as the only indicator of coolant level, should
not, assuming it continues to function reliably (as reliably as it did in the auto-
mobile), be able to do precisely what the more expensive instruments do—viz.,
tell the operators that the coolant is at a safe level. I admit that the operators
should not rely on a single gauge, and certainly not one manufactured under such
casual quality control, but if they do rely on it, I don’t see any basis for denying
that they know. They should be nervous, but this nervousness is not to be
explained by their failure to know what the coolant level is, but by their
uncertainty as to when (due to gauge malfunction) they stop knowing it.
(5) Finally, we come to the difﬁcult question, the question of when an alterna-
tive (not otherwise excluded as irrelevant by one of the considerations already
discussed) is just too remote to qualify as relevant. In the case of our bird-
watcher, some philosophers, thinking to turn the tables on the skeptic (by dras-
tically diminishing the relevance set), have suggested that an alternative only
becomes relevant when there are positive reasons for thinking it is, or may be,
realized. Doubt can also be irrational, and if there are no reasons to doubt, mere
possibilities are irrelevant to whether what is believed is known.
This, obviously, is an over-reaction. The Wisconsin lakes could be loaded with
migrant Siberian Grebes without the bird watcher having any reason to think
that such look-alike birds actually existed. His lack of any reason to doubt, his
FRED DRETSKE
548

ignorance of the possibility that what he sees is a grebe and not a Gadwall, is
irrelevant. The mere possibility is in this case enough to show he doesn’t know.
This shows that having a reason (evidence) to think X is a genuine possibility is
not a necessary condition for X’s being a relevant alternative. Perhaps, though, it
is sufﬁcient. Perhaps, that is, a reasonable (justiﬁed) belief that yonder bird might
be a look-alike grebe (whether or not this belief is true) is enough to make its
being a look-alike grebe a relevant possibility.
But if a person really does believe that the bird could be a grebe, aside from the
question of whether or not this belief is reasonable, he surely fails to have the
kind of belief requisite to knowing it is a Gadwell. He certainly doesn’t think he
knows it is a Gadwall. I do not know exactly how to express the belief condition
on knowledge, but it seems to me that anyone who believes (reasonably or not)
that he might be wrong fails to meet it.8 And so the present suggestion is irrele-
vant to our problem. It describes conditions in which the subject fails to know
but only by robbing him of the belief requisite to knowledge.
It may be thought that the mere presence of evidence that one might be wrong,
assuming this evidence does not affect one’s willingness to believe, is enough to
make the respect in which one (according to this evidence) might be wrong a
relevant alternative. This has the unfortunate consequence that one can rob a
person, indeed a whole community, of its knowledge by spreading a false rumour.
I can, for example, tell the bird-watcher that I just met an ornithologist looking
for migrant grebes. Once this message is relayed to the bird watcher, even if he
rejects it as a silly fabrication, he no longer knows that the bird he saw was a
Gadwall duck. And, as a consequence, the whole community is robbed of its
knowledge that their local pond was visited by a rather rare bird (a Gadwall
duck). The mere fact that I have given them a reason to think that the bird could
be a look-alike grebe,9 whether or not they accept this as a reason, implies that,
lacking evidence that it was not a grebe, they do not know it was a Gadwall.
Without dragging the dialectic out any longer, let me simply say what such
considerations suggest to me. They suggest that the difference between a relevant
and an irrelevant alternative resides, not in what we happen to regard as a real
possibility (whether reasonably or not), but in the kind of possibilities that actu-
ally exist in the objective situation. Whether or not our bird watcher knows that
the bird he sees is a Gadwall depends on whether or not, in some objective sense,
it could be a look-alike grebe (or any other similar looking creature). If, as a
matter of fact, there are no look-alike grebes, that settles the matter. He knows it
is a Gadwall. If there are grebes, but due to certain geographical barriers, they are
conﬁned to their Siberian habitat, then, once again, the possibility of the bird’s
being a grebe, though remaining a logical possibility, is not a relevant possibility.
They, the grebes, cannot migrate to the midwest.
If, however, there are grebes, and they can migrate, but just have not done so,
the case becomes more ambiguous. I think, however, that we now have a genuine
possibility, a relevant alternative. By hypothesis the bird-watcher does not know
it is not a migrant grebe, and however improbable this possibility may be, there is
nothing the bird watcher has (either in the look of the bird or in general back-
ground information) that excludes the possibility that what he is looking at is a
migrant grebe. He does not, therefore, know it to be a Gadwall. He will, no
doubt, say he knows. And everyone else may agree and, as a result, think they
“THE PRAGMATIC DIMENSION OF KNOWLEDGE”
549

know (having been told by someone who knows): But the truth lies elsewhere. It
is, I suggest, tantamount to saying that the bottle is empty when there is a drop
left. No one is going to quarrel with this description since all the relevant
implications (e.g., we can’t make another martini) are true. But the claim itself is
false.
Notes
1
I know we sometimes say things that suggest a comparison of this sort (e.g., No
one knows better than I that there are a lot of mosquitos in the Northwest
Territories), but I take such constructions to be describing, not better knowledge,
but more direct, more compelling, kinds of evidence.
2
“Conclusive Reasons,” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49 (1971): 1–22; and
Seeing and Knowing (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969).
3
Peter Unger, “A Defense of Skepticism,” Philosophical Review 80 (1971): 198–
219.
4
I have in mind Harman’s discussion in Thought (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1973) of evidence one does not possess; Goldman’s barn
example in “Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge,” Journal of Philosophy
73 (1976): 771–91; the sorts of examples appearing in various defeasibility
analyses of knowledge (see Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson, Jr., “Know-
ledge: Undefeated Justiﬁed True Belief,” Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969):
225–37; and Peter Klein, “A Proposed Deﬁnition of Propositional Knowledge,”
Journal of Philosophy 68 (1971): 471–82); Ernest Sosa’s recommendation (in
“The Concept of Knowledge: How Do You Know?”, American Philosophical
Quarterly 11 (1974): 113–22) that we must depart from the traditional con-
ception of knowledge by putting in relief the relativity of knowledge to an
epistemic community (p. 117); and David Annis’ “A Contextualist Theory of
Epistemic Justiﬁcation,” American Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978): 213–19,
in which the basic model of justiﬁcation (and, presumably, of knowledge)
revolves around a person’s being able to meet certain objections. The trend
here, if this is a trend, seems to be toward the kind of relativity espoused by
Thomas Kuhn in his The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1962).
5
Though there are grebes, and some of them look like ducks, there are (to the
best of my knowledge) no Siberian Grebes that look like Gadwall ducks. This part
of my story was pure invention.
6
In “Contrastive Statements,” Philosophical Review 81 (1972): 411–37.
7
I tried to describe the way this works with perceptual claims in Seeing and
Knowing, pp. 93–112.
8
We needn’t suppose that for S to know that P, S must believe that he can’t be
wrong. But it does seem reasonable to insist that if S knows that P, he does not
believe that he might be wrong. In other words, if the bird-watcher really believes
that the bird he sees might be a grebe, then he does not know it is a Gadwall.
9
I assume here that my saying. “There is an ornithologist in the area looking for
migrant grebes, a species that looks very much like a Gadwall duck” is prima
facie evidence that there is an ornothologist in the area looking for migrant
grebes. If the bird-watcher ignores me (as we are assuming he does), he
FRED DRETSKE
550

nonetheless has been given evidence that the bird he saw might have been a
grebe.
QUESTIONS
1
In what way, according to Dretske, is the term “ﬂat” similar to “knows”?
2
According to Dretske, what absolute requirement must one satisfy in order to
have knowledge?
3
According to Dretske, why are skeptical hypotheses not “relevant”?
“THE PRAGMATIC DIMENSION OF KNOWLEDGE”
551

Peter Klein, “Skepticism and Closure: Why the
Evil Genius Argument Fails”1
Introduction
Skepticism is the view that we lack knowledge in areas commonly thought to be
within our ken.2 One of the most powerful arguments for skepticism employs the
Closure Principle and it can be traced at least to Cicero and, later, to Descartes.3
The purpose of this paper is to show that the Closure Principle cannot be used to
motivate skepticism, for either the principle is false or if the principle is true, the
argument for skepticism employing it must, of necessity, beg the question.
Here is a standard argument for skepticism employing the Closure Principle:
1. If a person, S, is justiﬁed in believing that there is a table
before her, then S is justiﬁed in believing that she is not in
one of the skeptical scenarios in which there is no table
but it appears just as though there were one.4
2. S is never justiﬁed in believing that she is not in one of the
skeptical scenarios in which there is no table but it
appears just as though there were one.
Therefore, S is never justiﬁed in believing that there is a table
before her.
This argument for skepticism (from now on called the “main argument”) is
powerful for at least four reasons: (1) If we are never justiﬁed in believing such
simple, straightforward, and basic propositions like there is a table before me,
then hardly any proposition could be justiﬁed; and (2) even if (on some accounts)
knowledge does not entail justiﬁcation, it seems almost as disturbing to accede to
the conclusion that we are never justiﬁed in believing that there is a table before
us as it would be to acquiesce to the conclusion that we fail to know such things;
and (3) the argument is valid and appears, at least initially, to be sound; and (4)
the range of skeptical scenarios can vary from the mundane and local (e.g., nor-
mal cases of misperception considered so important by the Pyrrhonians) to the
extraordinary and global (e.g., evil demon cases considered so important by the
Cartesians).
Peter Klein, “Skepticism and Closure: Why the Evil Genius Argument Fails,” Philo-
sophical Topics (1995): 213–36.
552

Nevertheless, I believe that the main argument for skepticism is useless to
the skeptic. Many will agree. But they will do so because they think that
premise 1 which appeals to an instantiation of the Closure Principle is false;
and they have given what seem to be plausible objections to it. I will present an
argument for the Closure Principle that avoids those objections and show that
only an argument of this sort avoids those objections.5 Nevertheless, the very
reason why the Closure Principle is true, if indeed it is true, renders the prin-
ciple useless in motivating skepticism. For in order to vouchsafe the Closure
Principle employed in premise 1 in the main argument against various objec-
tions, the skeptic must embrace a particular account of internally situated
grounds for justiﬁed beliefs which is such that there will be no way for the
skeptic to argue for premise 2 in the main argument for skepticism without
begging the question. In short, the skeptic faces a dilemma: Either the ﬁrst
premise of the main argument cannot be defended or the main argument begs
the question.
One cautionary note: My argument does not show that skepticism is
incorrect.6 It merely shows that the family of arguments employing the Closure
Principle cannot be used to motivate skepticism. Nevertheless, these argu-
ments constitute a principal weapon, if not the principal weapon, in the
arsenal developed by the skeptic and, if they can be shown to be worthless, some
signiﬁcant progress will have been made in assessing the power of skepticism.
This paper has three main parts. Part 1 is designed to clarify the Closure
Principle and to suggest a possible defense of it based upon internally situated
grounds for justiﬁed beliefs. In part 2, I argue that only a defense of the Closure
Principle like the one employed in part 1 can safeguard the Closure Principle
against otherwise sound objections. Part 3 is designed to show that, given the
requisite type of defense of the Closure Principle, the skeptic is forced to provide
an argument for premise 2 of the main argument that is sufﬁcient, by itself, to
demonstrate the conclusions of the main argument without employing either of
the premises of the main argument. In other words, if the Closure Principle is
true, the main argument for skepticism begs the question.
Part 1: How might the Closure Principle be defended?
In this part, I want to clarify the Closure Principle and suggest a defense of it. It is
not crucial for this paper that the proposed defense is adequate or, for that matter,
even plausible. What will be crucial to show in part 2 is that without the kind of
defense suggested in part 1, the Closure Principle is vulnerable to otherwise
sound objections.
Let me begin by noting that premise 1 in the main argument for skepticism
does not actually employ a general principle. It simply claims that if S is justiﬁed
in believing a particular proposition (there is a table before her), then S is justiﬁed
in believing another proposition (S is not in a skeptical scenario in which there
only appears to be a table). But presumably the main argument is only one of
many arguments employing an instantiation of a general principle of justiﬁca-
tion. That is, the main argument is not employed by the skeptic merely to show
that we fail to have knowledge about tables! By parity of reasoning, the skeptic
also believes that it can be shown that we lack knowledge of trees, our hands,
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
553

ﬁsh, rainbows, etc. In fact, the skeptic takes the ﬁrst premise to be an instanti-
ation of a general principle roughly like this:
(x)(y)[If S is justiﬁed in believing that x, and x entails y, then S is justiﬁed in
believing that y].
As stated, the general principle is clearly false. Every necessary truth is entailed
by every proposition. But one surely does not want to claim that S is justiﬁed in
believing every necessary truth simply because S is justiﬁed in believing some
randomly chosen proposition. In addition, some entailments might be beyond S’s
capacity to grasp. Finally, there might even be some contingent propositions that
are beyond S’s capacity to grasp that are entailed by some propositions that S
does, indeed, grasp. So, let us simply stipulate that the domain of the propositions
in the generalization includes only contingent propositions that are within S’s
capacity to grasp and that the entailment is “obvious” to S. Typically, the skep-
tical scenarios are posited in such a way as to render it obvious that our ordinary
beliefs are false in those scenarios, and it is taken to be a contingent claim that S is
in the actual circumstances as described in the antecedent and not in the posited
skeptical scenario in the consequent. Thus, the stipulated restrictions are in line
with the use made of the Closure Principle by the skeptic.
Before suggesting a possible defense of the Closure Principle, one other crucial
point must be noted in order to clarify it and its role in the main argument for
skepticism. S’s being justiﬁed in believing a proposition, say p, does not entail
that S actually believes that p. What is meant is that S has an adequate source of
justiﬁcation for p. S may fail to believe that p because, for example, S is epi-
stemically timid or because S simply fails to recognize the adequate source of
justiﬁcation. The main argument could have been stated by using “S has an
adequate source of justiﬁcation for believing . . .” in place of “S is justiﬁed in
believing . . .” as in the following:
(x)(y)[If S has an adequate source of justiﬁcation for believing that x, and x
entails y, then S has an adequate source of justiﬁcation for believing that y].
Although this way of stating the principle would have underscored what I take to
be the issue at stake—namely, the adequacy of the sources of justiﬁcation for
beliefs—it is not the standard way of formulating it. I chose the standard way in
order to make clear that I intend to be discussing the merits of the principle as it is
usually understood.
The crucial point to note is that the main argument for skepticism, if success-
ful, concludes that S never has an adequate source of justiﬁcation for those pro-
positions that we typically think are most evident. Clearly then, in order to assess
the validity of the Closure Principle, we must examine the potential sources of
justiﬁcation.
We can conveniently divide the sources of justiﬁcation into two mutually
exclusive and jointly exhaustive types. One source is what I will call “externally
situated evidence”—that is, features of the world other than the contents of S’s
actual beliefs and S’s justiﬁed beliefs. During a murder investigation, the dis-
covery of ﬁngerprints, eyewitness testimony, letters, and traces of gunpowder
PETER KLEIN
554

may lead a detective to justiﬁably accuse someone of the crime. These are
examples of externally situated evidence.
On the other hand, the contents of a person’s actual beliefs and justiﬁed beliefs
can serve as an adequate source of justiﬁcation for further beliefs. When the
detective “puts two and two together” as, for example, when the detective recog-
nizes the consequence of her belief that the murderer’s ﬁngerprints match those of
a suspect, she may be led to justiably believe the suspect is the murderer. Such
potential sources of justiﬁcation are internally situated reasons.7 Finally, it is
possible that a belief could be added, legitimately, to the corpus of justiﬁed beliefs
on a “mixed” basis, that is based on both sources of justiﬁcation, i.e., internally
situated reasons and externally situated evidence. For example, by inspecting our
current justiﬁed beliefs, we could uncover internally situated reasons which are
such that we justiﬁably come to believe that only two people remain plausible
suspects in the murder case and, then, discover externally situated evidence in
order justiﬁably to narrow the list of plausible suspects to only one person. What
is provided in answering the question “What justiﬁes S in believing that x?”
determines whether the source is purely external, purely internal, or mixed.
In order to avoid some possible misreadings of my position, it is important to
note that as I am using the terms “external” and “internal” (and related terms
such as “internalist” and “externalist”) they do not refer to general theories of
knowledge or justiﬁcation, namely, what are commonly referred to as “external-
ism” and “internalism.”8 Rather, as I use these terms, they merely refer to poten-
tial sources of justiﬁcation. Some general theories of justiﬁcation (for example,
some forms of reliabilism) would hold that a belief is justiﬁed just in case it arose
in a reliable way; and included among those reliable ways could be various pro-
cesses of inference, Hence, an adequate source of justiﬁcation endorsed by a
general externalistic theory of justiﬁcation would be “internally situated
reasons” in my sense.
Now, of course, it is true that some general externalist theories of knowledge
eschew the use of “justiﬁcation” or “justiﬁed beliefs” because those terms have
such a deontic ring to them.9 But that causes no real problem here since the entire
discussion could be recast using other epistemic terms in place of “justiﬁcation.”
For example, the Closure Principle (with the restrictions mentioned above con-
cerning the range of the variables and the obviousness of the entailment) could be
recast in many ways, including:
(x)(y)[If S knows that x, and x entails y, then S knows that y].10
Of course, suitable revisions in the main argument for skepticism would have to
be made by substituting “knows” (or some linguistic variant) for “is justiﬁed in
believing.” The point I wish to emphasize here is that externalist theories of the
sources of epistemically acceptable beliefs look to features of the world beyond
S’s actual beliefs and S’s justiﬁed beliefs in order to determine whether S can
expand the corpus of beliefs that are suitable candidates for knowledge.11 It does
not matter whether the term “justiﬁcation” is employed. What matters is whether
it is claimed that the only sources of epistemically acceptable beliefs are external
to S’s actual beliefs and S’s justiﬁed beliefs.
Theories about internally situated sources of justiﬁed beliefs, on the other
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
555

hand, focus on the propositions that S already believes and those justiﬁed for S in
order to determine whether a new belief can be added to the corpus of beliefs that
are suitable candidates for knowledge. A question that typiﬁes such theories is
this: In what ways is an epistemic agent justiﬁed in expanding her corpus of
justiﬁed beliefs based on S’s actual beliefs and those already justiﬁed for S?12
It is important to note that an internalist with regard to the sources of justiﬁca-
tion can appeal to S’s justiﬁed beliefs, as well as to S’s actual beliefs, in order to
determine when, if ever, there is an adequate source of justiﬁcation for a further
belief.13 That the internalist can do so follows from a point mentioned earlier,
namely that S can be justiﬁed in believing a proposition without actually believ-
ing it. In assessing the Closure Principle, the question is whether it is necessary
that S has an adequate source of justiﬁcation for a proposition, q, whenever S has
an adequate source of justiﬁcation for a proposition, p, which entails q. The
question is not whether it is necessary that S has an adequate source of justiﬁca-
tion for q whenever S believes that p, and p entails q. Put another way, the
antecedent in the Closure Principle refers to propositions which S is justiﬁed in
believing, not to propositions that S believes.
Consider a particular internalist question: If S is justiﬁed in believing that p
and S is justiﬁed in believing that q, does S (necessarily) have adequate internally
situated reasons for being justiﬁed in believing that (p & q)? The answer might
seem to be “obviously yes,” until it is recognized that, depending upon the prob-
abilities assigned to p and to q and the method of calculating the probability of a
conjunction, the threshold for justiﬁcation required for each conjunct might be
reached without reaching the threshold for the conjunction. (Of course, in
some cases, that threshold could be reached and, consequently, the conjunction
could be justiﬁed.) I might note, in passing, that this fact does not provide any
evidence against the Closure Principle since that principle concerns the trans-
mission of justiﬁcation from one proposition to another through entailment; it
does not concern the transmission of justiﬁcation from sets of justiﬁed proposi-
tions containing more than one member to another proposition entailed by the
set.14
This is not the place to discuss the merits of the external, internal, or mixed
accounts of the sources of justiﬁcation. Indeed, they may not be genuine rival
theories about the sources of justiﬁed beliefs at all. For it seems plausible to
suggest that all three types of sources of justiﬁcation are required in order to have
an adequate account of justiﬁed beliefs. In addition, for the purposes of this paper
it can even be granted that there is no pure form of external source of justiﬁcation
because so-called “background” beliefs are always operative in the justiﬁcation
of beliefs. But that there is a particular type of “pure” internal source of justiﬁed
beliefs is crucial to any credible defense of the Closure Principle. I hope that will
become obvious as the discussion proceeds.
What is important to bear in mind when considering the validity of the Closure
Principle is that there are two distinct questions that can be asked:
1.
What externally situated evidence, if any, provides an adequate source of
justiﬁcation for a belief?
2.
What internally situated reasons, if any, provide an adequate source of
justiﬁcation for a belief?
PETER KLEIN
556

At ﬁrst glance it might seem that developing a comprehensive account of justi-
ﬁcation and, in particular, providing a full account of the sources of justiﬁcation
would be a prerequisite to answering these two questions as they apply to the
Closure Principle. But, luckily, because the Closure Principle assumes in its ante-
cedent that some proposition is already in the corpus of S’s justiﬁed beliefs, the
relevant question is much easier to answer. It is this: Can a new (contingent and
graspable) belief be added to the corpus of S’s justiﬁed beliefs whenever it is
obviously entailed by one of the justiﬁed (contingent) beliefs already within that
corpus?
Putting the question that way suggests a clear, intuitive internalist argument
for the Closure Principle: Assume that a belief, x, is justiﬁed for S just in case
there is a source of justiﬁcation (whether an internally situated reason or exter-
nally situated evidence or both) in virtue of which x is sufﬁciently likely to be true
(from S’s point of view).15 Now, consider a belief, say bi, such that bi is justiﬁed
for S and obviously entails another, graspable belief, say bk. By hypothesis, since S
is justiﬁed in believing that bi, it is sufﬁciently likely to be true. Since believing
that bi satisﬁes that requirement, believing that bk also satisﬁes that requirement.
For the likelihood of bk’s being true is at least as great as that of bi’s being true.
Thus, if believing that bi is justiﬁed for S, so is believing that bk. In short, bk is
justiﬁed for S because bi provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation of bk for S.16
This is the argument concerning the internally situated reasons that can pro-
vide sources of justiﬁed beliefs to which the defender of the Closure Principle can
appeal.17 It strikes me as a plausible argument, but for the purposes of this paper
it does not matter whether it is a good argument. The crucial point is that the
skeptic has the option of employing such an internalistic defense of the Closure
Principle.
Part 2: The defense of the Closure Principle suggested in Part 1 is necessary
to save it from the attacks that have been developed against it
When Gettier ﬁrst introduced the principle that has come to be known as the
Closure Principle, it appears that he thought of it as invoking internally situated
reasons as adequate sources of justiﬁcation for expanding the corpus of justiﬁed
beliefs discussed in part 1. He stated the principle as follows: “For any prop-
osition P, if S is justiﬁed in believing P, and P entails Q, and S deduces Q from P
and accepts Q as a result of this deduction, then S is justiﬁed in believing Q.”18 In
the language suggested earlier, the principle asserts that whenever S has an
adequate source of justiﬁcation for P, and P entails Q, then S has an adequate
source of justiﬁcation for Q because P, itself, is such an adequate source.
Nevertheless, many putative counterexamples have been developed to the
Closure Principle, and general theories of knowledge have been proposed in
which closure fails. While not denying the validity of the counterexamples or
questioning the accounts of knowledge in which closure fails, I do want to show
that most of them share a family resemblance, namely, that they ignore the type
of defense of the Closure Principle presented in part I that is based upon the
adequacy of the internally situated reason that entails an additional proposition
for providing a source of justiﬁcation for expanding the set of justiﬁed beliefs to
include the entailed proposition. For these objections to the Closure Principle
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
557

(i.e., the counterexamples and the general theories in which closure fails) rely
upon employing an externalist account of the sources of justiﬁcation and/or
knowledge or they fail to note that the internalist can argue that a justiﬁed prop-
osition provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation for any proposition that it
obviously entails. More precisely, these objections to the Closure Principle
depend upon the fact that the externally situated evidence or the internally situ-
ated reasons that provide an adequate source of justiﬁcation for a proposition, p,
do not always provide an adequate source of justiﬁcation for a proposition, q,
entailed by p. But that fact cannot be used against the Closure Principle if the
argument for closure depends upon the claim that in the relevant cases p, itself,
provides an adequate internally situated reason for expanding the corpus of
justiﬁed and/or known beliefs to those propositions obviously entailed by p.
So, let us turn to the ﬁrst type of objection—the counterexamples—to the
Closure Principle and begin with the one given by Dretske, since it is the most
well known and is the prototype of many other purported counterexamples. In
the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case, he points out that there are circumstances in which
we are justiﬁed in believing that the animal in the zoo is a zebra. The animal is in
a pen marked “Zebras” and it looks just like zebras look. He continues as
follows:
Yet something’s being a zebra implies that it is not a mule . . . cleverly
disguised by the zoo authorities to look like a zebra. Do you know that
these animals are not mules cleverly disguised? If you are tempted to say
“Yes” to this question, think a moment about what reasons you have, what
evidence you can produce in favor of this claim. The evidence you had for
thinking them zebras has been effectively neutralized, since it does not
count toward their not being mules cleverly disguised to look like zebras.19
Note that the counterexample depends upon the supposed lack of sufﬁcient evi-
dence or reasons for the claim that the animal is not a cleverly disguised mule. In
other words, Dretske grants that there is an adequate source of justiﬁcation for
the claim that the animal is a zebra, but he claims that there is no adequate source
of justiﬁcation (available at that moment) for the claim that the animal is not a
cleverly disguised mule.
If we restrict the meaning of “evidence” or “reasons” (as used by Dretske) to
what I have called externally situated evidence, then Dretske is clearly correct.
There can be adequate externally situated evidence to justify a proposition, p,
without there being adequate externally situated evidence to justify a prop-
osition, q, entailed by p. In addition, the internally situated reasons that are
adequate for making p justiﬁed might not be adequate to make q justiﬁed.20 For
example, the justiﬁed belief that the animals look like zebras and are in a pen
marked “Zebras” cannot be used to justify the claim that the animals are not
cleverly disguised mules. But the important point to note is that Dretske has
restricted the search for a source of the justiﬁcation of the entailed proposition
in such a way that it precludes ﬁnding the entailing proposition—namely, the
animals in the pen are zebras—as that source.
The Dretske-type purported counterexample aims at a mistaken target. It does
not aim at the Closure Principle. The Closure Principle does not require that the
PETER KLEIN
558

source of justiﬁcation for the entailed proposition is anything other than the
entailing proposition. Return to Gettier’s formulation of the principle: S is justi-
ﬁed in believing Q because S deduces it from P and accepts Q as the result of the
deduction. Now, of course, in the statement of the Closure Principle we are using,
we have stripped it of the description of the psychological process by which S
comes to believe the entailed proposition. We did that in order to focus attention
on the central question, namely: Does S have an adequate source of justiﬁcation
for the entailed proposition? Nevertheless, it is clear from the original formula-
tion of the principle that Gettier thought the entailing proposition provided an
adequate source of justiﬁcation for the entailed one.
Irving Thalberg’s formulation of the Closure Principle explicitly attacks what I
have called the mistaken target. He says that the principle he is criticizing can be
put as follows:
For any proposition, P, if a person S is justiﬁed [by evidence-propositions E1
. . . En which S accepts] in believing P, and P entails Q, and S deduces Q
from P and accepts Q as a result of this deduction, then S is justiﬁed [by E1
. . . En] in believing Q.21
The material in the square brackets is in the original and it illustrates my point
convincingly.22
The mistaken target is this:
(x)(y)[If e is an adequate source of S’s justiﬁcation for x, and x entails y,
then e is an adequate source of S’s justiﬁcation for y].
The mistaken target is a much stronger principle than the Closure Principle. The
mistaken target implies the Closure Principle; but the Closure Principle does not
imply the mistaken target. Because the mistaken target is a stronger principle, one
might expect that there are counterexamples to it that are not counterexamples to
the Closure Principle.
More recently, Robert Audi has given another supposed counterexample to
the Closure Principle. I want to quote the argument at some length in order to
show that it is yet one more case (albeit in a disguised form) of the way in
which the standard objections to the Closure Principle ignore the type of pure
internalistic defense available to ground the principle. Here is his argument:
I add a column of ﬁgures, check my results twice, and thereby come to
know, and justiﬁably believe, that the sum is 10,952. As it happens, I some-
times make mistakes, and my wife (whom I justiﬁably believe to be a better
arithmetician) sometimes corrects me. Suppose that, feeling unusually con-
ﬁdent, I now infer that if my wife says this is not the sum, she is wrong. But
even though I know and justiﬁably believe that this is the sum, can I on this
basis, automatically know or justiﬁably believe the further proposition that
if she says that it is not the sum, she is wrong? Suppose my checking just
twice is enough to give me the minimum basis for justiﬁed belief and know-
ledge here. Surely I would then not have sufﬁcient grounds for the further
proposition that if she says the answer is wrong, she is wrong.23
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
559

I emphasized “this basis” in the quotation. The reason for doing so will become
apparent shortly.
One might object to Audi’s putative counterexample by pointing out, ﬁrst, that
the seemingly entailed proposition is a disguised subjunctive conditional of the
form “if my wife were to say that the sum is not 10,952; then she would be
wrong.” And, second, either the proposition “the sum of the ﬁgures in the col-
umn is 10,952” is a necessary truth (if the ﬁgures are designated rigidly as “the
very ﬁgures in this very column”) or it is a contingent truth (if the ﬁgures are
designated nonrigidly as “the ﬁgures, whatever they are, in the column that I
added”). On the one hand, if the proposition is a necessary truth, then this is not
an appropriate counterexample to the Closure Principle since that principle
concerns only contingent propositions. On the other hand, if the proposition is
contingent, then it does not entail the subjunctive claim because in some near
possible worlds in which the wife does say that sum is not 10,952, the sum is,
indeed, not 10,952 (because the numbers in the column have changed).
Nevertheless, Audi’s general point is well taken, namely, there are cases in
which there is the minimum amount of externally situated evidence available to
justify a proposition without there being the minimum amount of such externally
situated evidence available to justify the entailed proposition. That was the lesson
learned from the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case. One could change Audi’s example so as
to make the justiﬁed proposition clearly a contingent one and the entailed prop-
osition one which asserts that an expert has not truly denied the contingent
proposition. For example, the pair of propositions could be: There will be a
snowstorm tomorrow (based upon reading a local newspaper) and a meteorolo-
gist who said that there will not be a snowstorm is wrong. In addition, such cases
show that if the content of the set of S’s relevant justiﬁed beliefs is limited to the
propositions delineating the externally situated evidence S has for a proposition,
it is clear that there are cases in which the internally situated reasons that justify a
proposition, p, are not sufﬁcient to justify every proposition entailed by p. To
generalize, there will be cases in which the adequate source of justiﬁcation for a
proposition, p, is not an adequate source of justiﬁcation for a proposition, q, even
when q is entailed by p. But those cases provide telling evidence against only
the mistaken target identiﬁed earlier; they do not provide evidence against the
Closure Principle.
An initially plausible explanation of these cases has been provided by the
“relevant-alternatives” account of justiﬁcation.24 The suggestion is that the
source of justiﬁcation for p can be adequate because it makes p sufﬁciently likely
relative to p’s relevant alternatives without that source being adequate to make q
sufﬁciently likely relative to q’s relevant alternatives, even when p entails q. In
such cases, it is held that the range of relevant alternatives for q is larger, or at
least different, than the range of relevant alternatives for p.
Whether the relevant-alternatives account turns out to be the best explanation
of these cases is not important for my purposes. What is crucial to note is that the
defenders of the Closure Principle could point out that its validity is not
impugned by the existence of such cases or the relevant-alternatives account of
them. In order to underscore that point; I emphasized “this basis” in the quota-
tion from Audi. Look back to the quotation and note that the referent of “this” in
“this basis” can be either to the proposition that the sum is 10,952 or to the
PETER KLEIN
560

evidence or reasons for the proposition that the sum is 10,952. If it refers to the
evidence or reasons, namely, to the fact that one has added the column of ﬁgures
twice and arrived at the sum 10,952 both times or to the belief that one has done
so, then the claim would be that the evidence or the reasons one has for that
proposition are not enough to justify the further claim that the expert is wrong.
As I have said, that general point must be granted; but it is not telling against the
Closure Principle as it was defended in part 1, for this objection, once again, aims
at the mistaken target.
But there is another way of reading Audi’s example which does not involve the
mistaken target. If “this” in “this basis” refers to the proposition “the sum is
10,952,” then the defenders of the Closure Principle should not grant what is
being claimed. For it is no longer a question of whether the basis for believing
that the sum is 10,952 is an adequate basis for believing that an expert who
disagrees is wrong. Rather, the question is whether the justiﬁed proposition “the
sum is 10,952” is an adequate basis for justiﬁably believing that an expert who
disagrees is wrong. The defense of the Closure Principle does not require that the
externally situated evidence and/or the internally situated reasons one has for p
are adequate for q, even when p entails q. It does depend upon the supposed fact
that the internally situated reason one has for q, namely p, is an adequate basis on
which to add q to the corpus of justiﬁed beliefs whenever p entails q. In terms
congenial to the relevant-alternatives account, the defenders of closure could say
that it is p that is the source of justiﬁcation for making q sufﬁciently likely relative
to q’s alternatives, since p is incompatible with all of the relevant alternatives to
q. (All of the alternatives to q contain ∼q.)
What emerges from an examination of the counterexamples examined thus far
is that if closure fails, it does so only if there are no pure internalist methods of
expanding the set of justiﬁed beliefs like the one described in part I.25 The same
conclusion emerges from a brief examination of Robert Nozick’s general account
of knowledge that is designed to allow for some cases in which the corpus of
beliefs can be expanded by deduction.26 It is an example of accounts of know-
ledge mentioned earlier that eschew “justiﬁcation” as a necessary condition of
knowledge.
A detailed examination of Nozick’s account would take us too far aﬁeld;
however, it is crucial to note the essential role assumed by an externalistic
account of the source of justiﬁed beliefs.27 Brieﬂy, Nozick requires that if S comes
to know q via deduction from p, then if q were false, S would not believe p (or
wouldn’t infer q from p).28 This condition blocks an unrestricted Closure Prin-
ciple, even when the method of arriving at a belief is deduction. In Nozick’s
terminology, S’s beliefs may fail to “track” q because there will be cases such that
if q were false, S would still believe that q (because S would still believe that p and
infer q from it). For example, let p be “there is a table before S” and let q be “S is
not in a skeptical scenario in which there only appears to be a table.” The failure
of closure occurs on this account of knowledge because S can track a proposition,
p, and although p entails q, S can fail to track q because in the near possible
worlds for ∼q, it will still appear that p, whereas in the near possible worlds for
∼p, it will not appear that p.
Internalists can (and should) readily grant that tracking does not transmit
through deduction; but they can (and should) point out that if S’s beliefs track p,
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
561

and p entails q, it is not necessary for S’s beliefs to track q in order for S to know
q. Put bluntly, the internalist defense of closure is that expanding the corpus of
known beliefs to include q by deducing q from a known proposition, p, is per-
missible on internalist grounds alone. It is not further required that S’s beliefs
track q.
At this point, I hope it is clear that unless a justiﬁed (contingent) proposition
can provide an adequate internal basis for every (contingent) proposition that it
obviously entails (with the qualiﬁcations discussed in note 16), the general Clos-
ure Principle fails. However, it is important to recognize that it does not follow
immediately from this fact that the skeptic must appeal to this internalistic
defense of the general principle to vouchsafe the instantiation of the general
principle in the ﬁrst premise of the main argument for skepticism. For even if the
general principle is susceptible to counterexamples, there might be an instanti-
ation of the principle that is not prone to such counterexamples and such that it
can be employed by the skeptic. For example, “if S is justiﬁed in believing that p,
then S is justiﬁed in believing p” is an instantiation of the general Closure Prin-
ciple whose defense does not depend upon the internalistic argument given in
part 1. But, of course, that instantiation of the principle will not aid the skeptic’s
cause. My point is that the mere existence of counterexamples to the general
principle is not sufﬁcient to show that the skeptic must adopt the suggested
internalistic defense of the instantiated general principle employed in premise I of
the main argument for skepticism.
But a quick look at the skeptic’s particular use of the Closure Principle shows
that it is tailor-made for the general pattern of the supposed counterexamples.
We are not normally required to have evidence against the likelihood of signiﬁ-
cant, or perhaps even almost universal, deception in order justiﬁably to add a
new belief to the corpus of justiﬁed beliefs. In coming to believe that animals in a
zoo are what they appear to be, one does not normally have to investigate the
possibility that the animals are cleverly disguised to look like something other
than what they really are. If something looks like a duck, walks like a duck, and
quacks like a duck, then a Dretske-like externalist with regard to the sources of
justiﬁcation will argue that, at least in the usual circumstances, one can justiﬁably
believe that it is a duck. But looking, walking, and quacking like a duck is not an
adequate basis on which to justify believing that the duck-like thing isn’t a phony
duck. A phony duck would look, walk, and quack just like a duck.
To sum up: The recipe for cooking up counterexamples to the general Closure
Principle provides an adequate basis for challenging the ﬁrst premise of the main
skeptical argument only if there is no purely internalistic method of expanding
the corpus of justiﬁed beliefs like that suggested in part I. In addition, Nozick’s
general account of knowledge blocks closure, at least in those cases in which the
skeptic wishes to employ the principle, unless the internalistic method of expand-
ing the corpus of justiﬁed beliefs is accepted. Thus, either the skeptic has no
adequate defense of the ﬁrst premise in the main skeptical argument or the
skeptic must claim that a justiﬁed belief, p, provides an adequate source of
justiﬁcation for anything entailed by p.
PETER KLEIN
562

Part 3: The main argument for skepticism that depends upon the Closure
Principle is useless
So far, I have argued that the instantiation of the Closure Principle employed by
the skeptic can be defended only if there is a pure internalist method of expanding
the corpus of justiﬁed beliefs which is such that whenever a proposition, p, is
justiﬁed for S, p provides an adequate internally situated reason as a source of
justiﬁcation for every graspable proposition obviously entailed by it. Now, I want
to show that if the skeptic embraces this internalistic defense of the Closure
Principle, as I have argued she must, the main argument for skepticism is useless
because it must beg the question.29 More precisely, my contention is that the main
argument virtually begs the question—a fallacy virtually equivalent to begging
the question and equally as devastating to any argument committing it. Typically
it is held that an argument begs the question just in case one of the premises
illicitly “contains” the conclusion.30 Strictly speaking, the skeptic’s main argu-
ment is not guilty of that fallacy because neither premise 1 nor premise 2 contains
the conclusion in the most straightforward way of understanding that term.31 I
deﬁne an argument as “virtually begging the question” just in case the conclusion
of the argument can be reached by employing only a subargument on behalf of
one of the main premises. If the conclusion can be reached, so to speak, before the
main argument begins, then the main argument is useless. For the conclusion can
be reached without employing any of the main premises. In particular, I think it is
clear that the skeptic’s subargument for premise 2 of the main argument must be
sufﬁcient, by itself, to establish the main conclusion without employing either of
the premises of the main argument.
It will be useful to consider an example of an argument that (1) is closely
analogous to the main argument for skepticism and (2) clearly commits the
informal fallacy of virtually begging the question. Suppose that there are two
ways to go by train from New Brunswick, N.J., to Washington, D.C.: (1) You can
take the D-train, the “direct train” that stops brieﬂy in Trenton or (2) you can
take a train to Trenton, wait there for two hours, and then get a train from
Trenton to Washington. Suppose that there are always tickets available from
Trenton to Washington and that nothing prevents you from buying such a ticket.
Now, consider this argument:
1*. If a person, S, has a way to get to Trenton by train, then
S has a way to get to Washington by train.
2*. S has no way to get to Washington by train.
Therefore, S does not have a way to get to Trenton by train.
Since there are two ways to get to Washington, a subargument for premise 2*
would be inconclusive if it only demonstrated that S did not have a D-train ticket
to Washington. For there is an indirect way of getting to Washington, namely, by
stopping over in Trenton for two hours. Thus, an argument for 2* must show
that S does not have any ticket that will get S to Trenton by train. But I trust it is
clear that although such a subargument for 2* could be sound and valid, it would
cause the main argument to virtually beg the question. The main premises (1*, 2*)
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
563

would become superﬂuous because the subargument for premise 2* has already
shown that S does not have a way to get to Trenton by train.
Let us return to the main argument for skepticism and recall premise 2:
2. S is never justiﬁed in believing that she is not in one of the skeptical
scenarios in which there is no table but it appears just as though there
were one.
Now, what must the skeptic do in order to demonstrate that premise 2 is true?
The typical strategy to support premise 2 looks like this: S is not justiﬁed in
believing that she is not in a skeptical scenario because S does not have an
adequate source of justiﬁcation for that belief. After all, so the subargument goes,
if she were in a skeptical scenario, it would appear to S just like it now does; i.e.,
that there is a table before her. That is, it is claimed that all of the externally
situated evidence and internally situated reasons S now has for believing that
there is a table before her are not adequate to justify the belief that she is not in a
skeptical scenario.
This typical argument for the second premise is reminiscent of the argument
against the Closure Principle suggested by the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case and the
other counterexamples, and it explicitly employs the reasoning used by Nozick to
introduce the tracking condition as a requirement for knowledge. It claims that
since the source of justiﬁcation for S’s believing that there is a table before her is
not an adequate source of justiﬁcation for denying that S is in a skeptical scen-
ario, S is not justiﬁed in believing that she is in the skeptical scenario. But, as we
have seen, that reasoning conﬂates the Closure Principle with the mistaken target.
Further, the skeptic had better be very careful here, for in utilizing the typical
subargument for premise 2, the skeptic appears to be appealing to the very intu-
itions that (mistakenly) provided the basis for rejecting the Closure Principle.
Such an argument in support of premise 2 might (mistakenly) be appropriated by
the nonskeptic as just one more reason for denying closure.
But more to the point, since the attack on the Closure Principle can be repulsed
only by arguing that there is a pure internalistic method of expanding the corpus
of justiﬁed beliefs like the method described in part 1, the skeptic cannot provide
a conclusive argument for premise 2 by employing what I called the typical
strategy. For even though the reasons or evidence that S has for believing that
there is a table before her might not provide an adequate source of justiﬁcation
for the denial of the proposition that she is in a skeptical scenario in which it only
appears that there is a table, there might be the requisite sort of internally situated
reason that provides an appropriate source of justiﬁcation for the denial of the
proposition that S is in a skeptical scenario—one that is not itself a reason for
believing that there is a table before her and, in particular, one that entails the
denial of the proposition that S is in a skeptical scenario.
It is crucial to recall that in order to defend the Closure Principle, the skeptic
was forced to include justiﬁed propositions among the requisite sort of internally
situated reasons that provide an adequate source of justiﬁcation for further
beliefs. The parallel with the Train Tickets Case should be obvious. Just as there
are always tickets available from Trenton to Washington, on the internalist
grounds we have been considering there are always “inference tickets” available
PETER KLEIN
564

from the claim that there is a table before S to the claim that the skeptical scenario
does not obtain. Further, just as any subargument sufﬁcient to demonstrate prem-
ise 2* (in the Train Tickets Case) must be sufﬁcient to show that S does not have a
ticket to Trenton, any argument sufﬁcient to demonstrate premise 2 (in the main
argument for skepticism) must be sufﬁcient to show that S does not have a
justiﬁed belief which entails that S is not in a skeptical scenario.
The moral is this: The defense of the Closure Principle relies upon the claim
that there are internalist entailment “inference tickets” available from S’s justi-
ﬁed beliefs about her surroundings to the denial of the skeptical scenario. There-
fore, any subargument for premise 2 sufﬁcient to show that S does not have any
adequate source of justiﬁcation for the denial of the skeptical scenario must show
that S does not have a justiﬁed belief that entails the denial of the skeptical
hypotheses. Of course, such a subargument will be sufﬁciently strong to establish
the main conclusion, namely, that S is not justiﬁed in believing that there is a table
before her. For, ex hypothesi, that proposition entails that S is not in a skeptical
scenario in which it only appears that there is a table. Thus, premise 1 and
premise 2 of the main argument for skepticism are superﬂuous because the
conclusion can be reached simply on the basis of the subargument for premise 2.
Conclusion
The main argument for skepticism fails; and with it many related arguments for
skepticism become useless. The speciﬁc argument considered in this paper made
use of a closure principle employing “justiﬁcation” as the term of positive epi-
stemic appraisal. Other such terms could be used. Suppose that someone in a
Cartesian mood were to claim that knowledge entailed certainty and that since S
is not certain that she is not in one of the skeptical scenarios, she could not be
certain that there was a table before her.32 In other words, suppose that the
version of a closure principle invoked is: (x)(y)[If S is certain that x, and x entails
y, then S is certain that y]. The strategy employed in this paper could be used to
show that such an argument would be worthless. For, in order to show that S is
not certain that she is not in one of the skeptical scenarios, it must be shown that
S is not certain of any proposition that entails that she is not in such a scenario. If
such a subargument could be developed, it would be sufﬁcient to show that she is
not certain that there is a table before her. The same outcome applies to argu-
ments employing other terms of positive epistemic appraisal, such as “reason-
able,” “warranted,” “acceptable,” “beyond reasonable doubt,” “evident,”
“plausible,” and “probable.” Thus, the strategy employed in this paper can be
generalized to show that the Closure Principle cannot be used to motivate
skepticism.
Notes
1 I want to thank David Benﬁeld, Victoria Chapman, Stewart Cohen, Paulo Faria,
Richard Foley, Christopher Hill, Brian McLaughlin, Tom Senor, and Jonathan Vogel
for their helpful comments on the issues discussed in this paper and/or criti-
cisms of earlier drafts of this paper. I hope I have been able to meet their
criticisms; but, no doubt, in some cases they will believe that I have not done so.
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
565

2 Actually, there are many forms of skepticism. The form I will be concerned with
here is what can be called “Direct Skepticism.” It holds that we lack knowledge.
Another form, “Iterative Skepticism,” holds that we do not know that we know.
Finally, a third form can be called “Pyrrhonian Skepticism” since it holds that we
have no better reasons for believing any (nonevident) proposition than we do
for denying it. Thus, withholding belief appears to be the outcome. I discuss
these forms in Certainty (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981),
esp. pp. 5–11.
3 I think that the best sources of recent discussions about the Closure Principle
are The Possibility of Knowledge, ed. Steven Luper-Foy (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman
and Littleﬁeld, 1987), see esp. the bibliography provided on pp. 324–325; and
Doubting: Contemporary Perspectives on Skepticism, ed. Michael Roth and Glenn
Ross (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990).
In the Academica (2:26), Cicero points out that some people do have identical
twins who cannot be distinguished on the basis of perception alone. In addition,
he claims that the “single case of resemblance” will “have made everything
doubtful.” The point seems to be that if we are justiﬁed in believing that we are
seeing a chair, for example, we have to be justiﬁed in believing that it is not a
chair-facsimile. This appears to be a clear use of the Closure Principle.
Although I say the principle can be “traced” to Descartes, I think that the
argument for skepticism in the “First Meditation” employs a principle even
stronger than the Closure Principle. The argument in the “First Meditation” could
be put as follows:
1. If a person, S, is justiﬁed in believing that there is a table, then S
is justiﬁed in believing the denial of every proposition which makes
it somewhat doubtful that there is a table.
2. S is not justiﬁed in believing the denial of every proposition that
makes it somewhat doubtful that there is a table before her. (In
particular, at least at the stage of the argument in the “First Medi-
tation,” Descartes is not in a position to believe the denial of the
proposition that he was created by some thing or some process
that lacked the ability to create reliable epistemic equipment, e.g.,
equipment that delivers the truth when properly used.)
Therefore, S is not justiﬁed in believing that there is a table.
This employs a stronger principle than the Closure Principle, since Descartes
requires that one be justiﬁed in denying all grounds for doubting x in order to
know that x. The stronger principle could be put as follows:
Immunity Principle: (x)(y)[If S is justiﬁed in believing that x, and y
is the denial of grounds for doubting x, then S is justiﬁed in believ-
ing that y].
This is stronger because a contrary to x would be grounds for doubting x, but not
all grounds for doubt are contraries. I discuss this principle in “Immune
Belief Systems,” Philosophical Topics 14 (1986): 259–280, and in “Epistemic
PETER KLEIN
566

Compatibilism and Canonical Beliefs,” in Doubting: Contemporary Perspectives
on Skepticism, pp. 99–120.
4 Ex hypothesi, “there is a table before S” entails “S is not in one of the skeptical
scenarios in which there is no table but it appears just as though there were
one.”
5 I argued for the principle in Certainty, pp. 70–81. But I now think that argument
was mistaken. I thought that a defeater of justiﬁcation for a proposition would
defeat every proposition entailing the proposition. But that is false. Consider the
following assignments:
e: adequate evidence, ceteris paribus, for believing p;
d: an overrider, ceteris paribus, for the justiﬁcation of p by e;
r: an overrider, ceteris paribus, of the defeating effect of d.
That is, r, is a restorer of the justiﬁcation of p by e.
I think it is clear that d is a defeater of (e & p), but it is not a defeater of (e & p
& r). Thus, the argument in Certainty was unsound. One might think that this
provides a basis for rejecting Closure on the pure internalist grounds to be
discussed later. But it doesn’t. One might think that S could be justiﬁed in
believing (e & p & r & d) but not justiﬁed in believing that (e & p & d) because the
former is coherent and the latter is not. It is true that the former is coherent and
that the latter is not coherent, but S doesn’t lose whatever justiﬁcation she had
for r, and it remains true, as the pure internalist will claim, that the former
provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation for the latter.
6 In particular, it will not show that an argument for skepticism employing the
stronger Immunity Principle (see note 3) faces a similar dilemma.
7 Anthony Brueckner in “Skepticism and Epistemic Closure,” Philosophical Topics
13 (1985): 89–117, criticized my defense of the Closure Principle in Certainty. I
had said that justiﬁed beliefs can serve as evidence for further beliefs. He
correctly pointed out that “evidence” does not typically refer to beliefs. For
example, in the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case (discussed later) the evidence I have is
that the animals are in a pen marked “Zebras” and the animals look like zebras.
I do not have additional evidence, namely, that the animals are zebras. I think
Brueckner may be right about the scope of “evidence” in ordinary discourse.
(But see the passage by Dretske quoted later in the main text for some evidence
that the use of “evidence” is not so precise.) Thus, in order to avoid that confu-
sion, in this paper I have distinguished between externally situated evidence and
internally situated reasons.
8 I am indebted to Christopher Hill for pointing out the need for this clariﬁcation
and for some of the terminology employed in describing the two sources of
justiﬁcation.
9 See Alvin Plantinga’s discussion of the relationships among internalism, exter-
nalism (as those views are typically understood, namely, as referring to general
theories of knowledge), and deontology in his book Warrant: The Current Debate
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).
10 Other modiﬁcations of the principle are required when “knowledge” is substi-
tuted for “justiﬁcation.” Since belief does not transmit through entailment, the
constraints used by Gettier (discussed later) need to be reintroduced; namely,
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
567

that S deduces y from x and accepts y as a result of this deduction. Given the
interpretation of “S is justiﬁed in believing x” employed throughout this paper, it
is not necessary to include these constraints when the consequent does not
entail that S believes x.
11 See, for example, Robert Nozick, Philosophical Explanations (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1981). His account is discussed later.
12 Note that beyond the differences already mentioned in the text concerning my
use of “internal” and “external” (namely, that I am using those terms merely to
refer to the sources of justiﬁed beliefs and not to general theories of justiﬁca-
tion), even with regard to the sources of justiﬁcation, my use of the terms is not
quite parallel to the externalist–internalist distinction as normally employed.
Typically, “internalism,” even with regard to only the sources of justiﬁcation,
refers to a stronger view than the one I am attempting to characterize, because it
is usually held that internally situated reasons, if they are to provide a source of
justiﬁcation for S, must be “accessible” to S. That is, typically it is held that what
I am calling “internally situated reasons” are accessible to S on the basis of
reﬂection alone. I do not include an accessibility condition in my account of
internally situated reasons. But nothing of any signiﬁcance hangs on employing
the weaker notion in this paper. One could add the accessibility condition without
affecting the argument. See William Alston, Epistemic Justiﬁcation (Ithaca N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1989), esp. pp. 185–226, and Alvin Plantinga, op. cit.,
esp. pp. 3–29, for discussions of the accessibility condition.
13 The justiﬁed beliefs can provide a source of further justiﬁed beliefs and the
actual beliefs can provide overriders. Thus, both play a role in determining
whether S has an adequate source (i.e., a sufﬁcient source) of justiﬁcation for
further beliefs.
14 In other words, the Closure Principle, alone, does not sanction some of the
troublesome inferences in the Lottery Paradox or Preface Paradox.
15 I placed the material in parentheses in order to indicate that the argument for
the Closure Principle can be stated in either an objectivist or subjectivist man-
ner. That is, justiﬁed beliefs could be those that are, indeed, likely to be true
given certain procedures for adopting beliefs, or they could be those beliefs that
the agent thinks are likely to be true given some belief acquisition procedures. I
will state the proposed defense of the Closure Principle in the objectivist mode,
but it could be transformed into a subjectivist defense of the Closure Principle by
adding the parenthetical qualiﬁcation at the appropriate points.
16 There is an interesting objection to this argument for the Closure Principle that
arises from some correspondence with Stewart Cohen (although the cor-
respondence was not about this argument in particular and I am not certain that
he would agree with my way of framing the problem): Suppose that S comes to
believe some proposition, say p, on the basis of some source of justiﬁcation, say
a conjunction of a and b. And suppose further, as is possible, that p entails a. For
example, suppose that S comes to justiﬁably believe p, that the next card in the
deck is the seven of diamonds, on the basis of a, that the next card in the deck is a
seven, and b that the next card is a diamond. (Let the probabilities of a and b be
sufﬁciently high so as to permit the conjunction.) Surely, if S came to believe that
p, at least in part, because S already justiﬁably believes that a, S could not use p
as an internally situated reason for a source of justiﬁcation for a. For doing so
PETER KLEIN
568

would be a clear instance of the fallacy of circular reasoning. (The proposition, a,
is a reason for p: so, p could not be a reason for a.) So, generalizing and return-
ing to the argument for the Closure Principle: bi cannot always provide an
adequate source of justiﬁcation for bk even if bi entails bk (because bk might have
been one of the internally situated reasons that provided support for bi).
I have taken the relevant form of the Closure Principle to involve expanding S’s
corpus of justiﬁed beliefs. Strictly speaking, the Closure Principle is not
restricted to such cases.
There are four responses to this important objection. First, although the Clos-
ure Principle is not strictly limited to expanding the corpus of S’s justiﬁed beliefs,
the argument given in the main text for the Closure Principle could be easily
modiﬁed to account for the case in which the entailed proposition is a source of
justiﬁcation of the entailing proposition. Just rewrite the argument so that the
initial conditions are that either bk (the entailed proposition) is one of the
sources of justiﬁcation for bi (the entailing proposition) or it isn’t. On the one
hand, if bk is among the sources of justiﬁcation for bi, then it remains true that if
bi is justiﬁed, bk is justiﬁed, because bk could not be a source of justiﬁcation (or
partial justiﬁcation) of bi without bk, itself, being justiﬁed. Otherwise, bi would be
based upon an unjustiﬁed source; and reasoning based on arbitrary grounds is
as unacceptable as circular reasoning. On the other hand, if bk is not one of the
sources of justiﬁcation for bi, then the argument as presented goes through; that
is, bi will provide an adequate, internally situated reason for bk. I chose not to
present the argument in this disjunctive form because it seemed unduly
complicated.
Second, and more importantly, if the skeptic were to be appealing to an
instantiation of the Closure Principle in this form in the main argument for skep-
ticism (namely, in the form that requires that in order for S to be justiﬁed in
believing that p, S must ﬁrst be justiﬁed in believing all the propositions that p
entails or, at least, justiﬁed in believing the conjunction of the denials of all of the
contraries of p), it would be susceptible to the Dretske-like counterexamples to
be considered later. To jump ahead a bit, Dretske and others have shown that S
can be justiﬁed in believing a proposition, say, that the animals in the pen are
zebras without ﬁrst being justiﬁed in believing that the animals in the pen are not
cleverly disguised mules. By parity of reasoning and applying this to the main
argument for skepticism, I think it is clear that S can be justiﬁed in believing that
there is a table before her without ﬁrst being justiﬁed in believing that she is not
in one of the skeptical scenarios.
Third, ignoring the Dretske-like counterexamples, suppose the skeptic were,
indeed, to be requiring that the sources of justiﬁcation for a proposition must
include all of the propositions that p entails (or at least the conjunction of all of
the denials of all of the contraries of p). That requirement is clearly too strong for
the sources of justiﬁcation for a contingent proposition. For it has the con-
sequence that a source of justiﬁcation for a contingent proposition is adequate
only if it contains a proposition that entails p. In order to satisfy that require-
ment, every proposition that is equivalent to p would have to be in the source
of justiﬁcation for p. [Or at least (∼(∼p & q) & ∼(∼p & ∼q)) would have to be in
the source of justiﬁcation for p; for each of the propositions within the inner
parentheses is a contrary of p, and that conjunction entails p.]
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
569

Finally, unlike the plausible version of the Closure Principle that we are con-
sidering, since this requirement so obviously leads to skepticism, it can be (and
should be) rejected by the nonskeptic immediately. For since there are so many,
if not inﬁnitely many, contingent propositions (or propositions equivalent to the
denials of contraries) that are entailed by any contingent proposition, p, the
process of coming to be justiﬁed in believing a contingent proposition would be
so difﬁcult, if not impossible, that the nonskeptic would be entitled to point
out that (I) this requirement does not capture our epistemic practices (as the
Dretske Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case shows) and (2) if such a principle were recom-
mended as one we ought to follow, it would make the acquisition of justiﬁed
beliefs so difﬁcult, if not impossible, that as a heuristic recommendation for the
acquisition of justiﬁed beliefs, it would fail on its face.
For a relevant discussion of this issue, see Stewart Cohen’s entry “Scepti-
cism,” in Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward Craig (London: Routledge
Press, forthcoming). As of the writing of this article, the projected date for the
publication of the Routledge encyclopedia is 1997. Also see Certainty, esp.
pp. 96–104.
17 As I pointed out earlier, I use “internal” and “external” to refer to theories about
the sources of justiﬁed beliefs. By calling this a pure internalistic defense of the
Closure Principle. I am calling attention to the fact that the argument depends
upon supposing that S’s justiﬁed beliefs can, in the relevant cases, serve as an
adequate source of further justiﬁed beliefs. Thus, as mentioned in the main text,
under some externalistic general theories of justiﬁcation this argument for the
Closure Principle might be acceptable, if the process of inference is such that it
is sufﬁciently reliable. The argument might be acceptable because some general
externalistic theories of knowledge countenance what I am calling internally
situated reasons as sources of justiﬁcation. That they should do so might strike
some as odd, but once it is clear that the important distinction I wish to
emphasize concerns the sources of justiﬁed beliefs, that difﬁculty should
disappear.
18 Edmund Gettier, “Is Justiﬁed True Belief Knowledge?” Analysis 23 (1963): 122;
emphasis mine.
19 Fred Dretske, “Epistemic Operators,” Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970):
1015–1016. Note that Dretske seems to treat “evidence” and “reasons” as
synonymous. (See note 7.)
20 It is clear from the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case that “x provides an adequate source of
justiﬁcation for y” is not transitive. In that case, one of the propositions (i.e., the
animals in the pen are zebras) that provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation
for another (i.e., the animals are not cleverly disguised mules) does so because it
entails it. But the failure of transitivity is more general. Let c, b, and o be chosen
as follows:
c: Jones is a clever car thief and stole car A;
b: Jones engages in behaviors b1–bn.
o: Jones owns car A.
Now, if a clever car thief is one who typically engages in behaviors b1–bn with
regard to cars he or she has stolen and if those behaviors are just those that
PETER KLEIN
570

would lead anyone to justiﬁably conclude that Jones owns the car (e.g., Jones
speaks about buying it, Jones puts it in his or her garage, Jones has a valid
looking title), I take it that the following are true:
(1) c provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation for b;
(2) b provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation for o;
(3) c does not provide an adequate source of justiﬁcation for o.
This result obtains if the source of justiﬁcation in the example is taken to be
either an internally situated reason or externally situated evidence and is a
direct consequence of justiﬁcation being defeasible. I discuss this more fully in
Certainty, esp. pp. 44–70.
21 Irving 
Thalberg, 
“Is 
Justiﬁcation 
Transmissible 
through 
Deduction?”
Philosophical Studies 25 (1974): 347–348.
22 Moreover, near the end of the paper, Thalberg suggests that if justiﬁcation is
taken to be “strategic” justiﬁcation rather than “evidential” justiﬁcation, then the
Closure Principle is valid. Here is what he says:
The unyielding advocacy of PDJ [his name for the Closure Principle] has
persuaded me that a strategical variant of it is acceptable:
(PDSJ)
For any proposition P, if a person S is evidentially or strategically
justiﬁed in believing P, and P entails Q, and S deduces Q from P
and accepts Q as a result of this deduction; then S is strategically
justiﬁed in believing Q, unless Q can be false under more cir-
cumstances than P (ibid., p. 355).
That last qualiﬁcation in PDSJ is added because Thalberg mistakenly thinks
that the Closure Principle would sanction the conjunction of justiﬁed beliefs. But
as we have already seen, the Closure Principle does not sanction conjunction in
general since “P” (in PDSJ) stands for a single proposition, not for a set of
propositions containing more than one member. So there is no danger of a
conjunction principle arising from the Closure Principle alone. Nevertheless,
Thalberg has tacitly granted my point, namely, that the standard objections to
the Closure Principle neglect a possible type of internalistic defense of it—what
could be called, using his terms, a “strategic” defense of it.
23 Robert Audi, Belief, Justiﬁcation, and Knowledge (Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth,
1988), p. 77.
24 For accounts of relevant alternatives, see Gail Stine, “Scepticism, Relevant
Alternatives, and Deductive Closure,” Philosophical Studies 29 (1976): 249–
261; David Lewis, “Scorekeeping in a Language Game,” Journal of Philosophical
Logic 8 (1979): 339–59 (reprinted in his Philosophical Papers [Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press, 1983]); Palle Yourgrau, “Knowledge and Relevant
Alternatives,” Synthese 55 (1983): 55–70: Alvin Goldman, Epistemology and
Cognition (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986); Bredo Johnsen,
“Relevant Alternatives and Demon Scepticism,” Journal of Philosophy 84
(1987): 643–653 (reprinted in Doubting: Contemporary Perspectives on Skepti-
cism, pp. 29–37).
25 There are other purported counterexamples to the Closure Principle that have
been considered, in part, because they seem to avoid some problems of the
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
571

earlier proposals. In “Are There Counterexamples to the Closure Principle?” (in
Doubting: Contemporary Perspectives on Skepticism, pp. 13–27), Jonathan
Vogel examines a case, the Car Theft Case, in which it could be thought that S is
justiﬁed in believing that her car is now parked on Avenue A (because she
remembers having just parked it there) while not being justiﬁed in believing that
her car has not been stolen and is no longer on Avenue A. He points out that it
could be held that in this case, S is not justiﬁed in believing that her car was not
stolen because she justiﬁably believes that some cars are stolen and she has
no evidence that her car is not among those that have been stolen. In contrast,
in Dretske’s Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case, S does not justiﬁably believe that there have
been cases of mules cleverly disguised to look like zebras. Vogel ultimately
rejects even the Car Theft Case as a counterexample to the Closure Principle by
appealing to “psychological considerations” to explain away the intuitions.
According to him, the focus of our attention shifts to new potential defeaters
when we consider the proposition that the car has not been stolen. As Vogel
says, “the anomalous character of our intuitions about the Car Theft Case may
be due to some kind of epistemically important shift rather than to closure
failure” (ibid., p. 19). Perhaps psychological shifts can explain away the intu-
itions in this particular case, although I doubt that those who object to closure
will be so sanguine. Nevertheless, unless one supposes that a justiﬁed propo-
sition provides an adequate source of justiﬁcation for all propositions that it
obviously entails, there is no way of guaranteeing that all purported counter-
examples can be eliminated by appealing to psychological considerations. (I
should note that Vogel initially introduces the Car Theft Case as one in which
you know the antecedent in the entailment but you do not know the consequent.
But in the article, he does shift to “justiﬁcation” at some points; for example,
see p. 16. For my purposes, the shift is not important, since the cases he
considers regarding the possible failure of the Closure Principle depend upon
the claim that S lacks a justiﬁcation for the entailed belief and, thus, S lacks
knowledge.)
26 See Nozick, op. cit.
27 I discuss Nozick’s views in “On Behalf of the Skeptic,” in The Possibility of
Knowledge, pp. 267–281. Although I do not discuss the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case
there, I think that this case can be used to show that Nozick’s tracking condi-
tions are too strong. On Nozick’s view, one of the necessary conditions of S’s
knowing that x is that beliefs about x must “track” x, and this requires (among
other things) that if x were false, S would not believe that x (in near possible
worlds). Now, suppose that the zookeeper believes that if she can’t at least
make it appear that there are zebras in the pen she will lose her job. In other
words, the actual world is so constructed that whenever there are no zebras,
there will be some things that look like zebras. The zookeeper never has to
resort to the ruse, but she would if need be. Hence, in near enough worlds, if the
animals in the pen were not zebras, S would still believe that they are. But I take
it that S does know that the animals in the pen are zebras.
28 Nozick, op. cit., p. 231.
29 I want to make clear that I am not arguing, as others have done, that the
defender of knowledge can equally well employ the Closure Principle against the
skeptic. It has been claimed that just as the skeptic uses the Closure Principle
PETER KLEIN
572

and modus tollens, the antiskeptic uses the principle and modus ponens. G.E.
Moore put it this way:
I agree with that part of the argument which asserts that if I don’t know
now that I’m not dreaming, it follows that I don’t know that I am standing
up. . . . But this ﬁrst part of the argument cuts both ways. For if it is true, it
follows that it is also true that if I do know that I am standing up, then I do
know that I am not dreaming. I can therefore just as well argue: since I do
know that I am standing up, it follows that I do know that I am not dream-
ing. . . . (G. E. Moore, “Certainty,” in his Philosophical Papers [New York:
Collier Books, 1962], p. 242.)
I think it is not absolutely clear from the context that Moore took the proposition
“I am dreaming” as shorthand for “I am (in bed) dreaming.” If it is not shorthand,
this would not be an instantiation of the Closure Principle (since “I am dreaming”
does not entail “I am not standing up”); but even if Moore did not take this to be
an instance of the Closure Principle but rather took it to be an instance of the
Immunity Principle (see note 3), the point I wish to make here is not
compromised.
My point, here, is that even though the argument employing the Closure Prin-
ciple on behalf of the skeptic must virtually beg the question and that, therefore,
it is useless to the skeptic, it does not follow from this that the principle is
useless to the nonskeptic. A full discussion of this point would take us beyond
the scope of this paper, but brieﬂy: The type of internalist reasons that make the
Closure Principle safe from counterexamples do not force us to grant that an
argument which demonstrates conclusively that S is justiﬁed in believing that
there is a table before her would have to show, as part of the defense of one of
its premises, that S is justiﬁed in denying the skeptical hypothesis. For such a
denial would not form part of every adequate source of justiﬁcation for the belief
in the existence of the table.
30 Note that I say that an argument begs the question if the conclusion is illicitly
contained in a premise rather than saying that an argument begs the question if
the conclusion is contained in a premise. I believe that there are some argu-
ments that do not beg the question but in which the conclusion is “contained” (in
a clearly straightforward, intuitive sense) in a premise. Consider this argument:
The main argument given above would be classiﬁed as begging the question by
most accounts because premise I contains the conclusion. I do not think that it
is an instance of begging the question because the argument does not employ
the conclusion in an illicit manner. It is beyond the scope of this paper to attempt
a characterization of what makes the presence of the conclusion in a premise
illicit.
31 If the meaning of “contain” were stretched a bit beyond its ordinary sense, then
Subargument for Premise 1
Main Argument
1.1
S says “P & Q.”
1.2
Whatever S says is true.
1.
P & Q
Therefore, P.
“SKEPTICISM AND CLOSURE: . . .”
573

the conclusion could be said to be contained in the subargument. That is, if one
could suppose that a proposition, x, is “contained” within another one, y, just in
case x is strictly implied by y, then the distinction between arguments which beg
the question and those which virtually beg the question would vanish.
32 As I mentioned in note 3, there is a better way to put the Cartesian point.
QUESTIONS
1
What is the closure principle?
2
In the Zebra-in-the-Zoo Case, what is Dretske trying to establish?
3
What is the difference between “externally situated evidence” and “internally
situated reasons”?
4
What does it mean for an argument to “virtually beg the question”?
PETER KLEIN
574

Michael Huemer, “Direct Realism and the
Brain-in-a-Vat Argument”
One of the advantages traditionally claimed for direct realist theories of percep-
tion over indirect realist theories is that the direct realist is able to avoid skeptical
problems to which the indirect realist falls prey.1 If the only things we are ever
directly aware of are the ideas in our own minds, it is asked, then what reason do
we have for thinking anything other than ideas exists? How do premises about
ideas conﬁrm propositions about physical objects? This is one sort of skeptical
worry that the direct realist has an obvious prima facie advantage in dealing with.
However, there are other sorts of skeptical problems that direct realism does
not seem to particularly help us with, and it is on one of those that I want to
focus. Speciﬁcally, does the direct realist have an answer to brain-in-a-vat
skepticism that is not available to the indirect realist? I claim that the answer is
yes.
Before we are in a position to see that, we’ll ﬁrst have to review the brain-in-a-
vat argument and explain the distinction between direct and indirect realism.
After that, we’ll need to look at two contemporary responses to the brain-in-a-vat
argument to see why they fail as long as the direct realist account of perception is
neglected. Then we’ll be able to see how direct realism ﬁgures in the refutation of
the skeptical argument.
1. Direct and indirect realism
Direct realism is often understood as the view that, in cases of normal perception,
we are directly aware of something in the external world. This “something”
could include external objects, events, or states of affairs; surfaces of external
objects; and/or properties of external objects. Indirect realism is then character-
ized as the view that, in normal perception, we are only directly aware of internal
(mental) phenomena, and we are indirectly aware of external phenomena, by
means of our awareness of the mental phenomena. These internal, mental phe-
nomena could include mental objects, states, events, and/or properties. So there
can be different versions of indirect realism, according to what the theorist says
about the nature of the mental phenomena that perception makes us aware of: the
indirect realist might hold that what we are directly aware of are sense data, or states
Michael Huemer, “Direct Realism and the Brain-in-a-Vat Argument,” Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 61 (2000): 397–413.
575

of “being appeared to” in certain ways, or some other sort of mental phenomena.
That is one traditional way of formulating the issue, but I’m going to use a
slightly different formulation here. For our present purposes, what we need is an
explicitly epistemological characterization of direct and indirect realism, a char-
acterization in terms of the justiﬁcation for perceptual beliefs. A person’s belief
that P is a perceptual belief if the (causal) explanation for why he believes that P is
that he perceives that P. For instance, the explanation for why I believe that there
is a pen here might be that I see that there is a pen here, which is a particular way
of perceiving that there is a pen here, so I have the perceptual belief that there is a
pen here. Now we can deﬁne indirect realism as the view that, at least in normal
cases, perceptual beliefs about the external world are justiﬁed, but they depend
for their justiﬁcation on our being aware of certain mental phenomena. So for
example, my belief that there is a pen here might depend for its justiﬁcation on
my awareness of a sense datum of a pen, or on my awareness of a state of being
appeared to penishly, etc. Direct realism is the view that, at least in normal cases,
our perceptual beliefs about the external world have justiﬁcation that does not
depend on our being aware of mental phenomena, or anything else that’s not in
the external world.2
2. The brain-in-a-vat argument
The brain-in-a-vat argument goes like this:
(1) If S is justiﬁed in believing P and P entails Q, then S is justiﬁed in
believing Q.3
(2) I’m not justiﬁed in believing that I’m not a brain in a vat.
(3) That I have a body entails that I’m not a brain in a vat.
(4) Therefore, I’m not justiﬁed in believing that I have a body.
It is important to understand that the conclusion of this argument is not merely
that I cannot be absolutely certain that I have a body. Such a conclusion would be
accepted by many philosophers without much excitement. But the argument
we’re considering is much more interesting. It purports to establish that I don’t
even have good reason for believing that I have a body. And of course, the
assumption is that if you can’t justiﬁably believe that you have a body, then you
can’t justiﬁably believe much of anything about the physical world.
A note about the phrase “justiﬁed in believing”: “S is justiﬁed in believing P,”
as I use the phrase, does not entail that S actually believes P. Rather, it just means
that S has available an adequate source of justiﬁcation for P. S might fail to
actually accept some of the propositions that are justiﬁed for him, either because
S is epistemically timid or because he hasn’t noticed the justiﬁcation he has avail-
able. To illustrate the distinction, let’s suppose that S knows that P and he also
knows that (P ⊃ Q); however, S has not yet put together these two beliefs and
noticed their logical consequence, so S doesn’t actually believe that Q. (Presum-
ably, this sort of thing takes place frequently, because we are often aware of
certain axioms without being aware of most of the theorems derivable from
them.) Nevertheless, S has available an adequate justiﬁcation for Q, insofar as P
and (P ⊃ Q) would provide adequate reason for believing Q, so I would say that S
MICHAEL HUEMER
576

is “justiﬁed in believing Q.”4 In general, S is justiﬁed in believing P whenever S is
in possession of some evidence that, if properly deployed, would lead S to believe
P and be justiﬁed in doing so.
3. Why direct realism may be irrelevant to the argument
At ﬁrst glance, it is not obvious how the issue between direct and indirect realism
is relevant to this skeptical argument. One could say that, if direct realism is true,
it follows that the skeptical argument is unsound, since direct realism as we have
deﬁned it involves the claim that we are justiﬁed in believing propositions about
the external world. But it is equally true that, if indirect realism is true, then the
skeptical argument is unsound, since indirect realism also involves the claim that
we are justiﬁed in believing propositions about the external world. So far, no
advantage for direct realism is evident. And neither of these observations consti-
tutes a response to the skeptical argument; the skeptic will simply reject both
forms of realism as I have formulated them.
One might try arguing that the brain-in-a-vat scenario, as usually described, is
impossible, in the sense that the brain in a vat could not really have the same kind
of experiences we have. We have experiences of perceiving (and hence, being
directly acquainted with) external objects. But the brain in the vat doesn’t have
any perceptions. The brain in the vat only has hallucinations. According to one
faction of direct realists, perceptions and hallucinations do not really share any-
thing in common; they are merely states that seem alike to the subject at the time,
but this does not show that they actually are intrinsically alike.5 Thus, John
Hyman writes:
[T]he causal theory is still committed to the Cartesian illusion that “the
ordinary notion of perceiving” is a composite notion, which can be divided
into its purely mental and its physical components, each of which can exist
without the other . . . Against this view I have argued, ﬁrst, that perceptual
experience and illusion are not two species of the same psychological genus
and hence the concept of perceiving cannot be dismembered in this way;
and second, that there is no epistemological reason for trying to dismember
it, since the foundations of empirical knowledge are propositions stating
what the speaker perceives.6
Supposing that this view is right—namely, that there is no mental state common
to both hallucination and veridical perception—does it furnish us with an answer
to the brain-in-a-vat argument?
It certainly provides us with a way to object to one way the brain-in-a-vat
scenario is commonly described—namely, as a situation in which a being would
have the same experiences we presently have, but most of his beliefs about the
external world would be false. However, the important question is really whether
hallucinations and veridical perceptions can be subjectively indistinguishable
(that is, indistinguishable for the subject, at the time). If the direct realist holds
that there can not be hallucinations that are subjectively indistinguishable from
perceptions, then his theory is just empirically false. We have every scientiﬁc
reason to believe that if a brain were electrically stimulated in the way described
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
577

in the brain-in-a-vat scenario, its hallucinations would be subjectively indis-
tinguishable from the perceptions of a normal person. But if the direct realist
admits that hallucinations can be subjectively indistinguishable from perceptions,
then the skeptic can merely rephrase his challenge: how do we know that what
we are actually doing is perceiving things, rather than merely hallucinating?
Whether perceptions and hallucinations have a common component isn’t what
matters; what matters to the skeptic’s question is whether we have a way of
distinguishing perceptions from hallucinations in our own case. As long as we
can’t tell the difference, a skeptical worry will remain. All the direct realist has
accomplished, so far, is to get the skeptic to reformulate his question.
4. Two contemporary responses
Premise (1) of the skeptical argument is called “the Closure Principle”—the prin-
ciple that the set of propositions one is justiﬁed in believing is closed under
entailment. This principle is highly plausible intuitively, but some epistemologists
have challenged it.7 Fred Dretske cites the following case. Imagine you’re at the
zoo. In a pen clearly marked “zebras,” you see some black and white striped
equine animals. It seems that you have good reason to believe that those animals
are zebras. Surely their zebra-like appearance counts strongly in favor of their
being zebras, as does their being in the zebra pen at the zoo. Now, their being
zebras entails that the animals are not mules that have been cleverly disguised by
the zoo authorities to look like zebras. Are you justiﬁed in believing that the
animals are not cleverly disguised mules? Dretske says no:
If you are tempted to say “Yes” to this question, think a moment about
what reasons you have, what evidence you can produce in favor of this
claim. The evidence you had for thinking them zebras has been effectively
neutralized, since it does not count toward their not being mules cleverly
disguised to look like zebras.8
Dretske views this as a counter-example to the Closure Principle: you are justiﬁed
in believing that the animals are zebras, that they are zebras entails that they are
not cleverly disguised mules, but you’re not justiﬁed in believing that they are not
cleverly disguised mules.
What can we say against this? Can we deﬁne the intuition behind the Closure
Principle? The Closure Principle holds that when S is justiﬁed in believing P and P
entails Q, S is justiﬁed in believing Q. There are at least two reasons why this
might be the case. One reason would be that the very same justiﬁcation S has for
P also counts as justiﬁcation for Q—i.e., whatever evidence supports P would
also support Q when Q is a logical consequence of P. If that were generally true,
then it would follow that the Closure Principle is true. Dretske’s example effect-
ively refutes that principle. Dretske’s example shows that what is evidence for P
need not be evidence for every logical consequence of P. The fact that the animals
in the pen look like zebras is evidence that they are zebras, but it is not evidence
that they aren’t mules cleverly disguised to look like zebras.
However, another reason for believing the Closure Principle is this: if S is
justiﬁed in believing P and P entails Q, then P, itself, constitutes an adequate
MICHAEL HUEMER
578

reason for believing Q. The idea is simply that deduction is an epistemically
permissible way to expand your corpus of beliefs. This idea is probably the real
source of the intuition in favor of closure. What Dretske says about his zebra-in-
the-zoo case does not address this idea; what he says is only that the evidence you
have for thinking the animals are zebras is not evidence against their being clev-
erly disguised mules. That much seems clear. But Dretske doesn’t explain why the
fact that the animals in the pen are zebras wouldn’t be a sufﬁcient reason for
thinking that they’re not cleverly disguised mules, given that you justiﬁably
believe that the animals are zebras.
Peter Klein has pressed the above point.9 However, Klein argues that, even
though the above reply enables the skeptic to defend premise (1) against
Dretske’s attack, it nevertheless leaves the skeptic with a problem in defending
premise (2). To defend premise (2), what the skeptic has to argue is that I have no
available source of justiﬁcation for the proposition that I’m not a brain in a vat.
In defending the Closure Principle, we have just said that when P entails Q and P
is justiﬁed, P is itself an adequate source of justiﬁcation for Q—deductive argu-
ments are a source of justiﬁcation. So the skeptic must argue that, among other
things, I don’t have that kind of justiﬁcation for believing I’m not a brain in a vat.
Since, as premise (3) now assures us, the proposition that I have a body would
provide just that sort of adequate justiﬁcation for thinking I’m not a brain in
a vat, the skeptic would have to argue that I don’t have that proposition
in particular available as a source of justiﬁcation for thinking I’m not a brain in
a vat.
What this means is that, in order to establish premise (2), the skeptic would
ﬁrst have to establish that I’m not justiﬁed in believing that I have a body, since
that belief, if justiﬁed, would be one adequate source of justiﬁcation for the claim
that I’m not a brain in a vat. But that I’m not justiﬁed in believing that I have a
body is just the conclusion of the argument. So it seems that the skeptical argu-
ment begs the question—one of its premises can’t be established unless the con-
clusion is established ﬁrst.10
To put the point another way:11 suppose I start out thinking that I’m justiﬁed in
believing I have a body, and the skeptic then proposes to argue me out of this
position. He starts by informing me that the Closure Principle is true, because it is
epistemically permissible to add to your body of beliefs the deductive con-
sequences of any of your justiﬁed beliefs. The skeptic then asserts that I have no
available justiﬁcation for believing I’m not a brain in a vat. I naturally reply, “Yes
I do, because I justiﬁably believe I have a body, which entails that I’m not a brain
in a vat, and you just told me that it is epistemically premissible to add to my
belief system the deductive consequences of any of my justiﬁed beliefs.” What
will the skeptic say? Why is this not an adequate source of justiﬁcation for think-
ing I’m not a brain in a vat? Because I’m not justiﬁed in thinking I have a body?
But that’s just the conclusion the skeptic is trying to establish; I’m not going to
grant that off hand. So the skeptic needs some other argument for the claim that
I’m not justiﬁed in thinking I have a body. But if he has such an argument, then he
doesn’t need to use the brain-in-a-vat argument to begin with, because he would
have an independent argument for the same conclusion.
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
579

5. What’s wrong with these responses?
In short, Dretske’s response to the argument is this: Okay, I don’t know whether
I’m a brain in a vat, but that doesn’t matter; I still know that I have a body. And
Klein’s suggestion is this: Suppose we grant the Closure Principle. Then the skep-
tic’s claim that I’m not justiﬁed in believing I’m not a brain in a vat just begs the
question.
In spite of what we have said above in the way of philosophical analysis, I
think intuition still balks at these responses. It seems as if there must be some-
thing wrong with them. It doesn’t seem right that I can just admit that I don’t
know whether I’m a brain in a vat and continue to go on claiming to know all the
things I have hitherto thought I knew. But nor does it seem right that the fact that
I have two hands could be an adequate proof that I’m not a brain in a vat.
Let’s try to articulate why the responses seem wrong. Consider the following
two, possibly analogous cases:
Case (i) (the courtroom case): Imagine that S is on trial for murder. The
prosecution offers as evidence the fact that S’s blood was found at the scene
of the crime along with the victims’ blood. The best explanation for this,
they say, is that S cut himself while stabbing his victims. The jurors ﬁnd this
argument initially persuasive. However, the defense attorney offers an
alternative hypothesis: perhaps S is innocent, and the blood was planted at
the crime scene by overzealous police ofﬁcers seeking to frame S.
We can imagine how jury members might react to the defense hypothesis.
Some jurors might feel that, being unable to rule out the alternative hypothesis,
they should acquit S. Jurors arguing for a conviction might argue that the defense
hypothesis should be rejected because it requires an improbable conspiracy on
the part of the police department, because the police had no motive to frame S,
and so on. But one thing that a jury member could not be expected to say is the
following: “Okay, I agree that we have no reason for rejecting the defense
hypothesis. But I still think we should convict S anyway, because we know he did
it.” Another thing that a juror would probably not come up with is this: “The
defense attorney’s claim that we can’t rule out his hypothesis begs the question,
because if we know S is guilty, then we can rule out the defense hypothesis.”
The ﬁrst of these unsatisfactory responses parallels Dretske’s response to the
skeptic. The second parallels Klein’s response. If either of these responses were
offered, they would probably be met with looks of puzzlement from the other
jury members.
Case (ii) (the scientiﬁc case): Two scientists are arguing over the interpret-
ation of quantum mechanics. Physicist A proposes the Copenhagen inter-
pretation, noting that it accounts for a number of weird experimental
results. The Copenhagen interpretation is the received view. Physicist B
then proposes Bohm’s interpretation of quantum mechanics, which is
incompatible with the Copenhagen interpretation, noting that Bohm’s
theory accounts for all of the same experimental results. Now A might be
expected to object that Bohm’s theory conﬂicts with relativity, or that it is
MICHAEL HUEMER
580

somehow less parsimonious than the Copenhagen interpretation. But one
thing A would probably not say is the following: “Okay, I agree that I can’t
rule out Bohm’s theory; for all I know, that may be the right interpretation.
But nevertheless, I still know that the Copenhagen interpretation is cor-
rect.” Nor could we expect A to resort to the following objection: “Your
claim that I can’t rule out Bohm’s theory begs the question, because if I
know the Copenhagen interpretation is right, and Bohm’s theory conﬂicts
with the Copenhagen interpretation, then I can rule out Bohm’s theory.”
Again, both of these would strike us as illogical replies; yet they are, respect-
ively, analogous to Dretske’s and Klein’s responses to the brain-in-a-vat argu-
ment. If Dretske’s or Klein’s response to the brain-in-a-vat argument is correct,
then one of these absurd replies should be correct in the courtroom case and the
scientiﬁc case.
Dretske, of course, would challenge the analogy. It is not his view that, in order
to know something, one never needs to rule out alternative possibilities. Rather,
his view is that there are certain kinds of alternatives that one needs to rule out
(call them the “relevant alternatives”) in order to know something, and there are
other kinds of alternatives that one does not need to rule out (the “irrelevant
alternatives”).12 Dretske would claim that the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis is an
irrelevant alternative, but the defense hypothesis in the courtroom case and
Bohm’s theory in the scientiﬁc case are each relevant alternatives. Of course, this
claim remains only a promissory note until it is explained what makes an alterna-
tive “relevant.” According to Dretske, an alternative is relevant only if it is
genuinely possible, in a certain sense:
[T]he difference between a relevant and an irrelevant alternative resides,
not in what we happen to regard as a real possibility (whether reasonably
or not), but in the kind of possibilities that actually exist in the objective
situation.13
Dretske doesn’t give a precise analysis of the sense of “possible” he is invoking
here, but his discussion makes it clear that it is a sense stronger than logical
possibility, stronger than physical possibility, and non-epistemic.14 Whether
something is genuinely possible is supposed to be independent of our beliefs,
evidence, and/or knowledge.
Dretske might argue that the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis is an irrelevant alterna-
tive, on the grounds that it is not, in his sense, genuinely possible for me to be a
brain in a vat (perhaps because no one possesses the technology for keeping a
disembodied brain alive, nor for stimulating it in the right ways). As a result, it is
not a condition on our knowing about the external world that we rule out the
brain-in-a-vat hypothesis. However, Dretske would have difﬁculty distinguishing
this case from the scientiﬁc case. In the scientiﬁc case, we have two competing
physical theories. If one of these theories is true, then the other one is not only
false, but physically impossible. If Bohm’s theory is true then, for example, it is
physically impossible for particles to have indeterminate positions, as required by
the Copenhagen theory. This is typical of cases of competing scientiﬁc theories.
Thus, Dretske’s account would imply that the two hypotheses in the scientiﬁc
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
581

case are not both relevant alternatives; whichever theory is false is an irrelevant
alternative, because it is not genuinely possible. And therefore, Dretske’s theory
really would license the conclusion that one could know the Copenhagen inter-
pretation to be true (assuming that it is true) even though one has no reason to
reject Bohm’s interpretation.
6. A reformulation of the skeptic’s argument and the direct realist’s response
This casts doubt on the validity of Klein’s and Dretske’s replies. However, all
we’ve done so far is to pump the intuition that there is something wrong with
those replies to the skeptic. We haven’t actually explained what is wrong with
them. Klein’s response, at least, seems to work against the skeptical argument as
formulated, so we need to reexamine the skeptic’s argument.
The problem is that, as we formulated and defended the Closure Principle,
your having justiﬁcation for the claim that you’re not a brain in a vat would be a
result of your having justiﬁcation for the claim that you have a body. But what
the skeptic wants to say is that your having justiﬁcation for the claim that you’re
not a brain in a vat is a precondition on your having justiﬁcation for the claim
that you have a body—that you need to ﬁrst be in a position to know you’re not a
brain in a vat in order to be justiﬁed in believing that you have a body. So the
Closure Principle,
(1) If S is justiﬁed in believing P and P entails Q, then S is justiﬁed in
believing Q,
doesn’t do justice to the skeptic’s motivating idea.
Of course, it would not be acceptable to merely substitute the following, logic-
ally stronger principle:
(5) If P entails Q, then a precondition on S’s being justiﬁed in believing P is
that S be justiﬁed in believing Q.
This principle has no intuitive plausibility. For one thing, it would entail that a
precondition on being justiﬁed in believing P, for any P, is that one be justiﬁed in
believing ∼∼P, and also a precondition on being justiﬁed in believing ∼∼P is that
one be justiﬁed in believing P; so one could never be justiﬁed in believing any-
thing. No, the skeptic needs to say something more speciﬁc about the relationship
between the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis and the claim that I have a body than that
one entails the negation of the other. The skeptic needs to formulate an epistemo-
logical principle weaker than the absurd principle (5) above but still entailing that
ruling out the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis is a precondition on knowing I have a
body. At the same time, we want this epistemological principle, whatever it is, to
account for our intuitions about the courtroom case and the scientiﬁc case
discussed above.
So here’s what we’re looking for: we want an epistemological principle that,
ﬁrst of all, shows why in the courtroom case, we cannot merely grant that the
defense hypothesis of a police conspiracy may be true and still claim to know that
S is guilty. It should at the same time explain why, presumably for the same
MICHAEL HUEMER
582

reason, we cannot merely grant that Bohm’s interpretation of quantum mechan-
ics may be correct and still claim to know that the Copenhagen interpretation is
the right one. The Closure Principle, of course, would satisfy this desideratum.
But second, we want the principle to explain why in the courtroom case, the
defense attorney’s argument does not beg the question, and in the scientiﬁc case,
the physicist criticizing the Copenhagen interpretation is not begging the ques-
tion either. This is where the Closure Principle falls short, because it does not tell
us why the received view in these cases couldn’t count as a source of justiﬁcation
for rejecting the rival hypotheses. Finally, we want our epistemological principle
to explain why one might think the brain-in-a-vat argument was sound. We don’t
actually want to make the brain-in-a-vat argument out to be sound; in fact, it is a
bonus if we can explain why the brain-in-a-vat argument is not sound, even
though it might reasonably appear so.
Now consider the following epistemological principle, which I will call the
“Preference Principle” (because it concerns the preference of one hypothesis over
another):
(6) If E is any evidence and H1 and H2 are two incompatible explanations
for E, then S is justiﬁed in believing H1 on the basis of E only if S has an
independent reason for rejecting H2.
In this context, an “independent reason” means a reason distinct from H1 and
not justiﬁed, directly or indirectly, through H1. So the idea is that when you’re
faced with two competing explanations of certain data, you can’t accept the one
explanation until you have ﬁrst ruled out the other. One’s reasons for rejecting H2
might include a priori reasons, such as that H2 is signiﬁcantly less simple than H1,
as well as empirical reasons.
Notice how the Preference Principle is weaker than the principle (5) that we
rejected above. (5) would require us to be able to rule out each logical contrary of
H1 (in the sense of having reason to accept its negation), in order to be justiﬁed in
accepting H1. Thus, for example, we would have to be able to rule out (∼H1 &
Q), where Q is any arbitrary proposition, as a precondition on being justiﬁed in
accepting H1. But the Preference Principle doesn’t demand this. It only concerns
the alternative explanations of the data. If H1 is an explanation of E, (∼H1 & Q)
will not generally be an explanation of E. For instance, Newton’s Theory of
Gravity (along with background assumptions) is an explanation for the fact that
things fall to the ground when dropped. But the proposition, “Newton’s Theory
of Gravity is false and my socks are white” is not an explanation for the fact that
things fall to the ground when dropped. So in order to accept the Theory of
Gravity, we are not required to have an independent reason for rejecting, “the
Theory of Gravity is false and my socks are white.” This is fortunate, since the
only reason I in fact have for rejecting that proposition is the Theory of Gravity.
The Preference Principle seems plausible intuitively, and it satisﬁes our desid-
erata. In the courtroom case, the hypothesis that S is guilty and the hypothesis
that S was framed by the police are two competing explanations for the fact that
S’s blood was found at the crime scene, so we cannot accept that S is guilty on the
basis of that evidence unless we rule out the other hypothesis.15 Also, relying on
the Preference Principle, the defense attorney is not open to a charge of begging
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
583

the question. To assert that we have no reason for rejecting the defense hypothesis
may require begging the question, because in order to establish that we have no
such reason, one must ﬁrst establish that we don’t know S is guilty. However, in
applying the Preference Principle, the defense attorney only need assert that we
have no independent reason for rejecting the defense hypothesis, i.e., no reason
that is independent of the claim that S is guilty. And to argue that we have no
reason independent of the claim that S is guilty for rejecting the defense hypoth-
esis clearly does not require one to ﬁrst establish that we don’t know that S is
guilty. Similarly, for the scientiﬁc case, we have two competing hypotheses, so
according to the Preference Principle we must rule out Bohm’s theory before we
can accept the Copenhagen theory, and we must do so on grounds independent
of the Copenhagen theory.
Now when we turn to the brain-in-a-vat argument, we can see why the argu-
ment would appear to be sound and non-question-begging—if one accepts one of
the assumptions of indirect realism. If one accepts that beliefs about the external
world are hypotheses for which the evidence is that we have certain sorts of
sensory experiences, then the Preference Principle comes into play. Frank Jackson
states this view particularly clearly:
Our beliefs about objects, all of them (including the ones about causal links
between sense-data and objects), form a theory, “the theory of the external
world,” which is then justiﬁed by its explanatory and predictive power with
respect to our sense-data.16
Our ordinary, common sense beliefs about the external world, on the one hand,
and the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis, on the other hand, are then two competing
explanations for the same data. Therefore, just as in the courtroom case and the
scientiﬁc case, we must rule out the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis in order to be
justiﬁed in accepting our common sense beliefs about the external world on the
basis of that data. So the indirect realist is faced with the responsibility of refuting
the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis.
On the other hand, we can also see why we need not accept the brain-in-a-vat
argument with its skeptical conclusion—if we adopt a direct realist account of
perception. For the direct realist, perceptual beliefs about the external world are
foundational; they are not hypotheses posited to explain anything. Some beliefs
about the external world are hypotheses posited to explain evidence, such as
atomic theory or electromagnetic theory; but immediate perceptual beliefs such
as “Here is a red, round thing” are not. So the direct realist is in a position to
make a principled distinction between, on the one hand, the courtroom case or
the scientiﬁc case, where alternative hypotheses do need to be ruled out; and, on
the other hand, the case of our ordinary perceptual beliefs. In the courtroom case
and the scientiﬁc case, we really do have hypotheses posited to explain certain
data, and as a result, the justiﬁcation of a particular hypothesis depends upon a
claim of superiority for that hypothesis over the alternative explanations.
Furthermore, the direct realist is in a position to explain simply how I know
I’m not a brain in a vat. When I look at my two hands, for example, I know
directly that I have two hands. It follows from this that I am not a brain in a vat.
Notice that what is a question-begging argument for the indirect realist is not
MICHAEL HUEMER
584

question-begging for the direct realist. For the indirect realist, the argument just
proposed is circular, because I have to start with the mere fact that I have certain
sorts of experiences. From there, I don’t have any way of getting to the claim that
I have two hands except by ruling out the alternative explanations of those
experiences. So I can’t use the fact that I have two hands to rule out skeptical
alternatives. But the argument is not circular as proposed by the direct realist,
because I’m allowed to start from the claim that I have two hands. I’m not
required to give an argument for that, so in particular I do not have to give an
argument for it that presupposes the conclusion that I’m not a brain in a vat. The
conclusion that I’m not a brain in a vat can be justiﬁed by a linear argument
starting from foundational propositions.
7. Two objections
Objection #1
The direct realist line gets us out of the skeptical problem. But does it perhaps
get us too much? There are some circumstances in which we genuinely need to
consider alternative “hypotheses” to our perceptual judgements. We do not want
our epistemological theory to rule out all such circumstances automatically. We
don’t want our response to the brain-in-a-vat argument to turn into a recipe for
dogmatism with respect to perceptual beliefs.
Here is an example of the sort of circumstance I have in mind. Suppose I am
driving late at night. There’s a stone wall running along the side of the road. And
suppose I seem to see a ghostly white ﬁgure at the side of the road walk through
the stone wall, at a place where there is no opening. Now I can consider a few
different hypotheses. One possibility is that I just saw a ghost walk through a
wall. Another possibility is that there was actually an opening in the wall that I
somehow did not see, and I saw a person who was walking through it. And a
third possibility—the “skeptical” hypothesis if you like—is that there was neither
person nor ghost there at all, and I merely hallucinated it. In this circumstance, it
seems that I should weight the advantages and disadvantages of the possible
explanations for my experience, as the Preference Principle would suggest. In fact
the rational conclusion seems to be the “skeptical” one.
But wouldn’t my direct realism enable me to resist this, just as it enables me to
resist the brain-in-a-vat argument? Suppose I say that I have foundational know-
ledge that the white ﬁgure just walked through the wall, and since this entails that
I did not merely hallucinate the ﬁgure, I can easily rule out that skeptical hypoth-
esis. Isn’t this comparable to claiming that since I have foundational knowledge
that I have two hands, I can rule out the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis?
The key to unraveling this objection is the notion of prima facie justiﬁcation.
The direct realist need not—and should not—hold that perceptual beliefs have a
kind of justiﬁcation that is immune from countervailing considerations. He
should hold that the justiﬁcation attaching to immediate perceptual beliefs is,
while foundational, nevertheless defeasible justiﬁcation. The idea here is similar
to the legal concept of presumption: perceptual beliefs may be presumed true
unless and until contrary evidence appears. As long as there are no special
grounds for doubting a given perceptual belief, it retains its status as justiﬁed, but
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
585

when other, justiﬁed or prima facie justiﬁed beliefs start disconﬁrming it, the
presumption in favor of the perceptual belief can be defeated and the perceptual
belief can wind up unjustiﬁed.17
This is the case in the example just described. I have a certain degree of prima
facie justiﬁcation for thinking the ghostly ﬁgure just walked through the wall. As
I might say, if I didn’t know better, I would naturally (and reasonably) assume
that that is what happened. However, I have a large body of background know-
ledge, which indicates among other things that people generally can’t walk
through walls and that ghosts probably don’t exist, and this defeats my justiﬁca-
tion for thinking the ﬁgure walked through the wall. It seems clear that this must
be the right analysis of the case—as opposed to the view that we always need to
rule out the possibility of hallucination before accepting perceptual beliefs—
because in cases in which there is no evidence either for or against the hypothesis
of hallucination (e.g., if I had merely seen a rabbit sitting by the side of the road),
our default assumption is that things are the way they appear.
Now the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis is different. There are no grounds for sus-
pecting that I’m a brain in a vat, in the way that there are grounds for suspecting
that my seeming ghost sighting is a hallucination. So the presumption in favor of
my perceptual belief that I have two hands, for example, remains undefeated, and
this belief is therefore available for constructing an argument against the
brain-in-a-vat hypothesis.
Objection #2
Does my response to skepticism merely beg the question? The skeptic’s position is
that we are not justiﬁed in believing any contingent propositions about the
external world. I have responded to the skeptic by putting forward a direct
realist account of perceptual knowledge. In asserting direct realism, I am assert-
ing that we have a certain kind of justiﬁcation for certain propositions about
the external world. So at least part of my direct realist thesis is simply the
negation of the skeptical thesis—namely, that we are justiﬁed in believing some
propositions about the external world. Doesn’t this mean that my response
merely begs the question against skepticism? Obviously, the skeptic will just
immediately reject direct realism. How does my asserting direct realism con-
stitute any more of a response to the skeptic’s position than just saying,
“Skepticism is false”?
In answer to this objection, we need to distinguish two senses in which one
might give a “response to the skeptic.” One way to respond to the skeptic would
be to give a positive argument, addressed to the skeptic, to show that we do have
knowledge of the external world. This we might term an aggressive response to
the skeptic. As the above objection shows, I have not given an adequate response
of this kind. In fact, I do not believe it is possible to give a non-question-begging,
positive argument against skepticism.
However, another sense in which one might be said to respond to the skeptic is
this: one might confront an argument produced by the skeptic that tries to show
that we don’t have knowledge of the external world, and show how our common
sense beliefs can be defended in the face of that argument. That is, one might
demonstrate how the skeptical argument fails to give us a good reason for think-
MICHAEL HUEMER
586

ing that we don’t know about the external world. We can call this sort of
response a defensive response to the skeptic.
That is the sort of response I have provided. Given this aim, my asserting direct
realism is a legitimate and non-question-begging move. I do not put forward
direct realism as a premise from which to prove, positively, that we can know
about the external world. That would certainly beg the question. Rather, I argue
that the skeptic has only refuted one possible account of our knowledge of the
external world, namely, indirect realism. I put forward direct realism by way of
showing that there is an alternative account of our knowledge of the external
world that is not damaged by the skeptical argument. The point is that if we take
the direct realist line, then the skeptic hasn’t given us any non-question-begging
grounds for changing our position. The skeptic has merely assumed that we will
take the indirect realist line.
8. Conclusion
Now let’s conclude with a review of what I have and haven’t done. I have
proposed an epistemological form of direct realism according to which percep-
tion gives us a kind of justiﬁcation for certain beliefs about the external world
that is
(a) foundational, in the sense that the perceptual beliefs are not based on any
other beliefs, but
(b) defeasible, in the sense that countervailing evidence can rationally require us
to revise the perceptual beliefs.
I have not sought to elaborate and argue for this theory in any detail. Rather, I
have focused on demonstrating one important advantage that a theory of this
kind has over indirect realism, an advantage that has hitherto been overlooked by
direct and indirect realists alike. I have shown that, whereas the indirect realist
has an obligation of refuting the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis on grounds independ-
ent of our common sense beliefs about the external world, the direct realist can
easily refute the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis on the basis of his beliefs about the
external world. We saw that this does not involve the epistemological direct
realist in circular reasoning, since he is able to construct a valid deductive argu-
ment starting only from foundational propositions. Finally, we have seen that the
direct realist is able to handle the following cases in the intuitively acceptable
manner:
(i)
The courtroom case, in which we imagine that a jury member arguing for a
conviction rejects the defense attorney’s alternative explanation of the evi-
dence, on the ground that the defendant is guilty,
(ii)
the scientiﬁc case, in which a physicist rejects Bohm’s interpretation of
quantum mechanics on the sole ground that it contradicts the received
interpretation, and
(iii) the case of the ghost sighting, where we imagine that I argue that my appar-
ent ghost sighting could not have been a hallucination, since the ﬁgure in
white really did walk through the wall.
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
587

The direct realist can distinguish each of the above examples of bad reasoning
from his own reasoning against the skeptic. The ﬁrst two cases are disanalogous
because they both involve hypotheses inferred from evidence, whereas perceptual
beliefs are not hypotheses inferred from evidence. The third case is disanalogous
because it is a case in which speciﬁc reasons for doubting what I appear to have
seen have defeated the initial justiﬁcation for my perceptual belief, but there are
no such defeaters for perceptual beliefs in general.
Thus, we’ve revealed a new way in which direct realism comes to our aid in
fending off skepticism. I haven’t shown that the indirect realist is inevitably
committed to skepticism, since the indirect realist might still come up with a way
to argue against the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis on a priori grounds.18 The direct
realist’s advantage is simply that he doesn’t need to go down that road—he
doesn’t have to play the skeptic’s game to begin with. Moreover, the direct realist
does not make out our knowledge of the external world to be contingent on any
abstract, recherché reasoning of which only a small percentage of people in the
world are aware. Refuting the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis is not a precondition on
having knowledge of the external world, and such knowledge is well within the
reach of all normal human beings.19
Notes
1 See Thomas Reid, Inquiry and Essays (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1983),
pp. 10–11 and throughout.
2 Compare Richard Fumerton’s deﬁnition of “epistemological naive realism” in
Metaphysical and Epistemological Problems of Perception (Lincoln, Nebr.:
University of Nebraska Press, 1985), p. 73.
3 This principle will need some qualiﬁcations to protect it from easy counter-
examples. For instance, if Q is a necessary truth, then P entails Q no matter what
Q is, yet it is not apparently the case that, by knowing that the sky is blue, I am
justiﬁed in believing Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem. We can avoid this prob-
lem by restricting the application of the principle to contingent propositions. We
can further qualify the principle by restricting it to cases in which S is able to see
that P entails Q. (See Peter Klein, “Skepticism, and Closure: Why the Evil Genius
Argument Fails,” Philosophical Topics 23 (1995): 213–36, p. 215.) These quali-
ﬁcations don’t affect the skeptical argument or the responses to it discussed
below.
4 Compare Peter Klein’s remarks, op. cit., p. 216.
5 See, for example, John McDowell, Mind and World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1996), pp. 111–13; Jonathan Dancy, “Arguments from Illu-
sion,” The Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995): 421–38; and John Hyman, “The
Causal Theory of Perception,” The Philosophical Quarterly 42 (1992): 277–96.
6 Op. cit., p. 294.
7 See, e.g., Robert Audi, Belief, Justiﬁcation, and Knowledge (Belmont, Calif.:
Wadsworth, 1988), p. 77; and Fred Dretske, “Epistemic Operators,” Journal of
Philosophy 67 (1970): 1007–23. But note that Dretske is discussing the
Closure Principle for knowledge rather than for justiﬁcation.
8 Dretske, op. cit., p. 1016 (emphasis Dretske’s).
9 Klein, op. cit., pp. 218–22.
MICHAEL HUEMER
588

10 Ibid., pp. 226–28.
11 In conversation, Professor Klein has denied that the argument of this paragraph
is equivalent to that of the preceding two, nor to his own argument. I have been
unable to understand the signiﬁcant distinction, but I think the argument of this
paragraph is worth considering regardless. If you like, consider it the argument
of a hypothetical philosopher, Klein*.
12 See “The Pragmatic Dimension of Knowledge,” Philosophical Studies 40 (1981):
363–78.
13 Ibid., p. 377 (emphasis Dretske’s).
14 Suppose I say, “The roads were covered with snow, so I couldn’t make it to
class.” This seems to be the sort of modality Dretske has in mind. Of course, the
roads’ being snow-covered doesn’t make it logically or nomologically impossible
for me to come to class. Nor am I making an epistemic claim—I’m not just
saying that I know I didn’t make it to class. Many uses of modal terms in ordinary
language are like this.
15 More precisely, the Preference Principle requires that we have reason (that is,
have an available justiﬁcation) for rejecting the alternative hypothesis. It doesn’t
require that one have actually entertained each alternative hypothesis. It may be
true that one must actually entertain and reject each alternative, but that is
something the skeptic need not commit to at this point.
16 Perception: A Representative Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1977), pp. 143–44.
17 John Pollock also takes this view in his Contemporary Theories of Knowledge
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1987), pp. 29, 175–79.
18 As Hilary Putnam has done in Reason, Truth, and History (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981), chapter 1.
19 I would like to thank Peter Klein and Brian McLaughlin for their helpful comments
on earlier versions of this paper.
QUESTIONS
1
How does Huemer deﬁne “direct realism”?
2
What is the “preference principle”?
3
According to Huemer, why does the preference principle not apply to the case of
the brain-in-a-vat hypothesis and perceptual beliefs?
4
According to Huemer, how does the ghost sighting case differ from ordinary
perceptual beliefs?
5
What is meant by a “defensive response” to the skeptic?
“DIRECT REALISM AND THE BRAIN-IN-A-VAT ARGUMENT”
589

Roderick Chisholm, “The Problem
of the Criterion”
1
“The problem of the criterion” seems to me to be one of the most important and
one of the most difﬁcult of all the problems of philosophy. I am tempted to say
that one has not begun to philosophize until one has faced this problem and has
recognized how unappealing, in the end, each of the possible solutions is. I have
chosen this problem as my topic for the Aquinas Lecture because what ﬁrst set me
to thinking about it (and I remain obsessed by it) were two treatises of twentieth
century scholastic philosophy. I refer ﬁrst to P. Coffey’s two-volume work, Epis-
temology or the Theory of Knowledge, published in 1917. This led me in turn to
the treatises of Coffey’s great teacher, Cardinal D.J. Mercier: Critériologie
générale ou théorie générale de la certitude.
Mercier and, following him, Coffey set the problem correctly, I think, and
have seen what is necessary for its solution. But I shall not discuss their views in
detail. I shall formulate the problem; then note what, according to Mercier, is
necessary if we are to solve the problem; then sketch my own solution; and,
ﬁnally, note the limitations of my approach to the problem.
2
What is the problem, then? It is the ancient problem of “the diallelus”—the
problem of “the wheel” or “the vicious circle.” It was put very neatly by Mon-
taigne in his Essays. So let us begin by paraparaphrasing his formulation of the
puzzle. To know whether things really are as they seem to be, we must have a
procedure for distinguishing appearances that are true from appearances that are
false. But to know whether our procedure is a good procedure, we have to know
whether it really succeeds in distinguishing appearances that are true from
appearances that are false. And we cannot know whether it does really succeed
unless we already know which appearances are true and which ones are false.
And so we are caught in a circle.
Let us try to see how one gets into a situation of this sort.
The puzzles begin to form when you ask yourself, “What can I really know
about the world?” We all are acquainted with people who think they know a lot
Roderick Chisholm, “The Problem of the Criterion,” The Foundations of Knowing
(Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press, 1982).
590

more than in fact they do know. I’m thinking of fanatics, bigots, mystics, various
types of dogmatists. And we have all heard of people who claim at least to know
a lot less than what in fact they do know. I’m thinking of those people who call
themselves “skeptics” and who like to say that people cannot know what the
world is really like. People tend to become skeptics, temporarily, after reading
books on popular science: the authors tell us we cannot know what things are
like really (but they make use of a vast amount of knowledge, or a vast amount of
what is claimed to be knowledge, to support this skeptical conclusion). And as we
know, people tend to become dogmatists, temporarily, as a result of the effects of
alcohol, or drugs, or religious and emotional experiences. Then they claim to
have an inside view of the world and they think they have a deep kind of
knowledge giving them a key to the entire workings of the universe.
If you have a healthy common sense, you will feel that something is wrong
with both of these extremes and that the truth is somewhere in the middle: we can
know far more than the skeptic says we can know and far less than the dogmatist
or the mystic says that he can know. But how are we to decide these things?
3
How do we decide, in any particular case, whether we have a genuine item of
knowledge? Most of us are ready to confess that our beliefs far transcend what
we really know. There are things we believe that we don’t in fact know. And we
can say of many of these things that we know that we don’t know them. I believe
that Mrs. Jones is honest, say, but I don’t know it, and I know that I don’t know
it. There are other things that we don’t know, but they are such that we don’t
know that we don’t know them. Last week, say, I thought I knew that Mr. Smith
was honest, but he turned out to be a thief. I didn’t know that he was a thief, and,
moreover, I didn’t know that I didn’t know that he was a thief; I thought I knew
that he was honest. And so the problem is: How are we to distinguish the real
cases of knowledge from what only seem to be cases of knowledge? Or, as I put it
before, how are we to decide in any particular case whether we have genuine
items of knowledge?
What would be a satisfactory solution to our problem? Let me quote in detail
what Cardinal Mercier says:
If there is any knowledge which bears the mark of truth, if the intellect does
have a way of distinguishing the true and the false, in short, if there is a
criterion of truth, then this criterion should satisfy three conditions: it
should be internal, objective, and immediate.
It should be internal. No reason or rule of truth that is provided by an
external authority can serve as an ultimate criterion. For the reﬂective
doubts that are essential to criteriology can and should be applied to this
authority itself. The mind cannot attain to certainty until it has found
within itself a sufﬁcient reason for adhering to the testimony of such an
authority.
The criterion should be objective. The ultimate reason for believing
cannot be a merely subjective state of the thinking subject. A man is aware
that he can reﬂect upon his psychological states in order to control them.
“THE PROBLEM OF THE CRITERION”
591

Knowing that he has this ability, he does not, so long as he has not made
use of it, have the right to be sure. The ultimate ground of certitude
cannot consist in a subjective feeling. It can be found only in that which,
objectively, produces this feeling and is adequate to reason.
Finally, the criterion must be immediate. To be sure, a certain conviction
may rest upon many different reasons some of which are subordinate to
others. But if we are to avoid an inﬁnite regress, then we must ﬁnd a ground
of assent that presupposes no other. We must ﬁnd an immediate criterion of
certitude.
Is there a criterion of truth that satisﬁes these three conditions? If so,
what is it?
4
To see how perplexing our problem is, let us consider a ﬁgure that Descartes had
suggested and that Coffey takes up in his dealings with the problem of the cri-
terion. Descartes’ ﬁgure comes to this.
Let us suppose that you have a pile of apples and you want to sort out the good
ones from the bad ones. You want to put the good ones in a pile by themselves
and throw the bad ones away. This is a useful thing to do, obviously, because the
bad apples tend to infect the good ones and then the good ones become bad, too.
Descartes thought our beliefs were like this. The bad ones tend to infect the good
ones, so we should look them over very carefully, throw out the bad ones if we
can, and then—or so Descartes hoped—we would be left with just a stock of
good beliefs on which we could rely completely. But how are we to do the
sorting? If we are to sort out the good ones from the bad ones, then, of course, we
must have a way of recognizing the good ones. Or at least we must have a way of
recognizing the bad ones. And—again, of course—you and I do have a way of
recognizing good apples and also of recognizing bad ones. The good ones have
their own special feel, look, and taste, and so do the bad ones.
But when we turn from apples to beliefs, the matter is quite different. In the
case of the apples, we have a method—a criterion—for distinguishing the good
ones from the bad ones. But in the case of the beliefs, we do not have a
method or a criterion for distinguishing the good ones from the bad ones. Or,
at least, we don’t have one yet. The question we started with was: How are
we to tell the good ones from the bad ones? In other words, we were asking:
What is the proper method for deciding which are the good beliefs and which
are the bad ones—which beliefs are genuine cases of knowledge and which
beliefs are not?
And now, you see, we are on the wheel. First, we want to ﬁnd out which are the
good beliefs and which are the bad ones. To ﬁnd this out we have to have some
way—some method—of deciding which are the good ones and which are the bad
ones. But there are good and bad methods—good and bad ways—of sorting out
the good beliefs from the bad ones. And so we now have a new problem: How are
we to decide which are the good methods and which are the bad ones?
If we could ﬁx on a good method for distinguishing between good and bad
methods, we might be all set. But this, of course, just moves the problem to a
different level. How are we to distinguish between a good method for choosing
RODERICK CHISHOLM
592

good methods? If we continue in this way, of course, we are led to an inﬁnite
regress and we will never have the answer to our original question.
What do we do in fact? We do know that there are fairly reliable ways of
sorting out good beliefs from bad ones. Most people will tell you, for example,
that if you follow the procedures of science and common sense—if you tend
carefully to your observations and if you make use of the canons of logic, induc-
tion, and the theory of probability—you will be following the best possible pro-
cedure for making sure that you will have more good beliefs than bad ones. This
is doubtless true. But how do we know that it is? How do we know that the
procedures of science, reason, and common sense are the best methods that we
have?
If we do know this, it is because we know that these procedures work. It is
because we know that these procedures do in fact enable us to distinguish the
good beliefs from the bad ones. We say: “See—these methods turn out good
beliefs.” But how do we know that they do? It can only be that we already know
how to tell the difference between the good beliefs and the bad ones.
And now you can see where the skeptic comes in. He’ll say this: “You said you
wanted to sort out the good beliefs from the bad ones. Then to do this, you apply
the canons of science, common sense, and reason. And now, in answer to the
question, ‘How do you know that that’s the right way to do it?’, you say ‘Why, I
can see that the ones it picks out are the good ones and the ones it leaves behind
are the bad ones.’ But if you can see which ones are the good ones and which ones
are the bad ones, why do you think you need a general method for sorting them
out?”
5
We can formulate some of the philosophical issues that are involved here by
distinguishing two pairs of questions. These are:
A) “What do we know? What is the extent of our knowledge?”
B)
“How are we to decide whether we know? What are the criteria of
knowledge?”
If you happen to know the answers to the ﬁrst of these pairs of questions, you
may have some hope of being able to answer the second. Thus, if you happen to
know which are the good apples and which are the bad ones, then maybe you
could explain to some other person how he could go about deciding whether or
not he has a good apple or a bad one. But if you don’t know the answer to the
ﬁrst of these pairs of questions—if you don’t know what things you know or how
far your knowledge extends—it is difﬁcult to see how you could possibly ﬁgure
out an answer to the second.
On the other hand, if, somehow, you already know the answers to the second
of these pairs of questions, then you may have some hope of being able to answer
the ﬁrst. Thus, if you happen to have a good set of directions for telling whether
apples are good or bad, then maybe you can go about ﬁnding a good one—
assuming, of course, that there are some good apples to be found. But if you don’t
know the answer to the second of these pairs of questions—if you don’t know
“THE PROBLEM OF THE CRITERION”
593

how to go about deciding whether or not you know, if you don’t know what the
criteria of knowing are—it is difﬁcult to see how you could possibly ﬁgure out an
answer to the ﬁrst.
And so we can formulate the position of the skeptic on these matters. He will
say: “You cannot answer question A until you have answered question B. And
you cannot answer question B until you have answered question A. Therefore
you cannot answer either question. You cannot know what, if anything, you
know, and there is no possible way for you to decide in any particular case.” Is
there any reply to this?
6
Broadly speaking, there are at least two other possible views. So we may choose
among three possibilities.
There are people—philosophers—who think that they do have an answer to B
and that, given their answer to B, they can then ﬁgure out their answer to A. And
there are other people—other philosophers—who have it the other way around:
they think that they have an answer to A and that, given their answer to A, they
can then ﬁgure out the answer to B.
There don’t seem to be any generally accepted names for these two different
philosophical positions. (Perhaps this is just as well. There are more than enough
names, as it is, for possible philosophical views.) I suggest, for the moment, we
use the expressions “methodists” and “particularists.” By “methodists,” I mean,
not the followers of John Wesley’s version of Christianity, but those who think
they have an answer to B, and who then, in terms of it, work out their answer to
A. By “particularists” I mean those who have it the other way around.
7
Thus John Locke was a methodist—in our present, rather special sense of the
term. He was able to arrive—somehow—at an answer to B. He said, in effect:
“The way you decide whether or not a belief is a good belief—that is to say, the
way you decide whether a belief is likely to be a genuine case of knowledge—is to
see whether it is derived from sense experience, to see, for example, whether it
bears certain relations to your sensations.” Just what these relations to our sensa-
tions might be is a matter we may leave open, for present purposes. The point is:
Locke felt that if a belief is to be credible, it must bear certain relations to the
believer’s sensations—but he never told us how he happened to arrive at this
conclusion. This, of course, is the view that has come to be known as “empiri-
cism.” David Hume followed Locke in this empiricism and said that empiricism
gives us an effective criterion for distinguishing the good apples from the bad
ones. You can take this criterion to the library, he said. Suppose you ﬁnd a book
in which the author makes assertions that do not conform to the empirical
criterion. Hume said: “Commit it to the ﬂames: for it can contain nothing but
sophistry and illusion.”
RODERICK CHISHOLM
594

8
Empiricism, then, was a form of what I have called “methodism.” The
empiricist—like other types of methodist—begins with a criterion and then he
uses it to throw out the bad apples. There are two objections, I would say, to
empiricism. The ﬁrst—which applies to every form of methodism (in our present
sense of the word—is that the criterion is very broad and far-reaching and at the
same time completely arbitrary. How can one begin with a broad generalization?
It seems especially odd that the empiricist—who wants to proceed cautiously,
step by step, from experience—begins with such a generalization. He leaves us
completely in the dark so far as concerns what reasons he may have for adopting
this particular criterion rather than some other. The second objection applies to
empiricism in particular. When we apply the empirical criterion—at least, as it
was developed by Hume, as well as by many of those in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries who have called themselves “empiricists”—we seem to throw
out, not only the bad apples but the good ones as well, and we are left, in effect,
with just a few parings or skins with no meat behind them. Thus Hume virtually
conceded that, if you are going to be empiricist, the only matters of fact that you
can really know about pertain to the existence of sensations. “’Tis vain,” he said,
“To ask whether there be body.” He meant you cannot know whether any phys-
ical things exist—whether there are trees, or houses, or bodies, much less whether
there are atoms or other such microscopic particles. All you can know is that
there are and have been certain sensations. You cannot know whether there is any
you who experiences those sensations—much less whether any other people exist
who experience sensations. And I think, if he had been consistent in his empiri-
cism, he would also have said you cannot really be sure whether there have been
any sensations in the past; you can know only that certain sensations exist here
and now.
9
The great Scottish philosopher, Thomas Reid, reﬂected on all this in the eight-
eenth century. He was serious about philosophy and man’s place in the world. He
ﬁnds Hume saying things implying that we can know only of the existence of
certain sensations here and now. One can imagine him saying: “Good Lord!
What kind of nonsense is this?” What he did say, among other things, was this:
“A traveller of good judgment may mistake his way, and be unawares led into a
wrong track; and while the road is fair before him, he may go on without sus-
picion and be followed by others but, when it ends in a coal pit, it requires no
great judgment to know that he hath gone wrong, nor perhaps to ﬁnd out what
misled him.”
Thus Reid, as I interpret him, was not an empiricist; nor was he, more gener-
ally, what I have called a “methodist.” He was a “particularist.” That is to say, he
thought that he had an answer to question A, and in terms of the answer to
question A, he then worked out kind of an answer to question B. An even better
example of a “particularist” is the great twentieth century English philosopher,
G.E. Moore.
Suppose, for a moment, you were tempted to go along with Hume and say
“THE PROBLEM OF THE CRITERION”
595

“The only thing about the world I can really know is that there are now sensa-
tions of a certain sort. There’s a sensation of a man, there’s the sound of a voice,
and there’s feeling of bewilderment or boredom. But that’s all I can really know
about.” What would Reid say? I can imagine him saying something like this:
“Well, you can talk that way if you want to. But you know very well that it isn’t
true. You know that you are there, that you have a body of such and such a sort
and that other people are here, too. And you know about this building and where
you were this morning and all kinds of other things as well.” G.E. Moore would
raise his hand at this point and say: “I know very well this is a hand, and so do
you. If you come across some philosophical theory that implies that you and I
cannot know that this is a hand, then so much the worse for the theory.” I
think that Reid and Moore are right, myself, and I’m inclined to think that the
“methodists” are wrong.
Going back to our questions A and B, we may summarize the three possible
views as follows: there is skepticism (you cannot answer either question without
presupposing an answer to the other, and therefore the questions cannot be
answered at all); there is “methodism” (you begin with an answer to B); and there
is “particularism” (you begin with an answer to A). I suggest that the third
possibility is the most reasonable.
10
I would say—and many reputable philosophers would disagree with me—that, to
ﬁnd out whether you know such a thing as that this is a hand, you don’t have to
apply any test or criterion. Spinoza has it right. “In order to know,” he said,
“there is no need to know that we know, much less to know that we know that
we know.”
This is part of the answer, it seems to me, to the puzzle about the diallelus.
There are many things that quite obviously, we do know to be true. If I report to
you the things I now see and hear and feel—or, if you prefer, the things I now
think I see and hear and feel—the chances are that my report will be correct; I will
be telling you something I know. And so, too, if you report the things that you
think you now see and hear and feel. To be sure, there are hallucinations and
illusions. People often think they see or hear or feel things that in fact they do not
see or hear or feel. But from this fact—that our senses do sometimes deceive us—
it hardly follows that your senses and mine are deceiving you and me right now.
One may say similar things about what we remember.
Having these good apples before us, we can look them over and formulate
certain criteria of goodness. Consider the senses, for example. One important
criterion—one epistemological principle—was formulated by St. Augustine. It is
more reasonable, he said, to trust the senses than to distrust them. Even though
there have been illusions and hallucinations, the wise thing, when everything
seems all right, is to accept the testimony of the senses. I say “when everything
seems all right.” If on a particular occasion something about that particular
occasion makes you suspect that particular report of the senses, if, say, you seem
to remember having been drugged or hypnotized, or brainwashed, then perhaps
you should have some doubts about what you think you see, or hear, or feel, or
smell. But if nothing about this particular occasion leads you to suspect what the
RODERICK CHISHOLM
596

senses report on this particular occasion, then the wise thing is to take such a
report at its face value. In short the senses should be regarded as innocent until
there is some positive reason, on some particular occasion, for thinking that they
are guilty on that particular occasion.
One might say the same thing of memory. If, on any occasion, you think
you remember that such-and-such an event occurred, then the wise thing is to
assume that that particular event did occur—unless something special about this
particular occasion leads you to suspect your memory.
We have then a kind of answer to the puzzle about the diallelus. We start with
particular cases of knowledge and then from those we generalize and formulate
criteria of goodness—criteria telling us what it is for a belief to be epistemologic-
ally respectable. Let us now try to sketch somewhat more precisely this approach
to the problem of the criterion.
11
The theory of evidence, like ethics and the theory of value, presupposes an object-
ive right and wrong. To explicate the requisite senses of “right” and “wrong,” we
need the concept of right preference—or, more exactly, the concept of one state of
mind being preferable, epistemically, to another. One state of mind may be better,
epistemically, than another. This concept of epistemic preferability is what Car-
dinal Mercier called an objective concept. It is one thing to say, objectively, that
one state of mind is to be preferred to another. It is quite another thing to say,
subjectively, that one state of mind is in fact preferred to another—that someone
or other happens to prefer the one state of mind to the other. If a state of mind A
is to be preferred to a state of mind B, if it is, as I would like to say, intrinsically
preferable to B, then anyone who prefers B to A is mistaken in his preference.
Given this concept of epistemic preferability, we can readily explicate the basic
concepts of the theory of evidence. We could say, for for example, that a prop-
osition p is beyond reasonable doubt t provided only that believing p is then
epistemically preferable for S to withholding p—where by “withholding p” we
mean the state of neither accepting p nor its negation. It is evident to me, for
example, that many people are here. This means it is epistemically preferable for
me to believe that many people are here than for me neither to believe nor to
disbelieve that many are people here.
A proposition is evident for a person if it is beyond reasonable doubt for that
person and is such that his including it among the propositions upon which he
bases his decisions is preferable to his not so including it. A proposition is accept-
able if withholding it is not preferable to believing it. And a proposition is
unacceptable if withholding it is preferable to believing it.
Again, some propositions are not beyond reasonable doubt but they may be
said to have some presumption in their favor. I suppose that the proposition that
each of us will be alive an hour from now is one that has some presumption in its
favor. We could say that a proposition is of this sort provided only that believing
the proposition is epistemically preferable to believing its negation.
Moving in the other direction in the epistemic hierarchy, we could say that a
proposition is certain, absolutely certain, for a given subject at a given time, if
that proposition is then evident to that subject and if there is no other proposition
“THE PROBLEM OF THE CRITERION”
597

that is such that believing that other proposition is then epistemically preferable
for him to believing the given proposition. It is certain for me, I would say, that
there seem to be many people here and that 7 and 5 are 12. If this is so, then each
of the two propositions is evident to me and there are no other propositions that
are such that it would be even better, epistemically, if I were to believe those other
propositions.
This concept of epistemic preferability can be axiomatized and made the basis
of a system of epistemic logic exhibiting the relations among these and other
concepts of the theory of evidence. For present purposes, let us simply note how
they may be applied in our approach to the problem of the criterion.
12
Let us begin with the most difﬁcult of the concepts to which we have just
referred—that of a proposition being certain for a man at a given time. Can we
formulate criteria of such certainty? I think we can.
Leibniz had said that there are two kinds of immediately evident proposition—
the “ﬁrst truths of fact” and the “ﬁrst truths of reason.” Let us consider each of
these in turn.
Among the “ﬁrst truths of fact,” for any man at any given time, I would say,
are various propositions about his own state of mind at that time—his thinking
certain thoughts, his entertaining certain beliefs, his being in a certain sensory or
emotional state. These propositions all pertain to certain states of the man that
may be said to manifest or present themselves to him at that time. We could
use Meinong’s term and say that certain states are “self-presenting,” where this
concept might be marked off in the following way.
A man’s being in a certain state is self-presenting to him at a given time pro-
vided only that (i) he is in that state at that time and (ii) it is necessarily true that if
he is in that state at that time then it is evident to him that he is in that state at that
time.
The states of mind just referred to are of this character. Wishing, say, that one
were on the moon is a state that is such that a man cannot be in that state without
it being evident to him that he is in that state. And so, too, for thinking certain
thoughts and having certain sensory or emotional experiences. These states pres-
ent themselves and are, so to speak, marks of their own evidence. They cannot
occur unless it is evident that they occur. I think they are properly called the “ﬁrst
truths of fact.” Thus St. Thomas could say that “the intellect knows that it
possesses the truth by reﬂecting on itself.”
Perceiving external things and remembering are not states that present them-
selves. But thinking that one perceives (or seeming to perceive) and thinking that
one remembers (or seeming to remember) are states of mind that present them-
selves. And in presenting themselves they may, at least under certain favorable
conditions, present something else as well.
Coffey quotes Hobbes as saying that “the inn of evidence has no sign-board.” I
would prefer saying that these self-presenting states are sign-boards—of the inn
of indirect evidence. But these sign-boards need no further sign-boards in order to
be presented, for they present themselves.
RODERICK CHISHOLM
598

13
What of the ﬁrst truths of reason? These are the propositions that some philo-
sophers have called “a priori” and that Leibniz, following Locke, referred to as
“maxims” or “axioms.” These propositions are all necessary and have a further
characteristic that Leibniz described in this way: “You will ﬁnd in a hundred
places that the Scholastics have said that these propositions are evident, ex ter-
minis, as soon as the terms are understood, so that they were persuaded that the
force of conviction was grounded in the nature of the terms, i.e., in the connec-
tion of their ideas.” Thus St. Thomas referred to propositions that are “manifest
through themselves.”
An axiom, one might say, is a necessary proposition such that one cannot
understand it without thereby knowing that it is true. Since one cannot know a
proposition unless it is evident and one believes it, and since one cannot believe a
proposition unless one understands it, we might characterize these ﬁrst truths of
reason in the following way:
A proposition is axiomatic for a given subject at a given time provided only
that (i) the proposition is one that is necessarily true and (ii) it is also necessarily
true that if the person then believes that proposition, the proposition is then
evident to him.
We might now characterize the a priori somewhat more broadly by saying that
a proposition is a priori for a given subject at a given time provided that one or
the other of these two things is true: either (i) the proposition is one that is
axiomatic for that subject at that time, or else (ii) the proposition is one such that
it is evident to the man at that time that the proposition is entailed by a set of
propositions that are axiomatic for him at that time.
In characterizing the “ﬁrst truths of fact” and the “ﬁrst truths of reason,” I
have used the expression “evident.” But I think it is clear that such truths are not
only evident but also certain. And they may be said to be directly, or immediately,
evident.
What, then, of the indirectly evident?
14
I have suggested in rather general terms above what we might say about memory
and the senses. These ostensible sources of knowledge are to be treated as inno-
cent until there is positive ground for thinking them guilty. I will not attempt to
develop a theory of the indirectly evident at this point. But I will note at least the
kind of principle to which we might appeal in developing such a theory.
We could begin by considering the following two principles, M and P; M
referring to memory, and P referring to perception or the senses.
M) For any subject S, if it is evident to S that she seems to remember that a
was F, then it is beyond reasonable doubt for S that a was F.
P)
For any subject S, if it is evident to S that she thinks she perceives that a
is F, then it is evident to S that a is F.
“She seems to remember” and “she thinks she perceives” here refer to certain
“THE PROBLEM OF THE CRITERION”
599

self-presenting states that, in the ﬁgure I used above, could be said to serve as
sign-boards for the inn of indirect evidence.
But principles M and P, as they stand, are much too latitudinarian. We will ﬁnd
that it is necessary to make qualiﬁcations and add more and more conditions.
Some of these will refer to the subject’s sensory state; some will refer to certain of
her other beliefs; and some will refer to the relations of conﬁrmation and mutual
support. To set them forth in adequate detail would require a complete
epistemology.
So far as our problem of the criterion is concerned, the essential thing to note is
this. In formulating such principles we will simply proceed as Aristotle did when
he formulated his rules for the syllogism. As “particularists” in our approach to
the problem of the criterion, we will ﬁt our rules to the cases—to the apples we
know to be good and to the apples we know to be bad. Knowing what we do
about ourselves and the world, we have at our disposal certain instances that our
rules or principles should countenance, and certain other instances that our rules
or principles should rule out or forbid. And, as rational beings, we assume that by
investigating these instances we can formulate criteria that any instance must
satisfy if it is to be countenanced and we can formulate other criteria that any
instance must satisfy if it is to be ruled out or forbidden.
If we proceed in this way we will have satisﬁed Cardinal Mercier’s criteria
for a theory of evidence or, as he called it, a theory of certitude. He said that
any criterion, or any adequate set of criteria, should be internal, objective, and
immediate. The type of criteria I have referred to are certainly internal, in his
sense of the term. We have not appealed to any external authority as constitut-
ing the ultimate test of evidence. (Thus we haven’t appealed to “science” or to
“the scientists of our culture circle” as constituting the touchstone of what we
know.) I would say that our criteria are objective. We have formulated them in
terms of the concept of epistemic preferability—where the location “p is epi-
stemically preferable to q for S” is taken to refer to an objective relation that
obtains independently of the actual preferences of any particular subject. The
criteria that we formulate, if they are adequate, will be principles that are
necessarily true. And they are also immediate. Each of them is such that, if it is
applicable at any particular time, then the fact that it is then applicable is
capable of being directly evident to that particular subject at that particular
time.
15
But in all of this I have presupposed the approach I have called “particularism.”
The “methodist” and the “skeptic” will tell us that we have started in the wrong
place. If now we try to reason with them, then, I am afraid, we will be back on the
wheel.
What few philosophers have had the courage to recognize is this: we can deal
with the problem only by begging the question. It seems to me that, if we do
recognize this fact, as we should, then it is unseemly for us to try to pretend that it
isn’t so.
One may object: “Doesn’t this mean, then, that the skeptic is right after all?” I
would answer: “Not at all. His view is only one of the three possibilities and in
RODERICK CHISHOLM
600

itself has no more to recommend it than the others do. And in favor of our
approach there is the fact that we do know many things, after all.”
QUESTIONS
1
What is “methodism”?
2
What is “particularism”?
3
What is “skepticism”?
4
Which of these views does Chisholm favor?
“THE PROBLEM OF THE CRITERION”
601

G.E. Moore, “Proof of an External World”
In the preface to the second edition of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason some
words occur, which, in Professor Kemp Smith’s translation, are rendered as
follows:
It still remains a scandal to philosophy . . . that the existence of things
outside of us . . . must be accepted merely on faith, and that, if anyone
thinks good to doubt their existence, we are unable to counter his doubts by
any satisfactory proof.
 . . .
It seems to me that, so far from its being true, as Kant declares to be his
opinion, that there is only one possible proof of the existence of things outside of
us, namely the one which he has given, I can now give a large number of different
proofs, each of which is a perfectly rigorous proof; and that at many other times I
have been in a position to give many others. I can prove now, for instance, that
two human hands exist. How? By holding up my two hands, and saying, as I
make a certain gesture with the right hand, “Here is one hand,” and adding, as
I make a certain gesture with the left, “and here is another.” And if, by doing this,
I have proved ipso facto the existence of external things, you will all see that I can
also do it now in numbers of other ways: there is no need to multiply examples.
But did I prove just now that two human hands were then in existence? I do
want to insist that I did; that the proof which I gave was a perfectly rigorous one;
and that it is perhaps impossible to give a better or more rigorous proof of
anything whatever. Of course, it would not have been a proof unless three condi-
tions were satisﬁed; namely (1) unless the premiss which I adduced as proof of the
conclusion was different from the conclusion I adduced it to prove; (2) unless the
premiss which I adduced was something which I knew to be the case, and not
merely something which I believed but which was by no means certain, or some-
thing which, though in fact true, I did not know to be so; and (3) unless the
conclusion did really follow from the premiss. But all these three conditions were
in fact satisﬁed by my proof. (1) The premiss which I adduced in proof was quite
certainly different from the conclusion, for the conclusion was merely “Two
human hands exist at this moment”; but the premiss was something far more
G.E. Moore, “Proof of an External World,” Proceedings of the British Academy 25
(1939).
602

speciﬁc than this—something which I expressed by showing you my hands, mak-
ing certain gestures, and saying the words “Here is one hand, and here is
another.” It is quite obvious that the two were different, because it is quite obvi-
ous that the conclusion might have been true, even if the premiss had been false.
In asserting the premiss I was asserting much more than I was asserting in assert-
ing the conclusion. (2) I certainly did at the moment know that which I expressed
by the combination of certain gestures with saying the words “There is one hand
and here is another.” I knew that there was one hand in the place indicated by
combining a certain gesture with my ﬁrst utterance of ‘here’ and that there was
another in the different place indicated by combining a certain gesture with my
second utterance of “here.” How absurd it would be to suggest that I did not
know it, but only believed it, and that perhaps it was not the case! You might as
well suggest that I do not know that I am now standing up and talking—that
perhaps after all I’m not, and that it’s not quite certain that I am! And ﬁnally (3) it
is quite certain that the conclusion did follow from the premiss. This is as certain,
as it is that if there is one hand here and another here now, then it follows that
there are two hands in existence now.
My proof, then, of the existence of things outside of us did satisfy three of the
conditions necessary for a rigorous proof. Are there any other conditions neces-
sary for a rigorous proof, such that perhaps it did not satisfy one of them?
Perhaps there may be; I do not know; but I do want to emphasize that, so far as I
can see, we all of us do constantly take proofs of this sort as absolutely conclusive
proofs of certain conclusions—as ﬁnally settling certain questions, as to which
we were previously in doubt. Suppose, for instance, it were a question whether
there were as many as three misprints on a certain page in a certain book. A says
there are, B is inclined to doubt it. How could A prove that he is right? Surely he
could prove it by taking the book, turning to the page, and pointing to three
separate places on it, saying “There’s one misprint here, another here, and
another here”: surely that is a method by which it might be proved! Of course, A
would not have proved, by doing this, that there were at least three misprints on
the page in question, unless it was certain that there was a misprint in each of the
places to which he pointed. But to say that he might prove it in this way, is to say
that it might be certain that there was. And if such a thing as that could ever be
certain, then assuredly it was certain just now that there was one hand in one of
the two places I indicated and another in the other.
I did, then, just now, give a proof that there were then external objects; and
obviously, if I did, I could then have given many other proofs of the same sort
that there were external objects then, and could now give many proofs of the
same sort that there are external objects now.
But, if what I am asked to do is to prove that external objects have existed in
the past, then I can give many different proofs of this also, but proofs which are in
important respects of a different sort from those just given. And I want to
emphasize that, when Kant says it is a scandal not to be able to give a proof of the
existence of external objects, a proof of their existence in the past would certainly
help to remove the scandal of which he is speaking. He says that, if it occurs to
any one to question their existence, we ought to be able to confront him with a
satisfactory proof. But by a person who questions their existence, he certainly
means not merely a person who questions whether any exist at the moment of
“PROOF OF AN EXTERNAL WORLD”
603

speaking, but a person who questions whether any have ever existed; and a proof
that some have existed in the past would certainly therefore be relevant to part of
what such a person is questioning. How then can I prove that there have been
external objects in the past? Here is one proof. I can say: “I held up two hands
above this desk not very long ago; therefore two hands existed not very long ago;
therefore at least two external objects have existed at some time in the past,
Q.E.D.” This is a perfectly good proof, provided I know what is asserted in the
premiss. But I do know that I held up two hands above this desk not very long
ago. As a matter of fact, in this case you all know it too. There’s no doubt
whatever that I did. Therefore I have given a perfectly conclusive proof that
external objects have existed in the past; and you will all see at once that, if this is
a conclusive proof, I could have given many others of the same sort, and could
now give many others. But it is also quite obvious that this sort of proof differs in
important respects from the sort of proof I gave just now that there were two
hands existing then.
I have, then, given two conclusive proofs of the existence of external objects.
The ﬁrst was a proof that two human hands existed at the time when I gave the
proof; the second was a proof that two human hands had existed at a time
previous to that at which I gave the proof. These proofs were of a different sort in
important respects. And I pointed out that I could have given, then, many other
conclusive proofs of both sorts. It is also obvious that I could give many others of
both sorts now. So that, if these are the sort of proof that is wanted, nothing is
easier than to prove the existence of external objects.
But now I am perfectly well aware that, in spite of all that I have said, many
philosophers will still feel that I have not given any satisfactory proof of the point
in question. And I want brieﬂy, in conclusion, to say something as to why this
dissatisfaction with my proofs should be felt.
One reason why, is, I think, this. Some people understand “proof of an
external world” as including a proof of things which I haven’t attempted to prove
and haven’t proved. It is not quite easy to say what it is that they want proved—
what it is that is such that unless they got a proof of it, they would not say that
they had a proof of the existence of external things; but I can make an approach
to explaining what they want by saying that if I had proved the propositions
which I used as premisses in my two proofs, then they would perhaps admit that I
had proved the existence of external things, but, in the absence of such a proof
(which, of course, I have neither given, nor attempted to give), they will say that I
have not given what they mean by a proof of the existence of external things. In
other words they want a proof of what I assert now when I hold up my hands and
say ‘Here’s one hand and here’s another’; and, in the other case, they want a
proof of what I assert now when I say ‘I did hold up two hands above this desk
just now.’ Of course, what they really want is not merely a proof of these two
propositions, but something like a general statement as to how any propositions
of this sort may be proved. This, of course, I haven’t given; and I do not believe it
can be given: if this is what is meant by proof of the existence of external things, I
do not believe that any proof of the existence of external things is possible. Of
course, in some cases what might be called a proof of propositions which seem
like these can be got. If one of you suspected that one of my hands was artiﬁcial
he might be said to get a proof of my proposition “Here’s one hand, and here’s
G.E. MOORE
604

another,” by coming up and examining the suspected hand close up, perhaps
touching and pressing it, and so establishing that it really was a human hand. But
I do not believe that any proof is possible in nearly all cases. How am I to prove
now that “Here’s one hand, and here’s another”? I do not believe I can do it. In
order to do it, I should need to prove for one thing, as Descartes pointed out, that
I am not now dreaming. But how can I prove that I am not? I have, no doubt,
conclusive reasons for asserting that I am not now dreaming; I have conclusive
evidence that I am awake: but that is a very different thing from being able to
prove it. I could not tell you what all my evidence is; and I should require to do
this at least, in order to give you a proof.
But another reason, why some people would feel dissatisﬁed with my proofs is,
I think, not merely that they want a proof of something which I haven’t proved,
but that they think that, if I cannot give such extra proofs, then the proofs that I
have given are not conclusive proofs at all. And this, I think, is a deﬁnite mistake.
They would say: “If you cannot prove your premiss that here is one hand and
here is another, then you do not know it. But you yourself have admitted that, if
you did not know it, then your proof was not conclusive. Therefore your proof
was not, as you say it was, a conclusive proof.” This view that, if I cannot prove
such things as these, I do not know them, is, I think, the view that Kant was
expressing in the sentence which I quoted at the beginning of this lecture, when
he implies that so long as we have no proof of the existence of external things,
their existence must be accepted merely on faith. He means to say, I think, that if I
cannot prove that there is a hand here, I must accept it merely as a matter of
faith—I cannot know it. Such a view, though it has been very common among
philosophers, can, I think, be shown to be wrong—though shown only by the use
of premisses which are not known to be true, unless we do know of the existence
of external things. I can know things, which I cannot prove; and among things
which I certainly did know, even if (as I think) I could not prove them, were the
premisses of my two proofs. I should say, therefore, that those, if any, who are
dissatisﬁed with these proofs merely on the ground that I did not know their
premisses, have no good reason for their dissatisfaction.
QUESTIONS
1
What are the premises and conclusion in Moore’s “proof”?
2
According to Moore, what three conditions must an argument satisfy in order to
count as a “proof”?
“PROOF OF AN EXTERNAL WORLD”
605

G.E. Moore, “Hume’s Theory Examined”
I think, therefore, those philosophers who argue, on the ground of Hume’s prin-
ciples, that nobody can ever know of the existence of any material object, are
right so far as the ﬁrst step in their argument is concerned. They are right in
saying: If Hume’s principles are true, nobody can ever know of the existence of
any material object—nobody can ever know that any such object even probably
exists: meaning by a material object, an object which has shape and is situated in
space; but which is not similar, except in these respects, to any of the sense-data
which we have ever directly apprehended. But are they also right in the second
step of their argument? Are they also right, in concluding: Since Hume’s prin-
ciples are true, nobody ever does know, even probably, of the existence of any
material object? In other words: Are Hume’s principles true?
You see, the position we have got to is this. If Hume’s principles are true, then,
I have admitted, I do not know now that this pencil—the material object—exists.
If, therefore, I am to prove that I do know that this pencil exists, I must prove,
somehow, that Hume’s principles, one or both of them, are not true. In what sort
of way, by what sort of argument, can I prove this?
It seems to me that, in fact, there really is no stronger and better argument than
the following. I do know that this pencil exists; but I could not know this, if
Hume’s principles were true; therefore, Hume’s principles, one or both of them,
are false. I think this argument really is as strong and good a one as any that could
be used: and I think it really is conclusive. In other words, I think that the fact
that, if Hume’s principles were true, I could not know of the existence of this
pencil, is a reductio ad absurdum of those principles. But, of course, this is an
argument which will not seem convincing to those who believe that the principles
are true, nor yet to those who believe that I really do not know that this pencil
exists. It seems like begging the question. And therefore I will try to shew that it
really is a good and conclusive argument.
Let us consider what is necessary in order that an argument may be a good and
conclusive one. A really conclusive argument is one which enables us to know
that its conclusion is true. And one condition, which must be satisﬁed, if an
argument is to enable us to know this, is that the conclusion must really follow
from the premisses. Let us see, ﬁrst, how my argument compares with that of my
opponent in this respect.
G.E. Moore, “Hume’s Theory Examined,” in Some Main Problems of Philosophy (New
York: Humanities Press, 1953).
606

My argument is this: I do know that this pencil exists; therefore Hume’s prin-
ciples are false. My opponent’s argument on the contrary is: Hume’s principles
are true; therefore you do not know that this pencil exists. And obviously in
respect of the certainty with which the conclusion follows from the premiss, these
two arguments are equally good. If my opponent’s conclusion follows from his
premiss, my conclusion must certainly also follow from mine. For my opponent’s
conclusion does not follow from his premiss, except on one condition, namely,
unless the following hypothetical proposition is true: If Hume’s principles are
true, then I do not know that this pencil exists. But if this proposition is true, then
my conclusion also follows from my premiss. In fact, both arguments depend in
this respect on exactly the same hypothetical proposition—the proposition which
both I and my opponent have admitted to be true: namely that: If Hume’s prin-
ciples are true, then I do not know that this pencil exists. Neither conclusion
follows from its premiss, unless this proposition is true; and each does follow
from its premiss, if this proposition is true. And this state of things is an excellent
illustration of a principle, which many philosophers are, I think, apt to forget:
namely, that the mere fact that one proposition coheres with or follows from
another does not by itself give us the slightest presumption in favour of its truth.
My conclusion coheres with my premiss, exactly as strongly as my opponent’s
coheres with his. And yet obviously this mere fact does not give the slightest
presumption in favour of either.
Both arguments, therefore, equally satisfy the ﬁrst condition that is necessary
to make an argument conclusive. Both equally satisfy the condition that the
conclusion must follow from the premiss. What other condition, then, is
necessary if an argument is to enable us to know that its conclusion is true?
The second condition, that is necessary, is this: Namely that we should know
the premiss to be true. Obviously, I think, this condition must be satisﬁed, if the
argument is to enable us to know that its conclusion is true. It is not sufﬁcient
merely that the premiss should be true, if we do not know that it is so. For
suppose that the premiss is true, and the conclusion does follow from it, and yet I
do not know that the premiss is true. How can this state of things possibly enable
me to know that the conclusion is true? Obviously so long as this is the whole
state of the case, I shall be just as far from knowing that the conclusion is true, as
if I had never thought of the premiss at all. The argument may be, and is, a good
argument in the sense that the conclusion does follow from the premiss, that the
premiss is, in fact, true, and that, therefore the conclusion also is in fact true. But
it is not a good argument in the sense that it can possibly enable either me or any
one else to know that the conclusion is true. The mere fact that the premiss is true
will not, by itself, enable any one whatever to know that the conclusion is so. If
anybody whatever is to be enabled by the argument absolutely to know the
conclusion, that person must himself ﬁrst absolutely know that the premiss is
true. And the same holds not only for absolute certainty but also for every degree
of probability short of it. If any argument whatever is to enable me to know that
its conclusion is in any degree probable, I must ﬁrst know that its premiss is
probable in at least the same degree. In other words, no argument is a good one,
even in the sense that it enables us to know its conclusion to have any probability
whatever, unless its premiss is at least as certain as its conclusion: meaning by
“certain,” not merely true or probably true, but known to be so.
“HUME’S THEORY EXAMINED”
607

The only way, then, of deciding between my opponent’s argument and mine,
as to which is the better, is by deciding which premiss is known to be true. My
opponent’s premiss is that Hume’s principles are true; and unless this premiss not
merely is true, but is absolutely known to be so, his argument to prove that I do
not know of the existence of this pencil cannot be conclusive. Mine is that I do
know of the existence of this pencil; unless this premiss not only is true, but is
absolutely known to be so, my argument to prove that Hume’s principles are
false cannot be conclusive. And moreover the degree of certainty of the conclu-
sion, in either case, supposing neither is quite certain, will be in proportion to the
degree of certainty of the premiss. How is it to be decided which premiss, if either,
is known? or which is the more certain?
One condition under which a premiss may be known to be true, is a condition
which we have already stated. Namely, any proposition is known to be true, if
we have a conclusive argument in its favour; if, that is to say, it does really follow
from some premiss or set of premisses already known to be true. I say some
premiss or set of premisses; and this new qualiﬁcation should be noticed, because
it introduces a complication. If any argument from a single premiss is to be
conclusive, the single premiss must, as we have seen, be at least as certain as the
conclusion: the conclusion cannot, by the help of any such argument, be known
with more certainty than the premiss. But obviously in the case of a set of
premisses, the conclusion may be more certain than any single one of the prem-
isses. Here, too, however, each of the premisses must be known to be at least
probable in some degree: no amount of premisses, which were not known to be
probable at all, could enable us to know that the conclusion which followed
from them all was even in the least degree probable. One way, therefore, in
which a proposition can be known to be true, is if it follows from some premiss
or set of premisses, each of which is already known to be so with some degree of
certainty. And some philosophers seem to have thought that this is the only way
in which any proposition can ever be known to be true. They seem to have
thought, that is, that no proposition can ever be known to be true, unless it
follows from some other proposition or set of propositions already known to
be so.
But it is, I think, easy to see that, if this view were true, no man ever has known
any proposition whatever to be in the slightest degree probable. For if I cannot
know any proposition whatever to be either true or probably true, unless I have
ﬁrst known some other proposition, from which it follows, to be so; then, of
course, I cannot have known this other proposition, unless I have ﬁrst known
some third proposition, before it; nor this third proposition, unless I have ﬁrst
known a fourth before it; and so on ad inﬁnitum. In other words, it would follow
that no man has ever known any proposition whatever to be even probably true,
unless he has previously known an absolutely inﬁnite series of other propositions.
And it is quite certain that no man ever has thus known a really inﬁnite series of
propositions. If this view were true, then, neither my argument nor my
opponent’s argument could possibly be a good argument: neither of them could
enable us to know that the conclusion was even in the least degree probable. And
the same would be true of every other argument whatsoever. So that if this view—
the view that we can never know any proposition whatever, unless we have a
good argument for it—were true, then it would follow that we cannot ever know
G.E. MOORE
608

any proposition whatever to be true, since we never can have any good argument
for it.
If, therefore, either my argument or my opponent’s, or any other argument
whatever, is to be a good one, it must be the case that we are capable of knowing
at least one proposition to be true, without knowing any other proposition
whatever from which it follows. And I propose to call this way of knowing a
proposition to be true, immediate knowledge.
. . .
It is certain, then, that if any proposition whatever is ever known by us mediately,
or because some other proposition is known from which it follows, some one
proposition at least, must also be known by us immediately, or not merely
because some other proposition is known from which it follows. And hence it
follows that the conditions necessary to make an argument good and conclusive
may just as well be satisﬁed, when the premiss is only known immediately, as
when there are other arguments in its favour. It follows, therefore, that my argu-
ment: “I know this pencil to exist; therefore Hume’s principles are false”; may be
just as good an argument as any other, even though its premiss—the premiss that
I do know that this pencil exists—is only known immediately.
But is this premiss in fact known by me immediately? I am inclined to think
that it is, though this might be disputed, for the following reasons. It must be
noticed, that the premiss is: I know that this pencil exists. What, therefore, I am
claiming to know immediately is not, that this pencil exists, but that I know it to
exist. And it may be said: Can I possibly know immediately such a thing as this?
Obviously, I cannot know that I know that the pencil exists, unless I do know
that the pencil exists; and it might, therefore, be thought that the ﬁrst proposition
can only be mediately known—known merely because the second is known. But
it is, I think, necessary to make a distinction. From the mere fact that I should not
know the ﬁrst, unless I knew the second, it does not follow that I know the ﬁrst
merely because I know the second. And, in fact, I think I do know both of them
immediately. This might be disputed in the case of the second also. It might be
said: I certainly do not know immediately that the pencil exists; for I should not
know it at all, unless I were directly apprehending certain sense-data, and knew
that they were signs of its existence. And of course I admit, that I should not
know it, unless I were directly apprehending certain sense-data. But this is again a
different thing from admitting that I do not know it immediately. For the mere
fact that I should not know it, unless certain other things were happening, is quite
a different thing from knowing it only because I know some other proposition.
The mere direct apprehension of certain sense-data is quite a different thing from
the knowledge of any proposition; and yet I am not sure that it is not by itself
quite sufﬁcient to enable me to know that the pencil exists.
But whether the exact proposition which formed my premiss, namely: I do
know that this pencil exists; or only the proposition: This pencil exists; or only
the proposition: The sense-data which I directly apprehend are a sign that it
exists; is known by me immediately, one or other of them, I think, certainly is so.
And all three of them are much more certain than any premiss which could be
used to prove that they are false; and also much more certain than any other
premiss which could be used to prove that they are true. That is why I say that the
strongest argument to prove that Hume’s principles are false is the argument
“HUME’S THEORY EXAMINED”
609

from a particular case, like this in which we do know of the existence of some
material object. And similarly, if the object is to prove in general that we do know
of the existence of material objects, no argument which is really stronger can, I
think, be brought forward to prove this than particular instances in which we do
in fact know of the existence of such an object. I admit, however, that other
arguments may be more convincing; and perhaps some of you may be able to
supply me with one that is. But, however, much more convincing it may be, it is, I
think, sure to depend upon some premiss which is, in fact, less certain than the
premiss that I do know of the existence of this pencil; and so, too, in the case of
any arguments which can be brought forward to prove that we do not know of
the existence of any material object.
QUESTIONS
1
What is meant by “immediate knowledge”?
2
Why does Moore say that we must have some immediate knowledge?
FURTHER READING ON SKEPTICISM
Audi, Robert, Belief, Justiﬁcation, and Knowledge (Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1988).
Brueckner, Anthony, “Brains in a Vat,” Journal of Philosophy 83 (1986): 148–67.
Chisholm, Roderick, The Foundations of Knowing (Minneapolis, Minn.: University of
Minnesota Press, 1982).
DeRose, Keith, “Solving the Skeptical Problem,” Philosophical Review 104 (1995):
1–52.
DeRose, Keith and Ted Warﬁeld, Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999).
Descartes, René, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, ed. John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1984).
Dretske, Fred, “Epistemic Operators,” Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970): 1007–23.
Feldman, Fred, “In Defense of Closure,” Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995): 487–94.
Foley, Richard, Working Without a Net (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Fumerton, Richard, Metaepistemology and Skepticism (Lanham, Md.: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 1995.
Garrett, Brian, “A Sceptical Tension,” Analysis 59 (1999): 205–6.
Huemer, Michael, Skepticism and the Veil of Perception (Lanham, Md.: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 2001).
Hume, David, A Treatise of Human Nature (Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus, 1992).
Klein, Peter, Certainty: A Refutation of Skepticism (Minneapolis, Minn.: University of
Minnesota Press, 1981).
Lehrer, Keith, “Why Not Scepticism?” Philosophical Forum 2 (1971): 283–98.
Luper-Foy, Steven (ed.) The Possibility of Knowledge (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld, 1987).
Pollock, John and Joseph Cruz, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, 2nd edn
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 1999).
G.E. MOORE
610

Stroud, Barry, The Signiﬁcance of Philosophical Skepticism (Oxford: Clarendon,
1984).
Unger, Peter, Ignorance: A Case for Scepticism (Oxford: Clarendon, 1975).
Vogel, Jonathan, “Cartesian Skepticism and Inference to the Best Explanation,”
Journal of Philosophy 87 (1990): 658–66.
Williams, Michael, Groundless Belief, 2nd edn (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1999).
“HUME’S THEORY EXAMINED”
611


INDEX
a posteriori knowledge see empirical
knowledge
a priori knowledge 3, 7–9, 10, 17,
125–30, 142–56, 161–3, 212, 283,
293, 388–9, 534, 599; and causal
theory of knowledge 18, 437; and
causation 299–301; and induction
212, 263, 311; in mathematics
208–13, 147–51; in science 148–9;
see also synthetic a priori knowledge
abstract ideas 34, 38, 40, 49, 158
absurdity 70
acquaintance 127, 157, 160–4
acquired perception 61, 234–5
action at a distance 100
additivity principle 345, 348
after-images 77, 81, 403
Alston, William 3, 16–17, 370, 402ff.
analytic propositions see analytic–
synthetic distinction
analytic–synthetic distinction 7–9,
125–8, 146–9, 152, 176–89, 192
angular size see visible magnitude
apparent magnitude see visible
magnitude
appearances 33, 35, 47, 74, 106, 144,
172, 379, 383, 476, 64–5, 77–8,
150–1, 590–1
argument from illusion see illusion
Aristotle 40, 177, 190, 219, 323, 600
artiﬁcial language 184–5, 234–5
atheism 44, 46, 49n1, 60, 228
attributor factors 19, 492–7, 500
Austin, J.L. 5, 31, 74ff., 245, 263
Ayer, A.J. 8, 18, 31, 74–83 passim, 94,
127, 166ff., 333–4, 377, 435, 440ff.,
444
Bacon, Francis 231
basic beliefs 105–6, 375, 391, 401,
417–19, 422; arguments against
377–80, 387–8, 408–11; see also
foundationalism
Bayes, Thomas: Bayes’ Theorem 296,
349–50
Bayesianism 296
behaviorism 89
being 41, 160, 172
belief: dispositional 7, 11–12, 114,
121n15, 253, 264–6; ﬁxation of
276–80; occurrent 104, 253, 264; see
also thoughts
Berkeley, George 4–5, 8, 28–30, 37ff.,
49n1, 54–61 passim, 66–8, 158–9
bias 254, 277, 282–7, 306, 417
BonJour, Laurence 8, 9, 15–17,
129–30, 208ff., 370, 387ff., 419, 426,
430n4
brain in a vat 20–2, 438–9, 507–10,
527–34, 575–88
Carnap, Rudolf 8–9, 129, 178–9, 184–5,
187–92, 194ff., 290n14, 353
Carroll, Lewis 11, 253, 256ff., 484
causal theory of knowledge 18, 437,
450ff., 459, 472, 475–6
causal theory of perception 577
causal theory of reference 509,
532–45
causation 30, 48, 154, 341; backward
355; knowledge of 299–301; in
memory 97–100
C-belief 420–2, 425
certainty 18, 20, 34, 64, 69, 92, 95
Chisholm, Roderick 22, 23, 283, 387,
613

414, 444, 465, 466, 468, 470, 473,
510–12, 590ff.
church/barn example (Austin) 78
circular reasoning 16–17, 114, 182,
218, 260, 322, 369–70, 373, 380–3,
389–90, 414, 420, 511, 568–9, 585,
587
Clark, Michael 18, 436–7, 447ff., 450,
455–8
clear and distinct ideas 20, 53
closure principle 21, 23, 438–9, 483–8,
509–10, 552–65, 578–85
Coady, C.A.J. 10, 218, 239ff.
cogito 69, 489n2, 508, 519–20
cognitive meaning see veriﬁcationism
cognitive synonymy see synonymy
cognitively spontaneous beliefs
393–401
coherence theory of justiﬁcation see
coherentism
coherentism 15–17, 370–1, 375,
389–401, 417–19, 424, 426;
arguments against 380–2; see also
perception, coherence of
cold, perception of 35, 37–40, 74, 308,
521
color 28, 30, 34, 37–41, 45, 65–6, 69,
71, 74, 144, 151, 154, 302, 304, 422,
516, 521
common sense 5, 22–3, 53, 57–60, 70,
73, 191, 312, 511
concepts 534–7; absolute 540–3; and
analyticity 125–6; a priori 144–9;
and simplicity 180
conﬁrmation 9, 186–9, 323–31
conﬁrmation theory 323–6; see also
conﬁrmation
consciousness 529–31; see also
introspection
contextualism 19, 439, 491–7;
objections to 498–500
contradiction 155
contrasting set 545–6
counterfactual analysis of knowledge
19, 437–8, 475–9
courtroom example see trial example
criterion of truth see problem of the
criterion
crossword puzzle example 17, 371,
420–8
Cruz, Joseph 86–7, 104ff.
culpability 115, 118
custom 12, 307–9
deductive inference 12–13, 164, 293–5,
322–4
defeasibility theories 18–19, 436–7,
464–73
defeaters 109, 119–20, 436, 466–8
deﬁnitions 9, 179
delusions 71, 75–7
demons see evil demon
derivative knowledge 8, 164, 469–70
DeRose, Keith 19, 439, 491ff.
Descartes, René 19–21, 23, 46, 48, 55,
60, 69, 83n8, 414n4, 428, 489n2, 508,
513ff., 528, 552, 592, 605
description, knowledge by 164
direct inference 352–7
direct realism 21–2, 29–31, 260, 510,
575–88; deﬁned 27
dispositional beliefs see belief,
dispositional
dissolution 20, 295, 321
dreams 22, 69, 71, 77, 80–1, 164, 393,
489n2, 508, 516; memory of 6, 101–2
Dretske, Fred 21, 494, 509–10, 539ff.,
558, 562, 578–82
dynamic argument 6, 86, 107–10
Edwards, Paul 13, 294–5, 311ff.
elliptic geometry see geometry
emotive meaning 127, 173
empirical knowledge 125–6, 142–3,
395–7; see also a priori knowledge
empirical reality 150
empiricism 4, 8, 11, 153, 176ff., 210–12,
253, 594–5; deﬁned 125–6; extreme
127–8; version of foundationalism
260ff; see also rationalism
essence 156–7, 177
Euclidean geometry see geometry
evil demon 69, 338, 399, 429, 479–83,
489n2, 495, 508, 518, 552
existence 37, 160
explanation see inference to the best
explanation
explication 179–81
extension (spatial) 38–41, 49, 146, 177,
522; visible vs. tangible 56
INDEX
614

extension of a term 177, 535
extensionality 183
external objects 27–8, 33–4, 41–3, 47–9,
55; inconceivability of 29; see also
matter
externally situated evidence 554–65
faith 231
familiarity 6, 76, 85, 89–90
ﬁgure see shape
ﬁve-minute hypothesis (Russell) 6, 85,
88, 116
ﬂatness 541
forms 125, 156–7
Foster, John 14, 295–6, 333ff.
foundational beliefs 23, 27, 53–4; see
also foundationalism; intuition; self-
evidence
foundationalism 8, 11, 15–17, 260, 370,
375; empiricist version of 259; inﬁnite
regress argument for 259–60, 265,
388, 412–14, 608; Lehrer’s criticism
408–12; and memory 105; minimal
16, 404–5; moderate 23; weak 16;
Will’s criticism 402–7
foundherentism 17, 370–1, 419–29
fully grounded beliefs 18, 436, 448–9,
457
Fumerton, Richard 11, 253–4, 259ff.
gambler example 435
gambler’s inference 354
Gauss, Carl Friedrich 195–7, 202–3
genetic argument 86, 107–10
genetic defeater 109–12
geometry 9, 126–30, 194–213, 298, 307
Gettier, Edmund 18, 426, 435–6, 444–6,
450, 476, 557; response to 447–9
Gettier examples see Gettier, Edmund
ghosts 69, 76, 585–6
God 20, 29, 33, 38, 42, 43, 46, 48,
59–60, 63, 67–8, 116, 144, 171, 231,
508, 514–15, 517–18
Goldman, Alvin 18, 437, 450ff., 472,
494–5, 497
Goodman, Nelson 13–14, 295, 320ff.
grounds for belief 93–5
grue 13–14, 295, 326–9, 425
Haack, Susan 17, 370–1, 417ff.
heat see cold
Howson, Colin 14, 296, 344ff.
Huemer, Michael 6–7, 21, 113ff., 575ff.
Hume, David: on abstract ideas 158; on
causation 143, 152–3; on empiricism
594–5; on induction 12–13, 293–5,
298ff., 317, 320–1, 330, 354–6; on
perception 4, 29–30, 46ff., 60–2, 88;
on reasoning 12, 254; on skepticism
487–8, 606–10; on testimony 10,
217–18, 221ff., 239–48, 270ff.
hyperbolic geometry see geometry
idealism 27–8, 55, 67, 128, 170–1;
defended 37–45
ideas 4, 27–8, 43, 57, 60–3, 67, 160;
distinguished from things 45; objects
of awareness 32, 37; sources of 32–5,
43
identity, nature of 59
illusion 75–7; argument from 29–31, 48,
60–62, 74–9; stick in water 31, 74,
76–9, 82
images 27, 29, 47–8, 60; in memory 85,
88–9; see also ideas; impressions;
sense data
immediate knowledge see foundational
beliefs
impressions 27, 88, 142
indirect realism see representationalism
induction 12–14, 143, 153, 217–18,
263, 293ff., 311; deﬁned 293; and total
evidence requirement 425–6
inductive/deductive practice 322
inference 11–14, 104–5; and perception
66, 254; rules vs. premises 253;
skepticism regarding 254
inference to the best explanation 14,
334–5, 337–42; and beliefs about the
external world 27, 31, 42, 71
inferentially justiﬁed belief 11–12,
259–68; deﬁned 264–5
inﬁnite regress 16–17, 253, 259,
370, 382–5, 387, 391, 412–14,
425, 592
innate knowledge 7, 125–6, 141
instinctive beliefs 30, 72; and induction
308; and perception 47–9; and
testimony 218, 237
intentionality 508, 524–5, 534
INDEX
615

internalism 117–18
internally situated reasons 554–65
introspection 5, 7, 10, 24, 28, 51, 408
intuition 7–9, 13, 129–30, 164, 166
invariantist view of knowledge see
contextualism
“I think, therefore I am” see cogito
Johnson, Samuel 29
Kant, Immanuel 7–8; 125–7; on
analyticity 176; on existence 172;
on knowledge of the external world
602; on synthetic a priori knowledge
126–7, 142ff., 152–6, 208; on
transcendent knowledge 167; and
transcendental arguments 534
Kekulé von Stradonitz, Friedrich August
126
Klein, Peter 21, 509–10, 552ff., 579–81
knowledge: analysis of 17–19, 92; as
justiﬁed, true belief 18, 435–6, 494;
relevant alternatives theory 21, 294–7,
509, 542–50, 560, 581; structure of
15–17
Kornblith, Hilary 12, 254–5, 275ff.
law of large numbers 296, 352–3, 360
lawlike statements 326–31
laws of nature 44, 59; and induction 14,
296, 334–7; our knowledge of 300;
and miracles 217, 223, 229–30,
233n3, 240; see also natural
necessity
Lehrer, Keith: criticism of Clark 458; on
defeasibility theory 18–19, 436–7,
464ff.; on foundationalism 408–12
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von:
monadism 67–8, 158; on truths of
reason 176, 598–9; on veriﬁcationism
205
linear justiﬁcation 390–2
Lobachevskian geometry see geometry
Locke, John: as methodist 594; on
perception 4–5, 28–9, 32ff.; on source
of ideas 187; on testimony 10, 217,
219–20
logical positivism 8–9, 127–8, 166–74,
211, 397
lunatics 53
Malcolm, Norman 6, 85–7, 91ff.,
502n16
Malebranche, Nicolas de 55
material substance see matter
mathematics: axioms of 30, 54; and
causal theory of knowledge 437;
certainty of 270; demonstrations 35;
as empirical 189; knowledge of 440; as
synthetic a priori 7–8, 125–7, 143,
145, 147–8, 153; see also geometry
matter 58, 60, 66–7; arguments against
39–44, 49; argument for 68–73
matters of fact 176, 294, 298
meaning 9; see also synonymy
memory 5–7, 10, 85ff.; and degrees of
justiﬁcation 118–20; deﬁnition of 85,
92; dualistic view of 87, 117–18; event
vs. factual memory 85; and inference
113–14; involved in reasoning
105–12; and justiﬁcation 106,
113–20; occurrent 111; pure vs.
impure 92; as retention of knowledge
95, 105–6 116–17; seeming memories
106–7; skepticism regarding 97–8,
118; as source of knowledge/
justiﬁcation 96, 106–7, 114–15
mental blackboard 104, 106
metabeliefs 16, 23, 400
metaphysics: problems of 144;
skepticism regarding 8, 47, 166–75,
273; as synthetic a priori 127,
149
method of doubt 69, 515–23
methodism 22, 510–11, 594–601
microscopes 52, 65
mind 37, 38–9, 44; see also self
mind/body interaction 42, 48
mirages 74–6, 78, 510
mirrors see reﬂections
misleading defeaters 437, 466–7
misreading 77
monads see Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm
von, monadism
monism 158, 170
Moore, G.E. 22–3, 511–12, 573n29,
595–6, 602ff.
naive realism see direct realism
nativism 7, 125–6, 141
natural language 234–5, 346
INDEX
616

natural necessity 333–5, 533; see also
laws of nature
necessity 143–4, 533
new riddle of induction 13–14, 295,
326–9
nomological explanatory solution 335;
see also inference to the best
explanation
nondeductive inference 293, 295–6; see
also induction
non-Euclidean geometry see geometry
noninferentially justiﬁed belief see
inferentially justiﬁed belief
nonlinear justiﬁcation see linear
justiﬁcation
Nozick, Robert 475ff., 543; on the
analysis of knowledge 19, 437–8,
572n27; on the closure principle 21,
438–9, 561–2, 564; on coercive
philosophy 290n14
number 40
Oakley, I.T. 15–17, 370, 375ff.
observation requirement 396–8,
400–1, 419, 426
occurrent beliefs see belief, occurrent
opinions 219–20
ordinary language philosophy 31
other minds 59–60, 68
pain 34–5, 305; and causal theory of
knowledge 460; knowledge of 101,
441, 448–9
paper example (Locke) 35
paradox of the ravens 324–5, 327
particularism 22, 511–12, 594–601
pastness, feeling of 6, 85, 90
Paxson, Thomas 18–19, 436–7, 464ff.
perception 4–5, 10, 23; analysis of 5,
51; and beliefs 4, 15, 51–3; coherence
of 35; objects of awareness 27–8;
reliability of 47
perceptions 80
perspective 62, 65–6, 70, 74, 76
phenomenalism 4–5; see also idealism
philosophers 53, 57–61, 65
philosophy 31, 72–3
physical objects 4, 66; see also matter
physician example (Edwards)
313–16
Plato 7, 125, 131ff., 145, 156–7
plausibility judgments 279–81
Poincaré, Jules Henri 202–5, 211
Pollock, John 6, 86–7, 104ff., 120–1
positivism see logical positivism
preference principle 510, 583–8
pressure, perception of 66
Price, H.H. 79–82, 248
primary qualities 28–9, 39, 49
primed search 110–12
principle of credulity 10, 218, 237–8,
283
probability 14; axioms 345; conditional
345–6; interpretation of 346; as
opposed to knowledge 270–4;
probabilistic independence 350–1
problem of projection see lawlike
statements
problem of the criterion 22, 47, 510–11,
590–601
projectible predicates see lawlike
statements
proof 16–17, 22, 69, 71, 270–1
proportional syllogism 357, 364
Putnam, Hilary 20, 508–9, 524ff.
qualities 158
Quine, W.V. 8–9, 127–8, 175ff., 263,
290n14, 331n1
rationalism 9, 20, 125–6, 153–4, 159,
317; defended 208–13; moderate
129–30; see also a priori knowledge;
synthetic a priori knowledge
rationalization 12, 254, 275–87
real magnitude see tangible magnitude
real things, idealist account of 43, 59
reason see a priori knowledge
reason-giving 275, 279–80
reasoning see inference
reductionism 9, 128, 176, 187–9,
240
reﬂections 74–6, 78, 81
refutation and rebuttal 23
Reid, Thomas 5, 10–11, 30, 51ff.
217–18, 234ff., 283, 595–6
relations 158, 161
relations of ideas 176, 293–4, 298,
303
relevancy set 545–8
INDEX
617

relevant alternatives theory see
knowledge, relevant alternatives
theory
representationalism 4–5, 27–8, 30–1,
48, 60–1, 253, 510, 575–6, 584–8
representations 47–8
representative samples 14, 296, 358
resemblance: between ideas and objects
28–9, 39–40, 48; and induction 225,
294–5, 305–6, 312; and
intentionality 525, 532; between
memories and past states 88; and
universals 158, 161
revelation 55, 232
Riemannian geometry see geometry
right to be sure 18, 94, 377, 435–6,
441–2, 444, 592
rules of inference see inference
Russell, Bertrand: on a priori knowledge
8, 127, 152ff.; on deﬁnition 187,
189; on induction 13, 294, 311–18;
on memory 6, 85, 88ff., 116;
on names 177; on perception 5,
30–1, 64ff.
Saddam example 115, 118
sameness see identity
S-belief 420–2
secondary qualities 28–9, 39, 49
second order beliefs see metabeliefs
self 69, 154, 522–3; see also mind
self-evidence 8, 30, 164; see also
foundational beliefs; foundationalism;
intuition
Senor, Thomas 115, 118
sensation 28, 33–5, 66
sense data 5, 27, 30–1, 66, 74, 79–80,
153, 187–91, 452, 575; causes of
67–8, 70–2; see also impressions;
images; ideas; representationalism
sensible qualities 32–3, 37–41, 49,
58–9, 161, 164, 302
Sextus Empiricus 15, 370, 372–3
shape 40, 65–6
showing see proof
simplicity 71–2, 180, 191–2, 211–13,
301
skepticism 3, 19, 15, 19–24, 28, 46–50,
53, 64, 372–3, 439, 507ff.; about a
priori knowledge 211–12; aggressive
response to 586; Cartesian 19–20, 23,
46, 399, 508, 516–18, 552, 565–6;
and contextualism 493–4; and
counterfactual analysis of knowledge
479–83; defensive response to 586–7;
external world 507; about memory
97–8, 114; about reasoning 254,
270–87; see also induction
Sklar, Lawrence 211–13
soul see mind
stick in water example see illusion
Stove, David 14, 296–7, 352ff.
subject factors 492–7, 500
subsistence 160
substance 44
substratum 39, 41, 58
synonymy 9, 126, 129, 177–87
synthetic a priori knowledge 7–9, 126–7,
152–3, 210, 262; defended 147–9;
rejection of 171; see also a priori
knowledge; analytic–synthetic
distinction
synthetic propositions see analytic–
synthetic distinction
table example: (Hume) 29–30, 48,
60–2; (Russell) 64–6
tangible magnitude 30, 56, 61–2
taste 40, 82
tautologies see analytic–synthetic
distinction
testimony 10–11, 52, 70–1, 120, 217ff.,
421–2; and causal theory of
knowledge 454–6
texture 65
theorem of total probability 349
thoughts: distinguished from beliefs 104;
occurrent 104–11
total evidence requirement 425–6
total probability, theorem of 349
tracking condition on knowledge 19,
437–8, 479, 561–2
traditional analysis of knowledge see
knowledge
transcendental idealism 150–1
trial example: (Reid) 52–3; (Huemer)
580
truth 16, 33
Turing test 529–31
Twin Earth 535
INDEX
618

unconditional probability see
probability
uniformity principle 12–13, 294, 321
unity, concept of 40
universality and a prioricity 143,
154
universals 8, 18, 127, 156–60, 173;
knowledge of 160–4
Urbach, Peter 14, 296, 344ff.
veriﬁcationism 8–9, 127, 167–8, 212;
see also logical positivism
virtue 16, 131–5
visible magnitude 30, 56, 61–2
wax example (Descartes) 20, 521–3
zebra example (Dretske) 21, 494–500,
558–60, 578–9
INDEX
619










