See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292976966
International Relations and Security in the Digital
Age
Book · January 2007
CITATIONS
49
READS
13,600
2 authors:
Johan Eriksson
Södertörn University
66 PUBLICATIONS   969 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Giampiero Giacomello
University of Bologna
71 PUBLICATIONS   624 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Giampiero Giacomello on 08 February 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


International Relations and
Security in the Digital Age
This book examines the impact of the information revolution on
international and domestic security, attempting to remedy both the
lack of theoretically informed analysis of information security and
the US-centric tendency in the existing literature.
International Relations and Security in the Digital Age covers a
range of key topics, including: critical infrastructure protection;
privacy issues; international cooperation; cyberterrorism; and
security policy. It aims to analyse the impact of the information
revolution on international and domestic security; examine what
existing international relations theories can say about this
challenge; and discuss how international relations theory can be
developed to better meet this challenge. 
The analysis suggests that liberalism’s focus on pluralism,
interdependence and globalization, constructivism’s emphasis on
language, symbols and images (including ‘virtuality’), and some
elements of realist strategic studies (on the specific topic of
information warfare) contribute to a better understanding of
digital-age security. 
This book will be of interest to students of security studies,
globalization, international relations and politics and technology.
Johan Eriksson is Associate Professor of Political Science at
Södertörn University College, and Senior Researcher at the
Swedish Institute of International Affairs, Stockholm, Sweden.
Giampiero Giacomello is Assistant Professor of International
Relations in the Department of Politics at the University of
Bologna, Italy.

Foreign Policy and Discourse
Analysis
France, Britain and Europe
Henrik Larsen
Agency, Structure and
International Politics
From ontology to empirical
enquiry
Gil Friedman and Harvey Starr
The Political Economy of
Regional Co-operation in the 
Middle East
Ali Carkoglu, Mine Eder,
Kemal Kirisci
Peace Maintenance
The evolution of international
political authority
Jarat Chopra
International Relations and
Historical Sociology
Breaking down boundaries
Stephen Hobden
Equivalence in Comparative
Politics
Edited by Jan W. van Deth
The Politics of Central Banks
Robert Elgie and Helen
Thompson
Politics and Globalisation
Knowledge, ethics and agency
Martin Shaw
History and International
Relations
Thomas W. Smith
Idealism and Realism in
International Relations
Robert M. A. Crawford
National and International
Conflicts, 1945–1995
New empirical and theoretical
approaches
Frank Pfetsch and Christoph
Rohloff
Party Systems and Voter
Alignments Revisited
Edited by Lauri Karvonen and
Stein Kuhnle
Routledge advances in international relations 
and global politics

Ethics, Justice and
International Relations
Constructing an international
community
Peter Sutch
Capturing Globalization
Edited by James H. Mittelman
and Norani Othman
Uncertain Europe
Building a new European
security order?
Edited by Martin A. Smith and
Graham Timmins 
Power, Postcolonialism and
International Relations
Reading race, gender and class
Edited by Geeta Chowdhry
and Sheila Nair
Constituting Human Rights
Global civil society and the
society of democratic states
Mervyn Frost
US Economic Statecraft for
Survival 1933–1991
Of sanctions, embargoes and
economic warfare
Alan P. Dobson
The EU and NATO
Enlargement
Richard McAllister and Roland
Dannreuther
Spatializing International
Politics
Analysing activism on the
internet
Jayne Rodgers
Ethnonationalism in the
Contemporary World
Walker Connor and the study
of nationalism
Edited by Daniele Conversi
Meaning and International
Relations
Edited by Peter Mandaville and
Andrew Williams
Political Loyalty and the
Nation-State
Edited by Michael Waller and
Andrew Linklater
Russian Foreign Policy and the
CIS
Theories, debates and actions
Nicole J. Jackson
Asia and Europe
Development and different
dimensions of ASEM
Yeo Lay Hwee
Global Instability and Strategic
Crisis
Neville Brown
Africa in International Politics
External involvement on the
continent
Edited by Ian Taylor and Paul
Williams
Global Governmentality
Governing international spaces
Edited by Wendy Larner and
William Walters

Political Learning and
Citizenship Education Under
Conflict
The political socialization of
Israeli and Palestinian
youngsters
Orit Ichilov
Gender and Civil Society
Transcending boundaries
Edited by Jude Howell and
Diane Mulligan
State Crises, Globalisation and
National Movements in North-
East Africa
The Horn’s dilemma
Edited by Asafa Jalata
Diplomacy and Developing
Nations
Post-Cold War foreign policy-
making structures and
processes
Edited by Justin Robertson and
Maurice A. East
Autonomy, Self-governance
and Conflict Resolution
Innovative approaches to
institutional design in divided
societies
Edited by Marc Weller and
Stefan Wolff
Mediating International Crises
Jonathan Wilkenfeld, Kathleen
J. Young, David M. Quinn and
Victor Asal
Postcolonial Politics, The
Internet and Everyday Life:
Pacific Traversals Online
M. I. Franklin
Reconstituting the Global
Liberal Order
Legitimacy and regulation
Kanishka Jayasuriya
International Relations,
Security and Jeremy Bentham
Gunhild Hoogensen
Interregionalism and
International Relations
Edited by Heiner Hänggi, Ralf
Roloff and Jürgen Rüland
The International Criminal
Court
A global civil society
achievement
Marlies Glasius
A Human Security Doctrine for
Europe
Project, principles, practicalities
Edited by Marlies Glasius and
Mary Kaldor
The History and Politics of UN
Security Council Reform
Dimitris Bourantonis
Russia and NATO Since 1991
From Cold War through cold
peace to partnership?
Martin A. Smith

The Politics of Protection
Sites of insecurity and political
agency
Edited by Jef Huysmans,
Andrew Dobson and Raia
Prokhovnik
International Relations in
Europe
Traditions, perspectives and
destinations
Edited by Knud Erik Jørgensen
and Tonny Brems Knudsen
The Empire of Security and the
Safety of the People
Edited by William Bain
Globalization and Religious
Nationalism in India
The search for ontological
security
Catrina Kinnvall
Culture and International
Relations
Narratives, natives and tourists
Julie Reeves
Global Civil Society
Contested futures
Edited by Gideon Baker and
David Chandler
Rethinking Ethical Foreign
Policy
Pitfalls, possibilities and
paradoxes
Edited by David Chandler and
Volker Heins
International Cooperation and
Arctic Governance
Regime effectiveness and
northern region building
Edited by Olav Schram Stokke
and Geir Hønneland
Human Security
Concepts and implications
Shahrbanou Tadjbakhsh and
Anuradha Chenoy
International Relations and
Security in the Digital Age
Edited by Johan Eriksson and
Giampiero Giacomello


International Relations 
and Security in the Digital
Age
Edited by Johan Eriksson and
Giampiero Giacomello

First published 2007 
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, 
an informa business
© 2007 Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello for selection and 
editorial matter; individual contributors, their contributions
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
International relations and security in the digital age / edited by 
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello.
p. cm. – (Routledge advances in international relations and 
global politics ; 52)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. International relations–Computer networks. 2. Security, 
International–Computer networks. 3. Internet--Political aspects. 4.
Technology and international affairs. 5. Cyberterrorism. I. Eriksson, 
Johan, 1967- II. 
Giacomello, Giampiero, 1959-
JZ1242.I576 2007
327.10285’4678--dc22
2006025057
ISBN10: 0–415–40185–2 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–203–96473–X (ebk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–40185–2 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–96473–6 (ebk) 
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-96473-X  Master e-book ISBN
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.

This book is dedicated to Emma Michela 
and Emil Gunnar


Contents
List of tables
xiii
Contributors
xv
Acknowledgements
xix
1
Introduction: Closing the gap between international 
relations theory and studies of digital-age security
1
JOHAN ERIKSSON AND GIAMPIERO GIACOMELLO
PART I
The politics of threats
29
2
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda and terrorism in 
an age of globalization
31
MAGNUS RANSTORP
3
From ‘cyberterrorism’ to ‘cyberwar’, back and forth: 
how the United States securitized cyberspace
57
RALF BENDRATH, JOHAN ERIKSSON AND GIAMPIERO GIACOMELLO
PART II
The politics of protection
83
4
Securing the digital age: the challenges of 
complexity for critical infrastructure protection 
and IR theory
85
MYRIAM A. DUNN

5
Assessing theories of information technology and 
security for the Middle East
106
HAMOUD SALHI
6
Public–private cooperation and information assurance: 
a liberal institutionalist approach
132
LORENZO VALERI
7
International policy dynamics and the regulation 
of dataflows: bypassing domestic restrictions
158
IAN HOSEIN AND JOHAN ERIKSSON
8
Conclusion: Digital-age security in theory and 
practice
173
JOHAN ERIKSSON AND GIAMPIERO GIACOMELLO
Bibliography
185
Index
219
xii
Contents

Tables
5.1
Internet diffusion in the Middle East and
population estimates
109
5.2
Internet penetration in the most penetrated states
in the Middle East as of March 2006
110
5.3
Internet penetration in the least penetrated states
in the Middle East as of March 2006
110
5.4
Ranking e-government readiness in the Middle East
in 2004–2005
111


Contributors
Ralf Bendrath is Research Fellow at the Collaborative Research
Centre ‘Transformations of the State’ at the University of
Bremen, Germany. His research interests include technological
influences on the change of privacy and data protection,
information warfare, cybersecurity, and peace and security
policy, as well as the forms and the legitimation of global
governance. He has published widely on peace and security
policy, cyber-security and information warfare, and was
actively involved in the preparations for the World Summits
on the Information Society (WSIS) 2003 and 2005.
Myriam A. Dunn, PhD, is Research Fellow at the Centre for
Security Studies at ETH Zurich (Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology). She heads the new risks research unit and serves
as coordinator for the Comprehensive Risk Analysis and
Management Network (CRN), an international initiative for
international dialogue and cooperation between governments,
academics and the private sector in the field of strategic risk
analysis. Her research interests include international relations
theory with a specific focus on security studies, the impact of
the information revolution on the international system, and
philosophy of science. She is author of the International
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Handbook (3rd
edition, 2006), author of Cyberthreats and Countermeasures:
Explaining the Threat Politics behind Efforts to Secure the
Information Age (forthcoming from Routledge, 2007) and
contributing editor of Information Revolution and the
International System: Challenges in Security and Governance
(forthcoming from Ashgate, 2007).

Johan Eriksson is Associate Professor of Political Science at
Södertörn University College, and Senior Researcher at the
Swedish Institute of International Affairs, Stockholm. His
research interests include international relations theory,
security studies, foreign policy analysis, cybersecurity,
ethnopolitics, and the relationship between academia and the
policy world. He is the author/editor of five books including
Threat Politics: New Perspectives on Security, Risk and Crisis
Management (Ashgate, 2001). Articles have appeared in, for
example, International Political Science Review, International
Studies Perspectives, Foreign Policy, Journal of Contingencies
and Crisis Management, and Cooperation and Conflict.
Giampiero Giacomello is Assistant Professor of International
Relations at the Dipartimento di Politica, Istuzioni, Storia,
Università di Bologna. His research interests include strategic
studies, cyberterrorism, foreign policy analysis and political
psychology. He is the author of National Governments and
Control of the Internet (Routledge, 2005). Articles have
appeared in, for example, International Political Science
Review, Review of International Studies, Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism, and Information and Security.
Ian Hosein is a Visiting Fellow at the London School of Economics
and Political Science (LSE), where he lectures and researches
on technology policy. He is a Senior Fellow at Privacy
International where he works on various issues including
communications surveillance, free expression and international
policy-making. He is an advisor to a number of non-
governmental, 
governmental 
and 
intergovernmental
organizations on matters relating to identity, surveillance and
anti-terrorism policy. He has a B.Math (Hons) from the
University of Waterloo and a PhD from the University of
London (LSE). 
Magnus Ranstorp is Research Director of the Centre for
Asymmetric Threat Studies at the Swedish National Defence
College. Previously he was the Director of the Centre for the
Study of Terrorism and Political Violence at the University of
St Andrews. His research interests are terrorism and political
violence, radical Islamist movements, social movement theory,
intelligence studies and information operations. His articles
have appeared in, for example, Colombia Journal of
xvi
Contributors

International Affairs, Studies in Conflict & Terrorism,
Terrorism & Political Violence, and Mediterranean Politics.
He is also the author of Hizb’allah in Lebanon (Macmillan,
1996). His most recent edited work is Mapping Terrorism
Research: Trends, Achievements and Future Directions
(Routledge, 2006).
Hamoud Salhi is Assistant Professor of Political Science at
California State University at Dominguez Hills, and a political
analyst for Algeria’s Elkhabar Weekly. Previously he was a
senior writer for Gulf News, United Arab Emirates. His
research interest is in the fields of international relations and
comparative politics, with the Middle East and North Africa as
areas of concentration, focussing on security, democracy,
governance, Islamist movements and information technology.
His most recent article is on Syria’s threat to US national
security, published in Strategic Insight, The Center for
Contemporary Conflict at the Naval Postgraduate School in
Monterey, California. He has also published another article on
the political and social impact of information technology in the
Gulf Arab states for New Media and Information Technology
in the Middle East Working Papers, Georgetown University.
Salhi is now working on a manuscript about US foreign policy
in the Middle East in the post-9/11 environment to be
published by SNED in Algeria.
Lorenzo Valeri is a Manager at Accenture, working for both
private and public sector organizations on their IT strategy, as
well as security and privacy needs. Prior to joining Accenture,
he was a research leader at the European offices of RAND
Corporation where he was in charge of managing all public
policy activities in the field of security and privacy. His projects
were financed by a large array of organizations including the
European Commission, UK Department of Trade and Industry,
British Telecom and Deutsche Telekom. He was also seconded
to the Working Party for Information Security and Privacy of
the OECD where he worked on the privacy implications of
international transfer of personal data. He holds a PhD and
Master’s degree from King’s College London. 
Contributors
xvii


Acknowledgements
Information technology in general, and the diffusion of the
Internet in particular, unquestionably has become one of the most
dominant features of globalization, increasingly affecting states
and societies around the world. Claiming that this challenge
implies both opportunities and threats is basically a truism.
Surprisingly however, theorists of international relations have paid
only scant attention to the challenges of the digital age, especially
from a security studies perspective. Moreover, the specialist
literature on information security, information operations,
cyberterrorism, and cybercrime has largely ignored theories of
international relations and security, and has shown hardly any
interest in theory building. Our intention with this book is to
contribute towards filling the gap between theories of
international relations and the practice of digital-age security. 
The idea of this project was born in the summer of 2002 in New
York City, when we were Research Fellows at Columbia
University, with a generous grant from the SSRC (Social Science
Research Council). Ralf Bendrath and Ian Hosein, two of our
contributors, were also Research Fellows, and we were all assigned
to the SSRC program on Information Technology, Global Security
and International Cooperation. Many thanks to the SSRC and
Columbia University for providing the opportunity without which
this book would never have come into existence. 
We are also grateful for the generous financial support provided
by the Swedish Emergency Management Agency to the ‘Threat
Politics’ research project, led by Johan Eriksson. Invaluable
funding and critique were also provided by the ‘Power Disparity’
research project (The Baltic Sea Foundation), led by Olav F.
Knudsen.

Many thanks also to those who participated and gave valuable
critique at the workshop on theorizing digital-age security, which
we organized at the International Studies Association (ISA)
conference in Montréal in March 2004. This also gave us an
opportunity to discuss some of the very first drafts of the papers
published in this book.
Thanks also to our fellow contributors for their enthusiasm and
commitment. Together we have formed an international team,
which not only bridges disciplinary boundaries, but also connects
the academic and policy worlds. 
Finally, special thanks to our editors at Routledge, Heidi
Bagtazo and Harriet Brinton. Your professionalism and support
have been indispensable for turning the manuscript into a book. 
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello
Turri di Montegrotto Terme, Italy
xx
Acknowledgements

1 
Introduction
Closing the gap between 
international relations theory 
and studies of digital-age security
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero 
Giacomello
The development and interconnectedness of information and
communications technologies (ICTs) such as the Internet, email,
satellite television and mobile phones are diffusing globally at an
impressive speed.1 The Internet is undoubtedly the most striking
example. From only a handful of websites in the early 1990s, the
Internet grew to contain several million websites at the turn of the
millennium. Moreover, the costs of producing, using and
communicating information have constantly decreased, making
ICTs available to an increasing number of people all over the
world (Choucri 2000: 248–52; Nye 2003: 215–16; 2004a, 2004b).
There is still a significant ‘digital gap’, dividing the haves from the
have-nots in terms of access and usage, a long-standing and well-
documented problem both within and between societies (Choucri
2000; Hammond 2001; Norris 2001). Notwithstanding persistent
inequalities, the image is clear: the shrinking costs of ICTs have
made them widespread and decentralized, reaching far beyond the
political and economic elites of western societies.
These observations apparently mark the limit of consensus
among informed observers. The lack of consensus is particularly
apparent when the basic question of this book is addressed: What
are the implications of the information revolution for national and
international security? Some would argue that the state is still the
main player on the field, maintaining (although adapting) its role
as the supreme provider of security, even in cyberspace (Fountain
2001). Others claim that the emergence of ‘virtual states’ and
network economies implies a decline of interstate violence, and
hence that security generally plays a significantly lesser role than in
previous times. This truly optimistic perspective ‘sketches a future
with an ever-widening zone of international peace’ (Rosecrance

1999: 24). Still others hold that the information revolution has
greatly increased the significance of firms, interest organizations,
social movements, transnational networks and individuals. In this
vein, these non-state actors may be challengers to, as well as
providers of, security (Castells 1998: 376; Henry and Peartree
1998; Arquilla and Ronfeldt 2001; Nye 2003, 2004a, 2004b). The
general observation in this perspective, however, is that the
information revolution makes security an increasingly important
concern in all sectors of society.
In 1962, Arnold Wolfers wrote that national security is the
absence of threat to a society’s core values. If modern,
economically developed countries are increasingly becoming
‘information societies’, then following Wolfers’ argument, threats
to information can be seen as threats to the core of these societies.
The challenge of the information revolution for security and the
state still remains unexplored, however, both in terms of policy and
substantive issues. We argue that generally, past research on this
topic has been idiosyncratic and policy oriented, with little or no
effort made to apply or develop theory. In particular, very few
attempts have been made to apply international relations (IR)
theory in analysing the information revolution, an exercise which
seems warranted both for the understanding of the impact of the
information revolution on security and for the development of IR
theory.2 With this book, we intend to take a step towards filling
this gap. More specifically, the purpose of this book is twofold:
•
to analyse the impact of the information revolution on national
and international security;
•
to examine what existing IR theories can and cannot say about
this challenge, and thus how IR theory can be developed to
better meet this challenge.
For most of its post-Second-World-War existence, the discipline
of IR was quite content with itself. The development of IR theory
strongly emphasized parsimony and universality, at the expense of
empirical applicability (Wight 2002). It can be argued that
empirical applicability requires a greater degree of complexity and
contextually contingent thinking than has been provided by the
dominant and more parsimonious IR theories (George and Bennet
2005). However, whether theories such as Kenneth Waltz’s
neorealism or Keohane and Nye’s theory of complex
interdependence actually gave an accurate understanding of real
2
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

world politics (that is, external validity) was either considered
irrelevant or secondary to claims of internal validity (Keohane and
Nye 1977: vi; Waltz 1979: 6–7; Wight 2002).
The first major sign of discomfort with this inward-looking
obsession with theoretical consistency came with the end of the
Cold War (Allan and Goldmann 1995; Lebow and Risse-Kappen
1995). The end of the Cold War resulted in a major crisis not only
for neorealism (reputedly, the most successful of IR theories),
which had failed to predict and explain that turn of events, but also
for IR in general. But although much has been written about the
Cold War’s end and the associated need for redefining IR theory,
particularly for increasing its external validity, surprisingly little
has been written about the information revolution and what
challenges this implies for IR theory.
We begin by reviewing three bodies of literature of ostensible
relevance for understanding the impact of the information
revolution for security: general theory and research on the
emergence of the information society; the specific literature on
information operations and cybersecurity; and lastly, security
studies, a growing subfield of IR. Subsequently, three main IR
perspectives are discussed in terms of what they nominally have to
say about security in the digital age: realism, liberalism and
constructivism.
Past research on the digital age, and security: 
A critical review
When reviewing past research on the impact of the information
revolution on security, the first observation is that the three bodies
of literature which purport to have something to say about this
have apparently not been informed by each other, although they
deal with overlapping themes. Theory and research on the
emergence of the global information society say very little about
security, and when they do, the focus lies primarily on the security
of firms and markets rather than the security of states and societies.
There is also a specific literature on war and terror in the digital
age, which typically comes in the form of idiosyncratic policy
analyses, but which does not communicate with the more general
theory and research, and is very weak in terms of theoretical
application and development.
IR theory and digital-age security
3

The information society literature: Security neglected
It is difficult to ascertain when the expression ‘information society’
first appeared. In the early 1990s, many observers and journalists
in the United States began to write and talk about the ‘information
highway’, especially after US President Bill Clinton’s White House
began popularizing the term. Almost accidentally (The Economist
2002), the Internet became the icon of the digital age, and
particularly of ‘cyberspace’, a term coined by novelist William
Gibson (1984).
Marxist sociologist Manuel Castells has been among the first
and most influential prophets of the digital age. As early as the late
1980s, he noted that information had become the major primary
resource of material productivity in the newly emerging
‘knowledge economy’ (Castells 1989). Crucial services such as
banking, air travel, water or energy distribution relied more and
more on information technology (IT) to function. It was only a
matter of time before information, in the 1990s, would become an
indispensable cornerstone for modern, advanced societies. Castells
(1996, 1997, 1998) dedicated a whole trilogy to the dawn of a
global network society, pointing to the loss of sovereignty by
nation-states and the emergence of alternative identities and
communities. From Castells’ perspective, transnational organized
crime will become the greatest potential threat to global security.
Castells’ view of the force of change of information technologies
is consistent with the work of IR scholars such as Hamid
Mowlana. The study of the security dimension in Castells as well
as in Mowlana, however, is limited to the impact of ICTs for
organized crime (Castells 1997, 1998), military strategic
communications, and the use of information as ‘propaganda’
(Mowlana 1997). Mowlana’s work is empirically insightful, but
weak in linking the information revolution to IR theory.
Political scientists have for a considerable time identified the
ability to control information flows as a function necessary to
preserve national sovereignty and boost national security (Agnew
and Corbrige 1995; Anderson 1995; Krasner 1995). States have,
however, faced multiple obstacles in this endevour, as the
development and availability of communication means has been a
double-edged sword. In the past, one-to-many communication
systems (that is, radio and television) allowed national
governments to reach out to an entire citizenry with their own
message, often with nationalistic rhetoric. Increasingly in recent
4
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

years, however, professional media organizations (such as the BBC
or CNN), human rights organizations, and individuals have all
learned to take advantage of the same systems to distribute
nongovernmental information, counterclaims, independent
reports, and so on. This international flow of messages and images
has grown at an extraordinarily rapid rate, thus saturating the
capabilities of a state to monitor closely what information goes in
and what goes out of its territory. Moreover, this traffic flows
through increasingly integrated worldwide communication
systems, which are no longer dominated by national bodies
(Camilleri and Falk 1992).
As early as the 1970s, the new information technologies were
thought to be likely to increase the vulnerability of states. A report
to the Swedish government, the Tengelin Report (Tengelin 1981),
emphasized the main risks of a networked society (including
dependence on foreign vendors and the threat of hackers’ raids).
Currently, most governments are well aware that, through the
Internet, individuals and groups from all over the world can
communicate information over which a single government has little
or no control. This information may affect the attitude of their
citizenry vis-à-vis the political and economic structures of their
countries. This is not a new phenomenon, since nation-states have
had a similar experience with radio and television broadcasting.
What is different is the magnitude of information and the multiple
entry points that have further exhausted the capabilities of states
and their resources to block the penetration of that information.
There are two factors that are peculiar to the global information
society and are significant for appreciation of how ICTs have
changed the concept of security. The first factor is the centrality of
machines that communicate with each other and the psychological
effects that this centrality implies. More than other machines in the
past, the development of computers has resulted in optimistic
visions of technical solutions to societal problems, or
‘technological fixes’, as well as in feelings of fear (Volti 1995).
Movies such as 2001: A Space Odyssey, War Games, The
Terminator, and The Matrix are all sagas that depict ‘evil’
computers taking over the world and are symptomatic of a
culturally broad-based and profound fear of technological
development. If the idea of depending on machines can be
unnerving, knowing that our well-being and safety are entrusted to
computers that may be required to make vital decisions is hard to
IR theory and digital-age security
5

bear. Thus, the psychological dimension of network society matters
considerably.
The most famous computer network, the Internet, has a
distinctive characteristic: it is at the same time an infrastructure
(that is, the actual computer network) and a communications
medium.3 On the same wires and with the same protocol, packets
transport bytes that represent radically different information: an
email to a friend, details on one’s flight itinerary, online multiplayer
gaming, statistics on a municipality’s water consumption, or credit
card numbers. With the exception of the last, which, like virtually
all financial transactions, would be encrypted, most other
communications are available in public, that is, anyone using the
medium could read them.
When computer networks were proprietary, for example linking
together a bank with its subsidiaries or US strategic command with
nuclear missile silos, they were so expensive that only a very few
organizations or institutions could afford them. Furthermore, they
used protocols that authorized only their legitimate users to be in
each network. Today, the Internet has opened up countless
communication channels, reduced the cost of networking, and
allowed human rights dissidents to spread their message. The
Internet was designed to maximize simplicity of communication,
not security of communication. The price for this has been the
increasing opportunity for criminals or wrongdoers to exploit the
vulnerabilities of the network for their own ends.
The literature on digital-age security: Theory neglected
Whether hype or reality, cyberthreats have achieved an
indisputable salience in post-cold-war security thinking,
particularly among analysts and makers of defense and security
policy. Critical infrastructure protection, information warfare,
information operations,5 information assurance, cyberterrorism,
Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA)5 and similar buzzwords are
common currency in policy documents, defense bills and security
doctrines of the early twenty-first century. While conventional
forces and military budgets have been generally downsized
following the end of the Cold War, the new emphasis on
information security and cyberthreats is a noteworthy exception.
In North America, Europe, Russia, China and other parts of the
world, governments are setting up new units and employing
6
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

personnel for monitoring, analysing, and countering the perceived
risks and threats of the global network society.
The conception of cyberthreats has grown out of the fear of
increased vulnerability and loss of control that presumably is the
result of moving from an industrial to an information society
(Alberts 1996a, 1996b; Alberts and Papp 1997; Henry and
Peartree 1998; O’Day 2004). Without the development of global
computer networks and communications, cyberthreats would be
difficult to imagine except as science fiction. Notions of
cyberthreats have originated in both the private and public sphere,
among military as well as civilian actors. In the business
community and within the police, cybercrime has become a
particularly salient threat image. Within the military-bureaucratic
establishment, perceived threats have been framed as information
warfare, information operations, cyberterrorism and cyberwar.
Among computer scientists, technicians and network operators,
threat images are usually much narrower, with an emphasis on
computer network attacks, exploits and disruptions (implying an
adversary) and on structural vulnerabilities such as software
conflicts and other bugs which can lead to systems crashes (for
example, the Year 2000 or ‘Y2K’ computer bug).
Images of cyberthreats typically involve a very broad range of
adversaries and targets, including both state and non-state actors
(Campen et al. 1996; Schwartau 1996; Henry and Peartree 1998;
Khalilzad et al. 1999; Herd 2000; Erbschloe 2001; Polikanov
2001; Furnell 2002; Yourdon 2002; O’Day 2004). States are still
typically seen as the single most important type of potential enemy,
able to neutralize effectively the critical infrastructures of another
country (for example, by shutting down telecommunications), but
non-state actors are gaining attention as well.
A study by the National Research Council argues that
‘Tomorrow’s terrorist may be able to do more with a keyboard
than with a bomb’ (Bendrath 2001; Denning 2001a: 282).6 Former
Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge (2002) observed that
‘Terrorists can sit at one computer connected to one network and
can create world havoc – [they] don’t necessarily need bombs or
explosives to cripple a sector of the economy, or shutdown a power
grid’. Such rhetorical dramatization is characteristic of the entire
discourse on information security and cyberthreats. The common
view is that as societies and governments are becoming more
reliable with respect to information technology, they are also
becoming more vulnerable to all sorts of cyberthreats.
IR theory and digital-age security
7

The most cataclysmic dramatization in the literature is that of
an ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ (Schwartau 1997; Smith 1998;
Everard 2000; Bendrath 2001; Forno 2002; O’Day 2004).7
According to the ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ scenario, phone systems
could collapse, subway cars suddenly stop, and the money of
thousands of people become inaccessible as banks and automatic
teller machines stop functioning. In such an apocalyptic vision,
overall critical infrastructures would be disrupted to the point that
society and government would lose the ability to function
normally. The evocative image of an ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ was
immediately adopted in the US media and in certain circles of
policy-makers (Bendrath 2003). Former Deputy Defense Minister
John Hamre argued that ‘We’re facing the possibility of an
electronic Pearl Harbor… There is going to be an electronic attack
on this country some time in the future’ (CNN 1997).
Some commentators have argued that the ‘electronic Pearl
Harbor’ scenario is highly unlikely, and is more about fear-
mongering than sober analysis. For example, Denning (2001b)
argues that cyberterrorism, defined as digital attacks causing
physical destruction and human deaths, is extremely unlikely.8 Few,
if any, cyberattacks could be characterized as acts of terrorism.
Even the US Naval War College, in cooperation with the Gartner
Group, concluded that an ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’, although
theoretically possible, was highly unlikely: ‘There are far simpler
and less costly ways to attack critical infrastructure, from hoax
phone calls to truck bombs and hijacked airliners’ (The Economist
2002: 19).
Information operations are seen not merely as a means of
improving or complementing physical attack, but as a means of
replacing physical destruction with electronic (Denning 1999;
Harshberger and Ochmanek 1999: 12; O’Day 2004). Denial of
service attacks and the defacing of web pages certainly can have
material consequences. For firms operating with online
transactions, the result can be huge financial losses.9 Nevertheless,
the major impact is symbolic and the main effect is humiliation. To
a large degree, cyberattacks are attacks with and against symbols
and images. Net-defacing, in particular, is a means for attacking
symbols, something which is being done on an everyday basis by
‘hacktivists’ on both sides of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, the
China–Taiwan conflict, and the Protestant–Catholic conflict in
Northern Ireland.10
8
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

Most observers focus on the transnational and network-based
character of cyberthreats (Pfaltzgraff and Shultz 1997; Henry and
Peartree 1998; Keohane and Nye 1998; Arquilla and Ronfeldt
1999, 2001; Deibert and Stein 2003; O’Day 2004).11 Adversaries
are typically seen as operating in loosely organized networks
consisting of relatively independent nodes of individuals, groups,
organizations, or even states, capable of quickly assembling and
dispersing, even long before an attack has been discovered. In
particular, network actors capable of using such means can resort
to ‘asymmetric warfare’ (De Borchgrave et al. 2000; Herd 2000;
Applegate 2001; Arquilla and Ronfeldt 2001; Erbschloe 2001;
Sofear and Goodman 2001; O’Day 2004). Although they might be
incapable of engaging states in a conventional military conflict,
they can inflict serious damage by attacking and exploiting the
vulnerabilities of information systems by resorting to cyberattacks
(Arquilla and Ronfeldt 1999, 2001; Cordesman 2002).
The widely acknowledged framing of cyberthreats implies that
boundaries are dissolved between the international and the
domestic, between civil and military spheres, between the private
and public, and between peace and war. If taken seriously, this
framing suggests that not only the security of information systems
is challenged, but also, and more fundamentally, the sovereignty of
states (Rosecrance 1999; Everard 2000; Fountain 2001;
Giacomello and Mendez 2001; Giacomello 2005). Cyberthreats
challenge primarily internal sovereignty (effective control of the
national territory and of the people living within it), but not
necessarily external sovereignty (the formal recognition of
independence by other states) (compare Philpott 2001). At stake
are not only the tangible and intangible values of information, but
also the ability of governments to control the course of events.
In conclusion, while there is a growing body of specialized
literature dealing with the manifold aspects of digital-age security,
there is also an alarmist tendency in this literature. Furthermore,
this literature is policy oriented and hardly ever involves the
application or development of theory.
Security studies: The digital age neglected
A major issue in theoretically oriented security studies (a growing
subfield of IR) is the very meaning of the essentially contested
concept of security. Two contending positions can be discerned –
those of traditionalists and those of wideners. Traditionalists hail
IR theory and digital-age security
9

typically from the realist camp and practise state-centric and
military-oriented ‘strategic studies’ (Walt 1994; Ayoob 1997). They
maintain that despite the emergence of ethnic and religious
insurgence, global terrorism, transnational crime and global
warming, there is no need to broaden the definition of security.
Allegedly for the sake of conceptual clarity and theoretical
parsimony (Ayoob 1997; Goldmann 1999), and arguably because
of their underlying ideological priorities, traditionalists continue to
approach security from the viewpoint of the nation-state and
interstate war.
Wideners (who represent a mix of liberals and critical theorists)
claim that the security concept should be broadened to encompass
‘new’ threats and challenges, spanning political, societal, economic
and environmental sectors (Buzan 1991; Deibert 1997; Buzan et al.
1998; Stern 1999; Müller 2002). In addition, wideners incorporate
a range of ‘new’ actors in their analyses, notably nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), social movements, terrorist organizations,
private firms and individuals. The focus on the individual has
spawned interest in ‘human security’, which also has had an impact
on United Nations policy.
Rather surprisingly in light of their broadened perspective, the
wideners have only very rarely addressed the information
revolution and its impact on security. Their expanded security
concepts typically cover economic, ecological, political and
cultural issues, but seldom address the emergence of the Internet
and other elements of the information revolution.
Some traditionalists have addressed the development of
information technology, but only with regard to the technological
improvement of military capabilities (Lonsdale 1999). Material
capabilities have always played a crucial role in a state-centric and
military-oriented perspective on national security (compare Van
Creveld 1991; Knox and Murray 2001). Intelligence gathering and
psychological warfare (which are part of information operations)
are also ‘material’ capabilities and have always been important
elements of warfare. Likewise, technological revolutions have
always interested the military, from the invention of machine guns
and airplanes to the development of radar and satellites. ‘Electronic
warfare’ has been an established concept and practice within the
military for several decades. But for most traditionalists (and
realists imprimis), information technologies are merely a new fancy
add-on (compare Lonsdale 1999; Everard 2000: 109; Biddle
2004).
10
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

Regardless of the theoretical perspective advocated, there is
obviously a gap to be filled in security studies: to address the
impact of the information revolution for the general understanding
of security in the contemporary world, as well for explaining
variation in security relations and policies across the world.
International relations theory and security in the digital age
Realism, liberalism and constructivism stand out as the main
theoretical perspectives in contemporary IR. Although overlaps,
linkages and  internal varieties are matters of discussion, they are
generally perceived and portrayed as separate perspectives. Asking
what each of these perspectives can nominally say about security in
the digital age will clarify the potential relevance of each
perspective, and may serve as a source of inspiration for further
theory building and empirical research.
Realism
The core assumptions of realism are: (1) the state is the primary
unit of analysis; (2) the state acts in a rational way to satisfy its
national interests; and (3) power and security are the core values of
the state. In all versions of realism, the worldview is essentially
pessimistic. Anarchy (absence of central government) characterizes
the international system, which forces states to act out of their
national self-interest (survival). Anarchical conditions tragically
lead to the ‘security dilemma’. Power, measured primarily in terms
of military capabilities and the associated striving for security, is
the main driving force in world politics (Gilpin 1986; Morgenthau
1993; Schmidt 2002).
Kenneth Waltz attempted to turn realism into a scientific,
systemic theory of international politics, with foreign and security
policy beyond its scope. In so doing, he provided a universal and
parsimonious explanation of how world politics functions, but at
the cost of downplaying the real-world relevance of his theory
(Waltz 1979: 5–7). Mearsheimer, however, endevours in his most
recent book, The Tragedy of Great Power Politics (2001), to fill the
gap left by Waltz by laying the groundwork for a neorealist theory
that is not only logically consistent, but also applicable to the study
of foreign and security policy.
In principle, realists do not see a need to revise their theories for
understanding security in the digital age. The state is still seen as
IR theory and digital-age security
11

the main and sometimes only important actor. Moreover, a narrow
(military) definition of security is maintained, thus denying that
non-state actors may exercise any degree of (military) power.
Realists would presumably tackle the challenge of the information
revolution in much the same way as they have tackled previous
challenges of transnationalization, complex interdependence and
globalization. These trends are seen as epiphenomena, which may
very well affect the policies and domestic structures of states, but
which do not undermine the anarchic system of international
politics, and thus do not affect the primacy of the state as the
supreme political unit.
Realists might consider IT-related security threats to be largely
an economic issue, not necessarily affecting the security of states
and not in themselves security threats. Indeed, there are some
realists, or realist-inspired theorists, who generally defend a
narrow, military definition of security, but who argue that if any
widening of the concept should be made, it should be in order to
include the economic dimension (Buzan 1991; Walt 1994).
Some realists would likely consider information warfare as
relevant, if defined as a new technological component in otherwise
traditional interstate conflict (Lonsdale 1999). Psychological
warfare has been a central element in military thinking at least
since Chinese strategist Sun Tzu wrote his famous The Art of War
some 2000 years ago.12 Electronic warfare, such as the electronic
jamming of radio communication, has been an element of
interstate conflict for a much shorter time (since the Second World
War), but is also a precursor of the much more recent talk of
warfare in the digital age. The introduction of information warfare
in strategic studies and military planning (which generally has been
informed by realist thinking) could be seen as a marker of
continuity rather than dramatic change. Some of the technology is
new, as is the global capacity of resourceful digital adversaries, but
the basic notions of attacking and defending information and
information systems are as old as warfare itself – basically, old
wine in new bottles.
Liberalism
Liberalism is a broad perspective which includes, inter alia,
Wilsonian idealism and neoliberal theories (Walker 1993;
Moravcsik 1998, 1999), democratic peace theory (Russett and
Antholis 1993), interdependence theory (Keohane and Nye 1977,
12
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

1989), second-image theory (Gourevitch 1978), the bureaucratic
politics approach (Allison and Zelikow 1999) and domestic
politics approaches (Snyder 1991; Risse-Kappen 1995). The most
important contributions of liberal theory to the discipline of IR can
thus be summarized as: (1) the emphasis on a plurality of
international actors; (2) the importance of domestic political
factors in determining the international behaviour of states; (3) the
role of international institutions13 in establishing (although not
enforcing) rules of behaviour (or regimes) for state actors; and (4)
expanding the agenda of international studies (particularly in the
subfield of international political economy) by focusing on a
broader set of issue areas than mere ‘Hobbesian’ survival in an
anarchic international environment.14
Liberals agree with realists that states are central actors in world
politics, but, in contrast to realists, argue that states are by no
means the only actors that play significant roles in international
relations. Indeed, the most prominent change in recent years in the
field of international politics has been the emergence of a wide
range of new non-state international actors (transnational
corporations, social movements, pressure groups, political party
networks, migrants and terrorists). Thus liberalism has the
potential to show awareness of the emergence of new online
groups, operating in chat rooms and ‘blogs’, and through new
types of audiovisual ICTs.
In most liberal readings of contemporary world politics, it is
argued that the sovereignty of the nation-state is being permeated
and fragmented by the development of transnational relations.
Though any single transnational actor is seldom able to challenge
the political, military or economic power of a state, the increasingly
complex and globally penetrating web of transnational relations
perforates sovereign states to the extent that sovereignty is hardly
more than a symbol of territorial integrity which, in reality, is no
longer sustainable. Indeed, some liberals go so far as to claim that
sovereignty is a burden rather than a power asset, as suggested by
Rosenau’s (1990) distinction between ‘sovereignty-bound’ and
‘sovereignty-free’ actors.15
The long-standing clash between realists and liberals in IR has,
to some extent, overshadowed important similarities between the
two. In particular, realism and liberalism share a rationalistic
epistemological approach, including an emphasis on interest-based
interaction (Buzan et al. 1998; Katzenstein et al. 1998; Fearon and
Wendt 2002; Schmidt 2002). This distinguishes realism and
IR theory and digital-age security
13

liberalism from constructivism, and even more so from other
‘interpretative’ approaches such as post-structuralism and
postmodernism. Liberalism, with its emphasis on non-state actors
with transnational capacity and its insistence that the economy
matters as much as security (the former is seen as the underlying
element for the latter), broadens the definition of what
international relations is about.
In general, liberalism tends to emphasize the positive outcomes
of interdependence and interconnectedness, rather than the
increasing vulnerability and insecurity that might ensue. There are
two possible reasons for this ‘optimistic’ tendency within
liberalism. First, modern liberalism is influenced by Kantian and
Wilsonian idealism (Duncan et al. 2003: 21–2, 32–4). Emphasis is
on the possibilities of overcoming conflicts by peaceful means, in
particular, by norm and institution building at an international
level. In contrast to realists, liberals believe that humans are, if not
inherently ‘good’, then at least morally receptive. Modernization,
including technological development, is generally seen as a vehicle
of enlightenment and peaceful change. Against this background,
liberals have promoted notions such as collective security, and
cooperative security, which, among others things, have influenced
the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Co-
operation in Europe.
Liberalism has also responded to realist state-centric and
security-oriented theories of international relations by emphasizing
the significance of non-state actors and ‘non-security’ issues, such
as trade and travel. Many liberals have actually taken a realist
perspective of security for granted, and have taken a critical stance
against 
addressing 
issues 
labelled 
‘security’ 
altogether.
Consequently, the liberal critique of realist security thinking has
prevented liberalism from developing its own perspective on
security.
This problem has not gone unnoticed. Some liberals have
advocated a widened perspective, which, for example, includes
economic, ecological and human security concerns. Paradoxically,
however, few liberals seem to have apprehended the challenge of
the information revolution. Moreover, those that have are still
silent on its implications for security. The influential theory of
complex interdependence, initially developed in the 1970s by
Joseph Nye and Robert Keohane, has recently been updated to
meet the challenges of the digital age (Keohane and Nye 1998; Nye
2003, 2004b). In this updated version, the costs of interdependence
14
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

(sensitivity and vulnerability) are added as a new component to the
theory. In addition, the impact of the information revolution on
international relations is analysed. It is, however, noteworthy that
the costs of interdependence are framed merely in economic terms,
and are not portrayed as matters of national or international
security (Nye 2003: 199–202; 2004b).
Nye briefly observes that national security, defined as the
absence of threat to major values, can be at stake. He mentions that
many nations have ‘aggressive computer-warfare programs’, and
that ‘[w]ith a few keystrokes, an anonymous source anywhere in
the world might break into and disrupt the (private) power grids of
major cities’ (Nye 2003: 220). He does not, however, make any
attempt to elaborate, critique or place images of cybersecurity
threats within his own theoretical framework. Nye’s influential
concept of ‘soft power’ is relevant for our topic nonetheless. Soft
power is ‘the ability to get what you want through attraction rather
than coercion or payments. It arises from the attractiveness of a
country’s culture, political ideals and policies… Soft power rests on
the ability to shape the preferences of others’ (Nye 2004a: x, 5).
Nye argues that soft power is becoming more important in the
digital age than ever before, mainly because of the evolving
multiple channels of global communication which easily transcend
sovereign boundaries (Nye, 2004b: Ch. 7). Importantly, however,
soft power is more about form than content. Soft power and the
global ICTs that facilitate it are not simply instruments of
cooperation, democratization and peace, as Nye and other liberals
would like to have it, but may just as easily be means of deception,
propaganda and terror.
If idealism and the fear of treading on realist ground by doing
security analysis are removed, liberal theory implicitly provides
insight into the nature of security in the digital age. In particular, it
does so by paying due attention to the increasing plurality and
significance of non-state actors, which are ‘sovereignty-free’, and to
global complex interdependence, particularly its costs in terms of
sensitivity and vulnerability. Two contemporary socioeconomic
trends that are consistent with the dictum of liberal theory are
important for our analysis: (1) the expanding partnership between
the public and private sectors to provide services and (2) the
merging of the civil and military spheres. Because of these trends,
the distinctions in jurisdiction, competencies, duties and risks that
used to pertain to different segments of societies have become
blurred.
IR theory and digital-age security
15

Governments have increasingly recognized that they alone
cannot provide the growing number of public services needed by
modern societies. The trend towards public–private partnership
and privatization evident in, among others, the health, education
and transport sectors has even extended to national security. For
example, in the United States, the National Strategy to Secure
Cyberspace of the President’s Critical Infrastructure Protection
Board of September 2002 relies on public–private partnership,
conceding that ‘Government alone cannot secure cyberspace’
(PCCIP 2000: 5). This might be seen as a ‘civilianization’ of the
military or, perhaps, a ‘militarization’ of society. For instance, the
recent ‘war on terrorism’ is being waged with a mix of military and
law enforcement approaches. The post-9/11 reform resulting in the
new US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is yet another
illustration. In a speech to the Electronics Industries Alliance,
Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge (2002) argued that the
DHS indeed encouraged interoperability and cooperation at all
levels.
The integration and complex interdependencies that follow
from the information revolution are most apparent in the telecom
sector. The military has always used civilian telecom networks to
some extent, but currently, the vast majority of military
communication is transmitted through civilian networks and is
indeed dependent upon them. Computer networks have become
incorporated in the development of hard military power, but they
have also become the mainstay of soft power (Fountain 2001; Nye
2002, 2004a).
The question remains, nonetheless, whether a theory that was
originally designed for analysing actors and processes primarily in
a political economy context can capture the impact of the
information revolution on security. Is the development of global
ICTs mainly a continuation and expansion of the trans-
nationalization of society and economy which first began with
trade and travel or is it something qualitatively different? Liberal
analysts, including Nye, seem to suggest the former, but the
question should remain open for further inquiry and critique. The
inherent bias towards modernism and enlightenment tends to make
liberals emphasize the positive rather than the negative aspects of
complex interdependence and information technology.16
Cyberthreats and other challenges of the information revolution
are clear and present elements of the more general trend of
globalization, which arguably weakens the sovereignty and security
16
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

of the state. Non-state actors are becoming even more numerous
and powerful because of the information revolution. The
emergence of the Internet made real-time global communications
possible, not only for existing NGOs, but also for new, exclusively
online groups. This can obviously have both positive as well as
negative effects: integration, cooperation and liberation may be
eased, but also terrorism, transnational crime and the
destabilization of states.17
The liberal emphasis on a plurality of world actors is perhaps
the most valuable contribution to theory building with regard to
security in the digital age. This theme, however, is still
underdeveloped. Arquilla and Ronfeldt (2001) are among the few
scholars who not only adopt mainstream liberal notions of
globalization and other challenges to state sovereignty, but also
explicitly address the issue of actor plurality in the security
problems of the digital age. They do so mainly by introducing and
applying general network theory. Nevertheless, they do not make
any explicit attempt to communicate with or contribute to theory.
Although providing a theoretically informed analysis, their writing
is most accessible to policy analysts and policy-makers, rather than
to students of international relations.
Constructivism
In the late 1980s, social constructivism (or simply ‘constructivism’)
was explicitly introduced into the IR discipline. Since then, IR
constructivism has expanded enormously, making a significant
impact, in particular, on meta-theoretical debates, and increasingly
on theory building and empirical research in IR.18
The
breakthrough for IR constructivism came partly from attacking the
meta-theoretical rationalism which is common to both realism and
liberalism19 and partly from providing substantive interpretations
of those processes and factors downplayed by these theories. The
end of the Cold War implied a crisis for both realism and
liberalism, as both perspectives failed to account for this
paradigmatic change. This consequentially opened a window of
opportunity for constructivism. In terms of ontological and
epistemological positioning, IR constructivists claim to have seized
the ‘middle ground’ between rationalism and postmodernism
(Adler 1997; Wight 2002: 36).
Constructivists 
emphasize 
the 
unavoidability 
of 
the
interpretation (and thus distortion) of reality, especially with
IR theory and digital-age security
17

respect to the understanding of social and political activity. The
ambition to uncover causal mechanisms and patterns is,
notwithstanding, seen as entirely compatible with constructivism.
Constructivists maintain that there is a material reality (for
example, computers and cables) as well as a social reality
(identities, interests, norms and institutions), and that it is
meaningful to distinguish between the two. The argument here is
that unlike material reality, social reality is socially constructed,
and so is consequently always susceptible to change. Thus
constructivists argue that social realities such as interests and
identities can never be seen as static or be taken for granted, but
should be seen as constantly produced and reproduced. Rather
than asking what social realities are, IR constructivists ask how
social realities become what they are (Wendt 1992; Adler 2002).
Constructivists come in many forms and guises (modernist,
critical and pragmatic) and advocate a very wide range of
methodologies and an even wider range of particular IR theories.
Some constructivists focus entirely on states and the interstate
system (Wendt 1999), while others study, for example, NGOs and
transnational communities (Keck and Sikkink 1998) and epistemic
communities (Haas 1990; Adler 1992). Adler (2002: 108, 110) has
also suggested that constructivists should focus more on the
individual. In terms of providing frameworks for understanding
world politics, constructivism is clearly much more heterogeneous
than realism and liberalism (Checkel 1997; Fearon and Wendt
2002: 56).
If there is anything resembling a core constructivist theorem on
what forces shape world politics or social reality in general, it goes
something like this. At the most basic level, actors have a set of
norms – beliefs about right and wrong. Norms shape identities –
the separation of ‘we’ from ‘them. In turn, identities shape
interests. Importantly and in contrast to rationalism, all of these
elements are seen as inherently dynamic. If interests change, it is
because there is an underlying shift in identities and norms (Adler
2002: 103–4; compare Ruggie 1998).
Not only are social factors seen as dynamic, but also as strongly
conditional. Unlike realism and liberalism, constructivism does not
aim for universal theory, but for conditional generalizations (Adler
2002: 101). Unlike postmodernists, however, constructivists do not
resort to idiosyncratic narrations, but rather strive to uncover
patterns of similarities and differences. What constructivism
contributes is a pragmatic meta-theoretical stance on material as
18
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

well as social reality, an emphasis on conditional generalizations,
and a few guidelines as to what substantive IR theories should
include and look at, especially the dynamic interplay between
social factors such as norms, identities, interests and institutions.
Constructivist security studies have contributed both with
elaborations on the security concept and with more substantive
analyses of security policy, as well as illuminating the relationship
between security policy and national identity (Wæver et al. 1993;
Katzenstein 1996; Buzan et al. 1998).
When using a theoretical framework based in realism or
liberalism, it is more or less prescribed as to what can or cannot be
a security threat. In general, realists focus on violent actor-based
threats (interstate war), while liberals tend to apply a wider
perspective, including both non-state actors and structural threats
(compare Sundelius 1983). Constructivism, on the other hand,
does not take a general stance as to what can or cannot be framed
as a security threat and how such threats can be dealt with.
Constructivism focuses on the verb ‘become’ rather than ‘can’ or
‘cannot’ (Adler 2002: 95). Nevertheless, constructivist security
studies tend to emphasize identity and culturally related threats,
particularly as these have been downplayed in realist and liberal
accounts of security (Buzan et al. 1998). The empirical openness of
constructivism makes it possible to address the widest possible
range of perceived security threats. In terms of threats to critical
infrastructures, this could, for example, include not only digital
attacks, but also technical collapses and bugs such as the infamous
Y2K problem, as well as natural disasters such as earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions.
A noteworthy constructivist approach to security is the theory of
‘securitization’, developed by the ‘Copenhagen school’. This is
about how, when, and with what consequences political actors
frame something (anything) as a matter of security (Wæver 1995;
Buzan et al. 1998; Williams 2003). The emphasis is on ‘speech acts’
(that is, political language) and the implications this has for
political agenda-setting and political relations. Securitization
implies that an ‘existential threat’ is identified, and that this speech
act prioritizes the issue on the political agenda, legitimating
extraordinary measures such as secrecy, the use of force and
invading privacy. The Copenhagen school, while advocating a wide
understanding of security, has not considered the information
revolution at all.
IR theory and digital-age security
19

Eriksson (2001a), however, has studied the securitization of
information technology in Swedish politics. His analysis shows the
impact of different frames of IT-related threats on whom or what
is blamed, and who is allocated responsibility for dealing with the
problems. For instance, framing an incident as ‘cybercrime’ implies
that criminals are to be blamed, and that the police are responsible
for dealing with them. In contrast, the very same incident can also
be framed as an instance of ‘information warfare’, which implies
that enemies to a given nation-state (other states or non-state
actors) are to be blamed, and that the military has a responsibility
to respond to the threat (Bendrath 2001; Eriksson 2001a).
In the few additional constructivist accounts of digital-age
security currently available, the emphasis is mainly on how
information warfare challenges a multitude of boundaries, notably,
boundaries of identity. Everard (2000) argues that information
warfare is a particular kind of ‘identity warfare’ in which all kinds
of 
boundaries 
are 
challenged, 
including 
the 
classical
domestic–international divide. Hence, the identity of the nation-
state is at stake, although it may very well adapt, rather than
succumb, to the constant penetration of formally sovereign
boundaries and the emergence and articulation of new identities in
cyberspace (compare Saco 1999).
The constructivist analysis of power and security in a virtual
world implies emphasizing the significance of images and symbols
in addition to the material reality of computers and cables.
According to Der Derian (2000), one of many effects of war in the
digital age is that it distances (some) actors from the bloody reality
of war. This distancing is not about rendering geographical
distance irrelevant (for example, the possibility of a hacker
attacking a computer in Shanghai from a computer in Seattle, via a
computer in St Petersburg). While not discounting the significance
of decreasing geographical distance, what we are, rather, referring
to here is how virtuality affects the perception and conduct of war.
Digital war is similar to computer games, to the extent that
simulation is performed and perceived in the same way, that is, by
using the mouse and keyboard of a computer. Virtuality thus blurs
the boundary between the real and the imagined. It is no
coincidence that the entertainment industry, including the film and
computer-gaming industries with their effects and tactical tools and
20
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

software, is also an increasingly important source of inspiration
and expertise for the military (Der Derian 2000; Everard 2000).
The study of ‘symbolic politics’ (the use and abuse of symbols
for manipulating political discourse and public opinion) is highly
relevant for studying digital-age security. The symbolic politics
approach, first and foremost represented by Murray Edelman, is a
constructivist contribution in social science, introduced long before
the information revolution (Edelman 1964, 1977, 1985, 1988; 
’t Hart 1993; Merelman 1993; Sears 1993). One study has been
conducted regarding the digital symbolic politics of US presidential
campaigning (Klinenberg and Perrin 2000), yet the symbolic
politics approach has not previously been applied in studies of
digital-age security.
Defacing websites is a noteworthy practice of symbolic politics,
less antagonistic than, but nonetheless comparable to, the burning
of an enemy’s flag. The cost of mending a website and securing a
server is usually negligible in comparison with the cost in terms of
lost confidence, disparagement and feelings of vulnerability.
Assaults and counterattacks against US and Chinese government
websites by hackers from the respective countries have transpired.
Similar digital wars are going on between Israeli and Arab hackers
and between Pakistani and Indian ones. A symbolic politics
approach shows how and why these actions are seen as an insult,
an offense to national pride (or a corporate brand). The Internet
could be seen as the vast new global arena for symbolic politics par
excellence.
Constructivist analysis can, moreover, illustrate the function and
impact of language in digital-age security. By making use of
analogies to things familiar in the ‘real’ or off-line world
(comparisons to ‘bugs’, ‘viruses’, ‘worms’ and ‘firewalls’, for
example), the abstract and technically complex world of
cybersecurity is made intelligible and indeed meaningful. The use
of terms such as information ‘warfare’ and ‘electronic Pearl
Harbor’ conveys a special meaning: that which is digital by nature
has, nonetheless, physical consequences comparable to those of
conventional war. Constructivist analysis can contribute to
revealing and understanding the significance of such rhetoric and
symbolic actions.
IR theory and digital-age security
21

Applicable perspectives? A pragmatic approach
In this introductory chapter, we have attempted to demonstrate the
need to develop middle-range theories that integrate liberalism,
constructivism and realism for understanding the impact of the
information revolution on security. The specialist literature on
security in the digital age is policy oriented with little or no
ambition to apply or contribute to theory, and IR scholars have,
with few exceptions, paid only scant attention to the security
problems of the digital age. In this conclusion, we seek to provide
some initial guiding direction as to how this gap between theory
and research can be bridged.
Liberalism and constructivism nominally seem to have more to
say about our topic than is the case with realism. If stripped from
its idealist and antirealist pretensions, liberalism grasps many of
the elements of security in the digital age: the multiplicity of non-
state actors with transnational capacity, network economies,
‘vulnerability interdependence’, and the consequent perforation of
formally sovereign boundaries. Likewise, constructivism seems apt
for analysing the symbolic, rhetorical and identity-based aspects of
digital-age security. In general, realism tackles the challenge of the
digital age as it has tackled other features of globalization – by
largely ignoring it, or by subsuming information security to either
political economy or domestic politics, none of which fit
comfortably in the (neo)realist field of vision. There is, however,
another possible application of (classical) realist thought in
strategic studies in which information warfare is a key concept. In
this perspective, information warfare is the technological
continuation of classical forms of psychological warfare and, more
recently, of electronic warfare. Yet even in this perspective, the
analysis does not go beyond a military and state-centric
orientation.
The foregoing analysis has shown that there are two interrelated
problems in past efforts at understanding security in the digital age.
First, theory and practice on this matter are so distant that they
hardly ever inform each other. Second, existing IR theories are
plagued by an entrenched dualism, implying great difficulties for
theoretical adaptation and application in analyses of the
complexities of the emerging new digital world.
One possible way of overcoming these problems is by adopting
a more ‘pragmatic’ approach.20 While there are several strands of
pragmatist philosophy, pragmatism generally advocates bridge
22
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

building between theory and practice, methodological pluralism,
contingent generalizations, and theoretical complementarities and
tolerance rather than entrenched opposition (Bauer and Brighi
2002: iii). This seems to be exactly what is needed to bridge the gap
between theory and practice, and to help overcome the dualistic
conflicts in academic IR. There is thus no reason why the scholar
trying 
to 
understand 
digital-age 
security 
cannot 
draw
simultaneously on insights from a diverse range of IR theories,
unfortunately often depicted as contending or incompatible, and
on insights from the policy-oriented literature.
The critical reader might wonder whether ‘pragmatist’ is
another word for ‘empiricist’, or more cynically worded, for ‘not
smart enough for theory’ (Lewontin 1992). Indeed, pragmatism is
more of an orientation, or ethos, than a theory. This is, however, a
necessary first step to overcoming the chasm between theory and
practice, and while a particular theory is not proffered, a fruitful
starting point for the development of theory on security in the
digital age is provided. With such a pragmatic approach applied to
case studies and comparative analyses, it is possible to build a
foundation upon which further theory building can be done, with
an emphasis on middle-range theory and on conditional rather
than universal generalizations.
Structure of the book
The contributors to this volume were asked to address two
questions: (1) What is the impact of the information revolution on
security, as seen in your particular field of research, issue-area, or
case study? and (2) How can international relations theory (or
other relevant theories) enhance understanding of the particular
issues of digital-age security that are addressed in your study? The
questions are obviously interrelated. The evaluation and
development of theory depends on its empirical application. 
Part I focuses on the politics of threats in the digital age. In
Chapter 2, Magnus Ranstorp analyses how al-Qaeda and other
Islamic terrorist groups make use of cyberspace. Ranstorp claims
that cyberspace is not merely an add-on that facilitates
mobilization and terrorist propaganda, but that it is the very nerve
centre of global jihadism. This argument is pursued through an
empirical inquiry which mainly makes use of network theory and
social movement theory. In Chapter 3, Ralf Bendrath, Johan
Eriksson, and Giampiero Giacomello analyse how the US framing
IR theory and digital-age security
23

of cyberthreats has varied over time. It is argued that this threat
framing cannot be explained by how cyberincidents have unfolded.
Rather, it has been domestic and bureaucratic politics, including
the ideological profile of various administrations, as well as major
offline incidents (especially 9/11) that have played and continue to
play important roles. 
In Part II, on the politics of protection, four chapters analyse
how governments and international organizations have responded
to the perceived threats of the digital age. In Chapter 4, Myriam
Dunn critically examines what particular features and challenges a
theory of ‘information age security’ would entail. It is argued that
focusing on acts of securing information systems is more fruitful
than trying to make sense of the essentially contested concept of
security in the digital age. With an emphasis on critical
infrastructure, Dunn uses complexity theory and globalization
theory to making sense of the patterns of continuity and change in
state power and security.
In Chapter 5, Hamoud Salhi theorizes the impact of information
technology (IT) on security in the contemporary Middle East. The
spread of IT in the Middle East region has been comparatively
slow, and so has theory building on this topic. Salhi explores the
relative merits of realism, liberalism and constructivism. In contrast
to the views of the editors in Chapter 1, Salhi argues that realism
provides the best fit, but that one should not disregard liberalism
altogether. His main argument is based on the relatively firm
governmental control of the Internet in the Middle East states,
which is in contrast with the development in ‘western’ liberal
democracies.
In Chapter 6, Lorenzo Valeri adopts a neo-institutionalist
perspective to examine the consequences of an ‘information
regime’ in international relations. Malicious activities and system
outages affect one of the pivotal elements for the continuous
success and growth of the Internet: trust in online public and
private activities and overall confidence in the medium. Valeri
examines how to establish an international regime for information
assurance. He contends that such a regime may develop only if
states and private businesses are able to cooperate.
In Chapter 7, Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson look at the
interactions between domestic and international dynamics in the
regulation of electronic dataflows. It is argued that this essentially
transnational process involves strategies such as ‘policy laundering’
and ‘forum shopping’. The chapter traces the movement of policy
24
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

ideas and innovations from national laws to international
organizations through coalition building, and the return to
national legislatures through harmonization and treaty ratification.
Empirically, focus is on the regulatory processes within the Group
of Eight (G8) and the Council of Europe.
The concluding chapter, written by the editors, synthesizes the
discrete observations and arguments in the preceding chapters in
order to (1) suggest a number of propositions on the impact of the
information revolution on security; (2) evaluate the utility of IR
theories for understanding digital-age security; and finally (3)
discuss requirements for further theoretical development on this
subject matter. 
Notes
1
This chapter is an updated, expanded and in many other ways revised
version of an article that has appeared in International Political
Science Review (Eriksson and Giacomello 2006).
2
A noteworthy exception is Millennium’s special issue on IR and the
digital age (vol. 31, no. 3). This issue deals primarily with IR theory
and the information age in general, however. Contemporary Security
Studies has also had a special issue (vol. 24, no. 1) published on
national security in the information age. This special issue makes
several interesting policy-relevant points, but does not tackle the
question of what IR theory can or should say about the empirical
puzzle. The same weakness plagues an otherwise useful volume on
The Information Revolution and International Security, edited by
Henry and Peartree (1998).
3
A possible point that might be raised by the reader here is whether this
is not true for nearly all information technologies. Radio, television,
the telegraph, and even books and newspapers are, after all, both
infrastructure and medium. This possible criticism misses the point,
however. With the Internet information about the status of the
network, about financial transactions, and about the functioning of
other utilities travels on computer networks along with emails to
friends and relatives or messages in ‘intimate’ chat groups. This is not
the case with radio or television. Data on the functioning and
management of a television or radio network does not travel ‘in clear’
(that is, unencrypted) on the same wavelength along with the morning
news or weather forecast.
4
The US Department of Defense has renamed Information Warfare
(IW) as Information Operations (IO). NATO has also adopted the
same definition. IO are ‘actions taken to affect adversary information
and information systems while defending one’s own information and
information systems’ (Denning 1999: 10). Hence, IO is a broad
concept that includes physical means (for example, a precision bomb
or a hammer) as well as digital means (a virus or a ‘hoax’) to fulfil
IR theory and digital-age security
25

that objective. If the tools used are digital, then the operation falls into
the subclass of Computer Networks Operations (CNO). CNO are
further divided into Computer Networks Exploitation (CNE),
Computer Networks Attacks (CNA), and Computer Networks
Defense (CND). CNO are also divided into nonlethal and lethal
CNO. The former group is much larger and comprises the most
diverse actions, ranging from propaganda and perception
management to psychological operations (psychops), denial-of-service
(DoS) attacks on commercial websites, web defacement, espionage,
and cybercrime. The goal is to control, disrupt, alter or deny use of
information, more than to cause damage or kill people. The latter
class of CNO aims at destruction or disruption of information
infrastructures to provoke economic damage or even casualties.
5
RMA, which depicts a technologically driven change in military
strategy, has received considerable scholarly attention both within and
beyond the military. Like most other work on information security
and technology, however, the RMA literature is distinctively
empiricist (see Laird 1999; Gongora and Von Riekhoff 2000;
Matthews and Tredderick 2001; Sloan 2002; Goldman and Mahnken
2004; Goldman 2005).
6
See also the following statement by US Senator John Edwards (2002):
‘We live in a world where a terrorist can do as much damage with a
keyboard and a modem as with a gun or a bomb’.
7
This is a metaphor that has been circulating among so-called
‘infowarriors’ since the mid-1990s, reportedly coined by Winn
Schwartau, the creator of www.infowar.com.
8
Libicki (1997: 38) hoists a warning against equating the destruction
of bits and bytes with the bloodshed of conventional war and
terrorism. To some extent, the volume edited by Robert Latham
(2003) inadvertently suggests that type of association.
9
For instance, in 1994, the Russian hacker ‘Vladimir Lenin’ illegally
transferred $10 million from the American Citibank (Cordesman
2002; Freedman 2000; PBS Online 2002).
10
On this point, see, for example, Denning (2001a), DSBTF (2001: ES-
4), and F-secure (2003).
11
This is illustrated by well-known incidents of cyberattacks. In 1998,
three young hackers successfully intruded upon hundreds of computer
systems with sensitive US armed forces information. The incident,
subsequently dubbed ‘Solar Sunrise’, initially provoked fear of a
possible information attack by a ‘hostile nation’, supposedly Iraq.
Two of the young hackers turned out to be located in California and
the third in Israel (Bendrath 2001; Cordesman 2002: 40; DSBTF
2001: 2).
12
According to several scholars (Keegan 1993; Van Creveld 1991;
Kaldor 1999), contemporary wars have rendered Clausewitz obsolete.
War as a rational instrument of a state’s foreign policy is too limited
a concept. Sun Tzu (1963) with his emphasis on surprise, deception,
attacking weak points, and ‘unlimited war’ seems to be the theorist of
modern times. Clausewitz (a romantic, dialectic, and complicated
European) was much more articulate than many readers might
26
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

imagine, however. His point was that war is policy as well as politics.
There is no distinction between politics and war; they are part of the
same game. Clausewitz’s conclusion is much more apt for modern
network societies than many might expect. As societies grow more
and more dependent on computer networks, they also increase their
vulnerability. The artificial distinction between politics and war (or
peace and war) that Clausewitz warned against acquires new meaning
in the digital age.
13
There are a few liberal analyses of regime building and
institutionalization concerning the Internet and other elements of the
digital age. Some concern mainly non-security issues (Franda, 2001;
Rosenau and Singh, 2002), but Valeri (2000) and Giacomello (2005)
are exceptions.
14
For an overview of IR liberalism, see, for example, Duncan et al.
(2003: 29, 32-4).
15
On this point, see also Keohane and Nye (1977, 1989) and Camilleri
and Falk (1992).
16
Liberals would acknowledge that ‘sovereignty-free’ actors include, for
example, not only General Motors, the International Monetary Fund,
and Amnesty International, but also al-Qaeda, the Irish Republican
Army, and Cosa Nostra.
17
An anathema for liberalism is the contagious fear that democratically
elected decision-makers cannot provide domestic security, let alone
guard state and society against transnational threats. With his theory
of ‘risk society’, German sociologist Ulrich Beck (1992, 1999)
provides a fundamental critique of liberal, utopian visions of
modernization. In Beck’s analysis, the development of and increasing
reliance on modern technologies, such as nuclear power, has the effect
of constantly producing new risks. In this perspective, the focus is on
the side effects of new technologies for communication, energy
production and commerce. In particular, Beck emphasizes the
ecological risks of living with new technologies. Beck is, however,
strikingly quiet on the risks of new ICTs in general, and on
cyberthreats in particular.
18
Onuf (1989) and Wendt (1992) are generally acknowledged as two of
the original constructivists in contemporary IR theory. For a useful
overview of how IR constructivism has developed since then, see
Adler (2002).
19
Some scholars claim that the gap between rationalism and
constructivism is exaggerated and that it can and should be bridged
(Checkel 1997; Katzenstein et al. 1998). This controversial argument
presupposes, however, that a division of labour is made between
explaining instrumental action (rationalism) based on interests and
explaining the norms and identities which shape interests and thus
action (constructivism). Adler (2002: 108-9) considers this a way of
subsuming constructivism under rationalism, a way of seeing
constructivism as merely a background theory of an otherwise
rationalistic approach.
20
Pragmatism is a philosophical orientation developed mainly by
American thinkers such as Charles Sanders Peirce (1963) and John
IR theory and digital-age security
27

Dewey (1948). Recently, a handful of IR scholars have tried to restore
pragmatism in IR. Millennium (vol. 31, no. 3) recently devoted a
special issue to this topic.
28
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

Part I
The politics of threats


2 
The virtual sanctuary of al-
Qaeda and terrorism in an 
age of globalization
Magnus Ranstorp
The conjunction of 21st-century Internet speed and 
12th-century fanaticism has turned our world into a
tinderbox.
Tina Brown1
Introduction
The fusion of globalization and terrorism in the twenty-first
century has created a new, adaptable and complex form of
‘networked’ asymmetric adversary. For al-Qaeda and its successor
affiliates, the Internet has become not just a virtual sanctuary,
where every dimension of the global jihad is taking place online. In
many ways cyberspace has created a virtual university of jihad
with advice available anytime to any militant and it has vastly
expanded the potential audience and modes of interaction. It was
also always more than a functional tool to enhance
communication, promote ideology, recruit, fundraise and even
train new adherents. For al-Qaeda and its progeny, cyberspace
constitutes a form of central nervous system as it remains critical
to its viability in terms of structure and even more as a movement.
Some have even argued that al-Qaeda has become the ‘first
guerrilla movement in history to migrate from physical space to
cyberspace’ (Coll and Glasser 2005). 
This virtual migration has opened up infinite and powerful
avenues to project the Salafist jihadi narrative. In this virtual
battlefield it is clear the militants have mastery of mechanisms to
project this ‘single narrative’ in a way that carries enduring
resonance and with a logic that thousands of Muslims find
absolutely compelling. This allows it to regenerate and reconstitute

endlessly and to survive, flourish and expand in the real and virtual
worlds. Some argue that this new form of ‘cybermobilisation’ is
‘perpetuating a fractionation of violence, a return to
individualized, mob-driven, and feudal forms of warfare’ (Kurth
Cronin 2006). Thomas Friedman argues that globalization has led
to the emergence of ‘super-empowered individuals’ (Friedman
2002). In this sense, these terrorist entities display a ‘global
microstructural configuration […] as structures of connectivity and
integration are global in scope but microsociological in character’
(Knorr Cetina 2005: 215). 
Other scholars have focused on the ideational dimensions of
what al-Qaeda represents and emphasize the normative
environment. 
As 
Marc 
Lynch 
has 
argued 
‘al-Qaeda’s
constructivism derives both from structural factors – absence of a
territorial base, a globalized field of contention shaped by the new
media and information technologies – and Islamist ideas
themselves’ (Lynch 2006). In this constructivist terrain, ‘strategic
social construction – actions oriented towards shaping the
background beliefs and norms of international politics – is at the
core of al-Qaeda’s strategy’ (Lynch 2005). Globalization has
enabled this transfiguration of local politics into the global
instantaneously in what Ulrich Beck describes as ‘a non-linear,
dialectic process in which the global and the local do not exist as
cultural polarities but as combined and mutually implicating
principles’ (Beck 2000; Beck 2002: 17). 
As Jarret Brachman has argued ‘al-Qaeda’s harnessing of
technology has been a calculated strategic move – the goal being to
catalyze awareness of the need for Muslims to “resist” and open
new ways for them to participate in that resistance’ (Brachman
2006: 158). This chapter explores this strategic move and the full
spectrum of interaction between violent ‘resistance’ and
cyberspace.
Understanding globalization and terrorism
Al-Qaeda has been described by Francis Pisani as a ‘particularly
complex organisation, halfway between a sect and a medieval
military order. It is a network of networks’ (Pisani 2002). The
debate on how al-Qaeda is best understood reveals the uncertainty
as to whether it is an ideology, a social movement, a dark network,
‘several networks or the network of networks?’ (Milward 2006).
Some have argued that it is ‘more of an ideal or social movement
32
Magnus Ranstorp

that is replicated by relatively disconnected groups than a network
of cells controlled by a “mother ship” ’ (Corman and Schiefelbein
2006: 4).
In order for us to understand the durability and resilience of the
polymorphic constellations of Salafist jihadist networks it may be
useful to turn to David Ronfeldt’s analytical framework in which
he advances that the strongest network rests on the integration
across five levels: on the organization level (their networked
design); on the doctrinal level (collaborative strategies); the
technological level (particularly information systems); the social
level (relationships that ensure loyalty and trust in closed systems);
and on the narrative level (Ronfeldt 2003). In fact, Ronfeldt argues
that ‘the strongest networks will be those in which the
organizational design is sustained by a winning story and a well-
defined doctrine, and is all this is layered atop suitable
communications systems and strong personal and social ties at the
base’ (Ronfeldt 2003). The prevalence of personal relationships
have been persuasively underscored by Marc Sageman’s work,
arguing in his voluminous case-study of 400 al-Qaeda members
that 70 per cent were initially formed and shaped through close
friendship and the remainder through family contacts or other such
similar relationships (Sageman 2004, 2005). These social
dimensions are difficult to penetrate but critical to understand. 
Again David Ronfeldt (2005) forcefully argues that al-Qaeda
and its affiliates represent a global tribe waging segmental warfare
upholding codes of honour – respect, pride, trust, dignity,
reciprocity and revenge are powerful tribal motifs that confer
legitimacy to their violent action and as a powerful instrument of
mobilisation to widen their social and popular appeal. These
cultural themes are recurring across many different levels of
Salafist jihadist propaganda and psychological warfare, offering a
remarkably revealing window into the connectivity between past
battles, contemporary realities and future missions. Often skilfully
choreographed in cyberspace and in Arabic, this rich figurative
symbolism evokes powerful passions from within Islamic history
and culture. From using the Black Flag (al-raya), the battle flag of
the Prophet, and horses with riders (emphasizing the human
agency in jihad) and swords to using different colours within the
Islamic tradition and the iconography of martyrdom are all
skilfully designed to conjure up key salafiyya notions of jihad in
early Islam and to stir the passions of the heart and mind of
soldiers and potential sympathizers and recruits.2
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
33

In the mindset of Salafist jihadi adherents, 9/11 was a ghazwah,
a raid following in the footsteps of the Prophet’s many raids as a
warrior emir. The immediate connectivity between the sacred past
and the present is at the very centre of the Salafist jihadi mindset
(Wiktorowicz 2006). This cultural paradigm is critical to study and
unlock in order to understand the inner landscape of jihad and
Occidentalism (Raufer 2003; Devji 2005). In many ways, one
could liken al-Qaeda to a band of historic ghazi ‘constantly
occupied with raiding the lands of the infidel…coming under his
flag of ever increasing numbers of gharibs (rootless wanderers of
various origins)’ (Vlahos 2002: 13). 
Another cultural dimension that has remained unchanged by the
forces of globalization but is little understood is the different
conceptions of time and space concerning the longevity and sacred
nature of the jihadi mission or its direction. Based on extensive
secret contacts and inner thoughts of al-Qaeda leaders and
members, Fouad Hussein (a Jordanian journalist who spent time in
prison with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi) provides in his book Al-
Zarqawi – al-jil al-jadid lil-Qa’idah (Qaeda’s Second Generation) a
unique synthesis of the disparate elements making up what is
essentially al-Qaeda’s grand strategy. In essence, Hussein argues
that al-Qaeda views its struggle as a long-term war with seven
distinct phases that are going to last at least until the year 2020:    
•
Phase one is the ‘awakening’ of the consciousness of Muslims
worldwide following the September 11, 2001, suicide attacks
to the fall of Baghdad in 2003. The aim of the attacks was
multifaceted. First and foremost the attacks were designed to
provoke the US into declaring war on the Islamic world in
order to ‘awaken’ Muslims everywhere. The radical Salafist
jihadi message would reverberate across the globe, creating the
conditions for mobilizing a new generation of radicals. 
•
Phase two is known as ‘Opening Eyes’, which began in the
autumn of 2003 and lasted until 2006. The underlying aim is
for the terrorists to make the ‘Western conspiracy’ aware of the
‘Islamic community’ and where al-Qaeda transforms from an
organization to a movement. Iraq constitutes the epicentre for
the jihad and for global operations while it continues to mould
secret battalions ready for battle and bases across the Arab
world.
•
Phase three, ‘Arising and Standing Up’, should last from 2007
to 2010, with a focus on attacks against Turkey and the arch-
34
Magnus Ranstorp

enemy Israel and neighbouring Jordan. The focus on attacking
Israel is designed to increase the legitimacy of the movement.
It is also believed there will be a focus on Syria.
•
Phase four, lasting between 2010 and 2013, will see the
downfall and even collapse of hated, corrupt and ‘godless’
Arab regimes. The weakening of these Arab regimes will only
strengthen the support for the movement. A primary focus will
be on attacking oil suppliers and the US economy will be
targeted using cyberterrorism.
•
Phase five will be the point at which an Islamic state, or
caliphate, can be declared – between 2013 and 2016. This will
become possible as Western influence in the region is
significantly reduced with Israel weakened. The Salafist jihadi
resistance will not be feared any more and the new situation is
the beginning of a new world order.
•
Phase six, from 2016 on, will be a period of ‘total
confrontation’. As soon as the caliphate has been declared, the
‘Islamic army’ will instigate the ‘fight between the believers
and the non-believers’ which has often been prophesied by al-
Qaeda’s leader, Osama Bin-Laden.
•
Phase seven, the final stage, is described as ‘definitive victory’
because the rest of the world is worn down by and cannot
resist the will of one-and-a-half billion Muslims. (Hall 2005;
Musharbash 2005a)
The synthesis of these different strands provides a useful
window into the multi-strand and often parallel priorities pursued
by those mobilized by the global revolutionary flag of al-
Qaedaism. In some ways it crystallizes the different instrumental
dimensions of terrorism. As underscored by Khalid Sheikh
Mohammad, the Chief of External Operations within al-Qaeda
and the principal architect of 9/11, in the written submission of
evidence at the Zaharia Moussaoui trial, the initial purpose of the
attack on the Twin Towers was to ‘wake the American people up’
(‘Substitution for the Testimony’ 2006). It was also meant to create
a massive American overreaction through which the powerbase of
Islamist extremists could create a momentum with a self-feeding
mechanism and replication power. 
All these different phases are strictly not meant to be a
sequential blueprint for action but they reveal overlapping
directives and areas of priority and concentration for subversive
violent action. Collectively they also reveal the competing different
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
35

centres of gravity within Salafist jihadi ideological circles. These
differences appear either in their ideological discourse or based on
geographic considerations that sharply focus where and against
whom violence should be directed. At its core this divergent issue
reveals the internal debates on whether to focus in the violence
against the ‘near’ or ‘far’ enemy. 
This division of labour has always been the object of debate
since Abdallah Azzam, one of the chief ideologues behind al-
Qaeda, advanced the idea of ribat, the need for ‘enlightened’
jihadists to place themselves directly as a spearhead in defence of
Muslims under siege. Answering the call for action was a sizeable
contingent of foreign mujaheedin fighters flocking principally from
Afghanistan and the Arabian Peninsula towards defending
Muslims in the Balkan conflict in the early 1990s (Kohlmann
2004). Some of these fighters joined the call to battle, Ilhaq bi-l-
qafila (Join the Caravan) to martyrdom while others committed
‘war crimes.’ Many moved periodically between regional conflicts
from Bosnia and Kashmir to Chechnya and of course Afghanistan. 
These regional conflicts crystallized the spirit of a Salafist jihadi
vanguard that would later become al-Qaeda. It did, however,
constitute a heterogeneous ideology as it contained a number of
‘intellectual substreams with various priorities’ (Lia and
Hegghammer 2004). As globalization intensified, the local became
instantaneously global, providing news of any local Muslim issue
in any remote region of the world. This ‘cyberumma’ is constantly
evolving and developing in all directions. It is supplemented at its
base by more traditional modes of physical interaction spreading
ideas, new doctrines and contacts. In particular, the role of the hajj
to Mecca and Medina in Saudi Arabia can be considered the
‘mothership’ of the networking of Muslims worldwide as ideas and
virtual networks spread and replicate, cross-fertilize and intensify.
For the Islamist extremists, moving constantly between these
spheres of virtual and physical interaction provides a high degree
of interoperability and survivability in hostile environments.
Fouad Hussein’s synthesis of al-Qaeda’s plan for the future not
only reveals different spatial dimensions in terms of the concept of
time. It also manifests itself in the form of organization. Unlike the
West’s proclivity to categorize and create sharply delineated
boundaries and hierarchies to achieve structure and order, the
creation of al-Qaeda represented not only a ‘solid base’ but a norm,
a principle to follow. As underscored by Abdallah Azzam, ‘every
36
Magnus Ranstorp

principle needs a vanguard to carry it forward … this vanguard
constitutes al-qaeda al-sulbah for the expected society’. 
This formlessness was emphasized by Khalid Sheikh
Mohammad: ‘you must study these matters to know the huge
difference between the Western mentality in administration and the
eastern mentality, specifically at al-Qaeda’ (‘Substitution for the
Testimony’ 2006: 55). The difference is also reinforced by the
evolution of the revolutionary intellectual contributions by various
Salafist jihadi strategists, most notably Abu Musab al-Suri and his
1,600-page treatise Da’wat al-muqawamah al-islamiyyah al-
‘alamiiyyah (The Call for an International Islamic Resistance). In
this work, al-Suri emphasized the slogan nizam, la tanzim, ‘System,
not organization.’ As perceptively argued by Brynjar Lia, this
slogan meant ‘there should be an “operative system” or template,
available anywhere for anybody, wishing to participate in the
global jihad either on his own or with a small group of trusted
associates, and there should not exist any “organization for
operations”’ (Lia 2006a). In essence, argued al-Suri, these
independent and self-resurrecting cells would only be glued
together by ‘a common aim, a common doctrinal program and a
comprehensive (self-) educational program’ (‘Substitution for the
Testimony’ 2006). 
This individualized and autonomous terrorism revolves around
total self-reliance and self-finance for security and ‘relies on a total
de-territorialisation of jihadist warfare’ with the entire globe as the
theatre of war (‘Substitution for the Testimony’ 2006: 16). As
underscored by Ubeid al-Qurashi, one of Bin-Laden’s lieutenants,
al-Qaeda had embraced so-called fourth generation warfare (Al-
Qurashi 2003) as these wars would, it was argued, tactically be
small-scale, emerging in various regions across the planet against
an enemy that, like a ghost, appears and disappears. This de-
territorialization of jihadi warfare with the principle of
atomization and self-initiation of terrorist cells follows some forms
of order and structured pattern. As highlighted by a Dutch Interior
Ministry report, new jihadist networks differed from traditional
ones in that the new network
Lacks a formal (hierarchical) structure, and has an informal,
flexible membership and fluctuating leadership. It is incorrect,
however, to conclude that such a network possesses no
structure whatsoever. There is always a pattern of connections
between individuals who communicate with one another with
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
37

a view to achieve a common goal. In some cases these
communication lines converge in one or more core groups,
which thus play a coordinating and controlling role. In other
cases there are random communication patterns between all
members while the network functions practically without
leadership or central control. It is also possible for several
groups to be active within one network. 
(Violent Jihad in the Netherlands 2005: 13) 
As argued by Ronfeldt, the durability and strength of these
networks rely on the close integration across five levels with a well-
functioning communication system providing the essential glue for
an effective projection capability of the narrative (or directives).
Within this context, globalization and the revolution in
information technologies have provided an infinite number of new
avenues to explore and exploit for the Salafist jihadi autonomous
cells. Cyberspace has provided full-spectrum capability to a degree
that is almost limitless. It is abundantly clear that they have been
quick to absorb these new technologies as they greatly expand the
range of their operational and structural capabilities. They have
also clearly shown the knowledge and determination to exploit
these capabilities innovatively to enhance and protect their
command and control within and between cell structures. 
This innovation is driven not just by their command of
technology but sometimes by its intelligent simplicity in design or
process. Predetermined coded messages between cell members are
often transmitted through ancient personal messenger methods as
a complex operation moves closer towards execution. For
example, this simplicity was revealed by Khalid Sheikh
Mohammad who stated that ‘I conducted the September 11
operation by submitting only oral reports. I would travel for a day-
and-a-half until I reach Bin-Laden, and I inform him what was
happening … (the) operation could be run successfully with simple
primitive means’ (‘Substitution for the Testimony’ 2006). At the
same time, the emir of the operation, Muhammad Atta, provided
the initiation code to launch the 9/11 attack three weeks before the
operation using an e-mail message to Ramzi bin al-Shib, the go-
between to al-Qaeda’s operational command: ‘The Semester begins
in three more weeks. We’ve obtained 19 confirmations for studies
in the faculty of law, the faculty of urban planning, the faculty 
of fine arts, and the faculty of engineering’ (Fuda and Fielding
2003: 140). 
38
Magnus Ranstorp

The infinite variations, mixing advanced and simple low- or no-
tech methods, create an impressive spectrum of choices. In many
ways, al-Qaeda, along with other terrorist organizations, has
recognized and exploited the infinite advantages that cyberspace
can offer in significantly enhancing its own offensive capability in
terms of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) as well
as its defensive capability in terms of command, control,
communications, computers and intelligence (C4I).
Adopting a multi-dimensional cyberapproach, combined with
creative new communication technologies, allows operational
agility and stealth mode far in excess of what was possible
previously for terrorist organizations. It facilitates a polymorphic
structure or design with multiplicity of nods or pods swarming
towards a mission or resurrecting shortly before or after an
operation. More fundamentally it allows survivability through a
constant virtual presence with no real or tangible physical centres
of gravity and in constant stealth mode and ideological motion.
Having simply an online presence confers a certain degree of
legitimacy which these organizations otherwise would not have. It
also allows them to resurrect and reconfigure at any time.
In many ways, the virtual world has become the principal
vehicle through which terrorist organizations communicate with
their own clandestine members, reach a broad audience of real and
potential sympathizers, publish propaganda and wage a skilful
auxiliary psychological warfare campaign to amplify violence on
the ground. Nowhere is this more starkly illustrated than in their
determination to invoke moral shock through videotaped brutal
beheadings of hostages in Iraq and Afghanistan. Many of these
shocking videos appear in extremist chat-rooms and websites
available for anyone to access. The empowerment of the terrorists
to create and distribute news themselves is evident in the explosion
of Salafist jihadi websites, from below 20 before 9/11 to over 5,000
websites providing ideological tracts, discussion fora, weblogs and
videos (Weimann 2006).
The increase in the number of Salafist jihadi websites is only
indicative of the fact that the cyberenvironments provide almost
infinite tactical and strategic operational advantages. The Internet
has become one of the principal means by which terrorists publish
propaganda; proselytize, indoctrinate followers; recruit new
members; communicate, train; engage in information gathering
and reconnaissance; raise funds and other material resources;
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
39

transfer funds; plan operations; and engage in information attacks
on enemy websites or other critical information infrastructure. 
Publishing propaganda and proselytizing in cyberspace
Cyberspace has emerged as a principal arena for spreading Salafist
jihadi ideology targeting internal and external audiences.
Maintained by thousands of dedicated IT-literate activists, the
jihadist Internet infrastructure is exploding in terms of size, scope
and sophistication (Lia 2006b). In many ways the cyberspace is
becoming a readily accessible digital library, an endless reservoir
which contains a vast variety of religio-ideological tracts and texts,
fatwas and khutbas (sermons) providing militant theological
justification for undertaking violent actions. This virtual domain
simultaneously expands and de-territorializes the social
interactions between the local and global jihadist milieux.
Ideological doctrines, derived and synthesized from Sayyid Qutb,
Saudi neo-Tawhid, Azzam, al-Maqdisi3 and other contemporary
Salafist jihadi sources and strategic thinkers, contribute to
sharpening the internal ideological debate over the nature and
direction of the sacred mission. Thomas Hegghammer has
identified five principal categories that exert and shape the
ideological tendencies and the direction of the mission: the
leadership of the ‘old’ al-Qaeda (providing purpose for taking up
arms against Crusaders); the religious scholars or ‘jihadi shaykhs’
(issuing fatwas and clarifying religious legitimacy of behaviour);
strategic thinkers (offering advice on how best to fight the enemy
through doctrines and paramilitary manuals); the active militant
organizations (publishing their own texts and justifications for
violence); and so-called ‘grassroots’ (radicals participating
anonymously in radical Islamist discussion fora) (Hegghammer
2006). A unifying factor across all these levels is that most of this
material is published and distributed on the Internet in various
forms. In essence, these diverse Salafist jihadi contributors from
around the globe participate in a collective ‘global brainstorming’
on how to achieve the desired effects through various action
(Hegghammer 2006). 
Often these website contributions ‘keep ideological pace with
breaking events’ (Ulph 2004). In this sphere, al-Qa’ida fi Jazirat al-
‘Arabiyya (al-Qaeda forces in the Arabian peninsula)iv has been
particularly active, from establishing online magazines dealing in
doctrinal or military instructions such as Sawt al-Jihad (Voice of
40
Magnus Ranstorp

Jihad), Muaskar al-Battar (the Al-Battar Military Camp, the name
of the Prophet Muhammad’s sword) and al-Neda who carry
directives and interpretations by al-Qaeda-affiliated Centre for
Islamic Studies and Research.
A large portion of Sawt al-Jihad is dedicated to doctrinal issues
and the religious justifications for waging offensive jihad and the
numerous supporting fatwas supporting violence itself. There are
also many first-hand jihadi battlefield accounts alongside portraits
and wills of dead martyrs as well as interviews with fighters living
on the run in the underground. They also demonstrate the zeal and
heroism of young fighters. Many of those working ‘in the service’
of al-Qaeda utilized ‘authorized’ web sites in Arabic (rather than
English sites that were primarily of propaganda value) to
communicate internally and between operational and sympathetic
members. A case in point is the establishment of the Yemeni wing
of al-Qaeda website: ‘You ask and the jihadi base in Yemen
answers’, established to counter rumours about arrests of members
and to address broader queries of the jihadists (‘Al-Qa’ida Yemeni
Branch’ 2003). An important Saudi-maintained website in this
respect was one devoted to publishing a book on how to assist the
mujahedin who are hunted down by the security organs in Saudi
Arabia, Morocco and Afghanistan. Published by At-Tiby‰n
Publications and entitled ‘39 ways for serving jihad and the
mujahedin’, the book calls for adopting various means of
publicising the ‘mujahedin news’ through Internet chatrooms and
fora as well as printing and photocopying the news from websites
for broader distribution, including relatives and friends; in
mosques and public places and even through text-messaging (‘Pro-
Qa’ida Website’ 2003). Many of these websites are no longer just
in Arabic, but in other languages also in order to reach a new
generation of sympathizers and recruits living in the West.   
Closely associated to Sawt al-Jihad, a new publication surfaced
in August 2004 dedicated solely to the female jihadists, al-Khansa,
named after a famous woman poet who eulogized martyrs in the
early days of Islam. Published by the Women’s Media Bureau in the
Arabian Peninsula, Al-Khansa focused on practical ways in which
women married to radical Islamists could provide support,
especially when they faced pressure from the authorities, and how
they should raise their children to become martyrs. Similarly
Muaskar al-Battar offered the provision of a practical jihad culture
to a new generation of youths through paramilitary guidance from
the comfort of their homes. As stated in the first issue of Muaskar
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
41

al-Battar: ‘Oh Mujahid (holy warrior) brother, in order to join the
great training camps you don’t have to travel to other lands …
Alone, in your home or with a group of your brothers, you too can
begin to execute the training program.’
Another important website was al-Qaida’s official site Al-Neda
maintained by the late Sheikh Yusuf Bin-Salih al-Ayiri, included on
Saudi Arabia’s list of 19 persons wanted in connection with the
Riyadh terrorist attacks on 12 May and who was killed in a clash
on 31 May 2003. Sheikh al-Ayiri remains one of the most
influential ideologues on the subject of the Salafist jihadi trends
(especially in connection with Saudi Arabia and Iraq) and wrote
around 40 books all published on the Internet (Paz 2005a). In the
‘Under the shadows of spears’ series written by Sulayman Abu-
Ghayth, this web-site carried the news releases of Osama Bin-
Laden for a couple of months. Al-Ayiri communicated regularly
with Bin-Laden in Afghanistan using a laptop and was the main
coordinator between members in Pakistan, Iran and the Arabian
Peninsula (‘Fundamentalists: Al-Ayiri’ 2003). In Al-Ayiri’s
possession when he died were four identity cards, a fake driving
licence, a Magellan GPS system, a mobile phone with multiple SIM
cards and a large amount of money (‘Fundamentalists: Al-Ayiri’
2003). The capture of this website forced al-Qaeda-affiliated
members to establish alternative ones, registering these online by e-
mail and using fake credit cards for the server fees. 
This specific capture of Al-Neda provided the crucial lesson for
these jihadis that fixed Internet sites were exceptionally vulnerable
as instead they turned more nomadic to ‘rapidly proliferating
jihadist bulletin boards and Internet sites that offered free upload
services where files could be stored’ (Coll and Glasser 2005). This
nomadic virtual sanctuary points towards a dynamic and
multilayered infrastructure of diverse functions flourishing
globally. Brynjar Lia has categorized these interrelated functions as:
the key nodes or ‘mother sites’; the distributors (who copy and
upload jihadist material on new sites); and the ‘producers’
(reproducing raw material in sleeker form) (Lia 2006b: 17). As
such, these websites constantly move their URLs and change
addresses and even embed themselves within other websites to
avoid detection. A recent example of this hijack was the discovery
of hidden files of Abu Musab al-Suri’s 1,600-word International
Islamic Resistance Call behind a password-protected US-based
crafts website allowing extremists to avoid using ‘traceable data
needed to start a new website’ (Levenson 2006).
42
Magnus Ranstorp

Other websites and discussion fora contain key strategic texts by
Salafist jihadi providing essential leadership and military principles
alongside a longer-term vision. E-books are posted on various fora
as exemplified by a 415-page book written by Bassam Assili and
found on the al-Firdaws (Paradise) forum. This outlined the
essential strategic cornerstones for success and leadership in the
paramilitary arena and even stressed the necessity of having a sea
presence.5
Among the most influential strategic texts distributed over the
Internet is the 113-page e-book titled Idarat al-Tawahhush
(Managing Savagery), written by Abu Bakr Naji who is an
influential contributor to Sawt al-Jihad. Published by the al-Qaeda-
affiliated Center for Islamic Studies and Research, the ten-chapter-
long Managing Savagery – The Most Crucial Period to Be Faced by
the Nation maps out a series of progressive stages towards
empowerment and identifies suitable targets against which to direct
violent attacks in order to create disorder, beginning with key
targeted regimes and eventually spreading worldwide. The name
itself refers to the period of ‘savage chaos’ that appears following
the collapse of a superpower or an enemy regional state. Abu Bakr
Naji argues that the initial focus should be on a key group of
targeted states: Saudi Arabia, Northwest Africa, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Jordan and Yemen, before applying the plan worldwide. 
This ‘path towards empowerment’ revolves around three
distinct phases. First, the ‘Disruption and Exhaustion’ phase is
principally geared towards the dual goal of exhausting the enemy
worldwide while attracting supporters and converts. It is argued
that this phase is achieved by creating maximum security disarray
worldwide by disparate and uncoordinated attacks by jihadist
groups. These types of attacks will also attract the jihadi youth to
join the ranks. Second, ‘The Management of Barbarism’ phase
refers to the control and management of the anarchy ensuing after
the first phase. This phase is built around the mechanics of re-
Islamization and in providing governance in all spheres of public
life (security, social welfare, legal system based on Sharia,
education, intelligence, foreign relations, and so on) in an overall
effort to establish an Islamict state. Lastly, Abu Bakr Naji presents
the third phase, ‘Empowerment’, which focuses on extending
‘Management’ by continued disruption and exhaustion attacks
against the West and Israel worldwide, forming logistical lines
between liberated territories under ‘Management’. Furthermore he
favours targeting tourist and oil facilities, focusing on the
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
43

tremendous value and effect of economic targeting. This last phase
does, however, require a well-developed and sophisticated media
and propaganda strategy for its success, specifically geared towards
attracting military officers to join the jihadi ranks.
The abrupt disappearance of Muaskar al-Battar after 22 issues
in November 2004 and of Sawt al-Jihad after 29 issues in April
2005 can probably be attributed to an accelerated Saudi security
success on the ground within the Kingdom. It is also largely due to
the fact that the Iraqi conflict has become the principal ideological
vortex of Salafist jihadi currents and spawns a number of
important web-based publications which are used to legitimate the
intensity and direction of the insurgency tactics. A major new
jihadi magazine and successor to Sawt al-Jihad is Dhurwat al-
Sanam (the highest or most virtuous belief/insight), providing
critical ideological and doctrinal guidance motivating violence,
especially focusing on the Iraqi theatre (Worth 2005). 
Not all focus is on Iraq, as a new successor publication appeared
in May 2006 dealing with the Arabian Peninsula. Ansar al-
Mujahideen fi Bilad al-Haramain (the Supporters of Mujahideen in
the Land of the Two Holy Places) provides standard doctrinaire
ideological and political content. The authors provide counter-
surveillance security advice using the Internet and recognize that it
offers invaluable avenues when pressured. As stated in the first
published issue: ‘the governments have coiled around the field of
Dawa and Jihad and have narrowed the trenches that can be used.
But God has opened a new, great, and hugely valuable door, and
that is the Internet’ (TRC TWW Report 2006: 5).
This plethora of Salafist jihadi publications was complemented
by the As-Sahab Foundation for Islamic Media Publication, a
clandestine in-house media/video production company affiliated to
al-Qaeda and based somewhere in Afghanistan/Pakistan, that
periodically released communiqués and threats by Bin-Laden and
Zawahiri and choreographed testimonies of the 19 hijackers in the
9/11 attacks as well as a range of statements by jihadis on the run
or ‘martyred heroes’. These videos appeared in hard-copy form
distributed to al-Jazeera or on the As-Sahab website. Perhaps
among the most surprising appearances was the As-Sahab video
release of the ringleader behind the 7/7 London bombings,
Muhammad Siddique Khan, especially as the investigation pointed
to the cell’s autonomy from external direction. 
44
Magnus Ranstorp

Another recent media development is the advent of Internet
streaming video news programmes, most notably Sawt al-Khilafah
(Voice of the Caliphate), which provides a 15-minute news
roundup covering various conflict zones with Mujahideen
successes. This new web-cast method allows the extremists to
bypass mainstream media outlets to shape more effectively their
anti-Western and anti-Zionist ideological messages. It also allows
them to act directly as a counterweight to Western propaganda
efforts (Musharbash 2005b). In its inaugural broadcast Sawt al-
Khilafah even veiled itself as a charity organization, urging
supporters to boycott support for the victims of Hurricane Katrina
and instead ‘pay more attention to the victims of famine in the
Muslim parts of Niger’ (Musharbash 2005b).
The literal explosion in the growing number of web-based
messages, articles and videotaped lectures is dramatically
expanding the scope of internal and external audiences and
affecting violent radicalization locally, instantaneously linking the
global with the local. While much new material is appearing daily
in an uncontrollable fashion, a variety of Internet discussion fora,
message boards and websites are busy circulating old materials
from recent years to instil a culture of Salafist-jihad martyrdom to
a new generation of potential activists. Along several battlefronts,
this exclusionary ideological force has skilfully established ‘new
“command headquarters” on the Internet to spread fear among its
adversaries and boost its men’s morale’ (Trabelsi 2005).
Radicalization and recruitment
The proliferation of extremist literature and doctrines in a new
digital frontier has reshaped the social spaces and boundaries for
interaction linking simultaneously terrorist strategists and
recruiters with their sympathizers and potential recruits as well as
the enemy audience. As Brynjar Lia perceptively argues, ‘online
jihadism brings geographically scattered and isolated militants
together in virtual transnational extremist communities that bind
the global jihadist movements together’ (Lia 2006b: 17). The
Dutch security and intelligence service, AIVD, identified early the
growing trend of so-called ‘self-radicalization’ or ‘autonomous
radicalization’ among Muslim youths occurring increasingly
through the virtual world which increases the ‘risk of ideological
ghettoization’ (Violent Jihad in the Netherlands 2006). These
autonomous 
radicalization 
processes, 
combined 
with
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
45

deculturalization (alienation of individuals trapped between two
cultures), provide for the susceptibility to more radical, dialectic
and emotionally appealing ideological force projected by a cadre of
Salafist jihadi scholars (Violent Jihad in the Netherlands 2006).
Through web-based interaction, radical youths can identify with,
connect to and emotionally share the intensity of suffering of
fellow Muslim victims and the cause of the Mujahideen around the
globe. The importance of these virtual platforms has not been lost
on al-Qaeda-affiliated strategists: 
We should direct some of these efforts to other targets that
could serve another goal, namely to promote the glory of the
Muslims, especially the youth, who are swimming in the
oceans of pleasures and lust. Those youth are in fact unused
petrol, while many efforts are dedicated to confront those
clerics who are selling their minds to the dictatorships, and
who are useless too. These moral attacks would leave in the
souls of the defeated youth a tremendous impact. Many idle
youngsters were motivated to join the Jihad by a photo or a
video such as of the USS Cole, or Badr al-Riyadh, or by
watching the crash of the planes into the high buildings. Those
youngsters, even though they were not fully aware of the
impact of the attacks upon them, turned their minds and
bodies towards the Jihad. Here comes the role of
indoctrination and developing the thinking of these people. It
is a mistake to leave these youngsters with their superficial
understanding of the nature of the war. Whoever listens to the
calls of Osama bin Laden senses in his words his care for the
indoctrination of the supporters of the Jihadi current, like for
example in the Gulf States, in order to target the oil fields. The
Sheikh, I think, could direct the Mujahidin by personal
messages. Yet, he wanted to do it in public, in order that the
crowds of people, who wait for the speeches of the Sheikh
through the TV channels or the Internet, would internalize his
targets and follow them.6
Professionally choreographed video productions create a
blurring effect between the real and virtual worlds, producing an
artificial high degree of intimacy with the battlefield. The process
can also contribute towards moral disengagement, gradually
breaking down any inhibitions of newly recruited members to use
violence. As underscored by Scott Atran, ‘the semi-anonymity of
46
Magnus Ranstorp

Internet communication, which lessens the compulsion to hedge
and defend oneself, promotes self-disclosure and facilitates
disregard of contextual differences that might otherwise distract
from or hinder communication’ (Atran 2006: 293). It evens allows
for anonymous women to participate in an otherwise exclusively
male-oriented activity. Direct female activism via the Internet
surfaced in connection to the Dutch Hofstad-network, where
women participated in radicalization and recruitment efforts.
David Cook has argued that there are visible signs that some
Salafist jihadi authorities are trying to legitimize active
participation by women in the actual fighting (Cook 2005a). 
The virtual world of Salafist jihadi extremism provides a perfect
medium for some alienated Muslim youths to understand the
world around them. As Peter Mandaville has observed: ‘more than
anything else the Internet and other forms of information
technologies provide spaces where Muslims, who often find
themselves to be a marginalized or extreme minority group in
many western communities, can go in order to find others “like
them” ’ (Mandaville 2001: 183). This virtual world is also perfectly
suitable for the self-anointed Salafist jihadi religious authorities
that bridge time and space; that combine religious dogma with
contemporary political realities to appeal to their audiences and to
compensate for a lack of traditional or prestige filled clerical
education. In the words of Oliver Roy, these are ‘Islamist new
intellectuals’, and each is ‘a tinkerer; he creates a montage, as his
personal itinerary guides him, of segments of knowledge, using
methods that come from a different conceptual universe than the
segments he recombines, creating a totality that is more imaginary
than theoretical’ (Roy 1994: 96–7). 
The mechanisms or processes of violent radicalization in the
virtual sphere do not substantively differ from those occurring in
the radical mosque, garage mosque (informal study-groups) or
prison environments. The Internet has revolutionized the collective
actors’ ability to create as well as frame new opportunities for
mobilization of contentious politics ‘as it offers a diverse menu of
options to those seeking new channels of protest’ (Ayres 1999:
137). Here social movement theory (SMT) is particularly useful to
explain the processes and framing strategies underpinning the role
of charismatic leadership and authority struggles within Salafist
jihadi circles. As Wiktorowicz reminds us, ‘a movement group – a
faction, clique, submovement, network cluster, organization, etc. –
asserts its authority to speak on behalf of an issue or constituency
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
47

by emphasizing the perceived knowledge, character, and logic of its
popular intellectuals while attacking those of rivals’ (Wiktorowicz
2004b).
Moreover, Wiktorowicz provides a convincing theoretical
pathway as to the processes that explain the attraction of the
ideology and specific factors enabling engagement: through
cognitive openings, religious seeking and constructing sacred
authority (Wiktorowicz 2004a). Within the context of creating
cognitive openings, he emphasizes the importance of catalysts
inducing a sense of moral shock or crisis to create receptivity for
influence and for frame manipulation. 
Cyberspace is an ideal vehicle for creating a wide range of
intensely emotional and powerful visual messages to prospective
recruits and current fighters. The real world influence of
clandestine face-to-face contact in a back room of a mosque with
emotionally stirring stories and videos from the battlefield has been
replaced with professionally edited CD-roms, websites and
discussion boards filled with thousands of clips of Muslim
massacres and suffering in Bosnia, Chechnya, Iraq and elsewhere
which are stark and overpowering in content and form, leaving no
one exposed unaffected. As recognized by Cetina, ‘the information
transmitted between Al Qaeda participants is not only cognitive or
symbolic in nature, but has strong sensory and motivating
components’ (Knorr Cetina 2005: 223–4). 
Essentially the virtual-based Salafist jihadi ideological currents
demonstrate a built-in capacity to achieve ‘frame resonance’, where
ideology is ‘always balanced by factors such as the political and
cultural environment and resource mobilization and leadership’
(Meijer 2005b: 282). Additionally, this ‘frame resonance’ is
facilitated by the doctrine known as al-wala’ wa-l-bara’ (loyalty or
fealty and disloyalty or disassociation) whose polarity enables the
extremists to maintain control over the definition of being
authentic or true Muslim (Cook 2005b: 141). 
The Internet has also empowered the activist in terms of
reaching new audiences worldwide in an instant and in anonymous
mode. It has also generated new spatial forms of interaction
between the recruiters and the targets as well as potential
sympathizers. It has allowed for asynchronous communication
between the centre and periphery, between activists and
sympathizers. In other fora it has promoted immediate
synchronicity and efficiency in securely communicating through
encryption or password protected channels. In essence it has
48
Magnus Ranstorp

provided infinite recruitment possibilities and configurations as
well as interactive channels to distribute their ideas and calls for
action. Heroism, martyrdom and the historic mission and
vanguard role of the Mujahideen are skilfully choreographed for
maximum effect and cascade across the web.   
Chat fora and weblogs (Muntadayat) have exponentially
revolutionized the scope of actual and potential audiences and
forms of interaction. For example, one of the most popular jihadist
fora, al-Hesbah (www.alhesbah.org), had almost 60,000 postings
under the sub-forum for communiqués (archives for different
communiqués) with a couple of million visitors according to the
webpage count (Rogan 2006). This forum facilitates fluidity in
communication, provides a panoply of multi-layered screening
processes against infiltration, and reduces vulnerability against the
potential shutdown of official, static websites. These blogs have
also resulted in a highly specialized fusion of Arabic and extremist
phraseology with computer lingo, greatly complicating intelligence
efforts to effectively penetrate and participate in these jihadist fora. 
Enhancing command, control and communication 
Al-Qaeda and other Salafist jihadi-affiliates have shown a
remarkable degree of ingenuity in recognizing the operational
advantages of interfacing with new information technologies. They
have shown quick adaptability in absorbing cutting-edge solutions
and the latest gadgets while integrating them into their command,
control and communication repertoires, expanding their own
operational security requirements while minimizing the
possibilities of detection. A uniform trademark is their relatively
advanced awareness of Western counter-surveillance techniques
and technologies as they continue to reduce and limit any
electronic footprints whether in cyberspace or over the phone. To
avoid being pinpointed, each of these networks used to ‘vary its
methods and never use one system too long’ (Evans 2004). Varying
operational security increased after Bin-Laden stopped using his
Compact-M satellite phone in October 1998 with a majority of
calls (260 out of 700) being made to 27 numbers in the United
Kingdom (Fielding and Gadhery 2002). 
Al-Qaeda itself demonstrated an early awareness of cyberspace
and the Internet as a convenient form of communication. While
Ramzi Yousef, the convicted mastermind of the 1993 World Trade
Center bombing, used sophisticated encrypted files to conceal a
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
49

plan to destroy 11 aircraft flying over the Pacific (Operation
Boijinka), Wadih El Hage, one of the suspects in the 1998 bombing
of two US embassies in East Africa, sent encrypted e-mails to other
al-Qaeda associates (Kelley 2001). Similarly, Khalil Deek, involved
in the so-called 1999 ‘millenium plot’ in Jordan, used encrypted
CD-roms to conceal an electronic version of the 11-volume, 7,000-
page Encyclopedia of Jihad and his plans for multiple bomb attacks
in Amman (Fielding 2001). Evidence even exists that Ayman al-
Zawahiri, Bin-Laden’s deputy, used a stationary computer since
1997 with over 1,700 password-protected or encrypted documents
(written in Arabic, French, Farsi or Malay) containing a treasure
trove of communications, training manuals and targeting
information for future operations.
In order to ensure the secrecy of communication, al-Qaeda
discouraged the use of e-mail or phones and favoured faxes and
personal couriers (Cullison 2004). Sensitive messages were encoded
using ‘one-time pad’ systems that paired individual letters with
randomly assigned numbers and letters and produced messages
readable only by those who knew the pairings (Cullison 2004).
These so-called ‘laundry lists’ were found in many training camps
in Afghanistan. No uniform standard codes exist but instead they
were naturally individualized and frequently changed to suit the
operational as well as security circumstances. Often the actual
coding assumed simple forms linked with word association, using
so-called ‘idiot-codes’ in intelligence terminology (Koprowski
2003) or pre-determined ‘code’ words, like ‘apples’ (grenades),
‘seven Seas’ (EU entry visa) and ‘red training shoes for runs’ (EU
red passports) (Butler and Van Atta 2003). At other times they used
number systems as in the case of Andrew Rove, who spoke only
about mobile phone models. ‘Money was “Nokia 3310”; trouble-
police was “3410”, weapon was “3610”; airport “3310” and
army base was “3331” ’ (McGinty 2005). 
Another case is Pakistani militant Mohammed Naeem Noor
Khan who ‘protected cellphone numbers by copying them down in
a code that did not use the digits zero, two or three’ (Fielding
2004). The beauty of this system was its simplicity and the infinite
range of combinations available to the operatives. This extended to
Al-Qaeda’s use and distribution of so-called ‘laundry-lists’ of
chemicals available on the open market, which it used in
combination with ‘how-to’ videos in the construction of
improvised explosive devices.
50
Magnus Ranstorp

Advanced knowledge of counter-surveillance techniques became
manifest, ranging from the encryption of computer files and CD-
roms to using untraceable SIM or pay-as-you-go telephone cards
(‘Swiss SIM Cards Slammed’ 2003), single use of Thurayya satellite
phones (as reported in Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, 20 November 2003)
and mobile phones before they were discarded, to the employment
of coded ‘flagged’ spam e-mails, common chat rooms and simple
electronic dead drops to communicate between cell members and
between the operational centre and the periphery. The genius of al-
Qaeda could be seen in the creative shell game techniques used, as
exemplified by the establishment of yahoo or hotmail accounts
with prearranged shared usernames and passwords. The
operational cells would communicate by lodging a draft message –
a dead drop – on the server without ever having to send or receive
electronic mail. Just like the one-time use of mobile phones,
anonymous e-mail accounts were established for one-time
purposes.
This familiarity with electronic intelligence measures was
evident in the field survival kit distributed during the American
military campaign in Afghanistan, where it urged fleeing members:
If you use a cell phone, use one obtained under fake name and
address. Never use a phone provided by your ‘nazm’ for calling
a friend or relative. If you ask your friends to call you, give
them a specific time and keep your phone open only when you
are expecting a call. For using the Internet, you must go to an
internet café. Never visit a site that can reveal your identity  …
when opening an e-mail account, go to an Internet café, never
do it at home. Never use the same Internet café again and
again. (‘An Al Qaida Blueprint for Terror’ 2004)
In order to ensure continued and easy and anonymous means of
communication, al-Qaeda and its affiliates employ the spectrum of
wireless networks, private mobile phones, instant messaging and
remote access email accounts to enhance digital coordination and
to circumvent security procedures and detection. The arrest of
Khalid Sheikh Muhammed in Rawalpindi in 2003 revealed a trove
of material identifying the Internet cafés in Quetta used by his
couriers to send coded messages to sleeper terror cells in Europe,
America and Asia (Sunday Telegraph, 9 March 2003). 
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
51

Pornographic images were used to hide coded messages or
explosives recipes. In November 2001 police conducted a raid on
the Via Quaranta mosque in Milan, seizing 11 computers with
pictures of the Twin Towers (created on 4 November 2001) and
hundreds of pornographic images, some with hidden messages
using stenography (Corriere della Sera, 5 May 2003). Equally, al-
Qaeda developed and improved on basic cryptography methods as
illustrated by the various spin-off versions from Mawsu’at al-jihad
(the Encyclopaedia of Jihad) and other so-called ‘military manuals’
found around the world. Al-Qaeda has even established the so-
called ‘Al-Qaidah University for jihad sciences’ imparting advice
through speciality subjects such as ‘electronic’ and ‘media’ jihad
alongside the technology of explosive devices and the operational
art of terrorism in all its facets (Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, 20 November
2003). For example, Al-Firdaws website contained 80 pages of
detailed instructions on how to make a nuclear or ‘dirty’ bomb and
biological weapons (Mahnaimi and Walker 2005). This training
material is not just consigned to being downloaded from the web,
through services like YOUSSENTIIT.COM, but also on to mobile
phones and other mobile devices (Brachman 2006: 153). 
Even Department of Homeland Security briefings can provide a
treasure trove on new means of clandestine communication or FBI
suspect lists with known addresses within the US and their e-mail
addresses. For example, one of the Saudi nationals on this FBI
suspect list had the ominous e-mail address <LAST_DAY_11@
hotmail.com>.
It is also clear that the digital sphere is providing new ways for
terrorists to raise and transfer funds in technologically creative and
clever ways. New digital online banks provide useful anonymity
and it is feared that Internet-based alternative value transfer
processes such as Paypal, E-Gold and other similar services are
providing auxiliary avenues for concealed and highly mobile
financial transactions. In some investigations of Salafist-jihadi cells
there is even evidence that terrorists are using small credit card
transactions to purchase goods which in turn are resold on E-Bay
and other similar commercial sites.    
There is growing concern that Salafist jihadi cells are familiar
with virtually untraceable real-time communication methods such
as IP telephony and Skype, PalTalk, alongside social networking
services such as Orkut (Hunt 2006), and other new collaborative
social software tools such as KaZaA’s P2P networking or
Morpheus. Additionally Salafist jihadi circles are beginning to
52
Magnus Ranstorp

circulate interactive videogames to extol the heroism, martyrdom
and virtues of the Mujahideen in Iraq.
A recent emerging trend is the creation of ‘virtual cells’, where
like-minded extremists meet online anonymously until bonds of
trust are sufficiently established, at which point the group meets in
person to conduct an operation.
Additionally there are some signs that the Internet has been used
to plan operations remotely. Bruce Hoffman astutely underscores
that: ‘The 9/11 Commission Report cites four specific instances in
which KSM and the 19 hijackers accessed information from the
Internet to plan and facilitate the 9/11 attacks’ (Hoffman 2006:
11–12). Investigators found also nearly 2,300 encrypted messages
and data files on the computer of Abu Zubayda (Bin-Laden’s
operational chief) in a password-protected section of an Islamic
website. Sent primarily from Internet cafés in Pakistan and public
libraries around the world, ‘the messages began in May 2000,
peaked in August 2001 and stopped Sept. 9, two days before the
attacks, (and) al-Qaeda operatives have been sending hundreds of
encrypted messages that have been hidden in files on digital
photographs on the auction site eBay.com’ (Kelley 2002). As
revealed in a recovered al-Qaeda manual in Afghanistan in January
2003, ‘using public sources openly and without resorting to illegal
means, it is possible to gather at least 80 percent of all information
required about the enemy’ (Carment 2006). 
Al-Qaeda has also demonstrated an ‘offensive’ capability in
terms of surveillance and reconnaissance of targets. For example,
in the conduct of surveillance of a US diplomat in Saudi Arabia, al-
Qaeda managed to break into the targeted diplomat’s e-mail
account and retrieve his bank statements and from this deduce his
general and specific pattern of location and movement.7 Towards
these ends, al-Qaeda employed simple hacking tools such 
as LophtCrack and other available hacking tools to penetrate
simple eight-digit passwords (‘What Are Al Qaeda’s Capabilities?’
24 April 2003). This incident demonstrated the sophisticated
ability of the network to locate the e-mail addresses of highly
protected targets as well as to use semi-advanced hacking tools
freely available on the Internet.
Al-Qaeda went beyond using publicly available hacking tools.
An al-Qaeda safe house in Pakistan was reportedly devoted solely
to training operational members for computer hacking and
cyberwarfare. This ‘cybertraining’ facility was devoted to ‘basic
training’ as well as more advanced cyberreconnaissance of both
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
53

infrastructure and SCADA systems, probing the control
mechanisms of numerous electricity grids and dam structures
within the United States. 
In the aftermath of 9/11, the FBI identified multiple casings of
sites nationwide by ‘anonymous’ suspected al-Qaeda sources
routing themselves through Saudi Arabia, Indonesia and Pakistan,
studying emergency telephone systems, water storage sites and
distribution (including pipelines and dams), electricity grids,
nuclear power plants and gas facilities. A worrying sign of this was
the discovery in one of al-Qaeda’s computers in Kabul of an
engineering program simulating the sequences of a catastrophic
breach of a dam and advanced computer programs simulating the
direction of flow of bursting dam water (NIPC 2002b). In addition,
there seem to be worrying signs that al-Qaeda was interested in
targeting specific fibre-cables underpinning large sections of the
entire Internet system.
Fitting al-Qaeda to international relations theory?
In July 2005, Ayman al-Zawahiri announced that ‘we are in a
battle, and more than half of this battle is taking place in the
battlefield of the media […] we are in a media battle for the hearts
and minds of our umma’ (Lynch 2006). Understanding how al-
Qaeda and its progeny shapes the narrative and worldview and
delivers it innovatively through modern technologies has become a
major strategic challenge for the West. The de-territorialization of
violent Salafist jihadi extremism has been achieved by the
simultaneous fusion of local and global contention. 
In essence, al-Qaeda’s success is derived from its ability to fuse
the war against the ‘near’ and ‘far’ enemy into parallel and
mutually supporting battlefronts through the globalization of the
local jihad. The Pentagon’s 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review
described it as a ‘long war struggle against Islamist terrorism […]
against global terrorist organizations that exploit Islam to achieve
radical political aims’. Hence, constructivism constitutes the core
theoretical lens for effectively waging this battle for ideas against a
religious, transnational movement. International relations theory
has traditionally struggled to fit or include non-state actors as
significant players shaping the international system. The sheer scale
of the 9/11 attacks and al-Qaeda have forced most of us to rethink
our theories. 
54
Magnus Ranstorp

As Robert Keohane has argued, ‘the globalization of informal
violence’ has undermined our assumptions about security threats
and reconceptualizes the notion of geographic space and
sovereignty. ‘Most problematic’, according to Keohane, ‘are the
assumptions in international relations theory about the role played
by states […] as states no longer have a monopoly on the means of
mass destruction’ (Keohane 2002). 
Similarly, Joseph Nye has argued that the recent ‘confluence of
globalization, mass destruction, and extremism amounts to the
“privatization of war” ’ (Fukuyama and Ikenberry 2005). While
many theorists argue that the 9/11 events did not fundamentally
change the international system, some acknowledge that the state-
centric underpinning of international relations theory has difficulty
in accounting for the growing influence of transnational and
networked non-state actors. Deibert and Gross Stein have argued
that not only are actor models misleading in an age of networks
but so too is the traditional concept of power in international
relations theory (Deibert and Gross Stein 2002). This is
particularly the case as ‘al-Qaeda refuses a sharp distinction
between “hard” and “soft” power with the matter in a supporting
role; instead, it sees ideational and material power as intimately
connected and mutually constitutive’ (Lynch 2006). 
As underscored by Fiona B. Adamson, there is a ‘lack of theory
regarding the relationship between individual agents and global
ideological structures – a disconnect between the structural theories
of the international system and the micro-practices of individual
actors engaged in the promotion of normative agendas […] who
are deeply embedded within particular ideological and geopolitical
configurations in world politics’ (Adamson 2005: 547–8).
Constructivism seems to offer a valuable pathway out of this
conundrum. As persuasively advanced by Lynch, ‘al-Qaeda’s
actions, both terrorism and rhetoric, can be conceptualized as a
series of “arguments” directed primarily toward the Islamic world
about the interests inherent to a Muslim identity’ (Lynch 2006). As
such, a focus on interpreting al-Qaeda’s frames and their resonance
offer another lens into their ‘life-world’ and a deeper
understanding of its durability and longevity both as a network
and as a movement. In our understanding of these ideational
packages, frames and repertoires as well as processes of violent
radicalization, it is useful to turn towards social movement theory.
This theory focuses on how these social movements ‘frame’ their
arguments effectively to persuade audiences and guarantee support
The virtual sanctuary of al-Qaeda
55

and participation. As argued by David Leheney, ‘the sheer variety
of studies of social movement theory provides a rich portfolio from
which to analyze terrorist organizations like Al Qaeda’ (Leheney
2005: 88). 
The relationship between symbolism and strategy, meaning and
action in contentious politics, requires a more sophisticated
theoretical approach achieving ‘a synthesis of rationalist and
culturalist approaches in international security’ (Leheney 2002). In
this new global ‘neomedieval’ order, Philip G. Cerny argues that
terrorist groups today can easily ‘extraterritorialize their very
identities’ and in essence constitute a global tribe that advocates
violence as an individual obligation in communicating ‘orders of
battle’ (Cerny 2005). Hence, it is critical, as argued by Quintan
Wiktorowitcz, to emphasize a wider theoretical ‘role for ideas’ in
the task of examining transnational Islamic activism and
extremism (Wiktorowitcz 2005). 
Notes
1
From Tina Brown’s article ‘Death by Error’, Washington Post, 19
May 2005, quoted by Hoffman in a testimony to the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Hoffman 2006).
2
For an excellent overview, see <www.ctc.usma.edu/imagery.asp>.
3
For an excellent biographical sketch of Maqdisi and his influence and
disagreement with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, see Brooks (2005). 
4
For further information about the Saudi dimension, see Meijer
(2005a).
5
This book contained the e-mail address <ZUBEIDDAH1417@
hotmail.com> on the front cover. 
6
Al-Faruq website quoted in Paz (2005b: 4).
7
Al-Qaeda operational blueprint entitled ‘Relief Operation’ in author’s
possession.
56
Magnus Ranstorp

3 
From ‘cyberterrorism’ to 
‘cyberwar’, back and forth 
How the United States securitized 
cyberspace
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and 
Giampiero Giacomello 
Introduction1
Threats and risks from cyberspace have become a popular theme
in the mass media, the security policy community, and the risk
consultant and IT industry. Probably everybody with some interest
in computers and politics has already heard of the hackers,
cyberterrorists or foreign intelligence agencies electronically
breaking into computers that control dams or air traffic control
systems, wreaking havoc and endangering not only thousands of
lives, but national security itself.
A good indicator of the popularity of these scenarios is the fact
that the entertainment sector has already capitalized on this,
producing movies like the 1995 James Bond Goldeneye2 or novels
like Tom Clancy and Steve R. Pieczenik’s Netforce (Clancy and
Pieczenik, 1999). Sometimes it is hard to tell what is science and
what is fiction. Winn Schwartau, for example, the rock manager-
turned-preacher of ‘information warfare’, runs the famous website
infowar.com, has testified several times as an IT security expert
before Congress, and has written two fiction books on cyberterror
(Schwartau 1991, 2002). Even renowned cyberwar theoreticians
like John Arquilla have not hesitated to publish thrilling
cyberterror scenarios for the general audience (Arquilla 1998). But
these works are not only made for entertainment. They produce
certain visions of the future and of the threats and risks looming
there. In doing so, they can be aligned with the works of serious
scientific groups or professional intelligence agencies that produce
threat warnings and trend estimates, like the National Academy of
Sciences or the National Intelligence Council.

The whole debate started around 1990, when the Soviet Union
had collapsed and the threat estimation professionals in the
security community were looking for new ideas. The rise of
widespread Internet use and the debate on the emerging
‘information society’ sparked several studies on the risks of the
highly networked, high-tech-dependent United States. The
National Academy of Sciences as early as 1990 began a report on
computer security with the words: ‘We are at risk. Increasingly,
America depends on computers. [...] Tomorrow’s terrorist may be
able to do more damage with a keyboard than with a bomb’
(National Academy of Sciences 1991: 7). At the same time, the
prototypical term ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ was coined,3 which
linked the whole debate to a historical trauma of US warfare. It did
not take very long until the highly technical problems of IT security
– encryption, password protection or intrusion detection systems,
to name but a few – were framed in terms before known only in
military policy statements. ‘Password security’ became ‘computer
security’, then ‘information systems security’, ‘information
protection’, and then ‘information warfare’ (Dornheim 1998: 60). 
Some people have likened cyberthreats to weapons of mass
destruction. When asked by the US Senate in 1996 to compare the
magnitude of the cyberthreat with nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons, then CIA director John Deutch answered, ‘It is very, very
close to the top’ (‘Cyberspace attacks…’ 1996). Others, like
Deutch’s successor George Tenet, used the term ‘weapons of mass
disruption’ (Tenet 1997), suggesting that in the information age an
electronic attack might be as dangerous to the fabric of society as
an attack with intercontinental missiles would have been in the
nuclear age.
Others doubted this perception. George Smith, the editor of the
Crypt Newsletter for example, published a widely read article in
Issues in Science and Technology under the headline ‘An Electronic
Pearl Harbor? Not likely’ (Smith 1998). Many of the more
technically educated political advisors and journalists wrote about
the practical difficulties of a serious cyberattack or the inability of
bureaucracies like militaries or intelligence agencies to really
acquire the skills needed to become successful hackers. Others saw
a hidden agenda behind all the fuss they preferred to call ‘fear
mongering’.4 They suspected it to be a pretext for the security
agencies to obtain greater powers for surveillance, oppression or
censorship in cyberspace, which in the early 1990s was seen – and
praised – by many as the land of total freedom, with little or no
58
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

government intervention (Barlow 1996). As we can see, the
cyberthreat assessment is far from being agreed upon by different
experts, government agencies or scholars working in this field. As
David Gompert wrote in the RAND Review: ‘How grave is the
threat from cyberspace? […] is information war being oversold?
We don’t know’ (Gompert 1995).
How was cyberspace made a priority in US security policy? In
answering this question, we will apply a ‘threat politics’ approach
(Eriksson 2001a, 2001b), which is elaborated in the following
section. The ensuing analysis will consider how cyberthreats have
been framed in US security policy, what actors have been pushing
these threat frames onto the security agenda, and what are the
implications of these framing actions. The analysis is focused
particularly on patterns of continuity and change. It does so 
by comparing threat framing during the Clinton years with 
those of the Bush regime prior to, and after, the events of
September 11, 2001.
Threat politics: A framework for analysis
To characterize a cyberincident as ‘cybercrime’ or as an
‘information warfare attack’ are competing ways of framing the
very same incident, but with quite different connotations and
consequences. The cybercrime frame makes the incident a case for
the police, while the warfare frame legitimates a role for the
military. Clearly, the words and symbols we use for characterizing
a problem have tremendous importance for how it is understood,
and what actions are considered necessary or relevant. The concept
of framing thus ‘refers to an interpretive schemata that simplifies
and condenses the world out there by selectively punctuating and
encoding objects, situations, events, experiences, and sequences of
actions within one’s present or past’ (Snow and Benford 1992: 137;
cf. Goffman 1974: 21; Entman 1993). Framing is one of those
heuristics people employ to make sense of the complex world they
live in. In short, a framing perspective implies taking seriously
those things that are always interpreted as something. Moreover,
Schön and Rein (1994: 29) see framing as ‘symbolic contests over
the social meaning of an issue domain, where meaning implies not
only what is at issue, but also what is to be done’ (cf. Fischer and
Forester 1993: 146). 
The concept of framing emphasizes the interpretative and
representative aspects of security. Threats, risks, dangers – or
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
59

whatever those things we fear are called – are social constructions.
Events, conditions, and actors can be framed in different ways, and
different frames may have different effects on policy choices and
outcomes (Tversky and Kahneman 1981; Rochefort and Cobb
1994: 26).This corresponds to how threats are understood in
securitization theory, developed by the ‘Copenhagen school’5 of
security studies: 
In security discourse, an issue is dramatized and presented as
an issue of supreme priority; thus, by labelling it as security, an
agent claims a need for and a right to treat it by extraordinary
means. For the analyst to grasp this act, the task is not to assess
some objective threats that ‘really’ endanger some object to be
defended or secured; rather, it is to understand the processes of
constructing a shared understanding of what is to be
considered and collectively responded to as a threat. […] The
securitization approach serves to underline the responsibility
of talking security, the responsibility of actors as well as
analysts who choose to frame an issue as a security issue. They
cannot hide behind the claim that anything in itself constitutes
a security issue. 
(Buzan et al. 1998: 26, 34; cf. Wæver 1995)
‘Security’ can be framed in other ways than the specific frame
implied by securitization. The Copenhagen school assumes that the
connotations of security are givens (existential threats requiring
emergency measures), and that only the threats and the core values
of security are variables. There are indeed cases in which threat
framing has exactly these consequences, especially when issues are
perceived as threats implying hostility and antagonism.
Theoretically, however, there is reason to expand the conception of
possible connotations beyond the negative and limited ones
associated with securitization. The need for doing so is evidenced
by the political success of alternative concepts like ‘common
security’ and ‘cooperative security’ (Chilton 1996; Stern 1999:
133–4; Wyn Jones 1999: 157–8). Not all threat frames fall into the
life-and-death category of existential threats, and extraordinary
‘hard power’ measures that sidestep democratic procedures are not
always legitimized by a certain threat frame. 
The ‘threat politics’ framework (Eriksson, 2001a, 2001b) we
apply draws on, but also goes beyond the securitization approach.
More specifically, our framework focuses on frame characteristics,
60
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

framing actors, and contextual conditions. For each of these
aspects, we are concerned with patterns of continuity and change.
Frame characteristics concern what is considered a threat, what
is considered to be threatened (core values and referent objects),
and what connotations are implied by both of these aspects. A
threat frame, like any frame, can be restricted as well as elaborated
(Snow and Benford 1992), specific and diffuse, and be about
antagonistic actors, structural problems, or particular events
(Eriksson 2001b). It can be expected that the securitization
hypothesis about legitimating extraordinary measures is more
likely to be valid when an antagonistic threat is identified than
when a threat is characterized as a structural problem. Feelings of
fear are greater when we perceive that someone intentionally wants
to harm us, in comparison with threats associated with structural
conditions or accidents (Dewey 1929; Johnson 1997). This is
probably an important reason why war and terrorism gain such
prominent positions on the policy agenda, although health
problems and traffic accidents kill more people. Yet even fearing
the unknown is about some imagined danger, though in this case it
is the very diffuse or unspecific nature of this that produces the
sense of threat (Dewey 1929; Johnson 1997: 13–15). If we are not
certain about the ways in which a newly discovered pandemic is
transmitted, then panic is not far away.
It does not seem too far-fetched to suggest that images of
cyberthreats may bear a resemblance to those of pandemics, due to
the combination of immediate global reach and their mystifyingly
faceless and complicated nature. Cyberspace is a landscape where
every action is only possible because the technical systems provide
an artificial environment that is built to allow it. The means of an
attack therefore change from system to system, from network to
network. This makes threat estimation and attack recognition a
much more difficult task. Instead of an easy-to-see exploding
bomb, you have to look for the values in the registers of the
computer and interpret their patterns. To detect a virus on your
hard drive, you need a virus scanner as a sensory tool; to find out
if there is a cracker in your network, you need an intrusion
detection system or a good systems administrator with some spare
time. For the average user, an intentional hacker attack is difficult
to distinguish from a technical failure, like a hardware defect, a
software malfunction or a normal system crash. In the case of
denial-of-service it is not obvious at all if the computer that is not
providing its service any more has just crashed, if the cable
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
61

connecting it to the Internet has been physically damaged, or if the
computer is the victim of a targeted flood of packets and requests.
Considering the dynamics of computer development, the whole
threat perception/estimation problem gets even worse when you
have to predict the future development of these threats.
Framing actors are essential for putting issues on the policy
agenda and removing them. Issues do not take on political salience
by themselves. Theoretically, anyone can be a framing actor, but
since policy-making is a matter for societal elites, it is the
politicians, bureaucrats, experts, media, pressure groups, and
academics who tend to be more influential than others. If threat
images are to take on political salience, they have to be articulated
by influential actors. This idea corresponds to the Copenhagen
school’s notion of ‘securitizing actors’ (Buzan et al. 1998: 40–42)
and to the concept of ‘policy entrepreneurs’ in agenda-setting
theory (Kingdon 1995; Birkland 1997). It is commonly argued that
governmental elites maintain a dominant position when it comes to
framing threats and risks of common interest (Hermann 1990:
11–12, 17–18; Kingdon 1995: 68–70, 199–200; Buzan et al.
1998). In particular, the realm of security is often strongly
institutionalized, thus privileging the government and special
security institutions such as the intelligence community and the
military. 
Contextual conditions include both the structure and culture of
policy establishments, and window-opening processes. While
established structures tend to function as gatekeepers and prevent
major institutional change, focusing events (Birkland 1997) and
processes often provide the necessary push for reform. The
literature on bureaucratic politics shows how turf battles and other
instances of interest conflicts influence policy-making, especially by
hampering new ideas (Halperin 1974; Allison and Zelikow 1999).
Path dependence is an important element in institutional inertia.
Hammond clarifies how bureaucratic actors manoeuvre under such
circumstances: ‘Strategic behavior by subordinates – bargaining,
coalition formation, and the dissemination of supposedly secret
information – enables them to circumvent constraints placed on
them by their positions and jurisdictions, thereby making the
structure largely irrelevant’ (Hammond 1986: 416). 
By contrast, dramatic events may, if skilfully seized upon, turn
the tables and open the window for new items on the agenda, and
also for institutional reform (Keeler 1993; Kingdon 1995: 94–100;
Birkland 1997). Harrisburg, Pennsylvania and Chernobyl, Ukraine
62
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

are key examples of focusing events (Birkland 1997) that pushed
the problems of nuclear safety into a top position on national
agendas. But the salience of focusing events is usually only
temporal. Accordingly, the media are often the most significant
framing agents of events (Tuchman 1978; Entman 1993; McQuail
1994: 335). 
It is difficult to challenge institutionalized threat frames, such as
the established connotations of ‘national security’ as having to do
primarily with state sovereignty and foreign military aggression.
The widespread breakthrough for the broadened concept of
security required nothing less than the end of the Cold War – a
major window of opportunity. When framing actors disagree either
on the meaning or the application of a frame, turf battles and
‘forum shopping’ can be expected. 
The Clinton years’ heritage: ‘Cyberterrorism’
The basic question for security policy makers, since the debate over
cyberthreats started, has always been: Are the most dangerous
actors terrorists, enemy states, or just criminals? In other words:
Will we have to deal with ‘cyberterrorism’, ‘cyberwar’, or just
‘cybercrime’? This debate has, naturally, never really been solved.
But the Clinton administration chose to focus on cyberterrorism.
Security analysts perceived terrorists, sometimes connected with
‘rogue states’, as the main danger. Allan B. Carroll from the
National Infrastructure Protection Center, for example, in
December 1999 warned of Osama bin Laden possibly planning a
computerized version of the Oklahoma bombing (Smith 2001).
Others even saw juvenile hackers as a serious threat, too. Jacques
Gansler, then Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and
Technology, for example, in 1998 called teenagers a ‘real threat
environment’ for national security (Madsen 1998).
This view was influenced by the idea that information
technology is the great equalizer. This fed into the general trend in
the security policy community not to talk any more about whole
threats (which would consist of an actor, his intention, and his
capabilities), but to focus just on the technologies needed to start
an attack:
Today, however, malefactors are no longer necessarily nation-
states, and expensive weapons of war are joined by means that
are easier to acquire, harder to detect, and have legitimate
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
63

peacetime applications. The tools designed to access,
manipulate, and manage the information or communications
components that control critical infrastructures can also be
used to do harm. They are inexpensive, readily available, and
easy to use. 
(PCCIP 1997: 14)
Clearly, the US framing of cyberthreats under Clinton was about
antagonistic actors, and not only about some vaguely defined
vulnerability in IT systems. More importantly, the type and range
of antagonistic actors went far beyond the more traditional and
much more limited notion of states as actors. Bringing
transnational non-state agents into view implied that Pandora’s
box of horrors was opened. In James Rosenau’s terminology, these
innumerable individuals and more or less organized groups –
‘sovereignty-free actors’ – are not limited by the territorial or
judicial boundaries of formally sovereign states (Rosenau 1990). 
One main reason for choosing to frame problems as
‘cyberterrorism’ was the experience of the first World Trade Center
attack in 1993 and the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. The
foundations for the National Infrastructure Protection Center
(NIPC), located at the FBI, were in fact laid as a reaction to the
Oklahoma City bombing in April 1995. In terms of agenda-setting
theory, these dramatic incidents were important windows of
opportunity that helped push cyberterrorism into the policy
limelight (cf. Birkland 1997). The inter-agency Critical
Infrastructure Working Group (CIWG), set up by President Clinton
and Attorney General Janet Reno in June 1995, two months after
this event,6
was tasked with studying the infrastructural
vulnerabilities of the United States by terrorist attacks. The CIWG
issued its report in January 1996, and this in turn led to the
establishment of the President’s Commission on Critical
Infrastructure Protection (PCCIP 1997; cf. Tritak 1999). The
PCCIP report of 1997 finally led to Presidential Decision Directive
NSC-63 in May 1998 and its more elaborated version, the
‘National Plan for Information Systems Protection’ in January
2000 (White House 1998; Clinton 2000).
This threat framing also shows how the US defined the referent
object of cybersecurity: infrastructure. Thus, it was not national
identity, national sovereignty, or any other possible target that
came into focus, but the critical infrastructures of IT,
communications, electricity and so forth. On a more general but
64
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

more vaguely defined rhetorical level, however, cyberterrorism was
often considered a threat to ‘national security’. Only on occasion,
however, was this explicitly interpreted as an existential threat, as
for instance when compared to weapons of mass destruction. 
Who, then, helped to put cybersecurity on the national policy
agenda? Who were the framing agents? In the context of the debate
about the new ‘international terrorism’ and the other new fear in
security policy thinking – ‘asymmetric warfare’ – the concept of
‘homeland security’ or ‘homeland defense’ was developed by
American think tanks in the late 1990s. The basic idea was the end
of the American invulnerability based on its special geographical
position. Possible enemies, the security analysts feared, would no
longer try to attack the United States by conventional means and
tactics of warfare, but by terrorist attacks from the inside – or from
borderless cyberspace. Indeed, the idea of homeland security,
including protection against cyberterrorism, was taken up by the
new government under George W. Bush in May 2001 (White
House 2001a).
The media took up these debates in the security community.
CNN for example, in April 1999, brought a headline about
‘guerrilla warfare in cyberspace’ (Christensen 1999). This
cyberterrorism discourse had gained enough momentum in the
Clinton years to even persist for a while after the conservative
government under George W. Bush came into office in January
2001. The newspaper USA Today is probably the best indicator for
the general threat perception in the mass media. In February 2001,
the newspaper published a story about Osama bin Laden’s al-
Qaeda using a special form of encryption called steganography,
where messages are hidden in the least significant bits of electronic
pictures, audio or video files. This case is especially interesting,
because the cyberthreat was not only combined with the terrorist
threat, but as well with pornography, which for many makes it
look even worse.
One day after the discursive connection between bin Laden,
cyberterror and pornography had been published by USA Today
(and immediately quoted in many other newspapers), the
conservative Congressmen Saxton and Chambliss introduced a bill
in the House of Representatives that would make the United States
Congress declare cyberterrorism ‘an emerging threat to the
national security of the United States’ (US Congress, 2001a).
Although more serious research showed that the alleged al-Qaeda
technical skill with steganography was only a rumour (Provos and
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
65

Honeyman 2002), we would soon see more examples of this close
connection between headlines in the mass media and a political
initiative along the same lines.
If terrorists are able to use encryption, they are not far from
planning cyberattacks. This assumption7 was repeated a month
later by the new director of the National Infrastructure Protection
Center, Ronald Dick. Already on his first day in office, he warned
of a possible cyberattack by bin Laden and other terrorists (Spiegel,
2001). In sum, at the end of the Clinton years cyberterrorism was
clearly established as one of the new security policy threats of the
twenty-first century. Clinton himself made this very clear in
December 2000 in his foreign policy farewell lecture at the
University of Nebraska at Kearney. In this speech, he named five
principles for future US foreign policy: strengthen alliances like
NATO; pay attention to Russia and China; confront local conflicts
in other parts of the world; pursue global trade with a ‘human
face’; and finally, face new security challenges like cyberterrorism
and infectious diseases like AIDS (Lacey 2000). He went on to say
that one of the biggest threats to the future would be
cyberterrorism, that is, people ‘fooling’ with computer networks,
trying to shut down phones, erase bank records, mess up airline
schedules, and generally do things to interrupt the fabric of life
(Bowman 2000).
The government response to this threat had been twofold: On
the one hand, the intelligence community together with the law
enforcement agencies tried to build up capacities for
cyberinvestigations, like computer forensics tools or close
surveillance of the hacker community. Then, this debate was used
by the FBI and others to ask for more surveillance powers on the
Internet (see Rotenberg 2003). On the other hand, because of the
amorphous nature of these non-state and unknown enemies, a lot
of effort was put into hardening the critical infrastructures and
making the private companies who run most of them work
together with the government (Bendrath 2001).
In conclusion, did the US framing of cyberthreats during the
Clinton years imply securitization, or did it imply some other kind
of threat framing? It would be wrong to conclude that the whole
debate was characterized by the panic politics, fears of existential
threats, and calls for extraordinary measures implied by
securitization theory. Indeed, there are several instances of ‘speech
acts’ which certainly fall into the securitization category, such as
when cyberthreats were compared to weapons of mass destruction,
66
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

or through the fear-mongering analogy of ‘electronic Pearl
Harbor’. However, there were not many calls for extraordinary
measures. A lot of money and energy was spent on analysis and
rhetoric, and also on technologically minimizing vulnerability of
critical infrastructure against attacks. But there was not much
panic politics that moved beyond democratic procedures, increased
secrecy, or implied the use of violence. The US government did talk
the talk of securitization, but they did not really walk the walk –
not yet.
The Bush regime before 9/11: Sovereign states 
in the limelight
Shortly after George W. Bush came into office in January 2001, the
debate 
about 
the 
cyberthreat 
changed 
quite 
radically.
‘Cyberterrorists’ were still taken into account, but the new
government focused much more strongly on foreign governments
as possible attackers. Not only did this imply a noteworthy change
in the framing of cyberthreats; it also made some framing actors in
the security establishment more influential than before. The turn
towards more traditional state-oriented threat conceptions made
the National Security Council, the Armed Forces, and the
intelligence community more relevant and thus more influential in
the debate. These institutions were still very much living in the
state-centric world of classic security policy. Rather than changing
their analytical frameworks, cyberthreats were interpreted to fit
into their traditional state-centric models for threat assessment.
A linkage between the ‘cyberterrorism’ perception of the Clinton
years and the ‘cyberwar’ fears of the first Bush year was the
concept of ‘rogue states’. This term, which had been abandoned by
Clinton8 but was quickly revived by Bush, implies that some states
will use terrorist means to attack the United States. Surprisingly,
the first ‘rogue state’ to be accused of planning cyberattacks against
the US was not Iraq, Iran, China or North Korea, but Cuba (cf.
McCullagh 2001). During the hearing of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence on ‘The Worldwide Threat in 2001’ in
February 2001, Defense Intelligence Agency director Thomas R.
Wilson identified Fidel Castro’s autocratic regime as a possible
cyberattacker.
ADM. WILSON: Cuba is, Senator, not a strong conventional
military threat. But their ability to ploy asymmetric tactics
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
67

against our military superiority would be significant. They
have strong intelligence apparatus, good security, and the
potential to disrupt our military through asymmetric tactics.
And I think that is the biggest threat that they present to our
military. 
SEN. WYDEN: What would be an example of an asymmetric tactic
that you’re speaking of? 
ADM. WILSON: Using information warfare or computer network
attack, for example, to be able to disrupt our access or flow of
forces to the region. 
SEN. WYDEN: And you would say that there is a real threat that they
might go that route? 
ADM. WILSON: There’s certainly the potential for them to employ
those kind of tactics against our modern and superior military.
(US Senate 2001)
Within a month, though, not only were these traditional
‘enemies’ of the US identified as possible cyberthreats, but as
strategic rivals as well. In March 2001, the Defense Science Board
issued a report on the United States’ vulnerability from
cyberattacks. According to this study, already more than 20 states
were supposed to have information warfare capabilities or to have
started developing them (Tiboni 2001: 1; Office of the
Undersecretary... 2001: ES-2). Especially interesting is the
perception of China. The chairman of the DSB study group
explicitly warned that China made clear its intention to use
Information Operations (warfare) as an asymmetric response in
any conflict with the United States (L. Wright 2001).
Even by the most hawkish politicians, China is not considered a
rogue state, but rather a strategic rival. From this new perception
of the possible cyberenemy as another state it is only a short way
to related strategic thought. Here as well, analogies to the
traditional state-against-state military and security policy thinking
can be found. The above-mentioned March 2001 Defense Science
Board report, for example, called the Pentagon’s ‘Global
Information Grid’ a weapons system, and concluded that the
United States was in an ‘arms race’ over information systems for
warfare (Office of the Undersecretary 2001: ES-2).
This development is not only a clear departure from the
‘cyberterror’ warning of the Clinton administration, but also
showed how the new government moved towards a much more
significant securitization, implying existential threat and
68
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

extraordinary measures. Cyberthreats were now framed in familiar
military and state-centric categories, which put them at the very
top of the national security agenda.
The classical security policy idea of the Cold War – deterrence –
was about to come back, as Bush’s national security advisor,
Condoleezza Rice, noted a few weeks later in her speech at the
second Internet Security Policy Forum (Poulsen 2001a). The
commander of the US Space Command, General Eberhardt, publicly
renewed the warnings of China as a possible cyberattacker at the end
of March 2001. This is even more important because ‘SpaceCom’ is
responsible for the coordination of cybersecurity and computer
network attacks within the whole US military (Gertz 2001).
In April 2001, an American spy plane was forced to land in the
People’s Republic of China. This focusing event implied a
noteworthy policy window (Kingdon 1995; Birkland 1997), which
was capitalized on both by the media and by hacker communities
in both China and the US. A Chinese–US hacker conflict
commenced, and became aggravated by the upcoming first
anniversary of the US bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade.
Though this was not at all comparable to a real war, the media
called it the first US–Chinese ‘cyberwar’ (Delio 2001a, 2001b;
Rötzer 2001). In this case it is especially hard to tell what was
reality and what was media invention. Some insiders even warned
that the media stories about the ‘coming cyberwar’ between the US
and China had started the whole problem, because they gave the
juvenile hackers an excuse for attacking the other side. The
hacker’s documentation group Attrition.org, for example, issued a
press release titled ‘Cyberwar with China: Self-fulfilling prophecy’
(Attrition.org 2001). Even so, the FBI’s National Infrastructure
Protection Center issued a threat warning, and the Pentagon raised
its cyberthreat level from ‘Alpha’ to ‘Bravo’ and prepared for
‘Charlie’, which would have pulled all government and military
computers offline (Delio 2001a, 2001b). 
This escalation clearly implies a securitization move – not only
in rhetoric, but also in practice, i.e., leading to the implementation
of extraordinary measures. Moreover, this episode shows how a
focusing event, though not a cyberincident, may have secondary
effects also on the framing of cyberthreats, given that framing
actors seize the temporary window of opportunity.
By the end of spring 2001, the new threat perception was
established in the media and the security policy community. In
early summer it had its first international political impact.
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
69

Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld in his speech at the NATO
Council in Brussels on 6 June 2001 told the allies that not only the
US was threatened by attacks from cyberspace, but the other
NATO countries and therefore the alliance as a whole. As ‘future
challenges’ for NATO, Rumsfeld named traditional terrorism,
high-tech weapons, and missiles with weapons of mass destruction,
but also ‘cyberattacks’ (Gilmore 2001). Less than half a year after
the new government came into office, the new threat perception
had gained enough ground in Washington to be discussed with the
NATO allies at ministerial level for the first time.
Nevertheless, Defense Secretary Rumsfeld merely laid the
grounds for the president. One day later, on 7 June 2001, George
W. Bush in his Iowa speech talked about the ‘true threats of the
twenty-first century’, among them ‘informational warfare’ (Bush
2001a) – again a clear securitization move. USA Today again is a
good indicator of this change in threat perception. While the paper
published a story about the possible use of computer technology by
Osama bin Laden in February 2001, only four months later it had
a front-page article about the threat from foreign governments in
cyberspace. Citing anonymous ‘military analysts’, USA Today in its
19 June 2001 edition reported that 20 states were preparing for
cyberattacks, among them the usual ‘rogue states’ and China, but
also Russia, France, Great Britain and Israel (Stone 2001: 1;
Greene 2001).
In this case, again, a political event on Capitol Hill was prepared
by this story. This tabloid article influenced the public opinion
before the event – the expert hearing in Congress – had taken place.
Two days later, CIA technology analyst Lawrence K. Gershwin told
Congress that non-state actors were not really dangerous in
cyberspace, but that foreign governments were (Gershwin 2001:
8f; Greene 2001).
After the quality of the threat had been changed in public and
political perception, the next step was to increase its quantity. In a
hearing in the House of Representatives in August 2001, Keith
Rhodes, Chief Technology Officer of the General Accounting
Office, stated that:
Over 100 countries already have or are developing computer
attack capabilities. [...] NSA has determined that potential
adversaries are developing a body of knowledge about US
systems and methods to attack them. 
(Dizikes 2001) 
70
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

Compared with the 20 countries the Defense Science Board had
mentioned in its report just five months earlier, this was an increase
of 400 per cent. So either the criteria for estimating the cyberwar
capabilities of other countries had been changed, or the numbers
were deliberately made this high to make the threat look more
serious. By early September 2001, the new US government had
established a new, state-centric discourse on cyberthreats. These
observations and threat frames were not completely novel
(Minihan 1998). Only under the new administration, however,
would this view gain support in the highest positions in
Washington and in the media.
Terrorism in cyberspace was no longer considered an urgent
threat. It was not really a case of desecuritization, however, since
the former Clinton administration only securitized the issue in
rhetoric, but not in practice. It was, nevertheless, moved further
down on the policy agenda. Leslie G. Wiser, Jr., the NIPC’s
Training, Outreach and Strategy Section chief, in his testimony on
‘CyberSecurity’ before the House of Representatives in late August
2001 (less than two weeks before the September 11 attacks) mainly
mentioned terrorists’ use of IT for communication and
organizational purposes (Wiser 2001). Though he called
cyberterrorism ‘a very real threat’, he cited estimates made earlier
that year by the intelligence community. This shows the importance
of specific texts that could be called ‘canonical’. They become
standards for the threat perception and are repeated again and
again. In late August 2001, states were clearly established as the
main cyberthreat. 
9/11 and the renewed focus on cyberterrorism
The attacks on September 11, 2001 obviously led to a complete
reprioritization of official threat perceptions. This was true for the
general policy debate, as well as the more specific cyberdimension.
The ‘9/11’ attack was not only a catastrophe of cataclysmic
proportions, but also opened a major policy window for reform
(Birkland, 2004). This major crisis not only implied urgency and
threatened core values, but also presented a new opportunity for
policy reform (cf. Boin et al. 2005: 122–9).
This is what experts had forecast for a while: a hacker attack
against the emergency communications systems, and a large-scale
conventional attack at the same time. IT and security policy
magazines were the first to start articles on cyberterrorism as soon
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
71

as 9/11 happened. At this time, of course, no leads at all were
available in this direction. Nevertheless, Federal Computer Week
(FCW) already on the evening after the attacks on 9/11 published
an article about the US Space Command, whose Joint Task Force-
Computer Network Defense (JTF-CND) is responsible for the
cyberdefense of the US armed forces. There were no special events
to report from the generals, but the usual threat warnings and
cyberwar game scenarios from the Pentagon-funded think tank,
RAND, were presented as a real possibility (Seffers 2001). 
The National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC) on 12
September issued a threat warning for the members of the
InfraGard program,9 recommending them to shut down all non-
essential computer systems or at least to take them offline – a small
but noteworthy extraordinary measure. All this happened in spite
of the fact that any evidence for looming cyberterrorist acts was
still missing, as the vice chairman of InfraGard, Phyllis Schneck,
had to admit (Verton 2001). 
In short, the massive securitization that followed immediately
after 9/11, epitomized in the new ‘war on terrorism’, implied an
increased sense of insecurity, which also affected assessments of
cyberthreats. Though 9/11 was a brutally physical offline attack,
images of cyberthreats were swept along with the general
securitization of US policy and reform post-9/11.
The media were among the first actors to frame cyberthreats in
terms of securitization, implying existential threat and call for
extraordinary measures. Following 9/11 many papers published
articles about the looming ‘cyberdanger’, and USA Today again
was one of the first. Two days after the attacks, on 13 September ,
the paper wrote about coming cyberattacks in the near future –
‘another wave of terrorism’ – and quoted a former Pentagon
official’s warning of an ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ (Schwartz 2001a)
– a clear instance of securitizing rhetoric. The government agencies
as well were somehow helpful for this new fear of ‘cyberterrorists’.
NIPC, for example, on 14 September issued another ‘Cyber
Awareness’ warning, this time for the general public. They warned
especially of politically motivated website defacements and some
modified computer viruses and worms.10 This of course posed no
real danger, especially not one at all comparable to terrorism. But
still the context in which this warning was issued made it look like
a warning of cyberterrorism to people who were not IT security
experts.
72
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

Even organizations that before September 11 had mostly dealt
with technical and economic aspects of IT security were now
talking about foreign and/or Islamic terrorists. The West Virginia
Information Assurance and Computer Security Alliance, for
example, which since its establishment in the summer of 2002 had
been concerned more about insider sabotage and disgruntled IT
employees, on its first meeting after September 11 warned only of
‘outsiders’ attacking computer systems (NIPC 2001a).
By the end of the month, this debate already had created enough
pressure to force the government to move. On 8 October, President
Bush set up an ‘Office of Cyberdefense’ at the White House, as part
of the new Homeland Security Office at the National Security
Council (Bush 2001b, 2001c, 2001d). The former coordinator for
counter-terrorism and critical infrastructure protection at the NSC,
Richard A. Clarke, was given this office (White House 2001b).
This was mainly a symbolic act, as the job had been there since the
Clinton administration established it in 1998 – it just had been
called by another name.11 Nevertheless, this shows how important
it seemed to the government to at least give the impression of doing
anything it could to prevent cyberterrorist attacks.
The first draft by the Justice Department of a new Anti-
Terrorism Act (ATA), which had been presented on 23 September,
accordingly treated most cases of computer crime as ‘terrorism’
and proposed lifelong imprisonment as the appropriate
punishment. Even harmless teenager activities like defacing
websites would have been treated as cyberterrorism under this act
(Poulsen 2001b). The USA Patriot Act that finally became law on
26 October followed this definition of cyberterrorism, but reduced
the maximum penalty for hacking to ten years in jail for a damage
of at least $5,000. But it now criminalized break-ins into any
computer outside the United States ‘that are used in a manner that
affects interstate or foreign commerce or communication of the
United States’ (US Congress 2001b). This is clearly the
cyberequivalent of the worldwide ‘war on terrorism’ the US
government has been fighting since September 11, 2001, as it
systematically expands beyond the American territory.
While so far the debate had been mostly abstract, in November
2001 it became more focused on Osama bin Laden, who by then
had clearly been established as the public enemy number one. A
member of the ‘Cyber Crime’ group in the CSIS’s project on
Homeland Defense testified in a hearing before Congress that
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
73

‘while bin Laden may have his finger on the trigger, his grandson
might have his finger on the mouse’ (Schwartz 2001b). 
In terms of framing theory, this implied not only that that the
frame become more restricted and specific, but also that the focus
was strongly on the threat itself rather on the threatened core
values or referent objects.
The way these conclusions were drawn is quite telling.
Sometimes it seemed that anybody who could book a flight ticket
online was suspected of being able to start cyberattacks.
Newsbytes, for example, a normally well-informed news service on
IT issues, quoted the Georgetown University computer security
professor Dorothy Denning pointing out that terrorists use the
Internet to send email and book airline tickets, and that many
groups have websites (Daukantas 2001). This is nothing
extraordinary, since almost everybody with Internet access has
shopped or booked flights online. But mentioning this in an article
generates the impression of a particular cyberterrorism danger,
especially when, as in this case, the story has ‘cyberterrorism’ in the
headline.
In December 2001, an alleged member of al-Qaeda who had
been caught in India was quoted by Newsbytes as saying his
organization had infiltrated Microsoft and manipulated the source
code for their new operating system Windows XP (McWilliams
2001). This report quickly made its way around the world, though
it relied on only a single and somewhat sketchy source. The
information came from the Indian IT security businessman Ravi
Visvesvaraya Prasad, who among information warfare experts was
already known for his sensationalist op-eds on the ‘threat’ of
Chinese information warfare in Indian newspapers (Visvesvaraya
Prasad 2001).
The fear of al-Qaeda led to some peculiar ways of handling
news even within the big news networks, including CNN which in
January 2002 ran the headline ‘Al Qaeda may have probed
government sites’ (‘FBI: Al Qaeda…’ 2002). Indeed, during the
months following 9/11 there was an abundance of fear-mongering
items in the news media that framed al-Qaeda as the main threat,
also in cyberspace. An example of this is a Newsweek article
entitled ‘Islamic Cyberterror. Not a matter of if but of when’
(Newsweek
2002; cf. McAlearney 2001; Manjoo 2002;
‘Government Not Ready… 2002; Kelley 2002; Trabelsi 2002;
Trendle 2002). Several polls also showed that IT experts
increasingly believed that the US would face a major cyberattack
74
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

within the very near future (‘Is Online Terrorism a Legitimate
Threat?’ 2002; Business Software Alliance 2002). It is noteworthy,
however, that the respondents were experts on computers rather
than on terrorism or war.
Particularly influential was an article written by retired Air
Force General and Kosovo veteran Wesley Clark and IT-
entrepreneur Bill Conner. Clark had led the campaign against
Serbia and still is an influential man in Washington security policy
circles. Conner in turn is president and CEO of the IT-security
company Entrust Inc. This joint venture of framing actors – an
experienced general who knows how to win a war, and a
trustworthy IT security expert – was enough for the Washington
Times to print their op-ed. One of their key sentences was: ‘The
next battle in the war on terrorism may be on the cyber front’
(Clark and Conner 2002).
Now, the US government found this threat perception serious
enough to try to convince its international allies of it. Defense
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld at the NATO Council meeting on 18
December warned of terrorism as one of the new ‘asymmetric
threats’ (Rumsfeld 2001). Half a year before, the same thing had
happened at the NATO Council. The only difference was the
complete change in the concept of the potential attacker. While it
had been foreign countries in June 2001, in December it was
terrorists. The same could be seen in other parts of the US
government (Watson 2002).
In December 2001, Congress had already approved the
establishment of a Cyber Division at FBI Headquarters that was
tasked with coordinating, overseeing and facilitating FBI
investigations into computer-related crime and foreign intelligence
(Mueller 2002). In March 2002, the intelligence community’s new
‘global threat’ estimate was presented to Congress. CIA director
George J. Tenet, when discussing possible cyberattacks, mostly
talked about terrorists (Tenet 2002: 3). Defense Intelligence Agency
director Thomas R. Wilson, who one year before had warned of
Cuba’s potential cyberwar capabilities, now as well called
cyberterrorism the clear and present danger (Wilson 2002: 14f).
Among the many new measures introduced in the wake of 9/11,
there was a new category of information that was not secret or
classified but ‘sensitive classified’ and much of that information
was deleted from government and private websites.12 With 9/11 the
US federal government launched a new wave of securitizing the
Internet, mainly as part of the new ‘war on terrorism’. The
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
75

Pentagon had found the enemy it had been searching for since the
end of the Cold War (Kaldor 2001; Barnett 2004).
In conclusion, post-9/11 cyberthreats were once again framed in
terms of cyberterrorism rather than in terms of interstate
cyberconflict. In contrast to the Clinton administration however,
which had also focused on cyberterrorism, the Bush government
now framed cyberterrorism with obvious securitizing implications
of existential threat and legitimizing extraordinary measures. Now
they meant serious business: the government both talked the talk,
and walked the walk of securitization. The media and the
government walked hand in hand in this endeavour. The 9/11
attack also shows how a focusing event (Birkland 2004), which
had nothing to do with cyberterrorism as such, nevertheless opened
a window for pushing this particular threat frame. 
Back to states as cyberenemies
Though the ‘war on terrorism’ dominated the entire security policy
discourse in the US, in mid- to late 2002 a noteworthy change
could be observed in the framing of cyberthreats. In August 2002,
the Naval War College conducted an exercise called ‘Digital Pearl
Harbor’. The simulation brought together a team of experts from
the Department of Defense and the Gartner Group to assess the
vulnerabilities and threats related to critical infrastructures. The
outcome was in stark contrast to the fears discussed since
September 2001. While local attacks were taken seriously, the
experts agreed it would be virtually impossible to bring off any
lasting, nationwide damage. Even more, the threat by
cyberterrorists was not considered high at all. If anybody should be
considered as dangerous to the slightest degree, only nation-states
would have the capability to at least attempt large-scale attacks.
But even governments with all the resources at their hands would
not be able to inflict serious damage (Greene 2002). If anything,
this was an attempt to desecuritize cyberterrorism.
Richard Clarke, head of the White House Office for Cyber
Security, told the press that the government had begun to regard
nation-states rather than terrorist groups as the most dangerous
threat. He mentioned even more reasons for this latest change in
the cybersecurity discourse. Not only simulations, but as well real-
world observations and experiences now seemed to be behind it
because the government, according to Clarke, had changed its
threat assessment after several suspicious break-ins into federal
76
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

networks. He noted that there were terrorist groups interested in
conducting cyberattacks in five or six countries (Eunjung Cha and
Krim 2002). The focus on states as cyberenemies remained at least
until the second term of George W. Bush (Jehel and Ranger 2004).
Clarke did not make clear which countries now were considered
‘real threats’. But the number he mentioned – five or six countries
– is remarkably lower than the 20 to 100 states the government
had considered as cyberthreats one year before (cf. Verton 2002a).
Since then, official reports have continued to quote various
numbers of potential cyberenemies. It might simply be a confusion
of capacity with intent to do harm, at least against the US. 
In 2002, Riptech’s annual ‘Internet Security Threat Report’
added a section called the ‘Cyberterrorism Watch List’. The
analysts specifically analysed the data on countries on the State
Department’s list of ‘State Sponsors of Terrorism’ and some other
countries known for terrorist activities. But the results were not
showing any link between so-called ‘rogue states’ or terrorism and
cyberincidents. About 90 per cent of the activities from countries
on the watch emanated from Iran, while the remaining 10 per cent
was split evenly between Cuba and Sudan. But more importantly,
‘countries on the Watch List generated less than 1 per cent of all
attacks detected during the past six-month period. More than two-
thirds of all incidents originated in Europe or North America’
(Riptech 2002: 15).
Cyberterrorism is still on the agenda, but with a considerably
lower priority than during the Clinton administration and in the
months immediately following 9/11. Cyberterrorism is still
considered more of a potential than an immediate threat.
One important reason why cyberterrorism again became
deprioritized is that none of the alarmists’ fear-mongering
scenarios came even close to be realized.13 Incident statistics were
often looking more alarming than warranted.14 In some cases even
Internet ‘pings’ were categorized as possible cyberattacks.
Computers viruses and worms continued to plague cyberspace,
which certainly cost a lot of time and money to combat. The
increasingly available easy-to-use automatic attack tools implied
that advanced hacking skills were no longer necessary, which in
turn increased the number of Internet incidents dramatically. But
none of this warranted the rhetoric of cyberterrorism and
cyberwar. Computer attacks by foreign governments and non-state
actors continued to plague cyberspace, with more or less costly
losses of information, money and confidence. Yet the destruction of
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
77

bits and bytes never directly killed anybody or destroyed any
buildings. In the words of Professor Denning: 
Few if any [cyberattacks] can be characterized as acts of
terrorism: fraud, theft, sabotage, vandalism, and extortion –
yes, but terrorism – no. Their effect, while serious and not to
be taken lightly, pales in comparison to the horror we
witnessed on September 11. 
(Denning 2001; cf. Dornheim 1998; Libicki 1997: 37–38)
The return of states as enemies in cyberspace coincided with the
launching of the first National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace
(PCCIP 2002), which was updated less than a year later (White
House 2003). This was the work of the President’s special advisor
for cybersecurity, Richard Clarke, together with representatives
from the private sector. Importantly, this document not only laid
the ground for the official US policy on cybersecurity, but also
showed that focus was not so much on the intentions and strategies
of real or potential adversaries, but rather on ‘malware’
technologies and on vulnerabilities (US Department of Defense
2001: iv; Fordahl 2002; Verton 2002b). A headline in the chapter
on ‘Threats and Vulnerabilities’ explicitly reads: ‘Reduce
Vulnerabilities in the Absence of Known Threats’ (PCCIP 2002: 4).
Thus, emphasis was more on ‘weapons’ and referent objects, rather
than on enemies. 
It is also noteworthy that although 9/11 is mentioned (PCCIP
2002: 14), this policy document is more concerned with
cyberincidents proper. An explicitly discussed instance is the
worldwide spread of the Nimda computer virus, which was
activated a week after 9/11. This incident is explicitly referred to as
‘a wake-up call’ (PCCIP 2002: 3). In theoretical terms this event
was a policy window that planners and analysts used for pushing
cyberthreats on to the agenda. 
Conclusion
Since George W. Bush became president, three sharp changes of
direction in the framing of cyberthreats have been observed. The
first change took place immediately after the new administration
came into office. The ‘cyberterrorists’ of the Clinton era were
replaced by ‘strategic rivals’, ‘rogue states’, and other countries
preparing for ‘cyberwar’. Then, after 9/11, this state-centred threat
78
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

perception was quickly but temporarily replaced again by the fear
of ‘cyberterrorism’, emphasizing transnational networks rather
than states. The last turn came in the late summer of 2002, when
attention was again shifted to nation-states, but with a significantly
lower threat estimate than a year before. This master frame still
seems to dominate the US government’s understanding of
cyberthreats, particularly as the ‘war on terrorism’ is increasingly
and explicitly compared to the Cold War, with its emphasis not
only on a known enemy and a long-term perspective, but also on
states as the sources of evil, and the core role given to the military.
The Bush administration contains some people in important offices
who had already served in former governments before 1989,
including Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld. He has repeatedly framed
the new ‘war on terrorism’ in Cold War terms. Likewise, Secretary
of State Condoleezza Rice, who had in the mid-1980s worked on
nuclear strategy planning for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has
compared ‘cyberwar’ with nuclear deterrence – a clear
securitization move (cf. Jehl and Sanger 2004: A1). Not only is
threat framing the same old wine, but now it also comes in the
same old bottles.
Securitization theory is clearly relevant for analysing the politics
of setting the agenda of cyberthreats. However, its hypothesis on
existential threat and extraordinary measures covers only a part of
threat framing. Securitizing moves can be observed both in rhetoric
and action in the Bush years, but mainly in rhetoric during the
Clinton years. The securitization move of the 2001 Republican
administration was more successful than the similar move
attempted by the Clinton administration in the 1990s, which
targeted individuals’ use of strong encryption software. In that
instance, using a powerful combination of freedom of speech
discourse and in-depth technical expertise, an ‘odd alliance’ of ICT
companies and civil liberties NGOs successfully shelved the move
to securitize encryption software (Giacomello 2005). 
US actors have also framed cyberthreats in several other, less
panicky ways than that assumed by the securitization logic. Except
for some scare-mongering scenarios like ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’,
cyberthreats such as viruses and hacking are often considered as
non-lethal, not being of existential significance, and not requiring
extraordinary measures such as the use of force. Securitization
theory thus fails to grasp the breadth of perceptions and positions
on cyberthreats. 
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
79

Therefore, the more comprehensive threat politics approach
adopted here (cf. Eriksson 2001a, 2001b), which incorporates but
goes beyond securitization, is a more useful analytical tool. This
approach focuses on frame characteristics, framing actors, and
contextual conditions (structures and focusing events). Frame
characteristics may, but do not necessarily, include an identification
of existential threat and a legitimization of extraordinary measures.
Threat framing may be elaborated or restricted, specific or diffuse,
and focus on antagonistic actors, structural phenomena or
particular events. The foregoing analysis of post-9/11 responses
shows that the US framing of cyberthreats has waxed and waned
between more alarmist scenarios of ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ and
more realistic analyses of the actual but non-lethal cyberplagues,
whether the culprits are states or non-state actors.
Likewise, this case study has shown the value of considering a
wide range of framing actors. Analysts and decision-makers within
the government’s security policy establishment, including the
intelligence community, certainly have played key roles, but so
have the media and a great many business actors (Schwarz 2002;
Delio 2002; Rotenberg 2003). It is the combined or coinciding
efforts of governmental actors, the IT business and the media that
have pushed and changed the framing of cyberthreats in US
security policy discourse.
Certain contextual conditions have also facilitated the
prioritization of some threat frames over others. The change in
administration from Clinton to Bush implied an ideological shift
which among other things affected foreign and security policy in
general, including the official understanding of global cyberthreats.
The more confrontational, state-centred and military-oriented
approach of the two consecutive Bush administrations contrasts
starkly with the Clinton administration’s multilateralism, network-
oriented and soft power approach. This difference remains even
though the Bush administration immediately after 9/11 temporarily
focused on (non-state) cyberterrorism. 
As has been argued elsewhere (Birkland 2004), the events of
9/11 had a tremendous impact as a pivotal policy window, opening
for reforms that would have otherwise not been on the agenda.
Indirectly it affected also the framing of cyberthreats, as analysts
immediately began asking how al-Qaeda was using the Internet,
spurring thinking on cyberterrorism. More important, however,
were various cyberincidents proper, such as the Nimda virus and
computer attacks by other governments, some of which were
80
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

considered ‘rogue states’ or ‘strategic rivals’. Nevertheless, it is
obvious that not only do the great majority of cyberincidents
originate from within the United States but also the US government
is the only superpower in cyberspace. 
Notes
1
This chapter is an updated and considerably revised version of a
chapter by Ralf Bendrath that appeared in Robert Latham (ed.)
Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging Relationship between IT and
Security, New York: The New Press, 2003, pp. 49–73. In particular,
the present chapter develops and applies a theoretical approach that
was not used in the original paper.
2
United Artists, starring Pierce Brosnan as James Bond and directed by
Martin Campbell.
3
Winn Schwartau of <www.infowar.com> used the term ‘electronic
Pearl Harbor’ in June 1991 in a testimony before Congress
(Schwartau, 1994: 43). 
4
There is even a special term nowadays for the typical overblown
threat warnings: ‘FUD, for fear, uncertainty, and doubt’.
5
Since the late 1980s, Barry Buzan, Ole Wæver, and their colleagues
have developed a creative research agenda of security studies, with
emphasis on a widened security concept. The ‘Copenhagen school’ –
a label suggested by one of their critics (McSweeney, 1996) – has
attained noticeable interest within the academic International
Relations community, as witnessed in the series of reviews, critiques
and amendments (for overviews, see Huysmanns, 1998; Williams,
2003). The most important contribution of the Copenhagen school is
the development of Ole Wæver’s securitization theory (Buzan et al.
1998). See also the section on constructivism in the introductory
chapter in the present volume.
6
It was established by Presidential Decision Directive 39, ‘US Policy on
Counterterrorism’, 21 June 1995; see also Freeh (1997). 
7
‘Hidden in the X-rated pictures on several pornographic websites and
the posted comments on sports chat rooms may lie the encrypted
blueprints of the next terrorist attack against the United States or its
allies. It sounds far-fetched, but US officials and experts say it’s the
latest method of communication being used by Osama bin Laden and
his associates to outfox law enforcement. Bin Laden, indicted in the
bombing in 1998 of two US embassies in East Africa, and others are
hiding maps and photographs of terrorist targets and posting
instructions for terrorist activities on sports chat rooms, pornographic
bulletin boards and other websites, US and foreign officials say’
(Kelley, 2001). 
8
Currently, encrypting files is very simple and only requires the use of
publicly available programs (see for example <http://www.pgpi.com>)
whereas a digital break-in, especially into computers critical for
security, requires years of experience in systems and network
programming. Additionally, only very few critical systems are
From cyberterrorism to cyberwar
81

connected to public networks. Furthermore, the defacement of
websites and the construction of computer viruses is relatively easy to
accomplish with only limited experience, especially because there are
instructional tools available for this on the Internet. However, this
does not pose a serious danger, but rather an annoyance, and real
hackers ridicule it as ‘script-kiddie’ behaviour.
9
The Clinton government later decided to call them ‘states of concern’,
which was immediately revised by George W. Bush when he became
president.
10
InfraGard is a locally based public–private partnership run by the FBI
and the private sector. See <http://www.infragard.net>.
11
For example, the old virus ‘life_stages.txt.shs’ had been renamed
‘wtc.txt.vbs’, alluding to the World Trade Center. See NIPC (2001b).
12
Earlier the post was called ‘Senior Director for Critical Infrastructure
Protection’ and had been held from 1998 until the end of the Clinton
administration by Jeffrey Hunker.
13
The website of the highly regarded Federation of American Scientists
is such an example: see <www.fas.org/terrorism/is/index.html>. The
US President’s order (executive order) is available from
<www.fas.org/sgp/bush/eoamend.html>. 
14
Despite widespread fears of cyberterrorism and virus attacks,
September 11, 2002 passed almost without incident in the online
world. A pro-Islamic hacking group, the ‘Unix Security Guards’,
hacked into three AOL Time Warner computers three days earlier and
kept them down until September 11. Though the analysts at mi2g had
predicted even more attacks, nothing else happened. According to the
website defacement archive Zone-H, only a few dozen websites 
were hacked, but with practically no references to September 11. The
only things that made the cyberthreat news over September 11 were
two poorly written computer viruses that did not spread very far. One
of them was even broken and crashed regularly (Middleton 2002).
15
For some statistics from the studied period, see mi2g Digital Solutions
Engineering, Link with Terrorism Affects Global Hacking, press
release, London, 2 February 2002,  <http://www.mi2g.com/cgi/mi2g/
press/020102.php>. See <www.mi2g.com/status> for detailed
statistics since 1995. The different measuring standards therefore
could explain changes and differences in quantitative measures (like
the number of countries actually preparing for cyberwarfare). But
there is no evidence of specific changes in the criteria before the threat
perception changed. More importantly, this does not explain the
qualitative changes in the discourse that changed from ‘terrorist’ to
‘states’. For discussions on the varying and often very encompassing
criteria of Internet incidents, see McKay (1998), Clark (2000),
Aldrich (2001) and Lemos (2002). 
82
Ralf Bendrath, Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello 

Part II
The politics of protection


4 
Securing the digital age
The challenges of complexity 
for critical infrastructure 
protection and IR theory
Myriam A. Dunn
Introduction
By aiming to evaluate the strengths and limits of international
relations (IR) theory in order to gain an understanding of security
in the digital age, we take on an exceedingly difficult task. Not
only has this issue hardly ever been addressed before, leaving us
with barely any literature to base our analysis on – we also enter a
realm of vast extent, indistinct boundaries, and a sloppy
conceptual arsenal. There are more basic questions than answers:
What is digital-age security and how might it be defined in a
meaningful way? Is there really anything new about digital-age
security that clearly sets it apart from more traditional security
matters? Which specific aspects of digital-age security do we want
to explain and why? And, maybe the most challenging question in
the context of this project: Is a theory of digital-age security
needed at all? 
Because of the vocabulary of clichés that inhabits the digital-age
debate, we must place particular emphasis on conceptual precision
in order to achieve a substantial theoretical analysis. Absent any
satisfactory definition of ‘digital-age security’, we must bring
meaning to the concept by designating issues that could form part
of a valid definition. It is sensible to discern two categories:
offensive activities such as information warfare, cybercrime or
cyberterrorism (Parker 1983; E. Cohen 1996: 39; Cooper 1997;
David 1997; Pollitt 1997; Libicki 1999; Lewis 2002); and
defensive activities such as defensive information operations,
information assurance or critical information infrastructure
protection (CIIP) (Libicki 1995; Dunn and Wigert 2004; Dunn
2006). The common denominator of these issues is their
unspecified connection to the so-called ‘information revolution’

and ‘cyberspace’, or, more specifically, their connection to the
‘information infrastructure’. 
However, it is not easy to understand what exactly the
information infrastructure is. This is because it has not only a
physical component that is fairly easily grasped – such as high-
speed, interactive, narrow-band and broadband networks; satellite,
terrestrial and wireless communications systems; and the
computers, televisions, telephones, radios and other products that
people employ to access the infrastructure – but also an equally
important immaterial, sometimes very elusive (cyber)component,
namely the information and content that flows through the
infrastructure, the knowledge that is created thereby, and the
services that are provided (Dunn and Wigert 2004: 19–20).
Furthermore, it would be misguided to restrict ‘digital-age security’
to cyberattacks or incidents or, conversely, to cybertargets, because
the means of attack can be either physical (such as a backhoe to
sever a telecommunications cable, or explosives) or virtual (such as
electromagnetic pulse or hacker tools) (Devost et al. 1997: 76;
OCIPEP 2003: 12).
It is striking that all the issues we have named are very
ambiguous concepts, each one with its own string of varying
definitions. As a basis for theorizing, this situation is not
satisfactory. In fact, it is doubtful whether the label ‘digital-age
security’, or any similar term, is practical at all due to its
imprecision. In order to lay the foundations for theorizing,
therefore, we must first carefully identify what precise aspects of
the phenomenon we want to explain, and for what reasons. It is
clear, furthermore, that the scope and nature of a possible theory
for aspects of the digital age depend on how we perceive and
interpret the magnitude and depth of the current transformations.
Such theorizing might either aim to be thoroughly ‘new’ if the
current transformation is thorough and sweeping – or it might be
considered satisfactory to adapt old approaches to specific
circumstances if changes are less thorough.
By setting out to answer what IR theory has to offer in terms of
explanations for the concept, one might assume that ‘digital-age
security’ is automatically and uncritically regarded as a specific
phenomenon – that it establishes a specific context with a specific
impact and thus creates the need for new approaches. However, it
is doubtful whether this is actually the case. Instead, therefore, in
this chapter we first set out to understand what makes the digital
age special and what its defining features are. From there, we go on
86
Myriam A. Dunn

to describe what this means for international relations. We will
show that states mainly focus their attention on the protection of
critical (information) infrastructures due to a very particular
information-age threat image. Notwithstanding this trend, we
argue that the forces of the information revolution have not
changed the conditions of security, defined in an objective sense as
the absence of threat to a society’s core values and in a subjective
sense as the absence of fear that these values will be attacked
(Wolfers 1962; Baldwin 1997). What have changed significantly
due to the particularities of the digital age, however, are some of
the conditions for securing.
The distinction between security and securing is slight but
pivotal; while security is a momentarily static condition, securing
has a somewhat different connotation: it includes the act of making
something safe or secure and thus of actively thwarting possible
threats to any given referent object of security, implying actors,
politics and policies. As an outcome of the information revolution,
we can observe a qualitatively significant change in the (perceived)
nature of threats or risks to security, a change in some of the means
to achieve the goal of security and a change in the constellation of
actors involved in the securing process. We then show that the
defining key feature of the digital age, underlying all of these
observations, is the predominance of complexity and change on
two levels: (1) on the level of technological systems and (2) on the
level of the international system. 
From the field of complexity studies, a research area belonging
to the natural sciences, we learn about the behaviour of systems in
general, and speculate on the consequences of this in the latter part
of this chapter. However, while complexity theory offers answers to
certain questions concerning the technical systems, we argue that
the applicability of these ideas is somewhat limited for the political
realm. The main reason is that from a constructivist vantage point,
the information revolution and ensuing complexity only matter
when they are perceived to matter. They are nothing more than
conditions that shape the threat perception of key decision-makers
and thus have an impact on their thoughts and actions. 
Digital-age literature scrutinized 
There is little doubt among experts that the basic conditions of
international relations have changed in the last decade, with the
information revolution often named as one major driver of change
Securing the digital age
87

(Zacher 1992; Castells 1996). But what is this famed information
revolution, and what makes it so special? It is common knowledge
that the significance of information is not unique just to our time,
but that it has always been vital to humankind. It is also commonly
understood that throughout history, advances in scientific-technical
fields have played major roles in changing human affairs, and that
there have been other information and communication revolutions,
all of which significantly shaped history, human activities and their
institutions (Deibert 1997; Papp et al. 1997; Waldrop 1998;
Borgmann 1999; Hobart and Schiffman 2000; Freeman and Louca
2002).
When probing phenomena that have been drained of meaning
by overuse, researchers must be particularly careful not to fall into
the trap of re-inventing the wheel or calling everything ‘new’ just
because it appears so at first sight. They should rather strive to see
things in their proper historical context and advance to the core of
things by meticulously analysing what exactly sets this
development apart from other developments. Such an undertaking
is hampered by imprecision in terminology: ‘information
revolution’ and ‘information age’ are terms currently used by many
different parties for many different facets of an elusive
phenomenon, leaving the researcher with a confusing diversity of
usually poorly defined concepts). The nature of these terms is such
that they have never been precise – nowadays, however, they have
been used so extensively that they can basically signify anything or
everything, and are thus ultimately devoid of meaning altogether.
But even though the terms have become mere catchphrases, there is
simply no alternative to their use. 
In our view, the current ‘revolution’ concerns a special set of
technologies, often subsumed under the heading of information
and communication technologies (ICTs) (Alberts et al. 1997). In
particular, the marriage of computers and telecommunications and
the ongoing, dynamic integration of these technologies into a
multimedia system of communication with global reach are
defining features of the current technological development. This
adds a great deal of speed, capacity and flexibility to the gathering,
processing and transmission of data into knowledge, and enhances
humankind’s ability to communicate, to utilize information and to
overcome obstacles earlier presented to communication by
distance, time and location (Dunn 2002).
88
Myriam A. Dunn

To advance from here and begin to interpret what this
technological expansion actually means for the individual, society,
the state, or international relations implies a great deal of
speculation. Even if certain ramifications seem evident, there is
almost no empirically grounded research that would allow us to
convincingly move beyond the anecdotal evidence that is
frequently offered. Nonetheless, in order to determine what the
international community believes to be the key characteristics of
the current revolution, we will recapitulate the main arguments
from the information revolution literature. 
The changing nature of power
At the core of these writings lies the notion that we face changes in
the nature and quality of power. Power in politics is often divided
into three subsections: economic, military and political power.
These are the three ‘pillars of power’ on which rests the ability of
nation-states to achieve their goals. Economic power is derived
from the resources within a state’s borders and the aptitude to
trade them; military power comes from the availability of people
and material; and political power is drawn from the potency of
leaders and institutions, the people’s support and endorsements
from other nation-states (Rothkopf 1999). The traditional view of
realist political science, in a basic form, is that military power
dominates other forms of authority, and that the states with the
most military power therefore dominate world affairs. This
interpretation of the realist school was critically confronted as
early as 1977, mainly as a reaction to observations about a
changing economic world (Keohane and Nye 1977). Since then, the
resources that produce power capabilities have become even more
complex; today, the three pillars of power are being shaken by the
growing influence of ICTs on international relations. 
Control over knowledge, beliefs and ideas is increasingly
regarded as a complement to control over tangible resources such
as military forces, raw materials and economic productive
capability. Often, one hears that ‘information is power’ (Nye and
Owens 1996). In a political-science view, this is the case because
information reduces uncertainty and can result in an asymmetrical
advantage over others who have less information at their disposal.
ICTs, which help to accumulate information that can be turned
into knowledge, are therefore today’s ultimate and most important
power resource. Economic instruments, too, have gained
Securing the digital age
89

importance for the exercise of power, mainly by multinational
corporations and other business entities. The most influential and
most frequently cited article on the topic is Keohane and Nye’s
‘Power and Interdependence in the Information Age’ (Keohane and
Nye 1998; Nye 1990). 
The relative power loss of state actors
It is frequently argued that the main locus of power resources has
shifted from military, to economic, and now to informational
resources, as noted in the previous chapter. Transfer of authority
occurs in diverse directions through ‘fragmegrative’ dynamics
(Rosenau 1998), while creation of wealth today occurs through
ideas, knowledge and opportunity. Power increasingly flows to
centres of innovations and technological know-how, and on the
individual level to a new kind of technological elite – those
specialists who control or master ICTs through extraordinary skills
or ideas. Two central conflicts reveal the nature of the ongoing
redistribution of power: first, the idea that the emergence of a
global electronic marketplace will bring about the inevitable
collapse of the state’s economic pillars of power, as companies
increasingly become global citizens and economic boundaries no
longer correspond to political ones (Rosecrance 1999); and second,
the notion that the information revolution empowers new forms of
international actors, thus challenging the state’s position as the
major player in the international system (Papp and Alberts 1997).
The information revolution is seen to affect not only the role
and position of states, but also the position and influence of other
actors in international affairs. These are mainly international
governmental organizations (IGOs), multinational corporations
(MNCs) and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). It further
exerts considerable influence on the role of the individual: the
strengthened position of the individual can be explained by the
expansion of the individual’s diagnostic capabilities thanks to the
advance of ICTs, which allow citizens to become more competent
and enhance their analytical skills. This development has been
labelled ‘the skill revolution’ (Rosenau 1998: 42). 
The outcome of this rearrangement will likely be a skewed,
complex and volatile pattern of power distribution, as transfer of
authority occurs in diverse directions, and as changes are absorbed
and operationalized by different actors, at different levels, in
different ways and at different speeds. The final result of such a
90
Myriam A. Dunn

development, it is assumed, will be a ‘bifurcation’ of global
structures into state-centric and multi-centric subsystems where
states are no longer the only key actors (Rosenau 1990; Nye 1998).
In order to express the complex and ambiguous nature of the
development, neologisms like ‘fragmegration’ (fragmentation/
integration) or ‘glocalization’ (globalization/localization) have
been created (Rosenau 1998).
From quantitative change to qualitative consequences
Even though many of the claims concerning changing power
structures ring true in some way, most of them are based on the
premise that more ICTs automatically imply a qualitative
difference. However, even if we count the numbers of computers
connected to the Internet, the use of mobile phones in percentage
of the overall population of a country, or the amount of
information available on the World Wide Web, no convincing
conclusion is possible as to their impact. Quantities are
undoubtedly important, but it is only our attribution of meaning to
them that will allow us to truly theorize about the digital age. As
Holsti (1998) notes, significance is the link connecting quantitative
changes (causes) to qualitative changes (consequences). Unless we
attribute meaning to quantities, we have no way of knowing when
change becomes significant, or when it is or becomes truly
transformational. In fact, one could argue that a new theory is only
required if we establish that there is such a fundamental change in
the environment that old approaches no longer hold true. 
When we turn to IR theory, we find that even though the
arguments about the nature of change, its possibilities and its
consequences are implicit in the great debates among theorists of
IR and thus constitute a major area of disagreement, the issue has
been largely neglected in the mainstream literature in this field
(Buzan and Jones 1981; Ruggie 1993; Holsti 1998). However,
(new) institutionalist approaches offer an interesting approach to
the topic of change. If we view the international system as an
ensemble of institutions, which can be defined as practices
constituted by norms or rules (Kratochwil 1989), we might argue
that a fundamental change in the international system occurs when
a significant part of its constitutive norms or rules are altered.
Strange (1988) has argued similarly, stating that technological
changes only change power structures if they are accompanied by
changes in the basic belief systems which underpin or support the
Securing the digital age
91

political arrangements acceptable to society. The key question in
connection with our topic can therefore be rephrased as follows:
Have quantitative changes induced by the information revolution
produced a significant number of new patterns, norms, practices or
institutions so as to cause a fundamental qualitative change in the
international system? 
There is no simple answer to this question, for a number of
reasons that are conceptual as well as empirical: First, these
developments are recent and ongoing, and difficulties in grasping
their true proportions are inevitable, because we are in the midst of
the process ourselves. Second, the implications are far from
straightforward; many observers have pointed out that complexity
and change are the two defining characteristics of the digital age,
since the present epoch is marked by persistent opposites and
derives its order from episodic patterns with very contradictory
outcomes (Rosenau 1990; CSIS 1996). It is therefore very difficult
to produce stringent empirical evidence for or against the claim
that international institutions have changed. Third, our key
question refers to a systemic and sweeping phenomenon, a
fundamental type of change that transforms the practices and
constitutive conventions of the entire system. This universalism is
the hallmark of almost every conventional international relations
theory. However, in the light of the fact that developments are not
only ongoing, but also very ambiguous, a context-dependent
approach is more appropriate. Fourth, and most importantly, we
believe that the perception of these changes is what truly matters,
and not their objectively measurable reality. Hence, in the
following discussion, we focus on qualitative consequences with
empirically observable effects on securing practices.
Broadening the threat spectrum
First and foremost, the information revolution is directly
responsible for the rapidly increasing number of forewarnings in
the 1990s concerned with digital-age security (Eriksson 2001a,
2001b). There are two sides to the particular information-age
threat image: a new kind of vulnerability due to the dependency of
modern society on inherently insecure information systems on the
one hand, and the aforementioned redistribution of power on the
other:
92
Myriam A. Dunn

•
Due to falling costs, increased and large-scale availability,
greater utility and ease of use, ICTs have propagated into all
aspects of life, with the result that societies in developed
countries are becoming increasingly dependent on them for
their well-being, every-day life, work, economic transactions,
comfort, entertainment and many personal interactions (Dunn
2002).
•
The perception today is that there are a variety of actors in the
cyberenvironment who are willing to contravene national legal
frameworks and hide in the relative anonymity of cyberspace.
The growing prevalence and adaptability of these cyberbased
threat actors is seen as a considerable threat to national
security, because they seem to have the capacity to inflict
significant damage through tools that are readily available and
relatively easy to use by those with even a cursory knowledge
of, and skill in using, computer technologies (PCCIP 1997). 
These two aspects together feed the fear of severe asymmetrical
vulnerabilities, a concept extensively discussed in the United States
(Metz and Johnson 2001; Berkowitz 2003; Blank 2003; Husain
2003). The word ‘asymmetry’ is used to describe a broad range of
threats and tactics; at the core of the term is the intention to
circumvent the opponents’ advantage in capabilities by avoiding
their strengths and exploiting their weaknesses (Kolet 2001). The
concept of asymmetric threat or vulnerability connotes that ‘the
enemy’, clearly doomed to fail against the mighty US high-tech war
machine in any conventional conflict, will instead plan to bring the
US to its knees by striking at vital points at home (Berkowitz 1997)
– these points being fundamental to the national security and to the
essential functioning of industrialized societies as a whole, and not
necessarily to the military in particular. These vital points are called
‘critical infrastructures’ (CI) in today’s security debate. 
The concept of critical infrastructures usually includes sectors
such as information and telecommunications, financial services,
energy and utilities, transport and distribution, plus a list of
additional elements varying across countries and over time (Moteff
2002; Dunn and Wigert 2004; Abele-Wigert and Dunn 2006).
Attacking infrastructure has a ‘force multiplier’ effect, allowing
even a relatively small attack to achieve a much greater impact.
Because the CI delivers a range of services that individuals, and
society as a whole, depend on, any damage to or interruption of the
CI causes ripples across the technical and the societal systems. For
Securing the digital age
93

this reason, CI structures and networks have historically proven to
be appealing targets for a whole array of actors (OCIPEP 2003). 
In fact, protection concepts for strategically important
infrastructures and objects have been part of national defence
planning for decades, though at varying levels of importance.
Towards the end of the Cold War and for a couple of years
thereafter, the possibility of infrastructure discontinuity caused by
attacks or other disruptions played a relatively minor role in the
security debate – only to gain new impetus around the mid-1990s,
due to the information revolution (Luiijf et al. 2003). Since then,
critical infrastructure protection (CIP) as a policy issue has risen to
the top of the security agendas of many countries in the last couple
of years.
The information infrastructure plays a very special role in the
CIP debate. Vulnerabilities in critical infrastructures are believed to
be on the rise mainly because the information infrastructure
underpins many elements of the critical infrastructure, which
therefore become dependent on a spectrum of highly
interdependent national and international software-based control
systems for their smooth, reliable and continuous operation
(Rathmell 2001; Moteff 2003). This, in turn, leads to increasingly
complex interdependencies. This part of the global or national
information infrastructure, which is essential for the continuity of
critical infrastructure services, is called critical information
infrastructure (CII) in the debate. 
The increasing value of information and the availability of
electronic means to manage its ever-growing volume have made
information and information systems not only an invaluable asset,
but a lucrative target, too. Information systems are exposed to
failures, are attractive targets for malicious attacks, and are
susceptible to cascading failures. The interdependency factor
implies that critical infrastructures do not need to be attacked
physically, but may be targeted through electronic or virtual means,
the worst-case scenario being a concerted action by qualified
hackers with hostile intentions that could force a whole nation to
its knees (PCCIP 1997). This is seen as a particularly worrying
prospect because the ‘enemy’ becomes a faceless and remote entity,
a great unknown that is almost impossible to track and that
opposes security institutions and legal systems that are ill-suited to
counter or retaliate against such a threat. 
As a qualitative consequence of the second order within the
information revolution, this particular threat image causes very
94
Myriam A. Dunn

specific reactions in the form of critical infrastructure protection
policies. This circumstance, in turn, has led to the situation where
CIP or the securing of the digital age lies at the heart of the ‘digital-
age security’ debate. 
Complexity as a key feature of systems
A second qualitative consequence of the information revolution is
complexity. It is an uncontested assumption that complex problems
are on the rise and are due to the digital age. One possible
explanation for complexity in the technical world can be found in
the combination of two laws of technical innovation, namely
Moore’s Law and Metcalfe’s Law, which are widely credited as
having provided the stimulus that has driven the stunning growth
of Internet connectivity (G.E. Moore 1965; Metcalfe 1995;
Downes et al. 1998): 
•
Moore’s Law states that the number of transistors per square
inch on integrated circuits will double approximately every 18
months, that is, computing power rises exponentially over
time.
•
Metcalfe’s Law states that the value of a communication
system grows as the square of the number of users of the
system, which implies an increasing number of networks,
nodes and links.
According to one simple but straightforward definition,
complexity is the sum of interdependencies plus change (cf. Gomez
2001). Complexity in information infrastructure systems is thus
increasing, as an exponential technological development leads to
change and brings forth an increasing number of networks, nodes
and links to growing interdependencies. In addition, the
complexity of these systems grows with the extension of the
geographical reach and the expansion of the services provided, the
introduction of new components with richer functionality using
diverse technologies, and the layering of systems over systems
(Kyriakopoulos and Wilikens 2000; Masera and Wilikens 2001).
Mainly as a consequence of their interactions with the
information infrastructure, the critical infrastructures are being
composed into networks-of-networks of different sizes. Three
main, interrelated trends affect these infrastructures: 1) their
increasing complexity, with an acceleration that reflects the general
Securing the digital age
95

evolution of technology; 2) their interconnectedness, put into
practice 
at 
different 
layers: 
organizational, 
procedural,
informational, material; and 3) a growing reliance on ICTs, both
for internal use and for interaction with external systems (Masera
and Wilikens 2001). Therefore, infrastructures are complex and
interdependent systems, and it is not possible to control their full
range of interaction with the surrounding, pre-existing technical
and social environments.
System complexity has two immediate consequences for the
topic of critical infrastructure protection. First, a well-known
theory claims that technological systems that are interactively
complex and tightly coupled will be struck by accidents that cannot
be prevented. Because of the inherent complexity, independent
failures will interact in ways that can neither be foreseen by
designers nor comprehended by operators. If the system is also
tightly coupled, the failures will rapidly escalate beyond control
before anyone understands what is happening and is able to
intervene (Perrow 1984; Turner and Pidgeon 1997). This overall
pessimistic perspective on accidents and the limited possibilities of
preventing them and coping with them resonates in much of the
digital-age security debate.
Second, the dynamic interactions of complex, decentralized,
open, unbounded (technical) systems amounts to an overtaxing of
abilities to articulate and evaluate the problem, thus creating a
practical challenge for those involved in drafting measures for
securing. As Forrester showed back in the early 1960s, complex
systems behave contra-intuitively due to parallel occurrences
happening at different speeds, irregularities and non-linear
cause/effect relationships, with the result that the human brain is
unable to ‘read’ these systems correctly (Forrester 1961). Besides,
the tools currently available for evaluation of these systems are
inadequate; the ‘methodological toolbox’ in use is filled with old
tools that have, in some cases, been hurriedly adapted to a new set
of problems (Dunn and Wiegert 2004; Dunn 2005, 2006).
However, both the systems and the risk environment have become
qualitatively different in a way that demands new analytical
techniques and methodologies for their evaluation (Allen and
Sledge 2002).
Furthermore, it has become almost conventional wisdom today
that ‘the world’, or to put it in IR terms, the international system,
has also become more complex. The main reason usually given for
this change is the growing number of independent international
96
Myriam A. Dunn

and transnational actors playing power games on multiple levels
evolving around national, regional and global dynamics (Jervis
1997a and 1997b). Complexity is thus seen as a consequence of
there being more actors in the international system. In addition, the
observation that the present epoch is marked by persistent
opposites and derives its order from episodic patterns with very
contradictory outcomes is seen as a sign of increasing complexity
(Rosenau 1990). 
The feeling of increasing complexity on a higher system level is
closely linked to the fact that the intellectual tools at present
available to probe the pervasive uncertainty underlying our
emergent epoch are not sufficient to the task. In that sense,
complexity and the overtaxing of our abilities are more than a mere
practical problem for those involved in the securing of the
information infrastructure. In fact, we can argue that the world has
always been complex, but it has been one of the aims of IR theory
to render it more intelligible by simplifying it. The most nefarious
consequence of Waltz’s legacy of an uncompromising search for a
universal, parsimonious theory has in fact been that mainstream IR
theory cannot account for complexity and the closely connected
concept of change. 
Theoretical and practical implications
At least since the development of Shannon and Weaver’s
information theory (1949), formal, semi-formal or informal
notions of ‘complexity’ have been used to express properties of
objects and processes in a variety of fields. Despite or perhaps
because of the diversity of scientific efforts involved in this work,
little agreement has been reached on what, precisely, complexity
entails, or how a general notion of complexity may be
systematically applied to various fields of research (Çambel 1992;
Butts 2001). In addition, many different kinds of complexity, such
as logical, relational, semiotic, or computational complexity, are
distinguished (Casti 1979; Biggiero 2001), so that the problem
does not end when appropriate definitions are found, but extends
to the issues of measurement and the understanding of
implications.
One prominent field of research that suggests itself for
determining how complex systems behave is that of complexity
studies, a branch of ‘chaos theory’. Chaos theory is a grab-bag
expression for a whole set of studies, an amalgam of different
Securing the digital age
97

techniques of mathematics and science concerned with order and
pattern where formerly only the random, erratic and unpredictable
had been observed (Gleick 1987; Kellert 1995). The difference
between chaos theory and complexity theory is not entirely clear-
cut, but we can state that chaos theory mainly deals with situations
such as turbulence that rapidly become highly disordered and
usually unmanageable, whereas complexity studies deal with
systems whose behaviour may be hard to predict, but which have
a good deal of structure (Axelrod and Cohen 1999). The notion of
systems is the founding stone of the ‘new sciences’, and the larger
framework that brought forth chaos theory is the so-called theory
of dynamical systems (Crutchfield et al. 1986). Complexity studies
are in fact applicable to all kinds of systems, regardless of their size
or nature, so that the following description is universally applicable
both to technological (sub-) systems and to the international
system.
Complexity studies and the behaviour of complex systems
According to the usual definitions, complex systems are complex
insofar as they incorporate a number of variables that
simultaneously play many different roles in the system’s evolution
and follow many different laws of behaviour (Cohen 1995).
Complexity is expected to arise as a natural development when a
system reaches a certain level of variety and diversity because of
many simple components interacting simultaneously. The
complexity is thus actually in the organization, or more precisely,
in the myriad possible ways that the components of the system can
interact. Therefore, its behaviour is not predictable from
knowledge of individual elements but can only be discovered by
studying how these elements interact and how the system adapts
and changes throughout time (Waldrop 1992). Complex
phenomena can also occur in relatively simple systems with very
few variables. Or, put differently, simple rules and simple initial
conditions can give rise to the most complex behaviour (Merry
1995).
One of the fundamental issues of complexity is the ‘nature of
order and organization’ (Bossomaier and Green 2000: 6). In
complexity theory, the appearance of new order is explained
through the concept of self-organization, which connotes a
spontaneous formation of a stable, but complex pattern out of
seemingly random entities (Ashby 1962; Foerster and Zopf 1962;
98
Myriam A. Dunn

Bak 1996). In general, self-organization refers to an evolutionary
process in which the internal organization of a system increases
automatically without being guided or managed by an outside
source. Self-organization is triggered by internal variation
processes, which are called ‘fluctuations’: Over time, complex
systems become increasingly sensitive to internal and external
fluctuations – and the more complex a system is, the more sensitive
and vulnerable to fluctuations it becomes (Prigogine 1981; Merry
1995). At a certain point, these fluctuations pass a critical
threshold, also called a bifurcation point, and then, following a
transitional stage of chaotic fluctuations, completely reorganize the
entire system (Laszlo 1991). 
The ability of a system to evolve in such a way as to approach a
critical point and then maintain itself at that point is called self-
organized criticality. Bak, who coined the term, argues that
complex behaviour in nature reflects the tendency of large systems
with many components to evolve into a poised, ‘critical’ state,
highly imbalanced, where minor disturbances may lead to events,
called avalanches, of all sizes (Bak 1996). Complex systems tend to
adapt to, or are themselves on, the edge of chaos, and most of the
changes take place through catastrophic events rather than by
following a smooth gradual path – that is, the new path the system
will take cannot be predicted and controlled. 
Complex systems further show surprising and unexpected
behaviour that is a property of the system as a whole. Often, they
self-organize in an evolutionary process in which the internal
organization of a system increases automatically without being
guided or managed by an outside source (Crutchfield 1994).
Structures can emerge both through the influence of emergent
phenomena on the various parts of a system, such as the effect of
norms on individuals, and through the ‘emergence of entirely new
dynamics within the system’ (Mihata 1997: 33). Due to the
emergent behaviour, the complex system cannot be understood by
reducing it to its parts; moreover, the behaviour we are interested
in evaporates when we try to reduce the system to a simpler, better-
understood one (Bar-Yam 1997).
That complexity theory, highly relevant to the CIP debate, is
clearly discernible from the fact that multi-million-dollar efforts are
currently under way at the US National Infrastructure Simulation
and Analysis Center (NISAC) to develop computer simulation tools
that can predict, in real time, the consequences of disruptive events
on a nation’s critical infrastructures. The modelling approach uses
Securing the digital age
99

an agent-based methodology to predict critical infrastructure
interactions. It treats infrastructures like Complex Adaptive
Systems (CAS), which are populations of interacting agents where
an agent is an entity with a location, capabilities and memory
(Rinaldi et al. 2001). From this perspective, each component of an
infrastructure constitutes a small part of the intricate web that
forms the overall infrastructure. This viewpoint incorporates
benefits for modelling and simulation, and it is hoped that such
approaches will be able to explain (some) emergent behaviour of
large-scale critical infrastructures.
Limits of the complexity paradigm
Apart from being directly applied to the modelling of complex
interdependencies, chaos theory and its various strands, developed
in a natural sciences context, are also increasingly being applied to
the social sciences. What the new science seems to have done is to
place within our grasp a set of very powerful intellectual tools and
concepts to think with, which appear to be free of many of the
limitations of the traditional approaches. New concepts, such as
emergence, become conceivable, and new methods, such as
nonlinear computer modelling, suggest themselves as legitimate
modes of study (Alberts and Czerwinski 1997; Cederman 1997;
Eve et al. 1997; Byrne 1998; Cederman and Gleditsch 2004). Given
the fundamental differences between physical and social systems,
various authors have explored the validity of applying the
conceptual and methodological tools of chaos theory to social
systems (cf. Albert 1995b; Eve et al. 1997; Turner 1997). Most of
these writings come to the conclusion that this exchange can be
very fruitful if one is aware of the dangers of abusing concepts
from other disciplines, such as chaos theory, or extending them by
false and far-fetched analogy to support existing theories or
normative views (Albert 1995; Michaels 1995). 
However, the hopes that complexity theory may somehow point
the way to a course of action which can ameliorate the
uncertainties inherent in a complex world have been disappointed,
mainly because the benefits have been exaggerated (Bak 1996;
Rosenau 1997). Another major problem is that the application of
the mathematics of chaos, of genetic algorithms that manipulate
precise numerical data through explicit operational rules, and of
nonlinear dynamics requires quantification and availability of
lengthy time-series data (Kellert 1995). Since human actions and
100
Myriam A. Dunn

cultures can never be so clearly encapsulated, the question is
whether the chaos paradigm is even methodologically accessible at
all to scholars in the humanities (R.S. Cohen 1995).
In addition, there are severe limitations to the system paradigm
that the whole construct of the new sciences depends on. One
problem is the inherent automaticity in systemic thinking. To see a
system as if it were a living organism in which things happen
without outside influence fails to take into account the most central
parameter of the social world: the actor, or, more explicitly, the
freedom of the actor to act. The main problem, however, is one of
system ontology: calculation and modelling inherently rely on our
ability to define the variables of the system. This is dependent on
our ability to describe the system, or more specifically, on our
ability to describe the system boundaries. However, the designation
of factors as being external (exogenous) or internal (endogenous)
with regard to a system ‘depends largely on the viewpoint of the
observer’ (Bertalanffy 1968: 141). 
Ultimately, all boundaries are dynamic rather than spatial.
Hence, an object – and in particular, a system – is definable only by
its cohesion in a broad sense, that is, by the interactions of the
component elements (Bertalanffy 1975). But how can we know
whether a variable is present in a system, unless we already know
all the variables it interrelates with? Interactions or interrelations
are never directly seen or perceived; they are always conceptual
constructs. Hence, no meaningful distinctions can be drawn
between ‘real’, observable objects and systems on the one hand,
and ‘conceptual’ constructs and systems on the other. 
Lessons and implications of the complexity paradigm
Even though we might not be able to define system boundaries, we
can draw some lessons for digital-age security from the complexity
paradigm. Complex systems exhibit a number of specific, non-
exclusive features and behaviours, from which lessons may be
learned without falling into the trap of domesticating ‘real-world
demons in ill-fitting complex cages’ (Bowker 1993) or of abusing
metaphors. As described earlier, both the inner workings and the
external manifestations of systems are characterized by
interrelation. Complex systems cannot exist in isolation – by their
very nature, they are tied to and connected to other systems, and
couple together to create higher order systems. Results cannot be
Securing the digital age
101

predicted from the separate actions: the effect of one variable
depends on the state of another. 
We can also argue that strategies depend on the strategies of
others. Interactions between strategies occur when actors
consciously react to others and try to anticipate what others will
do. Both the success and failures of policies are therefore
determined 
interactively 
(Axelrod 
1997; 
Jervis 
1997a).
Furthermore, non-linear behaviour is one of the cornerstones of
complexity, as it creates unpredictability, uncertainty and volatility
in the system. Cause and effect, or inputs and outputs, are not
proportional; the whole does not correspond to the sum of its
parts, and is not even qualitatively recognizable in its constituent
components. Indeed, behaviour changes the environment: initial
behaviour patterns and outcomes often influence later ones,
producing powerful dynamics that explain change over times and
that cannot be captured by labelling one set of elements ‘causes’
and the other ‘effects’ (Jervis 1997b).
In other words, initial conditions have an impact on the
outcome of the events. Tiny causes can have enormous effects.
Small uncertainties are amplified, so that even though the
behaviour is predictable in the short term, ‘it is unpredictable in the
long term’ (Merry 1995: 26). Extreme sensitivity to initial
boundary conditions or historical paths makes detailed prediction
impossible (Mihata 1997). Because specific dynamic system
outputs cannot be predicted (in the long run), it is not possible to
plan, via prediction, ‘the outcomes of an intervention in a social
system’ (Michaels 1995: 23).
The first implication of the complexity paradigm is therefore
mainly methodological by nature, since the underlying assumption,
which views the current environment as being interactive to a
degree such as to inhibit the tracing of causal sequences, obviates
the framing of hypotheses that link independent and dependent
variables. The presumption that certain phenomena (the
independent variables) are prior in time to those they affect (the
dependent variables) may be valid in a short-term context, but it
may not hold in a stretched-out time perspective (Rosenau 1992).
We should therefore switch our attention from outcomes to
processes (Michaels 1995), which is also the remedy proposed by
some constructivists to overcome the agent–structure problem
(Kratochwil 1989). 
Nevertheless, complexity, whether on the technical system level
or on a higher, international level, is, again, inherently a matter of
102
Myriam A. Dunn

perceptions. Views that abolish the concept of objective reality also
dissolve the idea of intrinsic complexity, meaning that complexity
is not an intrinsic property of an object, but rather depends on the
observer (Casti 1996). Consequently, no matter whether or not an
objective reality exists, it is approachable only through social
definitions. Individuals do not respond to the (probably existing)
objective reality directly, but through socially constructed thought
frameworks. In theoretical terms, if decision-makers or other
influential actors perceive complexity to be a problem, they will
influence the threat perception of key actors and their subsequent
actions (Eriksson 2001a). 
The same is true for the previous observation that there are
more actors on the international stage today, wielding more
influence due to the skill revolution, and with more knowledge at
their disposal. Based on the premise that decentralized network-
based soft power structures have gained in importance, the
argument runs that the state’s monopoly on authority has become
fragmented, and a plethora of non-governmental organizations,
social movements and other transnational non-state networks are
now competing with states for influence (Nichiporuk and Builder
1997; Papp et al. 1997). 
In CIP, we can observe that governments can no longer ‘go it
alone’: in securing the digital age, governments are challenged to
operate in unfamiliar ways, sharing influence with experts in the IT
community, with businesses and with non-profit organizations,
because the ownership, operation and supply of the critical systems
are in the hands of a largely private industry, which is diverse,
intermixed and relatively unregulated (Baird 2002). Collectively,
this industry has far more technical resources and operational
access to the infrastructures than the government does, so that
ultimately, the private sector will have to do most of the work and
must bear most of the burden to make infrastructures more secure
(Bosch 2002; Goodman et al. 2002). As a result, the process of
policy making is becoming more and more open and is being
transformed from a single-entity phenomenon to a multi-entity
one, as it has become customary to involve representatives of 
all major stakeholders in the policy preparation process (O’Brien 
et al. 2003). 
Clearly, what matters is not whether the change in power is
objectively ‘true’ or not, but whether states are willing to include
non-state actors in the policy process. Such changes in the
prevailing ideas about security practices challenge the state-centric
Securing the digital age
103

perspective on international relations and its attendant notion of a
distinction between domestic and foreign policy. Consequently, the
principles of the Westphalian order are not valid as a starting point
for analysing security in the digital age. Approaches are required
that focus on sub-units of the state, but also take into account
specific traits of the international system as changed by the
information revolution. 
For our purposes, actors and their respective values, interests
and beliefs should be the main unit of research. It is crucial to
understand the way individuals adopt changed practices arising
from new conceptions of identity and political community, thereby
altering interactions among states, or, conversely, the way in which
changes in interactions among states lead to changes in practices
among individuals (Koslowski and Kratochwil 1996; Braumoeller
2003). Specific actor constellations will develop specific
interpretations of information-age security threats and necessary
countermeasures. Depending on the ‘winning’ actor constellation
and its influence in the policy domain, these interpretations will
dominate the threat debate at given points in time and will be
responsible for specific countermeasures.
Conclusion
The broad, overarching research question addressed in this
publication is what the impact of the information revolution is on
security and what IR theory can say about these issues. At the
beginning of this chapter, a few critical questions were raised
concerning this task. We asked ourselves what information security
is and how it might be defined in a meaningful way, and came to
the conclusion that the term is not precise enough to be useful. 
For one thing, many of the anticipated changes seem apparent,
but just as many have yet to come into the open, as transformations
are ongoing. Statements about the implications of the information
revolution on security must be seen in much more relative terms
than generally suggested, especially because the outcome of change
is truly contradictory and a lot less explicit than some scholars like
to envisage. The complexity paradigm further turns one’s attention
to the concept of the inherently unpredictable situation – a
situation that is unpredictable in and of itself, not just by virtue of
the limitations of the observer. This resonates well with the general
postmodernist approach, in which no objective determination is
possible. The new sciences confirm the message that the observer
104
Myriam A. Dunn

and the observed cannot be detached from each other, and that
observation itself is an ontological event. Additionally, the complex
is assigned a specific epistemological meaning: It shows the limits
of knowledge due to complexity and unpredictability. 
Further, if we take the twin forces of complexity and change
seriously, we must reject the notion of a ‘grand’ theoretical project
that attempts to distil complexity, paradox and change into neat
theoretical packages and categories. The positivist-empiricist idea,
which still dominates the discipline, that a trained observer can
encapsulate the amazing complexity of the world into grand
theoretical projects through a variety of rigorous procedures, is
antithetic to the current circumstances. While looking at grand
theories may have heuristic value, we should acknowledge that
everything is in flux and that paradox and uncertainty prevail in
today’s security environment. Hence, even though we might aim to
reflect on theoretical premises, any theorizing will be limited in
scope, and generalizations might be conditional rather than
universal.
So, is a theory of the digital age really needed? All things
considered, the information revolution is a very important variable
in the equation of the modern world, with the ability to truly
change some aspects of international relations. But more
importantly, information-age security is not something that can be
objectively identified and analysed, but rather an ever-changing
construct. What it does, however, is to change the perception of
security and security practices. To study security in the digital age
thus means to focus on the process by which key actors subjectively
arrive at a shared understanding of what is to be considered and
collectively responded to as a security threat in the digital age. Even
if we conclude that this observation makes a specific theory for
information-age security redundant, the forces of the digital age are
still very poorly understood. Because there is very little exchange
between information-age research and the IR community in
general, we thus believe that the information revolution and its
impact on various aspects of IR should continue to be studied in
much more depth.
Securing the digital age
105

5 
Assessing theories of
information technology and
security for the Middle East
Hamoud Salhi
The spread of information technology (IT) in the Middle East
region1 has been too slow in evolving, and so has theory. Much of
what has been written in recent years has focused on case studies
and has been overly descriptive, highly prescriptive, and with little
or no emphasis on theory. Specifically, most scholarly
preoccupations have examined Internet infiltration across the
region while measuring the degree of its impact on state–society
relations and assessing the merits of government policies as they
pertain to democratic change, security and the survival of regimes
in the Middle East. This has resulted in an almost total neglect of
theory building as well as the absence of well-integrated middle
range theories. 
IT is still controversial in the Middle East, perhaps for many
solid reasons. While the region is pursuing development to achieve
e-readiness, scholars and observers are continuing to debate the
role of IT in society. Can IT take root in societies that have not yet
attained the post-industrial stage from which the West’s modern IT
transformation originated? Will IT be the locomotive of political
and social change with power to radically transform the Middle
East? What are its effects on the social fabric and politics of the
state? Will IT be the missing link that could enable the Middle East
to make the transition to democracy? Can IT bring an end to
fanaticism, including religious extremism and gender exploitation?
And, how will the governing and economic elite react to IT? Will
it be fully endorsed and popularized? Will it be used to maintain
the status quo or establish another order? It is such questions that
are generating active debate among scholars, policymakers,
researchers and think tank specialists who are striving to formulate
a best practice and best theory to use in examining IT in the
Middle East. 

Optimists (Fink and Kenny 2003; World Bank 2003) point to
what has occurred in Western societies in order to illustrate
passionately how IT can replicate the same progress while similarly
benefiting the people of the Middle East. Scholars note that the
movement of IT firms to the region is a strong indicator that the
Middle East is right on track (Corporate Location 2001; Gulf
News 2005; Elkady 2006). Given improved political representation
and economic infrastructure, an optimistic scholar might forecast
that the Middle East would experience a better future and that IT
would make the difference by enabling its potential as a fully
developed and integrated region (Rohozinski 2004). However,
there have been many doubters and sceptics. Some believe that the
region is simply not ready for such a transformation, citing weak
economic infrastructure, prevailing authoritarianism and
widespread corruption (Burkhart and Older 2003). Others simply
believe that the transformation would threaten the cultural and
social fabric of society by spreading values and morals deemed
unacceptable in the Middle East. To these observers, the expansion
of IT is merely another means of maintaining Western culture and
dominance (Kirat 2005). Between these two perspectives exists a
third group which perceives IT as neither all that good nor all that
bad, and they argue that the choice is not as absolute. The region
can have both: it can take advantage of new technologies while
ensuring full compatibility with its own culture (Hudson 2000).
Theoretically, scholars have actively engaged in debating the
cultural context of the Middle East and whether cultural norms can
be a predictor of IT’s integration into society. Additionally, they
have devised new models, enhanced old ones and prepared new
explanations with the aim of producing sound generalizations that
explain IT in the Middle East. Scholars have worked through
various phases of active theorizing while setting the tone (mostly
optimistic) and the stage (mostly descriptive) as they gather data
and assess the state of theory and practice. During these phases,
scholars have encountered challenging roadblocks resulting from
poor methodology and incomparable data. Early studies have
measured the social and political impact of IT in the Middle East
by the size of its diffusion without acknowledgment that these two
variables are not equal. Consequently, scholars have cautioned
against viewing IT as a magic wand while warning against high
expectations and suggesting that IT be seen as a tool of liberation.
As a result, the road of research is still long and bumpy, as well as
replete with obstacles. On the ground, IT is still in the building
IT and security for the Middle East
107

stage. In theory, scholars are continuing to contemplate the best
comprehensive approach to explain this phenomenon. 
The region itself remains either aloof or sceptical for key
reasons. Some citizens are illiterate and cannot understand or use
IT, whereas others are simply too economically disadvantaged to
purchase a computer or obtain Internet access. Just recently,
Algerian authorities allegedly complained that citizens were not
using low-interest government loans available to assist individuals
in the purchase of a computer. In a sense, access to a computer
today in the Middle East is no different than access to a typewriter
in the past. Simply put, there is little excitement about the Internet
because it has become like any other tool. Ironically, even people
who have access to a computer seem more excited about their
mobile phones than the Internet. 
Therefore, this study has two objectives. The first is to analyse
the state of International Relations theory and security in the
Middle East during the digital age. This will be achieved by
evaluating current theoretical literature with an emphasis on its
direction, problems of theory building and theory applications.
This study proposes that current theory is in the early
developmental stage. Scholars are creating a solid foundation for
conceptual clarity, data gathering, model building and the
identification of causal relations. Such a foundation will continue
its evolution into stronger theories of international relations and
security, specifically in the area of middle range theory. 
The second objective is to assess the applicability of
international relations and security theories in the Middle East as
influenced by the digital age. This will be achieved by exploring the
relative merits of Realism, Liberalism and Constructivism in regard
to theory construction and knowledge building in the Middle East.
This study proposes that Realism is the best fit, but Liberalism or
Constructivism should not be disregarded altogether. Although the
states maintain a monopoly over the spread and content of IT,
there are many challengers worthy of investigation. This enables
the possibility of testing the applicability of the liberal and
constructivist models with a focus on concepts such as interest
groups, interdependency, globalism, shared values and emerging
subnational identities.
108
Hamoud Salhi

IT penetration in the Middle East
Most indicators rank the Middle East among the least IT-
penetrated societies worldwide, with governments that are among
the least technologically prepared. Table 5.1 shows that Internet
usage in the Middle East is less than 10 per cent. Israel is the
highest penetrated state in the region with nearly half of its
population using the Internet. Among the rest, the UAE ranks
second at 35.8 per cent. This is to be expected, for the UAE has
placed a heavy emphasis on marketing new technologies,
supposedly taking advantage of its strategic geographical location.
However, towards the end of the spectrum, Iraq (at war), Yemen,
and Syria appear to be among the least penetrated societies in the
region. To a large degree this is a reflection of their level of
economic development – poorly developed and with inadequate IT
infrastructure. But it is worth noting that economics alone may not
accurately explain why certain states have fared better than others
IT and security for the Middle East
109
Table 5.1 Internet diffusion in the Middle East and population estimates
Population
Usage in
Internet
%
(2006 est.)
December
usage
population
2000
latest (penetration)
data*
Bahrain
723,000
40,000
152,700
21.1
Iran
69,442,905
250,000
7,500,000
10.8
Iraq
26,628,187
12,500
36,000
0.1
Israel
7,109,929
1,270,000
3,200,000
45.0
Jordan
5,282,558
127,300
600,000
11.4
Kuwait
2,630,775
150,000
600,000
22.8
Lebanon
4,509,678
300,000
600,000
13.3
Oman
2,424,422
90,000
245,000
10.1
West Bank 
(Palestine)
3,259,363
35,000
160,000
4.9
Qatar
795,585
30,000
165,000
20.7
Saudi Arabia
23,595,634
200,000
2,540,000
10.8
Syria
19,046,520
30,000
800,000
4.2
UAEmirates
3,870,936
735,000
1,384,800
35.8
Yemen
20,764,630
15,000
220,000
1.1
Total
190,084,161
3,284,800
18,203,500
9.6
* According to the website, the data were last updated on 31 March 2006.
Source: Internet World Stats, Usage and Promotion Statistics. Available on 12 May 
2006. <www.internetworldstats.com/stats5.htm>.

in the Middle East. The fact that countries with high gross national
products, like Saudi Arabia, are also among the least IT penetrated,
as the data show, suggests that other variables, such as political
priorities and relative openness of a society, may play a role 
in determining the extent to which IT is incorporated in the 
Middle East.
Also, most revealing from these data is that IT appears to be
concentrated in a very few countries. Tables 5.2 and 5.3 show that
without the top five countries the average Internet usage in the
region drops significantly from 9.6 to 7.42 per cent. On the other
110
Hamoud Salhi
Table 5.2 Internet penetration in the most penetrated states in the 
Middle East as of March 2006
Country
Penetration
(percentage of 
population)
Israel
45.0
UAE
35.7
Kuwait
22.8
Bahrain
21.1
Qatar
20.7
Average
29.06
Source: Adapted from Internet World Stats, Usage and Promotion Statistics. 
Available on 12 May, 2006, <www.internetworldstats.com/stats5.htm>. 
Table 5.3 Internet penetration in the least penetrated states in the 
Middle East as of March 2006
Country
Penetration
(percentage of 
population)
Lebanon
13.3
Jordan
11.4
Iran
10.8
Saudi Arabia
10.8
Oman
10.1
Palestine
4.9
Syria
4.2
Yemen
1.2
Iraq
0.1
Average
7.42
Source: Adapted from Internet World Stats, Usage and Promotion Statistics. 
Available on 12 May, 2006, <www.internetworldstats.com/stats5.htm>.

hand, Israel, UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain and Qatar comprise 29.06 per
cent of usage in the Middle East. This shows that IT is contributing
to regional disparities that reduce the likelihood of full regional
integration so paramount for growth in today’s global economy.
Additionally, in terms of e-government readiness, Table 5.4
shows that most, if not all, Middle Eastern governments are still
not ready for these technologies. According to the United Nations
Global E-Government Readiness Report 2005, the highest-ranking
country in e-government readiness (apart from Israel) was the UAE
with a ranking of 45, followed by Bahrain at 53, slipping from 46
in the previous year. Although the data show that most states in the
Middle East have made progress towards e-government, it is
obvious that the region as a whole is still struggling in its attempt
to catch up with the rest of the world. While many factors,
including a lack of adequate economic infrastructure can be
responsible for this lack of preparedness, corruption can be a
contributing problem as well. For example, some officials in the
IT and security for the Middle East
111
Table 5.4 Ranking e-government readiness in the Middle East in 
2004–2005
Country
Index
2005
2004
Change
ranking
ranking
Israel
0.6903
24
23
-1
UAE
0.5718
42
60
18
Bahrain
0.5282
53
46
-7
Turkey
0.4960
60
57
-3
Qatar
0.4895
62
80
18
Jordan
0.4639
68
68
0
Lebanon
0.4560
71
74
3
Kuwait
0.4431
75
100
25
Saudi Arabia
0.4105
80
90
10
Oman
0.3405
112
127
15
Iraq
0.3334
118
103
-15
Syria
0.2871
132
137
5
Yemen
0.2125
154
154
0
Egypt
0.3793
99
136
37
Tunisia
0.3310
121
120
-1
Algeria
0.3242
123
118
-5
Morocco
0.2774
138
138
0
Libya
n/a
n/a
n/a
PA
n/a
n/a
n/a
Source: United Nations (2005) Global E-Government Readiness Report 2005. 
From E-Government to E-Inclusion, New York: United Nations, pp. 51
and 65. 

Algerian Ministry of Finance have resisted IT because, allegedly, it
would undermine their authority to freely override higher taxes or
penalties for non-payment of taxes levied against their relatives,
friends, or whoever is willing to reward them with a handsome
bribe. Apparently, establishing an electronic system would require
them to be transparent in their actions, and consequently less likely
to abuse the system for their own profit.
Socially, the Middle East has yet to reach the era of ‘electronic
populism’, as it has been dubbed by Theorode Roszak (discussed in
Jordan and Taylor 2004: 13), in part because of what the region is
missing: a real electronic culture that transcends political change,
using computers and IT as a vehicle for social and political
transformation. To a large degree, the Middle East has not
experienced a flourishing of information societies in the same
manner as other regions. This is due in part to historical reasons
rooted in colonization and a long cycle of authoritarian rule. In
their seminal work Hacktivism and Cyberwars, Tim Jordan and
Paul Taylor detail how generations of hackers revolutionized IT
and allowed it to become what it is today: an e-populist culture. In
this book, the authors identify seven types of hackers and explain
how each group has contributed to electronic populism while
discussing how the culture of electronic activism evolved over two
succeeding generations, each with a different goal in mind. 
The first generation pushed for the democratization of the
Internet by popularizing the concept of access for everyone and
using this belief in certain cases as a method for pressuring the
government to reverse policy on issues critical to their causes.
However, this generation also struggled with balancing its
obsession and love for technological innovation with its passion for
political causes. The second generation was less political and more
professional in its outlook on information technology. Jordan and
Taylor believe that it was even co-opted by big business and its
entrepreneurial business goals. It seems that this generation lost
most of its drive for political causes in favour of material gains.
Computers have become user friendly, easy and affordable for the
vast majority living in advanced societies. Consequently,
‘hacktivists’ (or computer activists) have found themselves in a
rather ironic situation, having to choose between celebrating their
success in reaching the ultimate goal or mourning their fate after
realizing they had become obsolete without any cause to defend.
Hence, one may argue that the second generation has been
apolitical out of necessity rather than choice. 
112
Hamoud Salhi

The development that is vital to the growth of IT has been
missing in the Middle East for two reasons. First, IT has not
developed a class of its own similar to previous growth patterns in
the West, nor is it a manifestation of post-industrialism. IT has
been introduced to the region as a globalization force designed to
promote Western products and, some would say, a Western way of
life. In this context, the expansion of IT across the Middle East is
a natural outcome of globalism.
Second, just as the decision to adopt IT was political, it was
motivated by fear as well as economic gain. Politically, elites were
threatened by the prospect that a free and transparent IT would
expose notorious violations of human rights, and the deliberate
decision was made to adopt IT while simultaneously monitoring it
under existing rules of censorship and information control.2
Political control was then followed by economic hegemony. The
established elite knew the economic potential that IT would bring
and made it an exclusive part of their own business interests,
preventing the emergence of a new class of IT entrepreneurs and
business professionals. 
In a related point, scholars are correct in treating the lack of
adequate economic infrastructure as an impediment to IT’s growth.
It remains a matter of failed economic policy that is not just specific
to IT, and it would be wrong to assume that the government would
solve the IT problem ahead of other pressing policy issues. To put
it bluntly, people’s needs in the Middle East are far greater than
going online to chat, order pizza or shop (Rostamani 2006); only
a few have the luxury to do just that. In this context, the Middle
East’s economic needs are basic: shelter, food and clothing. Despite
a huge potential for economic growth, the region is still considered
among the poorest in the world. For example, in Algeria, an oil-
poducing country, it still takes at least 10 days’ salary for a
professor at a university, an elementary school teacher or a
journalist to purchase a kilogram of meat. For a security guard (a
highly dangerous job in a country ravaged by terrorism) it requires
at least 15 days’ salary to make the same purchase with nothing left
over for other needs. This is not exclusive to Algeria. It is a way of
life for many people in the Middle East, including Mauritania,
Morocco, Yemen, and even Egypt. Hence, it is far more likely that
the masses in the Middle East will be impassioned and motivated
by economic conditions and human rights.3
Third, universities in the Middle East have played a minor role
in the growth of the Internet because of a lack of government
IT and security for the Middle East
113

support. In the United States, the efforts of the Department of
Defense to expand the Internet to the academic sphere allegedly
were considered critical to its development into a mass movement.
This factor is missing in the Middle East.
There is no specific time frame during which the Middle East
discovered IT, but it is safe to suggest that universities began
offering classes in computer technology in the early 1980s 
(J. Anderson 1998). Because the field was still new, universities
relied on foreign expertise and hired nationals returning from
universities abroad to teach courses and build academic
programmes. In many countries, faculty and students did not
receive the support they needed to be successful. Universities did
not provide enough computers for everyone to use at their leisure
or outside class, so students had to complete less than adequate
practical training with minimal hands-on exposure to these
technologies. This is an example of what the 2002 United Nations
Development Program Report has described as a weak scientific
base in the Middle East. Report statistics show that the regional
average participation rate for university students specializing in
scientific fields in the Arab world is less than 10 per cent, with a
majority of students pursuing majors in the social sciences and
humanities. Though many states have established scientific and IT
institutes, they still lack adequate services and resources, and
teaching methods are considered mediocre. As a result, universities
have played only a minor role in pioneering and popularizing
information technology. Therefore, given these conditions, how
does the theoretical literature approach the state of IT? 
Empirical research and theory
Most IT studies have been journalistically driven by policy
outcome, both speculative and descriptive in nature, with some
focused primarily on US national security and cyberwars from the
perspective of the ongoing war on terrorism (Weimann 2006,
2004). Others have addressed social and political change while
viewing the expansion of IT as a source of instability that has
facilitated a post-9/11 cyberterrorist war led by Islamist
organizations such as al-Qaeda (Bunt 2003: 67–123). On the basis
of  the region’s poor economic conditions, traditional cultures and
authoritarian regimes, scholars have reasoned that IT would
undermine existing conditions, including regimes, and that IT
would enable non-state actors to expose corruption to the masses,
114
Hamoud Salhi

thereby leading to popular revolt. It is assumed that the people
would use the Internet to discover how democratic countries live,
and it would be only a matter of time before they would rise
against their government, ushering in a new era of democracy and
freedom (Parry 1999). Studies have also argued that the
governments of the Middle East would resist any e-technology
import for fear that it would enable the opposition to challenge
their authority (Human Rights Watch Report 2005). 
This body of literature has produced inconclusive evidence, and
there have been as many studies to support the argument as to
reject it. The discussion that follows will focus on the theoretical
debate as it relates to theory and theory building, emphasizing the
areas scholars and researchers have investigated and the
hypotheses and propositions they tested. 
Applicability
In the initial stage of IT’s expansion to the Middle East, scholars
examined the feasibility of IT integration within the region.
Specifically, they compared socioeconomic and political conditions
in the Middle East with the countries where IT had experienced
rapid growth. IT was believed to be a better fit for post-industrial
societies, having been the product of their own development.4 At
issue was (and still is) whether IT can spread across societies with
weak 
economic 
infrastructures, 
prevailing 
authoritarian
governments and traditional cultures. Proponents of IT see no
reason why it cannot and seemingly argue that the Middle East has
the drive and desire to be part of this revolution with everything
else being equal. In this regard, IT affords the Middle East an
opportunity to catch up with the rest of the world while promoting
its own culture and religion appropriately. Even though Jon
Anderson makes the point that the Middle East may not replicate
the post-industrial transitions that have occurred in Western
societies (J. Anderson 1998: 10–12), he observes in another work
(J. Anderson 1997) that IT offers tremendous possibilities for the
region, and he believes that it will be embraced with open arms: 
The desire to be part of the information revolution is all the
stronger because of widespread perception in the region that
the Middle East missed the industrial revolution leading not
only to its eclipse, but also to its domination by Western
countries. Interestingly, the Internet is not widely perceived as
IT and security for the Middle East
115

an example of ‘Americanization’ or ‘McDonaldization’ but is
seen rather as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. This vision
includes the opportunity to be on a par with other countries,
or with firms in other countries, to get access to information
and markets, and to participate in something that is not just
new but that Middle Eastern people can command from the
outset, and upon which they can put a distinctively Middle
Eastern mark, from Arabization technologies to national and
Islamic content.
(Anderson 1997: 10–12)
Concentrating on the media, Jon Alterman has noted in his
article on the ‘Information Revolution and the Middle East’,
published by Rand Corporation (Alterman 2004) that major
progressive changes have occurred in the Middle East during the
last decade because of changes in the information environment. He
predicts that advances in what he terms ‘mid-tech’ technologies
such as satellite televisions, videocassettes and photocopies will
‘affect the region in the most profound manner’ (Alterman 2004:
227). To Alterman, technology has forced the media, including
newspapers, to make improvements in the ‘quantity, quality and
variety of information’ that is made available (Alterman 2004:
228). As an example, he shows how satellite technology has helped
create a ‘vibrant and viable’ Arab press in the Western world,
beginning with Asharq Al-Awsat, a Saudi newspaper founded by
Saudi investors in London and built around the same concept as
USA Today, setting the stage for later newspapers such as Al-Hayat
and Al-Quds Al-Arabi (Alterman 2004: 229).
Other scholars have approached the transfer of IT to the Middle
East from a sociological and psychological perspective that
examines how interpersonal communication among individuals is
affected. 
Applying 
E.T. 
Hall’s 
model 
of 
intercultural
communication (Hall 1976) and Fons Trompenaars’ cultural
modes, Norhayati Zakaria and co-authors find that IT has
facilitated communication among individuals in the Middle East
(Zakaria et al. 2003). Citing other supporting studies, Zakaria et
al. find evidence that the basic traditional cultural values of
collectivism, honour and hospitality in the Middle East can be
predictors that explain individual reactions to IT applications.
However, a Rand study suggests otherwise and explains that the
region will miss the technological revolution. According to Grey E.
Burkhart and Susan Older, ‘there are simply too many
116
Hamoud Salhi

impediments, and the impediments are rooted in the conservative,
even when the resources, investments funds, technical know-how,
etc. are reasonably available’ (Burkhart and Older 2003: 53). Alon
Peled could not agree more: To him, the region is simply wasting
its time by diverting attention from real problems. He states:
In all, the Internet revolution highlights and extenuates the
political, economic, and technological backwardness of Arab
countries of the Levant. Rather than boast about how the
Internet will change the fortune of their countries, political
leaders, businessmen, and scholars should address the real
problems that inhibit growth and prosperity in their region –
political restrictions on free speech and economic
entrepreneurship, corrupt and wasteful bureaucracies, and
collapsing education systems. Technological dreams must not
be encouraged if they distract attention from these more urgent
problems that require immediate attention and a great deal of
hard work. Regrettably, all too many people conjure up
unattainable Internet dreams as a way to escape the real
problems of the Levant.
(Peled 2000)
A core problem remains in this debate: unwarranted
generalization and relevancy. It is evident that IT scholars are
influenced by post-industrial literature since they believe that it can
be replicated in an underdeveloped setting and that communication
can transcend social and political change (Garner 1996),
irrespective of the extent of political and economic development.
At times, these scholars have used previous literature only partially,
perhaps just enough to support their point. For example, scholars
have extensively used Habermas’ work as a reference to highlight
the importance of communication and technological innovation in
creating the Western civil society (Habermas and Seideman 1989).
Habermas also identified the dominant upper class as controlling
the flow of communication to serve its own interests (as discussed
in Tehranian 1999). That point seems to be missing from the
Middle East’s literature, or at least simply glanced over. 
Additionally, scholars seem to leave out the issue of relevancy
and fail to recognize how the region perceives the import of IT and
how it has dealt with the media historically. Writer Said Essoulami
(Essoulami 2000) has addressed the role of communication in the
Arab world. Writing on the evolution of the press in the region
IT and security for the Middle East
117

during the last 100 years, Essoulami depicted the Arab press as
always being in the hands of the dominant class. During the
colonial and post-colonial period, the press was subjected to state
supervision. While discussing the impact of oil revenues on the
press in recent years, Essoulami (2000) observed also that
journalists acquiesced for personal and seemingly unethical
reasons: they ‘fell over themselves to offer their services to the rich
and draw on the benefits due to them, such as cars, houses, or gold
watches’. A critical press was confined to the limits of the Arab
community abroad. 
Measurements
The second research question that scholars have addressed in their
studies about IT involves proper measures for adequately
explaining IT as a predictor of change in the region. Initially,
scholars used the size of IT penetration as a key determinant in its
ability to promote change. Later studies used different measures,
focusing on impact and producers to size up IT and its effect on the
Middle East, socially, economically and politically.  
Diffusion
Early on, many IT scholars and researchers interested in the Middle
East approached the diffusion of IT as way to revolutionize the
Middle East. Writing at a time of increased global interdependence
and IT expansion, research predicted that the growth of IT was
uncontrollable, and that it would change the dynamics of local
politics in the Middle East while setting the stage for liberation.
Hence, researchers hypothesized that the extent of IT penetration,
measured by the total number of users among other indicators,
would correlate with the readiness of a state to be technologically
apt. Based on this, researchers would then deduce whether or not
a state was prepared to be democratic. It was assumed that states
with more computers and a higher number of users would be more
ready for democratic change than countries with fewer computers
and users. 
To a large degree, the emphasis on diffusion as a criterion of
democratic change is reminiscent of the modernization theory in
the 1950s which measured the level of development of a Third
World country by the size of what was perceived at the time as
indicators of modernity, such as ownership of transistor radios and
118
Hamoud Salhi

cars. As documented by many studies elsewhere, this theory has
been severely criticized, most notably by Samuel Huntington who
suggested that the theory failed to distinguish between economic
(modernization) and political (institutionalization) development.
Much the same criticism has been levelled against the proponents
of IT diffusion, faulting them for wrongly concluding that
computer accessibility is linked to political and social change.
Specifically, another group of researchers and scholars argue that
greater accessibility to IT may not necessarily translate into
political action. To assume that it does underestimates the
supremacy and influence of states and the potential for retaliation,
which is an unlikely scenario since states are the primary actors in
the process of IT development. 
McLaughlin (2003) is on point when he observes that ‘the
Internet and other information technologies provide a broad
theoretical framework but do little to assess how this framework
relates to the Middle East’. Also, McLaughlin has doubts that this
approach will work due to practical constraints: ‘In a region where
Internet access is often limited by infrastructure constraints or
governmental censorship, the theoretical power of the Internet may
face serious practical challenges.’                       
In this regard, McLaughlin finds the literature to be lacking in
theoretical sophistication and analytical insights. According to
him, there have been improvements in analysis compared to the
initial stage when most IT studies were overly descriptive. His
suggestion is for scholars to move ‘into more specific analytical
frameworks that are explanatory and predictive rather than merely
descriptive’.
Impact
Along with McLaughlin’s critique, researchers and scholars soon
discovered that diffusion alone does not adequately measure
change; accessibility to the Internet does not necessarily result in
political action. Diffusion measures fail to convey an accurate
picture of what states are doing to become e-ready. According to a
World Bank study, the use of macro-analytical data such as gross
domestic product (GDP) produces an obvious bias: that advanced
countries will always fare better than poor countries for the simple
reason that they generate a higher GDP. A more relevant indicator
is the amount of IT investment compared to other sectors in the
IT and security for the Middle East
119

country. This shows the importance of IT to state policy and may
predict its potential to be e-ready (World Bank Report 2003).
Other researchers are also critical of the diffusion model for
being too descriptive and lacking proper tools for prediction. To
this end, McLaughlin introduces an Internet-based model which he
tests against the cases of three non-state actors: the Muslim
Brotherhood in Jordan, the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and the
Movement for Islamic Reform in Arabia (McLaughlin 2003). His
goal is to explain why and how non-state dissident actors resort to
political actions. McLaughlin builds his model around a rather
simplistic set of assumptions that the Internet is a tool that is used
because of the advantages offered to users and because it is cheaper
and more efficient than other communication tools. But to
capitalize on these advantages, the Internet must first be accessible
and free of any control. Second, it must have an audience willing
to use the tool by surfing websites and writing e-mails. McLaughlin
develops three typologies and applies them to the cases of Jordan,
Egypt and Saudi Arabia. These are internationalization,
mobilization and support erosion (McLaughlin 2003). Still, there
are scholars who simply prefer to measure the impact of IT as it
evolves in the Middle East. 
IT has created new spheres of public discourse and has been
thought to have ignited a new form of social and ethnic conflict.
Hence, it has enabled individuals and groups to challenge the social
and political order using Internet-based strategies never seen
before. For example, in Gulf region newspapers and even bridal
magazines, clothing is drawn to cover women’s bodies, because of
a social taboo that views exposure of arms, breasts, midriff or legs
as culturally inappropriate. However, the same level of exposure
appears to be acceptable on the Internet with users easily able to
find photographs of women in a variety of apparel which is not
compliant to these standards. Discussion and information on social
issues such as marriage, dating, contraception, menstruation,
sexuality and pornography, which have long been considered
acceptable only in the private sphere, are now freely available in
the public domain on websites that are accessible by everyone,
albeit checkable by law enforcement. Similarly, dating has also
been considered taboo. But more and more young men and women
are now seen together in public spaces, and it is becoming
increasingly likely that couples may get married after meeting in a
chat room or through a website. An anonymous Web blogger cited
in an article by Vesely describes her feeling that she ‘can talk very
120
Hamoud Salhi

freely and very frankly about things I can never talk about in any
other place, about subjects that are banned […] It is liberating’
(Vesely 2004: 25).
At the lowest level of political interaction, individuals have
become familiar with IT and acquired the skills to surf the Internet
for a variety of reasons, including research, entertainment and
friendship. Hence, the Internet has enabled individuals in the
Middle East to join transnational organizations or groups to learn
more about themselves and the outside world. In a Haverford
College IT programme, adolescents from Morocco are now able to
share experiences with adolescents in the US (Barrow 2004: 52).
Similarly, many academicians in the region are engaged in
collaborative learning with their counterparts in the US via
websites designed to improve curriculum development and
teaching skills. Hundreds of Iranian women are joining and
forming blogs, while finding ‘the Web particularly liberating.’
(Vesely 2004: 25) 
A recent study on emergency contraception has found that Arab
women are increasingly seeking information on feminine health
issues from the World Wide Web. For example, in May 2003 the
Arabic-language website created by Ibis Reproductive Health and
the Office of Population Research at Princeton University
registered about 40,000 visits and over 78,000 pages requests in 19
months (Foster et al. 2005: 134). Contemplating this phenomenon,
University of Cambridge researcher Rafal Rohozinski noted that 
Internet cafés, some containing only a few computers, are in
evidence from the refugee camps of Gaza to the suburbs of
Tehran, each with their teeming mass of young men hunched
over computer screens, downloading the latest music MP3s,
playing video games, chatting with unseen others, or, when no
one is looking, surfing porn. 
(Rohozinski 2004: 2–3) 
Focusing on the Coptic minority in Egypt, Paul S. Rowe
concludes that IT has ‘facilitated a revolution in political dissent
and debate’ (Rowe 2001: 91). IT has provided the Coptic diaspora
with a new means to lobby their cause while making political
activism ‘safer and more effective’ and has ‘encouraged a more
individualist approach to political protest, integrating a traditional
human rights discourse with the more traditional communal
solidarity practiced by Copts in their home setting’ (Rowe 2001:
IT and security for the Middle East
121

91). What is significant in Rowe’s analysis is the role played by the
external Coptic community in Washington D.C. and its ability to
influence legislature in ways that have captured the attention of
Egyptian authorities (Rowe 2001: 90).
Needless to say, this area has attracted the most research, in part
because it makes good journalism. In this sense, scholars have
relied heavily on the media to illustrate the impact of IT, without
pursuing the next step of testing propositions or building a
theoretical framework for comparative analysis.
Additionally, scholars have concluded that the emphasis on end-
users has made the diffusion of technology appear ‘passive’ and
‘the region primarily as a receiver or consumer of technology’ 
(J. Anderson 2000: 419). Thus, they recommended examining the
producers of IT through a solid case analysis with measures to test
real-time impact (McLaughlin 2003).
Producers
Recent developments in IT studies indicate that a new focus is
emerging. Anderson suggests that we shift our attention to
production because ‘production rather than the consumption, is
what shapes environments, use, economics, politics and the
cultural register of the Internet there [Middle East]’ (J. Anderson
2000: 420). Anderson surveys the users of technology, and the
problems associated with the Internet both nationwide and
internationally, including proper technical standards. Anderson’s
approach improves the quality of research because it deals with
specific actors and mechanisms involved in the process of acquiring
and integrating IT in the Middle East. 
Theories of international relations and IT
Scholars in the field of international relations have afforded little
importance to IT, except for studies on terrorism and cyberwars.
Most IT studies, as shown previously, have been in comparative
politics (social movements) (Keck and Sikkink, 1998);5 sociology
(culture studies); and psychology (intercultural communication).
However, theories of international relations are quite relevant for
IT, particularly in explaining the role of governments in acquiring,
promoting and controlling this medium (cf. Giacomello 2005) or
(not) managing information regimes (Bessette and Haufler 2001;
Herrera 2002). This part of the chapter will show just that by
122
Hamoud Salhi

highlighting how Realists, Liberals and Constructivists approach
IT.6 It will be followed by an examination of the best theoretical fit
for understanding IT, and the chapter will conclude with an
assessment of current research and trends. 
It is argued that advocates of Realism and Liberalism have
dominated research agendas by framing the debate around the
general proposition of whether or not IT has the ability to radically
transform the Middle East through democratic change. On the
other hand, Constructivists have held their own and brought a new
research focus that is centred on normative principles and identity
formation, including ethnic bonding and religious activism.
The state
Researchers and scholars from the three theoretical paradigms
discussed in this book are unanimous in their conclusion that the
state remains the most important agent of social, political and
economic change in the Middle East. Hence, they believe that the
states have the ultimate power to promote, manage or completely
derail IT development. However, scholars disagree in their
assessment of whether states will withstand continued domestic
and external pressure emanating from pro-IT groups pushing for
freedom from government control and interference. Proponents of
Realism argue that states have survived much bigger challenges in
the past, such as the wave of Arab nationalism in the 1960s and
religious fundamentalism in the 1980s and 1990s, and they are
already equipped with the necessary tools to deter any threat.
China is the ultimate example of this capability to stay in control
(The Economist 29 April 2006).
Liberals are not convinced, however. They believe that states are
trapped in a web of international transformation beyond their
control (cf. Deudney and Ikenberry 1999), namely globalization,
which will ultimately force even the Middle East to open its
societies and polities to the opposition. Short of this, the states of
the Middle East risk being left behind the rest of the world, facing
the high probability of regional political instability and violence. In
simple terms, the Middle East will have no choice but to
democratize.
In contrast to the Realists and Liberals, Constructivists have
taken a middle-of-the-road approach (Adler 1997). While
recognizing states as the most important actors of political and
social change, they underscore the power of transnational ideas,
IT and security for the Middle East
123

such as democracy, Islam and ethnicity, in rallying groups across
the Middle East and the world to promote change. Accordingly,
Constructivists have pushed the theoretical debate among the three
schools of international relations a step further because of a focus
on ideas that naturally transcend borders in a manner much bigger
than Realism or Liberalism. From a Constructivist perspective, IT
has connected people who share similar values and outlooks. As a
result of IT, for example, Muslims in South Africa and the Middle
East are regularly interacting and assisting each other in
understanding their religion. The same can be said about ethnic
communities living in a worldwide diaspora; IT has enabled them
to foster an ethnic bond and strengthen unity. Considering such
developments, the states appear to be irrelevant and in no position
to stop change. Constructivists are quick to point out that states
have devised their own norms by dictating what is socially and
politically inappropriate, thus keeping their power almost intact
(cf. Wendt 1992; Buzanet al. 1998).
Non-state actors
Scholars, such as Keck and Sikkink (1998) for example, have
placed heavy emphasis on non-state actors using IT as a tool of
mass political mobilization, including moves against regimes in the
Middle East. Studies have predicted a collapse of authoritarianism
that would usher in a new era of democratic change, courtesy of
information technology (Moore 1997; Maynes 1998; Friedman
1999). Within the region, many intellectuals and human rights
activists believed they had finally found a winning formula for
influencing government policy. Speaking with Human Rights
Watch, a Syrian defence lawyer claimed that ‘human rights
organizations can now send out calls for help whenever the rights
of a citizen have been violated’, and ‘that they can now launch
online campaigns directed at individuals, officials and ministers by
sending out e-mails accompanied by activists’ signatures to the
president, the attorney general, or the minister of the interior’
(Human Rights Watch Report 2005: 21). 
Moreover, even a Baath Party loyalist, Abd al-Nur, shared the
same view and was convinced that the Internet would change the
way in which the Syrian government operated. He noted how the
government already ‘has expanded the range of topics people can
read about. It has created a new, open atmosphere’ (Human Rights
Watch Report 2005: 68). Abd al-Nur, who lives in Syria and
124
Hamoud Salhi

manages a website, <www.All4Syria.com>, believes that he has
survived government censorship and been treated less harshly than
others because his site provides accurate and specific information
instead of general accusations. The content of his site mentions
officials by name, presents specifics regarding their errors, and
shows the impact on specific government sectors (Human Rights
Watch Report 2005: 68). 
Not far from Syria, Iran is experiencing the same trend, and
scholars are also just as optimistic. Analysing the situation in
Tehran, Human Rights Watch predicted that Iran would be a world
leader in information technology The report explained that:
Iran has the potential to become a world leader in information
technology. It has a young, educated, computer-literate
population that has quickly taken to the Internet. It is rapidly
developing its telecommunication infrastructure. Attempts to
restrict Internet usage violate Iran’s obligation to protect
freedom of expression and foster popular mistrust of the
government.
(Human Rights Watch Report 2005: 43)
Realists have a different view, arguing that the states can
undermine any challengers by virtue of their hegemony. In
addition, Realists doubt that non-state actors would use IT to
mobilize the masses since they may not even have access. Realists
argue that politicians in the Middle East still rely on traditional
methods for rallying the masses, such as personal contact, tribal
relations and face-to-face interactions. Constructivists also agree
while highlighting how states have infiltrated several societies to
watch these groups and later prosecute them. 
This approach, however, assumes that the same theories applied
elsewhere in the world may be replicated in the Middle East simply
by treating non-state actors in the Middle East as if they operated
in a pluralistic environment conducive to democratic change.
Moreover, critics disagree with the assertion that non-state
messages featured on websites and contained in e-mails will be read
and will positively influence individual mindsets. In doing so,
critics charge that this approach ignores the predispositions of
states to retaliate, and it overestimates the power of the masses by
mistakenly assuming that they have the ability and literacy to
access websites and receive e-mails.
IT and security for the Middle East
125

Shared values
The relationship between IT and cultural identities, including
religious groups, gender and ethno-nationalism, has been discussed
by many social scientists in recent years. Questions of Muslim
identities, religious duties and even attire have been dominant
themes on many websites designed specifically to promote a
version of Islam consistent with cultural and religious norms and
values. In general, sites offer content ranging from traditional to
militant forms of Islam in addition to a plethora of websites created
by different sources, including governments, non-state actors and
individuals. (Anderson 2003; Tadros 2005)
While each of the three international relations perspectives has
examined these issues, the recent trend, based on the number of
studies published in major international relations journals, appears
to be moving towards Constructivism (cf. Adler 2002; Fearon and
Wendt 2002). The danger of this newfound emphasis is that it
concentrates heavily on Islamist movements perceived as a threat
to Western security and focuses on the conditions of women and
minorities which support the prevailing image of authoritarianism
in the Middle East. In this sense, additional problems are
presented. Though a constant in many studies, there has been no
clear consensus as to what culture can do for the Middle East,
without the threat of an Islamist movement. Specifically at issue is
whether shared cultural values are a hindrance or an asset to IT. 
Those who believe that culture is problematic for IT’s
development have argued that the culture of the Middle East is
inherently anti-change and would oppose IT on the grounds of
being Western and anti-Islamic. To this group, such an attitude
could only leave the Middle East behind and cause long cycles of
economic underdevelopment, poverty and instability. Prudent
Realists have a different take on culture. While they believe that
globalization makes culture highly susceptible to change, they have
cautioned about the speed of change, which the state may be
unable to absorb without the risk of political and social instability.
Studies have yet to show what constitutes a rapid social change,
but already leaders in the region are using speed of change as a way
to control IT. 
Both Saudi Arabia and Iran have issued legislation to ban
websites deemed culturally inappropriate. In retrospect, the
prudent Realists seem to have given the states a much-needed
reason to justify what amounts to a violation of basic freedom of
126
Hamoud Salhi

speech. Even more, the fact that Islamist organizations and other
groups in society have endorsed this move has served to legitimize
such actions. This has not stopped or slowed the spread of Islamist
websites, nor has it discouraged scholars from studying them,
especially after the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States,
which created concern that Islamic norms and values can now be a
rallying force for militants eager to generate anti-Western feelings
and recruit involvement in terrorist movements. Considering how
the Islamist movement has shaped the politics and societies of the
Middle East, it is critical to ask if Constructivism and Liberalism
are better suited than Realism to explain IT. 
The best theoretical fit
Middle Eastern states have been the dominant agents of political,
economic and social change, enabling them to monopolize IT from
the inception. For example, while the Internet was made available
to the government of Saudi Arabia in 1994, it reached the public in
1999 only after the Kingdom obtained a technological tool which
filtered and controlled information. Furthermore, once the Internet
became publicly available, the Council of Ministers passed
legislation in 2001, which affirmed state control and made it illegal
for users to access or publish what the Kingdom considers
forbidden materials. Saudi Arabia is not the sole example; other
countries have also pursued the same path.
States have successfully controlled IT through the Internet
service provider (ISP). In theory, it is generally believed that states
with multiple ISPs have a more tolerant attitude towards
information gathering and dispersal. However, this is not always
the case, particularly in the Middle East. Although states have used
different strategies to provide cyberservices to the public, the end
result has been nearly the same. States with multiple ISPs control
the flow of information just as much or even more than states with
a single ISP. In 2000, Saudi Arabia had 30 ISPs serving over
130,000 users and monitored by a team of technicians from
Finland based in King Abdul Aziz City of Science and Technology.
While Tunisia has multiple ISPs, licensing is owned and controlled
by the daughter of the president. 
Because IT has developed as a commercial activity and not as a
university programme, the state incorporated IT within the public
sector in the absence of deregulation. Consequently, the governing
elite awarded the right of licensing and ownership of IT businesses
IT and security for the Middle East
127

to political allies, social peers and family members, further
enabling the state to uphold the status quo. For example, in the
UAE, the government has made the city of Dubai a hub of e-
commerce which has attracted major global technology companies,
such as Microsoft and Intel. Egypt is following the same course and
has established a goal of becoming the Japan of the Middle East in
the category of IT development. 
Finally, even socially and morally, the state seems to have taken
protection of what it deems morally, religiously and politically
correct as its sole responsibility. States have passed legislation to
sanction such control, even though there has been no public
debate. Accordingly, the states have used blocking, controlling and
censoring technologies to prevent Internet users from accessing
inappropriate sites. For those who attempt and actually succeed in
surfing such websites, punishment can be harsh, including
imprisonment without due process. 
This is the context in which the state remains the most
important actor in the Middle East. Because of the role it has
played in IT, Realism, with its emphasis on the state as the most
important actor, is best suited for explaining the phenomenon of
IT, both theoretically and in practice.
Conclusions and directions
To a large extent, the state of IT and its theory and research agenda
are continuing to emerge. Evaluation of IT in the Middle East
shows that states have made significant progress in accessibility
and affordability, but critical variables are constraining efforts to
integrate the region fully, and these variables include high illiteracy,
low economic development, persistent authoritarian rules and a
lack of government tolerance for e-democracy. 
From a theoretical standpoint, IT has created avenues for
empirical research testing and theory and model building. The
theoretical approaches examined in this study have broadened the
scope of empirical research and increased understanding of the
Middle East in an era of constant IT expansion. Within this
context, these three approaches have met the challenge by
formulating new models and frameworks supported by sound
analysis for improving the understanding of social, political and
economic dynamics affecting IT in the Middle East.
Still, more must be done. Generalization remains an issue for a
variety of reasons. Initially, scholars overstated the idea that IT
128
Hamoud Salhi

would be a driving force of social and political change that would
radically transform the Middle East. Later, they underestimated the
role of IT, arguing that the region was unprepared for its benefits
and that the Middle East would be better off by shifting its focus
elsewhere. In the same vein, the issue of applicability remains very
relevant, and it has continued to provide for an interesting debate
(while, in this author’s opinion, continuing far too long).  
As a phenomenon, IT has been studied from contrasting angles,
and there has been little interest in developing comprehensive
studies which examine IT using a social science approach within
the fields of economics, sociology, psychology and political science.
In this context, there is no doubt that multidisciplinary studies can
enrich our understanding of the role of IT in the Middle East while
placing it in the proper developmental context. For IT to play an
effective role in the economy, polity or society, other factors must
be present. Since social conditions are never equal, it is reasonable
to assume that the role of IT differs among Middle Eastern
countries. Any theory in this regard should consider variations and
differences in socioeconomic conditions and levels of IT
penetration. For example, IT might function more effectively in the
United Arab Emirates than in Syria or Mauritania, even though all
of these countries are located in the same region.
This distinction may pose a serious challenge for theorists as
they dig deeper to uncover similarities and differences among
societies. It is a known rule that deep analysis of social science
phenomena can only produce the obvious: more differences than
similarities – which render generalization more difficult. However,
such analysis should add value rather than undermine research. 
Similarly, studies involving IT in the Middle East continue to
struggle with a sampling issue. Scholars have been more interested
in IT at the macro-analysis level, and they have provided sound
comparative analytical data not necessarily reflective of IT as a
predictor of change. For example, it was appropriate in the early
stage for scholars to concentrate on end-users as an indicator of IT
progress. But, as the World Bank (2003) reported, these indicators
revealed the obvious: that economically advanced countries will
always perform better than those that are less advanced. What
needs to be done could take the World Bank report to another
level. Scholars must focus on effects of IT on end-users because this
is the key indicator. For example, researchers should concentrate
on whether the use of IT in universities has increased scholarship
quantitatively and qualitatively; or, for example, how the
IT and security for the Middle East
129

introduction of computers in schools has affected learning. This is
quite relevant in the Middle East because many complain that the
region’s educational systems remain weak because of an emphasis
on memorization rather than analytical thinking. 
Then there is the question of political agendas that may
compromise the efforts of the academician. Much has been written
about the threat of the Islamist movement and cyberterrorism, but
the issue of the authenticity of websites can be problematic. In
measuring the impact, knowing the true location of ISPs and site
owners can be challenging. Additionally, scholars should not
always assume that an Islamic-oriented website will automatically
produce an impact in the Middle East, because there is a chance
that it may not. 
Hence it is in this context that the theoretical debate must be
framed in the Middle East. As many contributors to this volume
have shown, theory must be linked to practice.7 So far, studies have
successfully advanced several theoretical propositions and
identified cultural, political and economic variables in IT
transformations. Studies have also shifted away from an emphasis
on end-users and moved towards an examination of the effect of IT
in order to understand the slow progression and potential for
growth. All this suggests that IT is but a product of its environment
and as such it must be studied in the context of the Middle East’s
own environment, economically, politically, socially and culturally.
Because of these conditions, even in the digital age, the state (with
its ‘favourite’ theory, Realism) will remain the unmatched actor in
the Middle East.
Notes
1
Because of its highly advanced technological development, Israel is
not included in this study.
2
A groundbreaking work on social control on information is Buchner
(1988). For a more in-depth analysis on the issue of state control of
IT, and more specifically on the Internet, see S. Wright, (2000) and
Giacomello (2005).
3
There is plenty of historical evidence to support this point: to cite a
few, the bread riots in Tunisia and Egypt in the 1970s and those in
Algeria and Jordan in the 1980s. Such riots were the result of the
austerity measures that these governments took to fulfil the
International Monetary Fund’s requirements for acquiring financial
assistance. The consequences were many but suffice to say that they
led in Tunisia to the collapse of Prime Minister Bin Salah, who
adopted a socialist planned economy, and who was replaced by Hedi
130
Hamoud Salhi

Nouira, the head of the National Bank, and a favourite at the time of
the IMF. In Algeria, the 1988 bread riots brought to an end the one-
party rule and socialism.
4
This question is not unique to scholars in the Middle East, but was
also asked across Western countries, including Japan, France and
Germany. Scholars studying these countries examined the extent to
which the Silicon Valley model designed for the US can be replicated
in other advanced countries, including Japan which has a culture not
similar to that of the US. The conclusion drawn from several studies
in this regard is that advanced societies other than the US adapted IT
in ways that conformed to their cultures (cf. Kogut 2003 and
Kambayashi 2003). 
5
See also Ranstorp’s chapter in this volume.
6
For a more detailed analysis of the relevant IR literature see Eriksson
and Giacomello (2006).
7
On this point, see the chapters by Dunn, Valeri, and Hosein and
Eriksson in this volume.
IT and security for the Middle East
131

6 
Public–private cooperation 
and information assurance
A liberal institutionalist approach
Lorenzo Valeri
Introduction
The Internet is rapidly changing the way services and goods are
delivered. State institutions are increasingly using this medium to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their services.
Businesses also have been at the forefront in exploiting the
financial and economic potential of the Internet, as exemplified by
the success of many e-commerce operations. The Internet,
however, has also become the venue for criminal activities by many
malicious actors. The negative effects of these malicious activities
have been compounded by the many outages and failures that have
hindered the delivery of Internet-based services and goods by
public and private organizations. The global nature of the Internet
does not allow for simply domestic responses to cybercrimes and
malicious outages, but calls for an international solution that can
protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of global IT
systems, while also fostering the privacy of the data exchanged
through them. 
This chapter proposes a theoretical framework explaining why
states and businesses need to work together to develop an
international regime for information assurance. It opens with an
overview of the notion of an ‘international regime’ and its
constitutive elements. It then argues that an international regime
for information assurance needs to reflect the principles of
openness that form the essence of the global success of the
Internet. The framework demonstrates that, unlike the case in
other sectors, states and businesses have the same power in the
development of Internet-related policies, including those
associated with information assurance. 

Nevertheless, even if states and businesses are the two main sets
of actors, their interests may conflict in the matter of information
assurance. Therefore, they need to overcome self-interest to work
together in devising an international regime for information
assurance – one that can counter the negative impact of cybercrime
and other online malicious activities to create an environment in
which the global online society can grow and prosper. 
Defining the constitutive elements of an international
regime for information assurance
The definition and constitutive elements of an international regime
have been the subjects of lengthy discourse among scholars of
international relations since the 1970s. Any research project on
international regimes, nevertheless, must open with Stephen
Krasner’s 
‘consensus’ 
definition. 
According 
to 
Krasner,
international regimes are implicit and explicit principles, norms,
rules and decision-making procedures around which actors’
expectations converge in a given area of international relations.
Principles are beliefs of facts, causation and rectitude. Norms are
standards of behaviour defined in terms of rights and obligations.
Rules are specific prescriptions or proscriptions for action.
Decision-making procedures are prevailing practices for making
and implementing collective choice (Krasner 1983).
Among the major accomplishments of this definition is the
distinction between international regimes and the notion of
‘international organization’. Puchala and Hopkins (1983) have
argued that an international regime exists whenever there is
regularity in states’ behaviours. 
Conformity of behaviour envisions the existence of principles,
norms and rules. This approach, however, is far too comprehensive
since it seems to indicate that states’ behaviour patterns are
characterized by a specific regime. Haggard and Simmons (1987:
493) have argued that ‘the term “regime” is sometimes used in a
purely descriptive way to group a range of state behaviours in a
particular issue-area, but since the potential for tautology is high,
this approach has largely been abandoned’. International regimes
involve principles, norms, rules and decision-making processes that
do not exclusively relate to the behaviour patterns of states,
especially when referring to the dynamic socio-political and
commercial environment created by the Internet. 
Public–private cooperation
133

International regimes are also distinct from international
organizations. The latter relate mainly to physical organizations
made up of buildings, budgets and secretariats. This confusion
arises from the fact that international organizations are often the
consolidation of an international regime. However, this has not
always been the case. Although it allows us to differentiate between
states’ behaviour patterns and international organizations,
Krasner’s definition has been criticized for its vague description of
the characteristics and components of an international regime. The
first critique led to the drafting of a framework highlighting the
diverse character of international regimes by combining the
formality of their constitutive elements and the convergent
expectations of the actors involved (Levy et al. 1995).
There is no international regime when low formality is matched
by low expectations. However, a combination of high formality
and high expectations indicates the presence of a classic regime like
those created by the Bretton Woods agreements. Between these two
extremes, there are two middle-ground possibilities: dead letter
regimes and tacit regimes. Dead letter regimes have extended
formality matched by very low expectations. Tacit regimes
combine a high level of convergence of actors’ interests matched by
limited formality or none at all. The balance of power that guided
European inter-state relations during the second half of the
nineteenth century is an example (Luard 1992).
How exactly do states and businesses work together towards
one ‘classic’ international regime for information assurance to
counter the negative implications brought forward by online
crimes and malicious activities? A dead letter regime would not
support the attainment of this objective. The principal
characteristic of this type of regime is that the involved actors do
not recognize its principles, norms, rules and decision-making
processes and do not feel the need to respect them. Consequently,
with regard to information assurance, a dead letter regime cannot
be considered an ‘external safeguard’ to allow the establishment of
‘fragile trust’. 
Before discussing the nature of a ‘classic’ international regime
for information assurance, it is necessary to look in some detail at
the relationships between the four constitutive elements: principles,
norms, 
rules 
and 
decision-making 
processes. 
Krasner’s
characterization of international regimes provides only an initial
definition 
of 
these 
elements 
without 
examining 
their
interdependence. In his work on international regimes, Keohane
134
Lorenzo Valeri

(1984) seems to have overcome this limitation. While principles
indicate the general aims of an international regime, according to
Keohane, norms contain somewhat clear injunctions to members
about legitimate and illegitimate behaviour, still defining
responsibilities and obligations in relatively general terms. Rules
indicate in more detail the specific rights and obligations of
members. Principles, therefore, act as a ‘guide’ for norms, which
then may be translated into appropriate rules and decision-making
procedures. Keohane emphasizes this relationship between the
various elements since they are perceived to be at the heart of the
legitimacy of any international regime. 
In his more recent analysis of international environmental and
technological regimes, Vogler has espoused an approach similar to
Keohane’s. He defines principles as ‘shared scientific understanding
as to the nature of the physical world, upon which many common
regimes rest’ (Vogler 2000: 25). Vogler implies that principles
reflect the attributes of the physical environment or phenomenon
that a specific international regime aims to address. Norms indicate
the rights and obligations related to activities carried out in that
specific environment and ‘stem directly from principles’. The third
element, rules, is conceived as the application of the principles and
norms of an international regime. Their implementation is carried
out through ad hoc mechanisms such as decision making processes.
Building on the approaches developed by Keohane and Vogler, it is
possible to graphically reproduce the interdependence among these
four elements through concentric circles (with principles being the
most inclusive circle, followed by norms, rules, and as the most
limited inner circle, decision-making procedures). 
Another approach, by Young (1985: 32) complements those of
Keohane and Vogler by creating a connection between
international regimes and the notion of institutions. Young defines
institutions as ‘recognized practices consisting of easily identifiable
roles, coupled with collections of rules or conventions governing
relations among the occupants of these roles’. Young, therefore,
seems to compare international regimes to agreements from an
international legal point of view. Elements of an international
regime regulate relations among clearly identifiable actors or
entities that, in the context of the Internet and information
assurance, are states and businesses. By combining Keohane and
Vogler’s specifications of the constitutive elements of international
regimes with Young’s notion of institutions as recognized practices
among concerned actors, it is possible to define international
Public–private cooperation
135

regimes as recognized practices based on principles, norms, rules,
decision-making procedures that allow identified actors to interact
and achieve their mutual interests in specific issue-areas.
The specific references to ‘recognized practices’ and ‘actors’
interactions’ are the pillars of this definition. They underline the
importance of reciprocal understanding among the actors
concerned in devising the constitutive elements of an international
regime. Still, specific attention should be directed also to the term
‘mutual interests’ since it emphasizes the need for cooperative
approaches instead of the imposition of elements of an
international regime by one of the ‘concerned actors’. This last
eventuality becomes extremely difficult in an Internet environment. 
Although international regimes may arise from a hegemon, it is
unrealistic to expect this eventuality, given the Internet’s dynamic
environment (Kindleberger 1981). The success of this medium
outside North America suggests that the initial dominant position
of the United States is being challenged by other states. This
challenge results from states becoming extremely active in
exploiting the socio-political and commercial functionalities
provided by the Internet. The same dynamism applies to the
business community, as indicated by the number of antitrust cases
mounted against large IT conglomerates like Honeywell and
Microsoft. Businesses are able to devise new software or hardware
applications, as well as innovative business models, to secure a
dominant position in the short and medium term. However,
maintaining dominance becomes a difficult undertaking due to the
constant rise of new competitors and advances in information and
network technologies. 
To summarize the foregoing, I have provided a definition of an
international regime and examined the relationship between its
four constitutive elements. In particular, I have argued that an
individual actor cannot impose its own principles, norms, rules, or
decision-making procedures for the long term. The initial
hegemonic position is challenged by the intervention of national
and international authorities and the dynamic nature of Internet-
related technologies and services.
How does this analysis relate to the notion of information
assurance? An international regime for information assurance is
made up of state and business practices aimed at establishing
fragile trust and online relational exchanges; it achieves this
through principles, norms, rules and decision-making procedures
for the protection of confidentiality, integrity and availability, non-
136
Lorenzo Valeri

repudiation, authentication, and privacy. This definition, first,
emphasizes the equal role of states and businesses in devising the
regime, an aspect discussed in detail later in this chapter. Second, it
highlights the relation between the four constitutive elements of the
international regime. An analysis of the Internet and its related
technologies and services seems to suggest that there is already a set
of principles that reflect the ‘shared understandings’ upon which
this information and communication medium rests. Norms, rules
and decision-making procedures need to reflect these principles,
given the connection among the elements of an information
assurance regime. Devising these norms requires states and
businesses to cooperate by overcoming their specific interests in the
individual elements of information assurance: confidentiality,
integrity and availability, non-repudiation, authentication, and
privacy.
Preserving the positive network externalities of 
the Internet: Principles of an international regime
for information assurance
The previous section concluded that the Internet embodies a set of
principles which need to be reflected in the other elements of an
international regime for information assurance, such as norms,
rules and decision-making processes. This section describes these
principles by exploring the Open Communication Infrastructure
(OCI) model drafted by researchers at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT) Research Program on Communications
Policy and relates them to the notion of ‘positive network
externalities’ (Neuman et al. 1997).
The open communication infrastructure (OCI) model 
This model rests on four elements: open architecture, open access,
universal access and flexible access. Open architecture indicates
policy and technological solutions facilitating interconnectivity and
interoperability among telecommunications and information
system services. Open access calls for the removal of barriers to the
entrance of new commercial actors to the markets created by
information and communication media like the Internet and its
related network and information solutions. Proponents of the OCI
model believe that open access means that the presumption should
be in favour of interconnection and the elimination of regulatory
Public–private cooperation
137

barriers, not the opposite. Public policy should be oriented towards
encouraging open access as a critical goal. Universal access
indicates those regulatory and legislative initiatives aimed at
fostering the use of information and communication media like the
Internet by as many actors as possible. Flexible access refers to
those initiatives that permit access to information and
communication media through different media such as personal
computers, wireless devices and similar instruments. 
The OCI model can be extended for the development of an
international regime for information assurance. The Internet has
embodied these principles through a set of technological and
regulatory developments. Consequently, any norms, rules, or
decision-making processes involving the Internet, such as the
present case of information assurance, need to take these principles
into consideration. With the aim of validating this assumption, the
next section provides an overview of Internet-related regulatory
and technical developments. 
Regulatory and technological developments supporting 
the principles of the OCI model
The Internet embodies the principles of the OCI model not only by
the open nature of its protocols such as TCI/IP, but also as a
consequence of regulatory decisions taken by government bodies
and international institutions, as well as several groundbreaking
technological developments. These developments have fostered a
dynamic environment where it is possible to participate and
interact through this information medium (Cohen 1992).
In 
conjunction 
with 
these 
regulatory 
developments,
technological advances in the provision of satellite, cable and
wireless communications have furthered the Internet’s embodiment
of each of the four OCI principles. Since the middle of the 1990s,
a large number of commercial operators have invested in the
exploitation of satellites for the delivery of Internet access.
Meanwhile, the cable television industry has been expanding its
services by providing access to telecommunications services and
information networks such as the Internet. Moreover, services such
as Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) have permitted
public and private companies, as well as individuals, to have
constant access to the Internet at relatively low cost.
Telecommunications and information technology firms have also
been working together to bring the functionalities of the Internet to
138
Lorenzo Valeri

the user through media such as mobile phones and personal digital
assistants. These instruments are seen not as mere communication
tools, but as new venues for information and commercial services.
In conjunction with developments in satellite and wireless
technologies, the explosion of cheap Internet services has made
universal and flexible access a reality for many. This trend is
epitomized by initiatives like city-wide Wi-Fi networks, where
people can freely access the Internet while on the move. 
To fully appreciate how and why the OCI principles have
fostered the socio-political and economic success of the Internet, it
is necessary to introduce the notion of ‘positive network
externalities’ and relate it to the consequences of malicious
activities and outages. 
The concept of positive network externalities and its 
relation to information assurance
The concept of network externalities is essential to understand the
relationship between the four principles of the OCI model and
state–business interaction under an international regime for
information assurance. Networks such as the Internet are an
assembly of multiple components. Navigating the World Wide
Web, for example, requires the simultaneous combination of an
Internet service provider (ISP), telephone access, hardware and
software. The essential element of a network is its accessibility
through the necessary hardware and software tools. As indicated
previously, developments in wireless, cable and satellite
technologies have allowed access to the Internet and its related
services either via a fixed telephone line or through mobiles and
satellite links. 
The use of these diverse access instruments depends on the
objectives and desires of the user. These, nevertheless, are
subjective factors, since they depend on individual requirements
and expectations of whoever is using the Internet. Some may just
want the Internet in order to communicate, while others may be
interested in leveraging it as a new online marketing and
distribution channel. The two possibilities require the use of
different combinations of hardware, software and communication
tools that the Internet permits through open architecture and
increasingly open, flexible and universal access. The most
important aspect, nevertheless, is that these four principles allow
Public–private cooperation
139

the Internet to experience ‘positive network externalities’ (Katz and
Shapiro 1985; Economides 1996). 
The term ‘externalities’ refers to a situation where the value of a
particular good or instrument is assessed not only according to its
features and qualities, but also by the number of its users. A
network or a product experiences positive externalities when its
value increases exponentially as more users connect and interact
through it. For example, when A decides to use the same
spreadsheet package used by B and C, then A benefits from the fact
that A’s documents can be read immediately by B and C.
Furthermore, B and C profit from the situation since they now have
another potential user of their files and, consequently, their services
or products. Due to its open architecture and capacity to offer
open, flexible and universal access, the Internet has been
experiencing positive network externalities. Every new entrant,
whether an individual or an organization, can take advantage of
the numerous services and tools already available on the Internet,
while the incumbents have a new potential recipient of their
services and goods. 
This ‘positive’ condition can be undermined if the Internet stops
attracting enough new users and/or if incumbent users have
difficulty in delivering their services and goods. Illegal misuses or
systems outages may lead to such scenarios. The statistics
presented in the previous chapter about users’ fears in making
online transactions seem to confirm this assumption. An
international regime for information assurance, therefore, is the
possible answer to the situation. It may foster relational exchanges
among new and incumbent Internet users. Essentially, norms, rules
and decision-making processes for information assurance may
assist in establishing the necessary trust which allows for both the
creation of relational exchanges and the preservation of the
positive network externalities of the Internet.
To conclude, the Internet embodies the four principles of the
OCI model, which explains why this medium has been
experiencing conditions of positive network externalities. Illegal
misuses and system outages may affect these pivotal characteristics
since they may undermine the arrival of new users and the activities
of the incumbent actors on the Internet. Since the Internet reflects
the four OCI principles, it is necessary to translate them into the
remaining elements of an international regime and, in particular,
into norms which indicate the rights and obligations of states and
businesses operating over the Internet. Because of this
140
Lorenzo Valeri

interconnection, rules and decision-making processes should derive
from these norms. This transposition, however, can only be
accomplished through international cooperation among the two
main players – states and businesses.
States and businesses: Main players in an international regime
for information assurance
The academic literature on international regimes has a propensity
to focus on states as the principal actors. Vogler (2000: 25) has
noted that this is because ‘governments are able to cohesively
represent the diverse demands and interests within society and, at
the same time, exercise real authority over global events and
situations like environmental damage’. This state-centrism,
however, does not provide the necessary framework for an
examination of the Internet’s socio-political and economic
implications and, in particular, the consequences of cybercrimes
and system outages. The state is just one of two principal players,
the other being the business community. 
The call to look beyond state-centrism in studying international
regimes is not a recent phenomenon. Keohane and Nye (1972) and
others have acknowledged the growing importance of non-state
actors, such as multinational corporations, in the international
arena since the beginning of the 1970s. Risse-Kappen (1995) and
Vogler (2000) reached similar conclusions in the 1990s. It is
possible to argue that, in examining international regimes, it is
unquestionable that private sector organizations and, especially,
large transnational corporations are actors of first importance. In
her contribution to Regime Theory and International Relations,
Haufler (1995) has taken the analysis further by indicating that
businesses themselves devise their own corporate private regimes,
when firms cooperate over issues beyond price, supply and market
share. Likewise, it is conceivable that these private international
regimes collide with those sustained and supported by states.
Haufler, moreover, has observed that when interests of government
policy makers and influential non-state actors come into direct
conflict, government leaders may not always prevail in determining
the final outcome.
The Internet has made the need to overcome the general state-
centrism of the international regime literature imperative with the
insertion of businesses as equal actors. This is mainly a
consequence of a series of historical events and transformations,
Public–private cooperation
141

both in the United States and Western Europe, which have seen the
Internet move from being a combination of state-controlled
networks to one privately managed and held (Abbate 1999).
Despite the fact that from the mid-1990s, the Internet went
through a phase of privatization, the central role of the state has
not been undermined. The Internet could not have developed
without the financial and technical support of state organizations.
States, individually or through international institutions, still
provide fundamental investment and research support for the
better information and communication technologies. Meanwhile,
many national and international research networks still carry
commercial Internet traffic. Finally, as discussed later in this
chapter, states have specific interests, since the Internet has become
the focus of new social issues involving privacy, intellectual
property, censorship, indecency, cybercrimes and system outages.
How do inter-state and inter-business cooperation relate to each
other? Do international regimes and standards facilitate this? An
international regime for information assurance would assist both
actors in accomplishing their individual objectives while exploiting
the potential of the Internet. Nevertheless, this can only happen if
states and businesses can converge their specific interests in relation
to each individual element of information assurance. If this
communion of interests were to be accomplished, the end-result
would be a set of norms and related rules and decision-making
processes that would not only reflect the interests of the two actors,
but also respect the principles of open architecture and open,
universal and flexible access, which are at the very heart of the
Internet.
Cooperation among states: Neo-realism and neo-liberal
institutionalism
Scholars of international relations disagree in explaining
cooperation among states and the function of international
regimes. As argued later, this chapter embraces the neo-liberal
institutionalism approach to inter-state cooperation. The main
reason for this is its appreciation of interdependence and focus on
‘absolute gains’ as the outcome of cooperative arrangements.
Nonetheless, this approach builds on the axioms of neo-realism
about the anarchical nature of the international system and the
egoistic and rational nature of the Internet. Differing from neo-
realism, neo-liberal institutionalism allows for a higher possibility
142
Lorenzo Valeri

of cooperation among states and confirms the importance of
international institutions and international regimes. Before
introducing each perspective and linking it to the Internet and
information assurance, it is important to define the notion of
‘cooperation’ and how it is distinct from ‘harmony’ and ‘discord’.
The existence of cooperation, harmony and discord is primarily
related to the preferences and interests of the involved actors. If a
state can achieve its interests by itself, it does not need to engage in
cooperative activities. However, these three possibilities refer to
situations where states have to coordinate since they cannot
achieve their interests individually. In the case of harmony, the
individual policies of one state are perceived by others as
supporting their own objectives. Therefore, there is no need for
policy coordination since individual aims are achieved
automatically with no changes in the policies of the other states.
‘Discord’ refers to the case where the differences in the policies of
the single state are so divergent that it is not possible to coordinate
policy. These states may lose the benefits of coordinating their
actions. Cooperation refers to a situation where states actually
resolve differences between their respective domestic policies in
order to achieve specific goals. 
Anarchy and interdependence: Two distinct but related concepts
The existence of harmony, cooperation and discord is directly
related to the anarchical character of the international system,
which neo-liberal institutionalism and neo-realism both assume.
Authors writing about international relations define anarchy as the
lack of a governmental authority in the international system.
Scholars compare the anarchical nature of the international system
(high politics) with domestic politics (low politics). As Wight
(1994: 156) has stated, ‘anarchy is the characteristic that
distinguishes international politics from ordinary politics. The
study of international politics presupposes absence of government,
as the study of domestic politics presupposes the existence of one.’
The presumption of anarchy in the international system,
nevertheless, has been criticized as being too reductive (Wendt
1992). Milner (1993: 116), in particular, has argued that ‘the
current tendency to over-emphasize the centrality of anarchy to
world politics may not be the most useful way to conceptualize
international politics […] Such reductionism overlooks another
Public–private cooperation
143

central fact about international politics – namely the
interdependence of actors.’
According to Keohane and Nye (1977: 9), interdependence
refers to ‘situations characterized by reciprocal effects among
countries or among actors in different countries’. This approach is
similar to the notion of strategic interdependence, which indicates
a situation when ‘the ability of one participant to gain his ends is
dependent to an important degree on the choices or decisions that
the other participant will make’. The most important characteristic
of interdependence is the allocation of costs and benefits among the
actors involved. The attainment of a particular interest is
dependent on the other actors’ perceptions and capabilities.
Therefore, each one of them has to quantify these costs and
compare them with the potential benefits originating from
international cooperation in those areas where they are
interdependent.
The Internet may be considered an anarchical system where the
two primary sets of actors, states and businesses, are
interdependent. There is no central governmental authority to
regulate activities over the Internet. The interdependence among
states and businesses, therefore, may create the conditions for
overcoming the Internet’s anarchical nature. This relationship is
even more crucial in making the case for a regime of information
assurance, which aims to counter the negative consequences of
misuses and malfunctions of Internet-based information systems.
The anarchical nature of the Internet and the notion of
interdependence among states and businesses are the two
conditions sine qua non for interpreting international cooperation,
not only among states but also among businesses. 
The debate between neo-realism and neo-liberal
institutionalism
Neo-realism and neo-liberalism are state-centric approaches to
international relations. Together with the assumption about the
anarchical nature of the international system, both approaches
consider states as rational egoists. Rationality refers to the capacity
of states to have stable preferences and calculate the costs and
benefits of different options in order to maximize their utility.
Egoism describes the capacity of states to focus on their own
interests independently of all the other actors (Van Walsum-
Stachowicz 1999). Neo-realism and neo-liberal institutionalism
144
Lorenzo Valeri

thus present divergent perspectives on cooperation among states
and the function of an international regime, as will be illustrated in
the next section. 
Neo-realism and its pessimism towards international
cooperation
The anarchical nature of the international system is the starting
point of neo-realist thinking on international cooperation.
According to neo-realism, anarchy refers not only to a lack of
central government, but also to the risk of a state becoming the
target of violence since there is no overarching authority to prevent
it. Realists have proposed that international anarchy makes
cooperation difficult because agreements cannot be centrally
enforced. Due to this fear of violence, states are constantly
assessing their position in the international system while deciding
whether to embark on cooperative arrangements. Essentially, they
are interested in achieving a ‘relative gain’ in comparison with the
other states. This focus on states’ positions creates a difficult
environment when it comes to inter-state cooperation. A state, in
fact, may decide to cooperate only when ‘it does better, or at least
no worse, than the other state’ (Mearsheimer 1995b: 339).
Although this neo-realist approach seems to exclude interstate
cooperation and international regimes or organizations, this is not
really the case. Realists, in fact, believe that international regimes
and organizations are the mirror image of the distribution of power
inside the international system. Examining the North Atlantic
Treaty Organisation (NATO), Mearsheimer (1995a) argues that it
was a manifestation of the bipolar distribution of power in Europe
during the Cold War, and it was the balance of power, not NATO
per se, that provided the key to maintaining stability on the
continent. Organizations, therefore, are mainly the expression of
powerful states, and NATO was essentially a US tool for managing
power in the face of the Soviet threat. 
Although it may prove useful in the field of military and security
studies, the neo-realist focus on relative gains and its pessimism
regarding international institutions make its direct applicability to
issues of information assurance and the Internet in general
unfeasible (Moravcsik 1999; Waltz 2000). It is interesting to note
Krasner’s (1991) examination of the issue of international regimes
in the realm of global communications. His neo-realist analysis
starts with the presumption that states’ relations in these issue-
Public–private cooperation
145

areas centre on the distribution of national power capabilities and
are not concerned with solving problems of common interest. In
particular, technological innovation gave some private actors,
primarily domiciled in the United States, an incentive to press for a
more competitive telecommunications regime both domestically
and internationally. Therefore, the US has pressed for changes in
telecommunications regimes by using a series of threats and
unilateral actions. Krasner’s approach can be justified by the fact
that he focuses on the notion of power in terms of technology and
market size, membership in international organizations, and
control over territorial access provided by juridical sovereignty.
Although Krasner’s analysis might have proven correct in the
1980s and the beginning of the 1990s (when state monopolies still
controlled the provision of telecommunications services), the
Internet environment today is profoundly different due to the
growing number of states involved, and more importantly, the
number of businesses. Hence, an analysis based on power cannot
be transferred to this environment since it would prove difficult to
define who has it and at what level. As mentioned earlier in this
chapter, in an Internet environment it is highly difficult to consider
the eventuality of a hegemon being either a business or a state. 
This multiplicity of actors and the Internet’s dynamism do not
allow the possibility of an international regime in information
assurance based on the power of the players. Therefore, the
negative impact of relative gains on cooperation among different
actors is reduced (relative gains have the greatest impact when the
number of states is small or there are asymmetries between them, a
situation which does not reflect the reality of the Internet).
Deudney and Ikenberry (1999: 191) have indirectly argued a
similar point by stating that in a world of advanced industrial
capitalist states, ‘the absolute gains to be derived from economic
openness are so substantial that states have a strong incentive to
abridge anarchy so that they do not have to be preoccupied with
relative gains considerations at the expense of absolute gains’. 
Nevertheless, this situation does not mean that inter-state
cooperation is made easier. The difficulties, however, may be
overcome if the analysis concentrates on the role of international
regimes, as championed by neo-liberal institutionalism. These
instruments enhance information sharing concerning present and
prospective partners and allow for the identification of so-called
‘obedient’ states. 
146
Lorenzo Valeri

Neo-liberal institutionalism and its positive approach 
towards international cooperation
Although it starts with the same assumptions as neo-realism, neo-
liberal institutionalism has a more positive attitude towards inter-
state cooperation. This position arises from the fact that its analysis
concentrates mainly on states’ interests in economic and
environmental affairs, although military and security arguments
are not ignored. Due to its economic focus, neo-liberalist scholars
affirm that states want to improve their own individual positions
independently of the other actors. They are more concerned with
enhancing their own position than comparing it with those of other
states, as argued by neo-realism. However, even if states
concentrate on achieving absolute gains, several factors inhibit
inter-state cooperation. States are afraid of the non-compliance of
partners and, in particular, the possibility of being cheated and,
consequently, receiving a low payoff from their cooperative efforts.
In this context, international regimes play an important role.
International regimes provide the necessary instrument for (a)
assessing the reliability of information and (b) overcoming the fear
of cheating by other states involved in cooperative arrangements.
While engaging in cooperative engagements, actors measure their
position in relation to other states and hope to predict how future
developments will affect their own interests. In this setting,
information is crucial because it correlates actors’ previous
activities with the level of present and future commitment to
specific cooperative engagements. This correlation is only possible
if the necessary information is both reliable and timely.
International regimes permit the sharing of reliable information
among actors, and thus aid in fostering individual interests via
cooperation.
The importance of international regimes as supportive
instruments for inter-state cooperation can also be assessed in
terms of costs and reciprocity. They provide information about the
actors’ present involvement and forecast their future commitment
to these arrangements. It is possible to value each actor’s actions
according to the principles, norms and rules of an international
regime. States, therefore, may uncover and eventually take action
against uncooperative behaviour that may hamper the achievement
of their individual gains. Meanwhile, potential defectors may also
quantify the consequences of their uncooperative behaviour in
terms of failure to fulfil their individual preferences and interests.
Public–private cooperation
147

Since states are rational actors, they may move away from
uncooperative behaviour and readjust their policies accordingly to
avoid reciprocal disapproving responses from other actors. 
Having assessed the role of international regimes as facilitators
of interstate cooperation, it is necessary to relate them to the issue
of information assurance and the Internet in general. Illegal
misuses and systems outages may originate in one specific
geographical area, but their effects may rapidly spread around the
globe. Individual states, therefore, need to cooperate among
themselves and with businesses to counter these threats. An
international regime for information assurance may facilitate this
cooperation. States may establish ‘Internet relationships’ to share
information about the negative uses of this medium and coordinate
commercial and political engagements. At the same time, these
international cooperative measures may affect those actors that do
not support information assurance. Through the establishment of
and participation in this international regime, a state can
demonstrate its commitment to the development of an
international environment that is conducive to countering the
negative implications brought forward by online cybercrime and
other malicious activities. 
According to neo-liberal institutionalism, international regimes
allow individual states to achieve absolute gains by cooperating
with the other members of the international community. Principles,
norms, rules and decision-making processes play an important
functional role since they permit actors to overcome fears about
any lack of reliable information concerning the others’
commitment to a specific cause, which in this case is the promotion
of fragile trust and Internet-based relations exchanges. Although in
a different setting, similar concepts can be found in the literature
discussing cooperative activities among businesses. 
Cooperation among businesses: The case of strategic
alliances
The examination of issues concerning information assurance and
the Internet in general requires going beyond the state-centric
nature of these approaches and must include the role of businesses.
Technical and management standards are among the enabling
factors for cooperative arrangements and, in particular, strategic
alliances (Tucker 1991). Businesses need a common framework in
which to assess the level of their partners. 
148
Lorenzo Valeri

Strategic alliances have become one of the most interesting
recent developments in the business world and have proven to be
extremely successful in terms of return on investments and
shareholder value. Indeed, ‘since the early 1990s, the percentage of
revenue that the one thousand largest companies in the United
States have earned from alliances has more than doubled, to 21 per
cent in 1997. By 2002, the successful alliance builder expects about
35 per cent of revenues to come from alliances’ (Harbison and
Pekar 1998: 33). 
Strategic 
alliances 
are 
complex 
arrangements 
among
independent partners involving financial integration of ownership
as well as extensive data sharing about business practices, research
and development, and clients (Nooteboom 1999). The two main
elements of differentiation are the continued independence of the
involved partners, coupled with an expected level of commitment
to the success of the alliance. The need for strategic alliances arises
from companies’ perception of their incapacity to accomplish their
financial and commercial objectives independently and, therefore,
the need to cooperate with other businesses. Nevertheless, in order
to achieve these goals, companies have to demonstrate a high level
of commitment to the alliance. 
Although strategic alliances may be found in almost every sector
of business, such arrangements have been most noticeable in the
financial industry and in the information and telecommunication
technologies. Several factors may explain the large numbers of
strategic alliances in these sectors. The issue of risk sharing
associated with product or business research and development
(R&D) presents many dangers in terms of financial returns and
market acceptance (Celeste 1996). As they aim to achieve higher
returns and profits, companies are very wary of costs and would
rather share them with partners. There are also uncertainties about
technology and market access for new products and services. As
customer demands constantly evolve, companies find it extremely
complicated to maintain a competitive edge in multiple technology
fields. Moreover, companies are constantly looking for new sources
of revenue through market expansion. They want to gain rapid
access to better and more cost-efficient supplies and market
outputs. However, some lack the necessary financial and
management skills; they focus on specific internal capabilities and
gain the required knowledge through strategic alliances. Finally,
firms may establish alliances to satisfy government restrictions
Public–private cooperation
149

concerning imports or ‘local content’ or even to favour important
customers.
Strategic alliances are not only being formed among non-
competitors. Scholars have examined the rise in the number of
cooperative 
arrangements 
among 
competing 
companies.
Companies may contribute complementary but different assets to
the production, distribution and sale of each other’s products and
services. Or they may share the necessary technical and physical
supply to produce goods and services that are, in the end, marketed
and sold by each firm individually. Finally, companies may
distribute, market and sell products and services jointly. Similar to
strategic alliances between non-competitive firms, each company
wants to increase its revenues, profits and share value.
Nevertheless, it is also possible that competitors decide to
cooperate to raise the ‘value-added’ requirements for introducing
new products and services and, consequently, raise the entry
barriers to new competitors.
Strategic alliances and the functional role of standards
Strategic alliances present strong parallels with interstate
cooperation along the lines of neo-liberal institutionalism. As
emphasized by alliances among competitors, individual firms are
rational actors engaging in strategic alliances to improve their
absolute gains, such as financial returns and commercial objectives
(Ciborra 1991: 58). These cooperative arrangements, in particular,
are expected to bring competitive advantage to each individual
member. Strategic alliances, moreover, involve costs that need to be
quantified and, more importantly, offset by the outcomes of
cooperative relationships. This quantification, consequently, may
involve specific measures to gauge the level of financial and
management commitment of those prospective partners, as well as
possible scenarios of reciprocity in case of non-compliance. 
International commercial and technological norms, rules and
decision-making processes may aid in the assessment of a potential
partner’s overall commitment towards a specific strategic alliance.
As an interesting example, the International Accounting Standards
make it possible to conduct an audit and due diligence analysis
among companies operating in different countries. In terms of
information assurance, one of the most interesting cases is British
Standard (BS) 7799 concerning information security management.
When companies are certified as BS7799-compliant, they can claim
150
Lorenzo Valeri

to have internal management procedures for preventing or, at least,
containing the potential negative implications of misuses or
outages. These technical, accounting and managerial standards
may play a pivotal role in assurance, as long as they are generally
accepted by each potential partner.
Similarities between standards and international regimes
The operational importance of standards in fostering inter-business
cooperation can be compared to the functional role of
international regimes as described by the dicta of neo-liberal
institutionalism. They facilitate the sharing of information among
the various businesses and assist in the defining of partners’
commitments to cooperative agreements such as strategic alliances.
The process leading to the creation of a standard is very similar to
that of an international regime. There are ‘de facto standards’ that
originate ‘with the arrival and acceptance of a standard in the
market and apply to standards affecting a product or system 
that has captured a large market segment’ (Bonino and Spring
1991: 98). 
The Internet’s dynamism allows neither software and hardware
products nor specific business processes to dominate in the long
term. New and improved ones developed by other commercial
operators may undermine this dominance. Similar arguments can
be presented for de jure standards that derive authority from some
legal base or treaty. Unless they fulfil the interests of all concerned
actors, they run the risk of being either similar to the de facto
counterparts or becoming dead letter regimes that neither party
sees the necessity to implement or utilize. Most technical and
managerial standards are based on consensus since they are
developed through interactions among the actors concerned.
Standards and international regimes are both instruments to
assist the involved actors, which in this case are states and
businesses, to achieve their objective as long as these instruments
echo their interests. Because the Internet already embodies the four
OCI principles, the remaining elements of an international
information assurance regime need to arise from overcoming
individual interests and creating consensus. 
Public–private cooperation
151

States’ interests in information assurance 
An international information assurance regime may be conceived
as an ‘external safeguard’ for countering the negative implications
of cybercrime and other online malicious activities. In order to
exploit the potential of the Internet, the state has a central role to
devise international instruments to counter misuses and accidental
outages. To appreciate how international regimes may assist in
achieving this objective, it is necessary to move beyond the
Weberian conception of the state, which claims the monopoly of
the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory. 
The limitations of the notion of sovereignty over a territory
become evident when we examine how neo-realism and, to a
certain extent, neo-liberalism tend to conceive the survival or
destruction of the state in physical terms. As Paul (1999: 221)
argues, they ‘imply that the physical parameters of a state, its
territory and population, define existence, just as (from a
materialistic perspective) the destruction of the human body marks
the boundary of an individual person’s existence’. This ‘physical’
classification of the state, nevertheless, becomes complicated to
translate into the global nature of the Internet, although it should
not be discarded. A possible solution is to extend the definition of
the state by considering it as a ‘social actor’ (with a physical
component), capable of knowing, learning and doing things
through an inter-subjective process of socialization. The state needs
to structure itself to understand the pervasive economic, political
and social changes brought by the Internet and foster them
accordingly. 
This extension of the definition is consistent with the notion of
the state in an era of financial and communication globalization
according to the international political economy and business
literature. The state should promote economic activities to make
firms and sectors located within its territory competitive in
international markets (Cerny 1996). Similarly, it should establish
an environment where businesses can gain competitive advantage
(Porter 1990). This competitiveness may be achieved through a
‘macro-organisational strategy’ that calls ‘actions taken by
governments to optimize the modality by which resources and
capabilities within the jurisdiction are created, upgraded and
allocated among different uses, and the efficiency at which these
are developed for any given use’ (Dunning 1992: 10). 
152
Lorenzo Valeri

Notwithstanding these specific economic and commercial
functions, a state continues to be engaged in addressing concerns
for the safety and well-being of individuals and enterprises in terms
of regulations and monitoring. Health care, environmental
protection, traffic regulation and product safety are just a few
examples of these functions (Goldring 1997). This role is also
particularly relevant in relation to the Internet, even if the functions
are global and owned and managed by businesses. V. Wright
(1994: 156), in particular, has argued that ‘as long as competition
is not fair, supply of telecommunications services is expected to be
just, and privacy has to be protected; a complete retreat of the state
from telecommunications is a romantic, and sometimes dangerous
illusion’. This idea becomes even more illusionary when referring
to issues of cybercrime and national security. 
The fight against malicious actors operating illegally through the
Internet is a central function of states. Actually, it may represent the
cornerstone for establishing an Internet macro-strategy aimed at
fostering the necessary ‘fragile trust’ which permits public and
private organizations to form Internet-based ‘relational exchanges’.
This struggle, however, may undermine the interaction between
states and businesses in defining the content of norms, rules and
decision-making processes of an international regime for
information assurance that still needs to reflect the principles
embodied by the Internet.
States, either individually or cooperating among themselves,
have tended to concentrate on devising norms concerning the
confidentiality element of information assurance to the neglect of
the remaining elements of information assurance. The protection of
data and information confidentiality through specific technologies
and management procedures has been a primary concern for state
organizations, especially with reference to defence and police
activities against criminal activities. States fear that classified or
sensitive data might leak, favouring the illegal activities of
malicious actors. The complexity associated with the protection of
data and information confidentiality during multi-partner military
operations is an interesting example in this sense. Therefore,
specific confidentiality-enhancing managerial and physical
procedures have been devised. At the same time, confidentiality-
enhancing technologies, such as symmetric or asymmetric
cryptography, have been shown to be instruments that hackers and
criminal organizations may exploit to safeguard their own
activities and data from the eyes of police and defence and
Public–private cooperation
153

intelligence organizations. Government institutions, consequently,
have considered these technologies as obstacles in the way of law
enforcement and national security objectives.
While trying to devise the contents of an information assurance
regime, states have tended to support norms concerning the
protection of the confidentiality of their information in an attempt
to prevent malicious actors obtaining analogous technological
capabilities. This assumption does not mean that states are not
interested in enhancing the integrity and availability elements of
information assurance. It only suggests that they consider these
two elements to be put on a lower level of importance than issues
related to confidentiality when devising an international regime for
information assurance, as part of their Internet macro-strategy. In
addition, there are certain state activities where these two elements
are as important as confidentiality. The case of online tax collection
is a prime example. Clearly, in this area there is a need for the
information systems of the internal revenue services to be available
to individual and commercial operators, while protecting the
integrity of the collected data.
Conclusion: Business interests in information assurance 
Businesses have a keen interest in devising an international regime
for information assurance to achieve their commercial and
financial ‘absolute gains’. Norms echoing the four principles of the
Internet may assist in these commercial and financial efforts which
are centred on the functional role of ‘fragile trust’ in establishing
‘relational exchanges’. This situation becomes even clearer when
examining some of the activities of businesses enhanced by the
Internet. Since the beginning of the 1990s, they have been rapidly
moving away from vertical integration and embracing horizontal
management procedures. Production and services are increasingly
executed through Internet-based data-sharing infrastructures
(Pasternak and Visco 1998). Moreover, they have also been setting
up ad hoc, geographically dispersed teams for developing specific
products and services whose critical data is also dispersed in
information systems over a variety of different locations (for
example, US and European information and network technology
companies using the services of software development houses based
in the Indian region of Bangladore).
The Internet has also been one of the enhancing elements for
inter-business cooperation in devising new services and goods, as
154
Lorenzo Valeri

suggested by the cases of strategic alliances in the information and
telecommunication sectors. Individual companies have opened
their Internet-based information networks to allow third parties
and partners to tap into their information and coordinate
production and management activities. This opening of access
becomes even more evident in situations where different companies
merge their products and services into a single solution or offering.
The case of the Internet’s search engine companies and online
financial services is illustrative in this regard. After having directed
business and individual users through the maze of Internet-based
services, search engine companies have started to differentiate their
business focus by adding features like news, financial services,
travel information and auctions. These new services are provided
mainly through contracts with third parties. 
Similar scenarios apply to the case of online financial
institutions. Some of the institutions do not even have regular
‘physical’ infrastructures such as branches, and they often provide
their services by repackaging financial services provided by a third
party. Nevertheless, the financial and commercial success of these
online operations is based on the fact that, no matter what,
customers may access these services knowing that their requests
will be fulfilled in the same manner as in the physical world. If
events such as malicious activities and system outages undermine
these operations, the expected revenue and financial success may
be greatly hampered. Hardware and software companies also have
a strong interest in information assurance. Their sales and support
services are directly connected to the rise of the commercial and
social potentialities of the Internet. If misuses and system outages
affect the establishment of profitable ‘relational exchanges’, the
delivery of services and goods online, and the sale of hardware and
software may become more complicated. 
This state of affairs emphasizes the specific interest of the
international business community in information assurance.
However, unlike states, businesses have a tendency to focus on
integrity and availability. Their services need to be constantly
available, and the data and information need to be precise and
unmodified. The previous cases of Internet-based just-in-time
production and online banks are good examples of this
requirement. Nevertheless, the preservation of these two elements
of information assurance is complicated by the fact that businesses
usually operate in very competitive environments that compel them
Public–private cooperation
155

to constantly review their information security postures by adding
new products and systems. 
The goal of these efforts is to acquire additional functionalities
and capabilities in order to offer new services to their partners and
clients. Moreover, it is important to emphasize that the operational
environments of businesses are often extremely different from
those of government institutions, particularly in defence and
intelligence settings. The former usually involve mobile employees
and authorized external users such as contractors and consultants.
These users require flexible access to information and network
systems that are constantly available and whose data are not
compromised. An interesting example in this sense is the need a
salesperson might have to access a company database to check
prices and availability via a wireless modem linked to a laptop
while concurrently trying to persuade a potential buyer. The
situation is made even more complicated by the fact that an
increasing number of internal businesses have been opening their
internal data and networks to their partners and clients, who want
this service to provide unmodified data and to be constantly
available.
This focus upon integrity and availability does not mean that
businesses are not concerned with confidentiality. Actually, they
need to protect their data and information to avoid the loss of
technical and commercial secrets to their competitors. Moreover,
this requirement may be directly stated in contractual and
regulatory acts. They call for easy access to those confidentiality-
enhancing technologies which states would like to control in their
fight against Internet-based criminal activities. But, unlike states,
businesses are prone to balance their confidentiality needs with the
need to ensure the integrity and availability of their information
infrastructures and services in order to establish Internet-based
relational exchanges. Consequently, businesses have tended to
prioritize their integrity and availability interests when devising the
elements of an information assurance regime. 
By espousing the theoretical approach of liberal institutionalism,
this chapter has demonstrated the need for states and business to
overcome their individual interests in developing an international
regime for information assurance. This theoretical framework goes
beyond the mere use of international regime literature and inserts
into the analysis approaches taken from business and
standardization studies. More importantly, the aim of this chapter
has been to demonstrate the analytical complexity of studying the
156
Lorenzo Valeri

security and policy implications of the Internet and its many facets.
This is particularly relevant for the case of information assurance,
where policies need to take into consideration the interests and
objectives of the two main stakeholders: states and businesses. As
information and communication technologies evolve, the Internet
will continue to be exposed to new online threats and
vulnerabilities. States cannot address these by themselves.
Businesses will always need to be involved.
Public–private cooperation
157

7 
International policy 
dynamics and the regulation 
of dataflows 
Bypassing domestic restrictions
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson
Introduction1
The basic contention of this chapter is that though states are
certainly challenged by the twin forces of globalization and
privatization, they may under some circumstances bypass domestic
restrictions and regain power and control through international
arrangements. Of this an illustration is how governments regulate
the security and privacy of international dataflows through the
Group of Eight (G8) and the Council of Europe. In particular, we
focus on how states use international cooperation for escaping
domestic legal restrictions (so-called ‘policy laundering’), how
strategic shifting between policy-making arenas may open
windows of opportunity (‘forum shopping’), and how states
selectively imitate policy frameworks from other countries
(‘blueprinting’).
This chapter does not formally apply a single theoretical
framework, but rather draws on a number of bodies of literature,
both from within and outside the realm of International Relations
(IR). Some observations are inspired by parts of the literature on
international cooperation (Keohane 1984; Ikenbery 1989, 1996;
Alvarez 2002), while others draw on the policy studies literature
on regulation (Baldwin and Cave 1999; Thatcher 2002), and
policy diffusion (Rogers 1962; Dolowitz and Marsh 1996).
However, the policy diffusion approach has to a limited extent also
been applied within IR (Risse-Kappen 1994). 
Technology and globalization: A regulatory challenge
Transborder activity challenges the ability of sovereign nations to
enact and enforce laws within their own jurisdiction. Data flows

within transnational digital networks are a case in point. Action
may occur from a distance, where the overflow of activity can
occur without an individual having to physically enter the
jurisdiction. Whether it is the penetration of computers or the
downloading of pornography, this conduct can occur across
borders, preventing law enforcement agencies, with their
traditionally bordered jurisdictions, from conducting investigations
and generating evidence. 
From a technological perspective, the challenges are already
numerous. Identifying and tracing an individual behind conduct on
the Internet is non-trivial, as is identifying the alleged perpetrator’s
geographic location. Identifying the location of evidentiary
information is also difficult: identifying which Communication
Service Providers hold customer data, emails and transactional
data regarding an incident, and ensuring that the information is
available to law enforcement officials. This is presuming, of course,
that the law enforcement agencies conducting this investigation
have the appropriate investigatory capabilities with appropriate
authorization and oversight procedures, enshrined in law and
made possible by technology.
Resolving national policy challenges is no easier. Criminalizing
conduct, through substantive law, such as hacking or downloading
child porn may seem trivial but the process of drafting bills and
testing laws through court decisions has proven to be difficult for
many countries either due to vagaries in definitions, contentious
updates due to new technologies and techniques, or legal
challenges on constitutional values. This all presumes
constitutional protections, and an active non-governmental sector
including industry lobbyists and human rights organizations. 
Establishing state powers of investigation is also non-trivial;
once it is decided, technologically, that investigative information
may exist in the form of computer data, allowing for lawful access
to this data usually requires new laws of interception, search and
seizure, and production and preservation by third parties. This all
presumes that law enforcement agencies have procedures and
knowledge to deal with these situations.
Finally, when information exists within other jurisdictions,
countries may be required to preserve and access the information.
Much of this, arguably, needs to occur quickly in order to begin
real-time access, or access to stored data before the data is deleted.
This all presumes that such regimes for international co-operation
exist.
Bypassing domestic restrictions
159

National governments are usually entitled to enact and enforce
laws within their jurisdiction; it is, after all, their sovereign right to
do so. There are conditions that arise where this sovereign right is
questioned, or where conflicts arise. One such conflict arises when
there is transborder activity: where activity occurs beyond the
jurisdiction that affects the ability of the sovereign jurisdiction to
enforce its laws. This renders the viability of potential laws to solve
this very problem as doubtful. Enforceability becomes immediately
questionable: activity may occur beyond the jurisdiction of
national law, regulating national activities are fruitless and
hazardous economically (Sun and Pelkmans 1998). 
With data flows within transnational digital networks and the
associated products and services, the transborder problems are
exacerbated. Action may occur at a distance, where the overflow of
activity can occur without an individual having to physically enter
the jurisdiction. Whether it is the penetration of computers or the
downloading of pornography, this conduct can occur across
borders preventing law enforcement agencies, with their
traditionally bordered jurisdictions, from conducting investigations
and generating evidence. 
Establishing national policies amid transnational data networks
and flows is a pressing technology policy issue. It is not new, nor as
infeasible as often presumed, or argued legally (cf. Johnson and
Post 1996). These presumptions and arguments have been
responded to by legal theory and in practice. Theoretically, it is
now argued that the infeasibility arguments exaggerated the
problems and promises of data flows (Goldsmith 1998b). In so
doing, the arguments failed to recognize that there have been many
multijurisdictional regulatory problems involving transnational
transactions in other fields of law (Goldsmith 1998a). 
The debate has long moved on beyond the halls of academia,
however. There are continuous calls for solutions to the challenges
of transborder data flows, transborder criminal activity and
transborder terrorist activity. The solutions that are preferred are
not distinct from the seemingly national laws that have been
established in response to national data policies (for example, data
protection and privacy, electronic commerce), criminal policies (for
example, investigatory powers and capacities), and anti-terrorism
policies (for example, blanket surveillance, immigration
procedures). Nor are the relationships between international and
national solutions necessarily clear-cut. 
160
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

International regularity activity is ever-increasing. From 1970
through to 1997, the number of international treaties more than
tripled, with the US concluding over 10,000 treaties in that period
(Alvarez 2002). The number of intergovernmental organizations
(IGOs), often the fora for treaty activity, has doubled in the past 20
years (Drezner 2001). While decisions made in other jurisdictions
and fora have always affected national policies, in areas such as
trade (e.g. WTO and GATT), standards (e.g. ISO and IETF),
defence (e.g. NATO and the UN Security Council), attention to the
influence of these decisions upon national policies is lacking.
In the domain of law enforcement and national security policy
developments there have been concerns, usually stated by
governments, about the creation of ‘safe havens’ for criminality.
Governments fear that their failure to have adequate laws to
combat criminality will result in criminals selecting their
jurisdictions as bases for anti-social activities. Similarly,
governments continue to alter their technology policies to cater for
new forms of criminality. Various policies on cryptography,
censorship, freedom of information and surveillance can all be
attributed to such concerns. The success of these policies, in a pre-
terrorism world, often depended on the responses from other
actors, including industry, civil society, the courts and epistemic
communities (Haas 1992). 
Previous national discourses surrounding these policies
sometimes resembled battlegrounds. Concerns would arise that
new regulations to enhance the power of the state would create a
burden too great for industry to survive (cf. Hosein and Whitley
2002). Opposition was mounted often by an organized civil society
lobbying, educating and influencing parliamentarians, the media
and mass publics. Courts decided the legality of these rules,
sometimes in favour, sometimes not. Epistemic communities, like
experts and specialists, argued that proposed regulations would
likely harm infrastructure, markets, and social frameworks and
practices (e.g. Abelson et al. 1998). In the language used by
Braithwaite and Drahos, actors pursued principles while employing
mechanisms to construct or destroy alliances and policies
(Braithwaite and Drahos 2000: 9). Put simply, and overly so
perhaps, national discourse in deliberative democracies gives rise to
rich discussions, negotiations and policy regimes that are openly
deconstructed.
Apparently governments have learned from earlier failures to
address safe havens, jurisdictional arbitrage and regulatory
Bypassing domestic restrictions
161

competition. Terrorism and high-tech crime have given rise to
increased activity in international policy-making. Discourse may
indeed be changing on a national level, due to other dynamics too.
Courts may be less likely to interfere with the executive arm of
government and defer on issues relating to national security and
terrorism; industry is less likely to reject government surveillance
proposals; and epistemic communities may become more
fragmented. International regulation may in some instances further
reduce the role of national policy discourse, as governments adopt
international agreements through various strategies, such as ‘policy
laundering’, ‘forum shopping’ and ‘blueprinting’ which we will
return to in a minute.
Regulatory strategies: Implications for power and security
With the increased movement of peoples (Alvarez 2002), the
growth of IGOs (Perritt 1998), the growth of civil society (Drezner
2001), free trade (Henkin 1995), globalization (Slaughter et al.
1998) and advances in communications (Nagle 2000), many argue
that we are now facing a radically new set of circumstances.
International solutions are often promoted to counter the
economic, social and geographical distribution of contemporary
problems (Slaughter 1997).
Thus, studying the dynamics of modern policy development
increasingly has to be done with an eye to international activities.
This may involve focusing on the mechanisms used within
international policy dynamics, including policy laundering,
blueprinting and forum shopping. Policy laundering is a practice
where policy-makers make use of other jurisdictions to further
their goals, and in so doing they circumvent national deliberative
processes.2 Blueprinting occurs when governments, overtly through
calls of harmonization or subtly through quiet influence and
translating of concepts, shape their laws based on laws developed
in other jurisdictions. Forum shifting occurs when actors pursue
rules in intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) that suit their
purposes and interests, and, when opposition and challenges arise,
shift to other IGOs or agreement-structures. 
One of the leading reasons for the political viability for such
international solutions is the perceived notion of international co-
operation as a good in itself. With backlashes against failing to
ratify international conventions on courts, environmental
protocols and proceeding through intergovernmental organizations
162
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

such as the United Nations, it is wrongly assumed by many that
international agreements are inherently good (Keohane 1984: 73).
Similarly, international cooperation and other initiatives in
national security and law enforcement are also seen as benign. The
trend of multilateralism (Henkin 1995), and associated calls for
‘harmonization’ and articulations of ‘international obligations’
continue unabated, as part of these international dynamics. 
When governments realized the challenges and new threats
involving terrorism committed by sub-state actors and action-at-a-
distance involving high-tech crime, international solutions were
immediately sought. Although these mechanisms were all used in
other times, their frequency is increasingly leading to policies being
adopted and the laws being transformed. Failing to adhere to these
pressures and agreements becomes more costly (Henkin 1995),
often intentionally so (Keohane 1984: 73). Failing to comply with
international covenants and pressures may result in becoming safe
havens to criminality, being out-ed and shamed by the international
community (Drezner 2001), being unable to co-operate in
international investigations, being unable to conduct national
investigations due to insufficient capacity, or even being unable to
conduct commerce due to resultant trade and border restrictions. 
The trick is that national governments often do not need their
arms twisted over some of these changes. Arguably, adopting these
changes and participating in these agreements helps by enhancing
their domestic powers, and minimizing deliberative discourse. 
International dynamics to promoting policy change are studied
within the regulation literature under concerns of regulatory
competition. Differences in policies in various countries give rise to
competition. Then regulatory competition may occur, consisting of
a competitive adjustment of rules, processes, or enforcement
regimes in order to secure an advantage, usually attracting
investment with a more favourable environment (Baldwin and
Cave 1999: 180). So long as regulatory competition exists,
countries are inhibited from establishing overly restrictive policy
(Sun and Pelkmans 1998: 457). 
Regulatory fora: G8 and the Council of Europe 
For a number of years, two international bodies were developing
agreements for international co-operation for ‘high-tech’ or
‘cybercrime’. The Group of Eight industrialized countries (G8) has
been meeting regularly to discuss harmonizing methods, creating
Bypassing domestic restrictions
163

new investigative powers and means of co-operation, formally
since 1995. Similarly, the Council of Europe (CoE), the
international treaty-making body with 43 member states  has
laboured to create the Convention on Cybercrime since 1997. 
The high-tech crime policies developed at the Council of Europe
and the Group of 8 point to the dynamics of international policy
development in intergovernmental organizations. Different rules of
engagement led to different policies being pursued at each forum.
With regard to jurisdiction, high-tech crime is analogous to
transnational organized crime. According to Zagaris:
The continued review and strengthening of global and
domestic financial supervisory mechanisms has become more
urgent in a globalized world in which transnational crime and
organized 
groups 
operate. 
Increasingly, 
international
organizations and groups, such as the Basle Committee, the
FATF, the World Bank Group, and Interpol, are exchanging
information 
and 
cooperating 
among 
themselves 
to
complement their regulatory and enforcement frameworks.
(Zagaris 1998) 
The work product of the CoE in cybercrime and the G8 on high-
tech crime are worthy of deeper analysis, and this is done elsewhere
(Hosein 2004). A quick rendition of the story is provided here. The
CoE convention on Cybercrime (2001) consists of three
components: a set of substantive crimes to be enshrined in law that
includes hacking, child pornography and copyright circumvention;
a set of surveillance capacities that ratifying countries are expected
to enable for use by their law enforcement authorities; and a regime
for mutual legal assistance and extradition among ratifying
countries.
This last component of the CoE convention is noteworthy: the
creation of a broad mutual legal assistance agreement. Co-
operation is particularly problematic as the convention tries to do
away with traditional concerns for dual criminality; in fact, it
dissuades and sometimes prevents countries from refusing
assistance to another country on these grounds. The convention
may create situations where a country will be required to collect
evidence on an individual without any contravention of domestic
law. 
The convention was drafted by a group of representatives from
national departments of justice and home affairs, most notably
164
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

Canada, France, Germany, the United Kingdom and the United
States. It is worth noting that two of these countries (Canada and
the US) are merely observer nations to the CoE. As a result of the
formulation and consultation processes, the convention represents
the interests of law enforcement agencies while all but ignoring
privacy and civil liberties protections.
Drafted in relative secrecy from 1997 to 2000, a consultation
process was opened in April 2000. Few changes were achieved in
the consultation stage, however, despite the activities of
representatives from industry and civil society. Both industry and
civil society organizations loudly opposed the convention on a
number of grounds, including the formulation process,
invasiveness, costs and burdens, lack of due process provisions and
the presence of ambiguous language within the body of the
convention.
The CoE responded to these appeals by promising repeatedly
that the opportunity for consultation and democratic participation
would arise on a case-by-case basis at the national level at the time
of signing and ratification. 
At the same time as the convention was being negotiated, the G8
Lyon Group on Transnational Organised Crime was working on
high-tech crime. Meetings began in 2000 to consult with industry
in the G8 countries on proposed investigative powers. The
conclusions of the first meeting in Paris, in May 2000, were
uncertain, as industry and governments diverged in their interests
and statements. The final communiqué articulated some of these
concerns, including civil liberties and privacy, maintaining the
powers of law enforcement agencies, defining a clear and
transparent regime to combat ‘cybercriminality’, and ensure free
and equitable market development to ensure good conditions for
industry, while evaluating the effectiveness and consequences of the
policies (G8 Lyon Group 2000).
In high-tech crime policy, the G8 and the CoE have been the
most active fora. The G8 has been meeting regularly to discuss
harmonizing methods, creating new investigative powers, and
means of co-operation, formally since 1995. Similarly, the Council
of Europe, has laboured to create the Convention on Cybercrime
since 1997. Previously these bodies focused on economic policies
and human rights, respectively. 
Bypassing domestic restrictions
165

Bypassing domestic restrictions: International 
‘policy laundering’
International policy dynamics are increasingly affecting national
policy, mainly because of complex interdependencies and
transborder activities (Alvarez 2002). Ikenberry observes that this
should not be surprising: 
By relaxing the divisions between domestic and international
political processes, and appreciating the special position state
officials occupy at the intersection of these spheres, political
outcomes within each become more explicable. 
(Ikenberry 1989)
Governments are in a position to play at both the national and
international levels. It was inevitable that international policy
dynamics would affect domestic policy discourse. 
One implication of international policy dynamics is that it is
increasingly difficult to identify the sources of laws. Sometimes it
can be said that the policies are homegrown, negotiated and
deliberated needs of government agencies. This is a simplistic view
of policy, however; policies are not immune to other influences.
These include the activities of intergovernmental organizations,
and the conduct of national governments while negotiating
agreements.
Intergovernmental organizations and other institutions ‘channel
and circumscribe the way state power is exercised’ (Ikenberry
1996: 62). International institutions may reduce transaction costs
for developing norms, reduce ambiguity surrounding compliance,
and provide high quality information to policy makers (Perritt
1998). Smaller states may participate in these fora, leading to the
democratization of international policy and treaties (Alvarez
2002). The dynamics (Ikenberry 1989: 399) at this international
level involve power and selection, however. 
Cooperating internationally and establishing international
agreements are not neutral activities. Power politics may prevail, as
countries may use international institutions to further their own
ends when they find it convenient and disregard them when they
do not (Slaughter 2000). This ‘convenience’ arises particularly
when it serves a domestic political purpose (Goldstein 1996).
Goldstein notes how the Canada–US free trade agreement actually
served the interests of the Reagan administration in circumventing
domestic institutions, i.e. an instance of policy laundering. 
166
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

In their review of global business regulation, Braithwaite and
Drahos (2000: 482–3) find that some countries (notably the US
and the UK) conduct policy laundering, i.e. pushing for certain
regulatory standards in international bodies and then bring those
regulations home under the requirement of harmonization and in
the guise of multilateralism. 
In fact, the expression of policy laundering was first used to
describe the activities of the US government regarding intellectual
property in 1996. The US was taking the concepts of its domestic
policies to the World Intellectual Property Organization in order to
get them approved abroad by other countries so that they could be
re-presented to the American people as a fait accompli. The same
was attempted with cryptography policy at the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Instead of envisioning domestic politics as a constraint upon
those nations that enter into international agreements, signing
an agreement is suggested to be a strategy whereby domestic
actors further their own interests. [...] International institutions
[...] may serve a number of specific political purposes for
policymakers at home. [...] Nations that are constrained by
domestic institutions may not only have an international
bargaining edge, but, as well, international bargains can be a
means of empowering particular domestic actors. 
(Goldstein 1996) 
As a result, these international agreements and commitments may
be sought after by some government officials as means to ‘loosen
domestic obstacles and impediments’ (Ikenberry 1989).
A noteworthy instance of policy laundering is the following one.
In August 2000, a number of United Kingdom law enforcement
agencies submitted a proposal to the UK Home Office to require
the retention of communications traffic data for up to seven years
by a central government authority (Gaspar 2000), as such
information may be useful for investigations. This retention of
sensitive information, including telephone traffic data, Internet e-
mail traffic data, and perhaps even website viewing data,
encountered significant resistance from NGOs, industry
organizations and the media. In particular, it was arguably
contrary to data protection principles, in accordance with the EU
Data Protection Directive 1995 (European Union 1995) as
enshrined into UK law under the Data Protection Act 1998, that
Bypassing domestic restrictions
167

calls for the destruction of personal information when it is no
longer required for the purposes for which it was collected. 
At about this time, the EU was working on ‘updating’ its data
protection directives to cater for electronic commerce and
transactions. In this forum the United Kingdom began calling for a
change to the Data Protection Directive on Electronic
Communications; a change that would permit member states to
allow for data retention. There was some discussion, but not much
progress. There was discussion of including data retention in the
CoE convention, but the CoE did not accept that. The G8 also
discussed data retention, but industry originally rejected the
proposals.
In October 2001 President George W. Bush wrote a letter to the
President of the European Commission recommending changes in
European policy, to ‘[c]onsider data protection issues in the context
of law enforcement and counterterrorism imperatives’, and as a
result to ‘[r]evise draft privacy directives that call for mandatory
destruction to permit the retention of critical data for a reasonable
period’ (Bush 2001e). This was building from previously
articulated concerns that ‘[d]ata protection procedures in the
sharing of law enforcement information must be formulated in
ways that do not undercut international cooperation’ (US
Government 2001). 
Very similar language later appeared in the G8 documents from
the May 2002 summit, even though the G8 government–industry
meetings, for instance, had previously rejected it in the pre-
September 11 era. 
Ensure data protection legislation, as implemented, takes into
account public safety and other social values, in particular by
allowing retention and preservation of data important for
network 
security 
requirements 
or 
law 
enforcement
investigations or prosecutions, and particularly with respect to
the Internet and other emerging technologies. 
(G8 Justice and Interior Ministers 2002) 
Over these ensuing months, EU law was changed to allow for
retention. In December 2001 data retention was introduced and
passed under the United Kingdom’s anti-terrorism law in response
to the events of September 2001. A significant number of other
member states have since passed similar retention laws. 
168
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

There was consideration at the EU that the Directive did not go
far enough. The 2002 Directive allowed for countries to pass
retention laws. Now, however, the situation in Europe is
fragmented where some countries have retention, others do not.
There is some pressure on the EU from the Justice and Home
Affairs ministers to finalize a Framework Decision on data
retention that would require all member states to have policies
allowing for retention.
This policy laundering is noteworthy for a number of reasons
that are beyond the scope of this study. One particular concern,
however, is that the US itself does not have a policy on data
protection, nor in turn, a policy on data retention; regardless, it
asked the EU to change its privacy practices. Meanwhile, the
United Kingdom failed with its original policy nationally and so
shifted to the EU to allow the UK to pass such laws. Now that the
EU has allowed for retention, there are calls for standardization
and harmonization across Europe to ensure that other countries
adopt similar laws. The confusing fact here is that policy
laundering is indeed going on, but it is hard to see who exactly is
doing the laundry.
Forum shopping and blueprinting
Not all institutions are ideal, and intergovernmental organizations
function differently. Alvarez (2002) argues that ‘[t]he choice of
organizational venue speaks volumes concerning the intent of
principal treaty backers’. For example, the US pursued anti-
terrorism rules in the 1970s through the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO). The US chose the ICAO over the
United Nations General Assembly in order to avoid the latter’s
inefficiencies.
Determining which organization and which sub-organ ought to
be the venue in which to initiate a treaty process may determine
whether the process will involve time-consuming and exhaustive
analysis of the current state of the law by general legal experts,
more superficial examination of the need for a treaty by those
attentive to the political desires of states, or thorough examination
of the need for a treaty relegated to technical experts in relatively
narrow specialities (Alvarez 2002).
Both the EU and the US have been shifting between fora for
selected policies (Braithwaite and Drahos 2000). According to
Drezner (2001):
Bypassing domestic restrictions
169

In the past fifteen years, the United States and European Union
have displayed an impressive dexterity in using international
law to advance their interests on the world stage, even if doing
so violates the sovereignty of other nations. Across several
issue areas, the United States has mixed treaty, custom, and
coercion as means of pushing international law towards
desired ends. Furthermore, the United States is adept at
‘forum-shopping’ among different international governmental
organizations to advance its preferred set of international laws.
The European Union and its members are latecomers to these
practices, but have eagerly embraced them. 
This dynamic is practised by the US particularly in the
globalization of US criminal law, bending the forces of
globalization to internationalize US laws (Tuerkheimer 2002). This
is a development from the US’s prior expertise within the war on
drugs in internationalizing US law enforcement agencies (compare
Nadelmann 1993). This shift from internationalizing law
enforcement to globalizing criminal law is noted by Alvarez:
This is a world that has the Security Council (most recently in
resolution 1373 of September 28, 2001 barring and freezing
financial transactions of undefined terrorists) assuming roles
once reserved to the US Treasury Department under the
International Emergency Powers Act.
(Alvarez 2002)
Alvarez concludes that the lines between domestic and
international rule making ‘are as porous as the borders between
nations’.
To be fair, governments are not alone in pursuing policies
outside national deliberative processes. International civil society
has been accused of using international law and institutions to 
achieve results that have been rejected by national democratic
political processes. In other words, international law and
international agreements are seen as a means of doing an end-
run around domestic democratic processes. 
(K. Anderson 2001) 
Forum shopping thus embodies the method of ‘if it does not
work here, then try it elsewhere’. It is not simply a matter of
170
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

moving an issue from one forum to another, however. Forum
shifting is often easier to accomplish if the issue is reframed (Rein
and Schön 1993), to make it more applicable in the new context.
For example, by reframing the European defence industry from a
defence policy to a market issue, and thus moving it from one pillar
to another, a joint European regulation was greatly facilitated
(Mörth 2000).
International policy dynamics do not infer an immediate flight
risk of producers, technology and consumers. Indeed, ‘ideas do not
float freely’ (Risse-Kappen 1994; see also Rogers 1962; Dolowitz
and Marsh 1996). Regulators may find it in one another’s interests
to collaborate to manage externalities, or may collude to limit
competition (Baldwin and Cave 1999: 184). This leads to the
harmonization of policies in order to remove distortions in
business uncertainty across borders (Sun and Pelkmans 1998: 461).
Harmonization is the process through which a common set of
policies is established across jurisdictions to remove irregularities.
Regulations can change in any direction, however: regulations may
be pushed to the lowest common denominator, but may equally
benefit from the ‘California effect’, where one regulator pushes for
the highest standards, setting blueprints for others to follow
(Baldwin and Cave 1999: 188). 
Conclusion
The policy landscape is being transformed in the digital age, and
not always in a shape favourable for national deliberation. Policy
laundering is occasionally used to promote policies at international
fora, only to bring them back home for ‘ratification’ or
‘harmonization’ with minimized debate. National governments
push ideas in international fora, and then are seen to pursue these
policies actively at home, without claiming responsibility in the
first place. Blueprinting is used to copy laws and international
agreements and treaties, incorporating the language used abroad
into national law without adequate consideration. Merely copying
the language of ‘traffic data’ in the CoE Convention on Cybercrime
may involve a radical re-consideration of national laws on due
process and law enforcement powers, but this debate may never
occur. Finally, forum shifting is used to pursue policies across IGOs
until adequate homes are found. Data retention was pursued at the
G8, and then pushed at the EU where it found its natural home for
Bypassing domestic restrictions
171

EU member states that wished to find the path of least resistance in
passing national laws.
The regulation of dataflows can certainly be approached from a
variety of perspectives, including those found in the literature on
regulation, and international cooperation. If anything, this chapter
has demonstrated that the regulation of cyberspace does not
necessarily deviate from policy dynamics observed in other issue-
areas. The argument that cyberspace regulation is ‘idiosyncratic’
because of the global, abstract and technical nature of the subject
matter cannot be corroborated. In contrast, cyberspace regulation
seems to resemble many of the patterns that characterize other
international and technically oriented issue-areas, which bypass
domestic restrictions and imply a particularly powerful position for
technical experts (compare Fischer 1990; Haas 1992). 
Notes
1
This chapter partly draws on past published and unpublished work by
Ian Hosein (especially Hosein 2004). The text presented here is
unique in that it contains theoretical discussions not present in past
works, and by being substantially restructured and edited. 
2
The Canadian government policy officer who first coined the term in
1996 was Stephanie Perrin of the Canadian Department of Industry,
a well-known privacy advocate. She is renowned for her activities at
the OECD meetings on cryptography policy.
172
Ian Hosein and Johan Eriksson

8 
Conclusion
Digital-age security in 
theory and practice
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero 
Giacomello
Linking IR theory to evidence has always been challenging, as
Hermann (2002) correctly observed. All the more so in the digital
age, we would add. In this concluding chapter, by drawing on the
previous case studies and theoretical elaborations, we will suggest
a few synthesizing observations and propositions on how the
information revolution impacts on the security of states and
societies. These can be seen as contributions to theory building
which take into account the implications of the digital age. Second,
we will discuss how existing IR theories fared in the empirical
applications. Finally, we will comment on some specific
requirements for further theory building on digital-age security.
What is the impact of the information revolution on
security?
This overarching question can be divided into two parts – one
concerning security problems as such, including the development
of threats and vulnerabilities, and the other concerning the politics
of security, including competing interests and ideas in agenda
setting and problem definition. Our main propositions on both of
these topics are presented and discussed in this section. 
P1: Cyberthreats are mainly intelligence problems, not physical
threats, but like any intelligence challenge they may facilitate or
obstruct physical attacks.
Cyberthreats are mainly problems in terms of loss or distortion of
information, but despite the scare-mongering scenarios of
‘electronic Pearl Harbor’, they are not direct physical threats

comparable to missiles or electromagnetic weapons (cf. Libicki
1997; Denning 2001b; Chapter 5 in this volume). With the
information revolution, intelligence and counter-intelligence have
grown vastly both in terms of opportunities and problems. The fact
that cyberspace allows global communication with text, images
and sound in real time, regardless of geographical distance, is a
double-edged sword. Terrorists, organized criminals and other
culprits can use cyberspace for mobilization and coordination,
harassment, theft and fraud (Chapter 2 in this volume). Such
attacks, however, only very rarely have effects other than the loss,
distortion, or obliteration of information.1 This is serious enough,
as such attacks may exact enormous costs in terms of time, money
and credibility. Like any other intelligence operation, they may also
have secondary effects, for instance by providing information that
increases the accuracy and effectiveness of physical attacks.
Cyberspace also provides a new arena and technology for
psychological operations on a global scale. Nevertheless, it is still
easier and more effective to detonate a regular bomb than to write
a malicious code to be sent over the Internet. Cyberattacks can
destroy bits and bytes, but it is highly unlikely and extremely
difficult to achieve the same effects in terms of fear and destruction
produced by a bomb or a missile. 
P2: If cyberthreats are to take on direct physical effects, then (1) a
technological leap in attack tools is required, as well as (2) a greatly
increased dependency on globally connected information and
communications technologies (ICTs).
Rather than speculating wildly about what the situation will
‘actually’ or ‘probably’ be like in the future, or cowardly refraining
from saying anything of value for preparing for the unknown
future, we suggest the following. If cyberthreats are to take on
direct physical effects, two changes are required. 
First, a technological leap is necessary in the development of
software and hardware that can be used for attacking information
systems. Though technological development is already developing
at a very rapid pace, it is not enough to have more of the same –
more viruses, worms, Trojan horses, denial-of-service attacks and
so forth. A qualitative and not merely a quantitative change is
required. Tools have to become a lot more aggressive and far-
reaching in their ability not only to penetrate and manipulate ICTs,
but to directly control (including the possibility of shutting down)
174
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

other functions and infrastructures, and indeed human beings,
which depend on these ICTs. 
There is certainly much research and development which points
in this direction, including advances in artificial intelligence,
biotechnology and the next generations of Internets which will
greatly increase interactivity, in effect expanding cyberspace to
encompass all electronic communications, across the terrestrial and
the extraterrestrial. Also with the development of quantum
computing, computers are not only able to store and logically
connect huge amounts of data, but also to analyze them and
suggest synthesizing conclusions.2 On the extraterrestrial challenge,
one example is the work of Vint Cerf and Robert Kahn, who in
1973 invented the TCP/IP technology on which Internet
communication is built; they are currently working with the NASA
Jet Propulsion Laboratory to develop a communications protocol
to link satellites orbiting around Mars and other planets.3
Second, and even more importantly, the dependency on ICTs
has to increase dramatically, to such a level that societal functions
and infrastructure would not be able to function in case of an ICT
system breakdown. The contention behind this observation is
uncontroversial: the more a country depends on ICTs for vital
functions (e.g. electricity, government, communications, financial
transactions), the more vulnerable it is to technical systems failures,
and attacks against those ICTs. True, this development is already
under way. Many societies are extremely dependent on ICTs for
their function and well-being. Yet the development is extremely
uneven, as shown by several authoritative sources on how national
network societies are emerging (IDC 2003; ITU 2003; WEF 2004).
While the technological leap would imply a new revolutionary
step, the increasing dependency on (and thus vulnerability of) ICTs
is an evolutionary development. While a technological leap is very
difficult to foresee – in terms of how, when and with what effects
–the evolutionary development of ICT dependency is growing
generally in a global perspective, but highly unevenly in different
countries and sectors of society. 
In the absence of a combined technological leap and a greatly
increased ICT dependency, cyberattacks are thus most effective if
combined with offline attacks. From the attacker’s perspective, the
choice of using cyberattacks is mainly a question of opportunity. If
the necessary skills and technology are available, and the target has
ICT systems that can be attacked, then a perpetrator may try
computer attacks alongside other available means. 
Digital-age security in theory and practice
175

Moving now from the substance of security issues to the politics
of digital-age security, a useful distinction can be made between the
politics of threats and the politics of protection. These are
obviously interconnected, however, as they both concern agenda
setting, framing, cooperation and conflicts of interests. A variety of
public and private actors are involved, including intelligence
communities, military bureaucracy, politicians, think tanks,
university scholars, business actors, NGOs and – not least – the
media.
P3: Threat framing and policy responses cannot be explained by
technological developments and cyberincidents themselves, but are
rather shaped by psychological, bureaucratic-political, and mass
media mechanisms.
To be sure, technological determinism must be avoided at all costs;
cognitive and political factors are ubiquitous, which implies a great
deal of complexity and variety across time and space (Chapter 4 in 
this volume). As shown in the study of US cybersecurity discourse
(Chapter 3), the framing of cyberthreats has changed more
dramatically than the nature and experience of actual incidents.
Threat framing shifted back and forth between cyberterrorism and
cyberwar (non-state enemies or states as enemies). Only
temporarily, in the wake of 9/11, did the Bush administration focus
on cyberterrorism, however. Before, and not long after, this
focusing event the Bush government prioritized interstate conflict
in cyberspace.
P4: In the absence of catastrophic cyberincidents, a ‘crying wolf’
syndrome may appear in the digital-age security discourse.
Information warfare and cyberterrorism do not gain the same kind
of attention and hype as they did some 10 or 15 years ago. Indeed,
a certain weariness can be perceived among experts and policy
makers. Importantly, there has not been any major drama in
cyberspace that has had significant salience and cascading effects
also in the offline world. Thus it has become hard to sustain the
fear-mongering rhetoric that dominated the cybersecurity debate in
the 1990s. This implies a risk of the ‘crying wolf’ syndrome (Betts
2001: 159; Parker and Stern 2005) – that is, if threatening
scenarios never come true, people stop paying attention to them
and to the associated alerting calls. Yet the development of
176
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

technology and incidents is merely a background factor, albeit an
important one, which is interpreted and exploited or downplayed
by policy-making actors. 
Turning now to how governments respond to the security
challenges of the digital age, a number of observations can be
made. When discussing the politics of protection, one may ask how
experts and policy makers perceive what it is that has to be
protected – the systems that communicate information, the
information as such, or perhaps the more abstract core values such
as sovereignty or identity? 
P5: Understanding digital-age security arguably requires a
combined social and technological approach, yet the politics of
protection is dominated by thinking in which technology is seen as
both the solution and the problem.
This domination, which emanates from the prevailing US discourse
on digital-age security, is illustrated by the widespread use of
acronyms and terms such as CIF – ‘critical infrastructure
protection’ and CII – ‘critical information infrastructure’ (see
Chapters 3 and 4 in this volume). Another widely used frame –
‘information assurance’ – suggests, however, that information
rather than infrastructure is the focus of concern (Chapter 6 in this
volume). Nevertheless, even in discussions on information
assurance, the focus is on how software and hardware can be used
to improve the security of information and communication. These
observations apply to many Western countries, including the
United States and Sweden. This infrastructural or more general
technological framing has also influenced which protective
measures are being prioritized. There is a clear tendency to
emphasize technological solutions: firewalls and antivirus products
for cybersecurity, and surveillance cameras and biotechnical tools
for the offline world. Social and political factors – for instance
ideology, leadership and organizational culture – tend to be ignored
or subsumed under a generally technological paradigm. Yet such
factors have a tremendous significance for how well states and
other organizations can protect themselves against threats,
including those of the digital age. By contrast, in Russia
infrastructure is downplayed, and emphasis in information security
policy is rather on the cohesion and stamina of the national
community. Russian identity and national psyche are seen as
threatened by, for example, psychological warfare, which has
Digital-age security in theory and practice
177

gained a new impetus through the information revolution (cf.
Weimann 2006). 
P6: The emergence of digital-age security problems has opened an
entirely new field for bureaucratic turf battles, and opportunities
for business and research.
The information revolution and the new vulnerabilities that follow
from increasing dependence on ICTs, as well as the scare-
mongering scenarios of the 1990s, have been helpful in creating a
new market for digital-age security. Of importance is also the US-
led ‘war on terrorism’ and the ‘homeland security reform’, both of
which have an explicit focus on ICTs, as means of attack and as
infrastructure to be protected. Within public administrations
across the world, bureaucratic turf battles on ICT-related security
issues have emerged. This new policy area potentially implies
opportunities for new budgetary and organizational resources,
attracting actors from all levels and sectors of government,
especially the military, the police and the intelligence community.
Particularly in countries which have experienced significant
downsizing of (conventional) military forces, cyberspace has
attracted a considerable interest in the new opportunities for the
military to play in what has become framed as ‘information
warfare’ and ‘information operations’. Moreover, the private sector
has a tremendously important role to play. Research and
development 
in 
computer 
software 
and 
hardware 
is
unquestionably led by the private sector. In addition, in many
countries, much of the ICT infrastructure is operated and owned
by private companies. 
P7: The dependency on the private sector for governmental
information security implies both opportunity and organizational
complexity, which in turn implies vulnerability.
The leading role of the private sector in ICT development also
implies that the information security of government and public
administration depends greatly on stable and fruitful relationships
with the private sector. When such relationships are established,
they imply not only governmental access to recent technological
advancements, but also an organizational complexity that might be
interpreted in terms of vulnerability. 
178
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

P8: Regime building on digital-age security issues implies a
resurgence of the classical dilemma of security vs. freedom.
Regulation of cyberspace and other elements of the digital age are
still mainly taking place on a domestic level, with significant
differences among countries. Increasingly, however, regulation is
also taking place on an international level, exemplified by the
European Convention on Cybercrime (see Chapter 7 in this
volume). On the one hand, such regulations reflect an increased
awareness among governments about the downsides of the
information revolution – dependency spelled ‘vulnerability’. States
seek to protect themselves not only by developing a policy and
organization for information assurance, but also by participating
in international regulatory efforts, establishing principles, rules,
norms and procedures for protection against cyberattacks (see 
Chapter 6). International regimes play an important functional role
since they permit actors to overcome fears about any lack of
reliable information concerning the others’ commitment to a
specific cause, which in this case is the promotion of fragile trust
and Internet-based relations exchanges. 
On the other hand, such cooperative policy-making efforts have
also spurred an international critique, mainly from NGOs, which
see such measures as an invasion of privacy (see Chapter 7 in this
volume). The securitizing politics which followed the events of
September 11, 2001 have also facilitated the implementation of
tougher regimes on digital-age security, including increased
monitoring of electronic communications, whether by e-mail,
Internet chat, mobile phones or any other means of electronic
communication. This development is observable not only in the
United States, but also in the European Union and in Russia. 
IR theories: How applicable are they?
The contributions to this volume have applied and discussed a wide
range of IR theories.4 Among general IR perspectives, the following
have been employed: realism (Chapters 1 and 5); liberalism
(Chapters 1, 4, 6 and, implicitly, Chapters 2 and 5); and
constructivism (Chapters 1 and 3 and, implicitly, Chapters 2 and
5). Several theories with a more limited scope than the general 
IR perspectives have also been used: globalization theories
(Chapters 2 and 5); institutionalism (Chapter 6); complexity theory
(Chapter 5); network theory (Chapter 2); social movement theory
Digital-age security in theory and practice
179

(Chapter 2); framing theory and securitization theory (Chapter 3);
and theories on regulation (Chapter 7). These theories have mostly
been used as sources of inspiration, but occasionally they have also
been applied more comprehensively and formally. 
Liberal and constructivist approaches are clearly the dominant
ones in this volume, with the exception of Salhi’s chapter on the
Middle East, in which Realism is credited as having a greater
applicability. Salhi’s argument is that in that geopolitical context,
state control over the Internet and other ICTs is generally much
greater than in most Western countries, wherefore the common
liberal assumptions about the loss of sovereignty, and the challenge
of non-state actors cannot be taken for granted.5 Nevertheless, the
picture is not black-and-white. Even in a country like China, in
which the government maintains a strict control of Internet usage,
globalization and the asymmetric power of non-state actors cannot
be dismissed. Indeed, China’s Internet filters have been produced in
close cooperation with powerful private actors such as Google and
Yahoo (Economist, 29 April 2006). Moreover, if there is a general
lesson to be learned here, it is that in the digital age, power and
security varies greatly over time and space. Thus, patterns of
continuity and change are extremely difficult to generalize about.
With this caveat in mind, the preceding applications nevertheless
suggest that theory building takes seriously the following elements:
•
Offline–online interaction. Digital-age security cannot be
understood by considering cyberspace as a confined arena – a
lesson learned from theories of networks and globalization. An
‘IT security’ perspective is far too limited to make sense of the
intermeshed offline and online worlds. From a terrorist’s
perspective, the use of cybertools is a matter of opportunity
and capability, which is pragmatically combined with other
means of communication and attack. For the coming ‘digital
generation’ the offline–online boundary is porous, if not
insignificant. Easy-to-use ICT tools such as pods, mobiles,
palm computers – or whatever gadgets lie in the future – are
increasingly considered an integral part of life. 
•
Complexity in both physical and social systems. Complexity
theory teaches us that not only are physical systems and social
systems increasingly interconnected through the Internet and
other elements of the digital age; they are also increasingly
complex. Technological approaches need to take into account
the complexity of social systems, and social science approaches
180
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

need to take into account the complexity and change in
technology. Determinism and simplicity must be avoided in
both camps. 
•
Public–private and domestic–international interactivity.
Insights from liberal and institutionalist perspectives show
how the domestic–international divide, as well as the
state–society divide, is increasingly being narrowed or even
bridged. The information revolution has not only reinforced
but 
also 
moved 
transnationalization 
and 
complex
interdependence to an increasingly globally interconnected
level.
•
Symbols, rituals and framing. The constructivist turn in social
science shows us that such ‘ideational’ elements need to be
taken into consideration a lot more in IR theory in general, and
in analyses of digital-age security in particular. If anything,
cyberspace provides a new global arena and a great variety of
means for real-time communication of symbols, rituals and
frames – mediated through text, graphics, video and audio.
‘Soft power’ is amplified, and it can be exploited for
‘fundamentalist’ as well as ‘liberal’ purposes.
•
Process tracing has to come into focus, rather than static
systems analysis (cf. George and Bennett, 2005). This is the
only way to capture patterns of continuity and change, which
are essential for understanding both physical and social
systems. Process tracing is also most fruitful if done on a
contextually limited or issue-oriented level, as it involves
identifying and analyzing decision points and other focusing
events.
It should be clear by now that we do not advocate a separate
theory on digital-age security (see also Chapter 4). Such an
endeavour seems utterly unfruitful, especially because it would
miss the significant linkages between the offline and the online
world. But IR theory in general and security studies in particular
does need to take digital-age issues into account, something which
has been the exception rather than the rule. In addition, as we
argued in the introductory chapter, the mostly policy- and
technically-oriented literature on information warfare and
cybercrime needs to apply and contribute to theory building.
Otherwise generic knowledge on digital-age security will be lost in
a sea of constantly changing details. 
Digital-age security in theory and practice
181

Moreover, theories that take digital-age security into account
cannot be of a general nature, but should take change, context and
complexity into account. In the words of Haas and Haas (2002:
574), ‘We do not aspire to a grand synthesis, but we do believe that
a pragmatic engagement may contribute to stronger and more
confident knowledge claims within delimited domains of mid-level
theorising.’6
Further theory building: Some requirements
We have repeatedly argued that the complexity and contextuality
of the subject matter requires that theory building on digital-age
security is based on a pragmatic approach aiming for typological
(middle range) rather than universal propositions (cf. George and
Bennett 2005; Chapter 4 in this volume). A few further
requirements need to be stressed.
If the gap between various approaches and their mutual
ignorance of either theory or the digital age is to be overcome, it is
important but not sufficient to suggest pragmatic syntheses. In
particular, computer scientists and social scientists need to make a
combined effort to reach a more comprehensive understanding.
Without such a joint venture, computer science will continue to
produce weak analyses of the context and consequences of threat
analyses, and social scientists will continue to lag behind and
misinterpret technological development.
Furthermore, case studies must move from anecdotal story
telling to penetrating investigations. This requires, on the one
hand, systematic methodology and theory, and, on the other, access
to accurate and comprehensive data on threats, vulnerabilities and
– not least – incidents. This approach in turn requires openness on
behalf of the system administrators of targeted networks, whether
private or public. There are two main reasons why getting access
to such data can be difficult: the double risk of losing credibility
and of revealing security weaknesses which can be seized upon by
cunning culprits. Nevertheless, getting access to data on the
intrasystem level is vital for moving forward in the analysis of
digital-age threats and security. 
One way of making this advance possible and minimizing the
risk of leaking sensitive information is to involve system
administrators in the research process from a very early stage. This
way, system administrators can help to make sure that sensitive but
highly interesting data is being generalized, abstracted or otherwise
182
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

presented in such a way that specific details are not revealed.
Moreover, by working closely together with system administrators,
researchers will get a much more accurate and in-depth
understanding of how cyberthreats, vulnerabilities and counter-
measures actually work. 
In addition to studying actual instances of cyberattacks, scenario
building is a fruitful theory-building technique. Scenarios are vital
in preparing for the unknown. Even though scenarios may not
come true or even come close to how the future actually unfolds,
they help to prepare analysts and decision makers to adapt to
changing circumstances, and to continually think in terms of
‘if–then’. In turn, this makes it necessary to clearly distinguish
between probability and consequence. This necessity comes
without saying in scientific risk analysis, but has surprisingly often
been confused in policy and scholarly debates on cyberthreats. But
by clearly making such a distinction, not only will scenarios gain a
much better credibility and realism, they will also minimize the
fear-mongering effects of unlikely but highly consequential
scenarios such as ‘electronic Pearl Harbor’.
Finally, we conclude that despite the much-vaunted superiority
of politics over technology, politics is doomed to lag behind, and
international relations theory almost always comes second within
political studies. This work is also an attempt to alert the attention
of IR scholars to concentrate on research topics that, much as they
may seem bizarre or marginal today, might become central and
crucial tomorrow. Forecasting in the social sciences is not so much
about guessing correctly what will happen, but rather to project
‘on the radar’ what issues might be relevant tomorrow and, if so,
under what circumstances.
Notes
1
This also includes attacks that collapse cyber-infrastructures, such as
‘denial-of-service’ attacks which make targeted websites inaccessible –
a type of attack which has increased considerably in the early twenty-
first century. For example, the websites of both the Swedish
government and the Swedish police were temporarily shut down in
early June 2006, allegedly because of concerted denial-of-service
attacks. It was suggested in the Swedish media that the (then
unknown) culprits were doing this as revenge for a Swedish police
action against ‘The Pirate Bay’, an online file-sharing community.
2
This has made, for instance, The Economist (25 March 2006) suggest
that another Kuhnian paradigm shift is under way in the practice of
science . 
Digital-age security in theory and practice
183

3
On this topic see  an interview with Robert Kahn and Vint Cerf in the
Italian daily La Repubblica (Balbi 2006).
4
IR theory is defined here in a broad sense, incorporating all theories
which claim to say something about world affairs, intergovernmental
as well as transnational relations, including also foreign policy
analysis. It has been neither a possibility nor a goal to develop a
comprehensive overview of the very rich field of IR theories and their
applicability to digital-age issues. Yet the theories that have been used
in this volume represent a sufficient variety to make for a meaningful
discussion of the empirical applicability of IR theory. It should also be
noted that the term ‘IR theory’ is somewhat misleading, as many of
the theories have been developed and elaborated in other disciplines
(e.g., framing theory and social movement theory, both of which have
roots in sociology). The exception is perhaps the embattled but still
highly influential paradigm within IR – political realism.
5
According to Valeri, however, liberalism gains stronger support in his
analysis of international regime-building, as he observes behaviour
that seeks absolute rather than relative gains (cf. Giacomello 2005). 
6
Ironically, the search for ‘a theory of everything’ is increasingly being
abandoned also in the natural sciences – which for such a long time
have provided the standard of scientific inquiry for the social sciences.
It might even be the case that, this time, the ‘messy’ social scientists
‘got there’ before their rigour-bounded colleagues in the natural
sciences (Bernstein et al. 2000).
184
Johan Eriksson and Giampiero Giacomello

Bibliography
Abbate, J. (1999) Inventing the Internet, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Abele-Wigert, I. and Dunn, M. (2006) The International CIIP Handbook
2006: An Inventory of Protection Policies in 20 Countries and 6
International Organizations, vol. I, Zurich: Center for Security Studies. 
Abelson, H. et al. (1998) Risks of Key Recovery, Key Escrow and Trusted
Third Party Encryption, Washington, DC: Center for Democracy and
Technology.
Adamson, F.B. (2005) ‘Global Liberalism Versus Political Islam:
Competing Ideological Frameworks in International Politics’,
International Studies Review, 7(4): 547–69.
Adler, E. (1992) ‘The Emergence of Cooperation: National Epistemic
Communities and the International Evolution of the Idea of Nuclear
Arms Control’, International Organization, 46(1): 101–45.
—— (1997) ‘Seizing the Middle Ground: Constructivism in World
Politics’, European Journal of International Relations, 3(3): 319–63.
—— (2002) ‘Constructivism and International Relations’, in W. Carlsnæs,
T. Risse and B.A. Simmons (eds) Handbook of International Relations,
London: Sage, 95–118.
Agnew, J. and Corbrige, S. (1995) Mastering Space: Hegemony, Territory
and International Political Economy, London: Routledge.
Albert, A. (1995a) ‘Chaos and Society: An Introduction’, in A. Albert (ed.)
Chaos and Society: Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications,
vol. 29, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 1–14.
—— (ed.) (1995b) Chaos and Society: Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence
and Applications, vol. 29, Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Alberts, D. (1996a) The Unintended Consequences of Information Age
Technologies, Washington, DC: National Defense University Press.
—— (1996b) Defensive Information Warfare, Washington, DC: National
Defense University Press.
Alberts, D.S. and Czerwinski, T.J. (1997) Complexity, Global Politics,
and National Security, Washington, DC: National Defense University
Press.

Alberts, D.S. and Papp, D.S. (eds) (1997) The Information Age: An
Anthology of Its Impacts and Consequences, vol. I, Washington, DC:
National Defense University Press.
Alberts, D.S., Papp, D.S., and Kemp W.T, III (1997) ‘The Technologies of
the Information Revolution’, in D.S. Alberts and D.S. Papp (eds) The
Information Age: An Anthology of its Impacts and Consequences, vol.
I, Washington, DC: National Defense University Press.
Aldrich, R. (2001) ‘CNA and Law Enforcement’, Staff Judge Advocate of
the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Presentation at the
InfowarCon in Washington, DC, 6 September.
Allan, P. and Goldmann, K. (eds) (1995) The End of the Cold War:
Evaluating Theories of International Relations, The Hague: Kluwer
Law International.
Allen, J.H. and Sledge, C.A. (2002) ‘Information Survivability: Required
Shifts in Perspective’. The Journal of Defense Software Engineering,
available on 19 October at <http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/
CrossTalk_Shifts_7-02.pdf>
Allison, G.T. and Zelikow, P. (1999) Essence of Decision: Explaining the
Cuban Missile Crisis, 2nd edn, New York: Longman.
‘Al-Qa’ida Yemeni Branch Opens Chat Channel for Members’ (2003) Al-
Sharq Al-Awsat, 24 October.
Al-Qurashi, A-U. (2003) ‘Fourth Generation Wars’, Al Ansar: For the
Struggle Against the Crusader War, February. 
Alterman, Jon B. (2004) ‘Information Revolution and the Middle East’, in
N. Bensahel and D.L. Byman (eds) The Future Security and
Environment in the Middle East: Conflict, Stability, and Political
Change, Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Alvarez, J.E. (2002) ‘The New Treaty Makers’, Boston College
International and Comparative Law, 25: 213.
‘An Al Qaida Blueprint for Terror’ (2004) Hindustan Times, 15 February.
Anderson, C. (1995) ‘The Accidental Superhighway: A Survey of the
Internet’, The Economist, 1 July.
Anderson, J. (1997) ‘The Internet and the Middle East: Commerce 
Brings Region O-Line’, Arab Information Project, Georgetown
University, available on <www.georgetown.edu/research/arabtech/
meer97.html>, (originally published in Middle East Executive Reports,
vol. 20, no. 12) (accessed 12 June 2006).
—— (1998) ‘Arabizing the Internet’, Occasional Papers, Emirates Center
of Strategic Studies, Number 30.
—— (2000) ‘Producers and Middle East Internet Technology: Getting
Beyond “Impact” ’, The Middle East Journal, 54(3). 
—— (2003) ‘New Media, New Publics: Reconfiguring the Public Sphere of
Islam’, Social Research, 70(3): 887–906. 
186
Bibliography

Anderson, K. (2001) ‘The Limits of Pragmatism in American Foreign
Policy: Unsolicited Advice to the Bush Administration on Relations
with International Nongovernmental Organizations’, Chicago Journal
of International Law, 2 (L 371).
Applegate, M. (2001) Preparing for Asymmetry: As Seen Through the
Lens of Joint Vision 2020, Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute.
Arquilla, J. (1998) ‘The Great Cyberwar of 2002: A WIRED Scenario’,
WIRED 6(February): 122–27, 160–70.
Arquilla, J. and Ronfeldt, D. (1999) The Emergence of Noopolitik:
Toward an American Information Strategy, Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
—— (eds) (2001) Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime,
and Militancy, Santa Monica, CA: RAND. 
Ashby, W.R. (1962) ‘Principles of the Self-organizing System’, in H. von
Foerster and G.W. Zopf (eds) Principles of Self-Organization, New
York: Pergamon Press, 255–78. 
Atran, S. (2006) ‘Commentary: A Failure of Imagination (Intelligence,
WMDs, and “Virtual Jihad”)’, Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 29.
Attrition.org (2001) ‘Cyberwar with China: Self-fulfilling Prophecy’, Press
release, 29 April, available on <http://attrition.org/commentary/cn-us-
war.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Axelrod, R. (1997) The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models
of Competition and Collaboration, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Axelrod, R. and Cohen, M.D. (1999) Harnessing Complexity:
Organizational Implications of a Scientific Frontier, New York: Free
Press.
Ayoob, M. (1997) ‘Defining Security: A Subaltern Realist Perspective’, in
K. Krause and M.C. Williams (eds) Critical Security Studies: Concepts
and Cases, London: UCL Press. 
Ayres, J.M. (1999) ‘From the Streets to the Internet: The Cyber-Diffusion
of Contention’, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 566(1): 132–43.
Baird, Z. (2002) ‘Governing the Internet: Engaging Government, Business,
and Nonprofits’, Foreign Affairs, 81(6): 15–20.
Bak, P. (1996) How Nature Works: The Science of Self-organized
Criticality, New York: Copernicus. 
Balbi, A. (2006) ‘Portiamo Internet su Marte’, La Repubblica, 41: 26 May.
Baldwin, D.A. (1997) ‘The Concept of Security’, Review of International
Studies, 23(1): 5–28.
Baldwin, R., and Cave, M. (1999) Understanding Regulation: Theory,
Strategy, and Practice, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barlow, J.P. (1996) A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace, 8
February, available on <http://www.eff.org/~barlow/Declaration-
Final.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Barnett, T. (2004) The Pentagon’s New Map: War and Peace in the
Twenty-First Century, New York: Putnam and Sons.
Bibliography
187

Barrow, D. (2004) ‘Networked Collaboration Transforms Curricula: The
Case of Arab Culture and Civilization’, Liberal Education, Spring:
49–53.
Bar-Yam, Y. (1997) Dynamics of Complex Systems, Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Bauer, H. and Brighi, E. (2002) ‘Editorial Note’, Millennium: Journal of
International Studies, 31(3): iii-iv.
Beck, U. (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, London: Sage.
—— (1999) World Risk Society, London: Polity.
—— (2000) What is Globalization? translated by Patrick Camiller,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
—— (2002) ‘Cosmopolitanism and its Enemies,’ Theory, Culture &
Society, 19(1–2): 17–44.
Bendrath, R. (2001) ‘The Cyberwar Debate: Perception and Politics in US
Critical Infrastructure Protection’, Information and Security, 7:
80–103.
—— (2003) ‘American Cyberangst and the Real World: Any Link?’, in R.
Latham (ed.) Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging Relationship
between IT and Security, New York: The New Press, 49–73.
Berkowitz, B.D. (1997) ‘Warfare in the Information Age’, in J. Arquilla
and D. Ronfeldt (eds) In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for Conflict in the
Information Age, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 175–90.
—— (2003) The New Face of War: How War will Be Fought in the 21st
Century, New York: Free Press. 
Bernstein, S. et al. (2000) ‘God Gave Physics the Easy Problems: Adapting
Social Science to an Unpredictable World’, European Journal of
International Relations, 6: 43–76.
von Bertalanffy L. (1968) General Systems Theory: Foundations,
Development, Applications, New York: George Braziller Publishing.
—— (1975)
Perspectives on General System Theory: Scientific-
Philosophical Studies, New York: George Braziller Publishing.
Bessette, R. and Haufler, V. (2001) ‘Against All Odds: Why There is no
International 
Informational 
Regime’, 
International 
Studies
Perspectives, 2: 69–92.
Betts, R.K. (2001) ‘Intelligence Test: The Limits of Prevention’, in J.F.
Hodge, Jr. and G. Rose (eds) How Did This Happen? Terrorism and the
New War, New York: Public Affairs, 145–61.
Biddle, S. (2004) Military Power: Explaining Victory and Defeat in
Modern Battle, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Biggiero, L. (2001) ‘Sources of Complexity in Human Systems’, Nonlinear
Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences, 5(1): 3–19. 
Birkland, T.A. (1997) After Disaster: Agenda Setting, Public Policy, and
Focusing Events, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
—— (2004) ‘“The World Changed Today”: Agenda-Setting and Policy
Change in the Wake of the September 11 Terrorist Attacks’, Review of
Policy Research, 21(2): 179–200.
188
Bibliography

Blank, S.J. (2003) Rethinking Asymmetric Threats, Carlisle, PA: Carlisle
Strategic Studies Institute.
Boin, A., ’t Hart, P., Stern, E.K. and Sundelius, B. (2005) The Politics of
Crisis Management: Public Leadership Under Pressure, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bonino, M. and Spring, M. (1991) ‘Standards as Change Agents in the
Information Technology Market’, Computer Standards and Interface,
12(2).
Borgmann, A. (1999) Holding on to Reality: The Nature of Information
at the Turn of the Millennium, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Bosch, O. (2002) ‘Cyber Terrorism and Private Sector Efforts for
Information Infrastructure Protection’, paper presented at the ITU
Workshop on Creating Trust in Critical Network Infrastructures, Seoul,
20–22 May.
Bossomaier, T.R.J. and Green, D.G. (eds) (2000) Complex Systems,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bowker, G. (1993) ‘How to be Universal: Some Cybernetic Strategies
1943–1970, Social Studies of Science, 23(1): 107–28.
Bowman, L.M. (2000) ‘Cybercrime Fighters: The Feds Want You!’,
ZDNet News, 11 December, available on <http://www.zdnet.com/
zdnn/stories/news/0,4586,2663288,00.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Brachman, J.M. (2006) ‘High-Tech Terror: Al-Qaeda’s Use of New
Technology’, The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs, 30(2).
Braithwaite, J. and Drahos, P. (2000) Global Business Regulation,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Braumoeller, B.F. (2003) ‘A Dynamic Solution to the Agent-Structure
Debate in International Relations’, paper presented at the CEEISA/ISA
International Convention, Budapest, Hungary, 26–28 June.
Brooks, D. (2005) ‘The Zarqawi Rules’, New York Times, 14 February.
Brown, T. (2005) ‘Death by Error’, Washington Post, 19 May.
Buchner, B. (1988) ‘Social Control and the Diffusion of Modern
Telecommunications Technologies: A Cross National Study’, American
Sociological Review, 53(3): 446–53.
Bunt, G.A. (2003), Islam in the Digital Age: E-Jihad, Online Fatwas and
Cyber Islamic Environments, London: Pluto Press.
Burkhart, G. E. and Older, S. (2003) The Information Revolution in the
Middle East and North Africa, Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Bush, G.W. (2001a) Remarks by the President in Tax Celebration Event,
Des Moines, IA: Office of the Press Secretary, 8 June.
—— (2001b) Executive Order, Establishing the Office of Homeland
Security and the Homeland Security Council, Washington, DC: The
White House, 8 October.
—— (2001c) Homeland Security Presidential Directive-1: Organization
and Operation of the Homeland Security Council, Washington, DC:
The White House, 29 October.
Bibliography
189

—— (2001d) Executive Order. Critical Infrastructure Protection in the
Information Age, Washington, DC: The White House, 16 October.
—— (2001e) Letter from President George W. Bush to Mr Romano Prodi,
President, Commission of the European Union, Brussels.
Business Software Alliance (2002) Government at Risk for Major Cyber
Attack in Next 12 Months, IT Pros Say, Press Release, 25 June.
Butler, D. and Van Atta, D., Jr. (2003) ‘Al Qaida Informer Helps
Investigators Trace Group’s Trail’, New York Times, 17 February.
Butts, C.T. (2001) ‘The Complexity of Social Networks: Theoretical and
Empirical Findings’, Social Networks, 23: 31–71. 
Buzan, B. (1991) Peoples, States and Fear: An Agenda for International
Security Studies in the Post-Cold War Era, 2nd edn, Boulder, CO:
Lynne Rienner.
Buzan, B. and Jones, R.J.B. (eds) (1981) Change and the Study of
International Relations: The Evaded Dimension, London: Frances
Pinter.
Buzan, B., Wæver, O. and De Wilde, J. (1998) Security: A New
Framework for Analysis, Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Byrne, D. (1998) Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: An
Introduction, London: Routledge.
Çambel, A.B. (1992) Applied Chaos Theory: A Paradigm for Complexity,
Boston, MA: Academic Press.
Camilleri, J.A. and Falk, J. (1992) The End of Sovereignty? The Politics of
a Shrinking and Fragmenting World, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Campen, A., Dearth, D. and Goodden, T. (1996) Cyberwar: Security,
Strategy and Conflict in the Information Age, Fairfax, VA: AFCEA
International Press.
Carment, D. (2006) ‘A Framework for Understanding Terrorist Use of the
Internet’, vol. 2, CCISS-ITAC Trends in Terrorism.
Castells, M. (1989) The Informational City: Information Technology,
Economic Restructuring, and the Urban–Regional Process, Oxford:
Blackwell.
—— (1996) The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture, vol. 1:
The Rise of the Network Society, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
—— (1997) The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture, vol. 2:
The Power of Identity, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
—— (1998) The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture, vol. 3:
End of Millennium, Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Casti, J.L. (1979) Connectivity, Complexity, and Catastrophe in Large-
Scale Systems, Chichester: Wiley and Sons. 
—— (1996) ‘The Great Ashby’, Journal of Complexity, 2(1): 7–9.
Cederman, L-E. (1997) Emergent Actors: How States and Nations
Develop and Dissolve, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cederman, L-E. and Gleditsch, K.S. (2004) ‘Conquest and Regime
Change: An Evolutionary Model of the Spread of Democracy and
Peace’, International Studies Quarterly, 48(3): 603–29.
190
Bibliography

Celeste, R. (1996) ‘Strategic Alliances for Innovation: Emerging Models of
Technology-based Twenty-first Century Economic Development’,
Economic Development Review, 14(1): 4–9.
Cerny, P. (1996) ‘What Next for the State?’, in E. Kofman and G. Young
(eds) Globalisation: Theory and Practice, London: Pinter.
—— (2005) ‘Terrorism and the New Security Dilemma’, Naval War
College Review, 58(1).
Checkel, J. (1997) Ideas and International Political Change:
Soviet/Russian Behavior and the End of the Cold War, New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Chilton, P.A. (1996) Security Metaphors: Cold War Discourse from
Containment to the Common House, New York: Lange.
Choucri, N. (2000) ‘Introduction: CyberPolitics in International
Relations’, International Political Science Review, 21(3): 243–63.
Christensen, J. (1999) ‘Bracing for Guerrilla Warfare in Cyberspace’, CNN
Interactive, 6 April, available on <http://www.cnn.com/TECH/
specials/hackers/cyberterror> (accessed 18 March 2006).
Ciborra, C. (1991) ‘Alliances as Learning Experiments: Co-operation,
Competition and Change in High-tech Industries’, in L. Krieger
Mytelka (ed.) Strategic Partnerships, London: Pinter Publishers.
CIPEP (2003) ‘Threats to Canada’s Critical Infrastructure’, Threat
Analysis TA03-001, Office of Critical Infrastructure Protection and
Emergency Preparedness, 12 March. 
Clancy, T. and Pieczenik, S.R. (1999) Netforce, Berkeley, CA: Berkeley
Publishing Group.
Clark, W. and Conner, B. (2002) ‘Vulnerability on the Cyber Front’,
Washington Times, 19 August.
Clarke, R.A. (2005) Memorandum: Implementation of PDD 63 Through
Project Matrix, Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office, 19 July,
Washington, DC.
Clinton, W. (2000) ‘Defending America’s Cyberspace. National Plan for
Information Systems Protection Version 1.0: An Invitation to a
Dialogue’, Washington, DC: The White House, 7 January.
CNN (1996) ‘Cyberspace Attacks Threaten National Security, CIA Chief
Says’, 25 June, available on < http://www.cnn.com/TECH/9606/25/
comp.security/index.html> (accessed 18 March 2006).
—— (1997) ‘Experts Prepare for an “Electronic Pearl Harbor”’, 
7 November, available on <http://www.cnn.com/US/9711/07/
terrorism.infrastructure> (accessed 27 February, 2003).
—— (2002) ‘FBI: Al Qaeda May Have Probed Government Sites’,
17 January, available on <http://archives.cnn.com/2002/TECH/
internet/01/17/fbi.alert/index.html> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Cohen, E. (1996) ‘A Revolution in Military Affairs’, Foreign Affairs,
75(2): 37–54. 
Cohen, J. (1992) The Politics of Telecommunications Regulation,
Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Bibliography
191

Cohen, R.S. (1995) ‘How Useful Is the Complexity Paradigm Without
Quantifiable Data? A Test Case: The Patronage of 5th–6th Century
Buddhist Caves in India’, in A. Albert (ed.) Chaos and Society:
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 29,
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 83–99.
Coll, S. and Glasser, S.B. (2005) ‘Terrorists Turn to Web as Base of
Operations’, Washington Post, 7 August.
Cook, D. (2005a) ‘Women Fighting in Jihad?’, Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism, 28: 375–84.
—— (2005b) Understanding Jihad, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Cooper, J.R. (1997) ‘Another View of the Revolution in Military Affairs’,
in J. Arquilla and D. Ronfeldt (eds) In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for
Conflict in the Information Age, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 99–140. 
Cordesman, A. (2002) Cyber-Threats, Information Warfare, and Critical
Infrastructure Protection: Defending the US Homeland, Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Corman, S.R. and Schiefelbein, J.S. (2006) Communication and Media
Strategy of the Jihadi War of Ideas, Report No.0601, Arizona State
University.
Corporate Location (2001) ‘IT Firms Seek Middle Eastern Sales Support’,
12, May/June.
Council of Europe (2001) Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime,
Explanatory Report, 8 November, Strasbourg.
Crutchfield, J.P. (1994) ‘Is Anything Ever New? Considering Emergence’,
in G. Cowan, D. Pines and D. Melzner (eds) Complexity: Metaphors,
Models, and Reality, SFI Series in the Sciences of Complexity XIX,
Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 479–97.
Crutchfield J.P., Farmer, J.D., Packard, N.H. and Shaw, R.S. (1986)
‘Chaos’, Scientific American, December, 46–57.
CSIS (1996) The Information Revolution and International Security:
Robert F. McMormich Tribune Foundation Report, Washington, DC:
Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Cullison, A. (2004) ‘Inside Al-Qaeda’s Hard Drive’, The Atlantic Monthly,
September.
‘Cyberspace attacks threaten national security, CIA chief says’ (1996)
CNN.com,
available 
on 
<http://www.cnn.com/Tech/9606/25/
comp.security/index.html> (accessed 20 October 2006).
Daukantas, P. (2001) ‘Professors Hash out Emergency Response,
Cyberterrorism Strategies’, GovernmentComputer News, 14 December,
available on <http://www.gcn.com/vol1_no1/daily-updates/17642-
1.html> (accessed 25 January 2006).
David, N.C. (1997) ‘An Information-Based Revolution in Military
Affairs’, in J. Arquilla and D. Ronfeldt, (eds) In Athena’s Camp:
Preparing for Conflict in the Information Age, Santa Monica, CA:
RAND, 79–98. 
192
Bibliography

De Borchgrave, A., Cilluffo, F.J., Cardash, S.L. and Ledgerwood, M.M.
(2000) Cyber Threats and Information Security – Meeting the 21st
Century Challenge, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and
International Studies.
Deibert, R. (1997) Parchment, Printing and Hypermedia, New York:
Columbia University Press.
Deibert, R.J. and Gross Stein, J. (2002) ‘Hacking Networks of Terror’,
International Organisation, Spring: 1–14.
—— (2003) ‘Social and Electronic Networks in the War on Terror’, in 
R. Latham (ed.) Bombs and Bandwidth, New York: New Press.
Delio, M. (2001a) ‘It’s (Cyber) War: China vs. US’, Wired News, 30 April,
available on <http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,43437,00.
html> (accessed 30 April 2006).
—— (2001b) ‘FBI Warns of Chinese Hack Threat’, Wired News,
27 
April, 
available 
on 
<http://www.wired.com/news/politics/
0,1283,43417,00.html> (accessed 18 March 2006).
—— (2002) ‘MS Refocuses on Software Pirates’, Wired News, 22 January,
available on <http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,49856,00.
html> (accessed 30 April 2006).
Denning, D.E. (1999) Information Warfare and Security, Boston, MA:
Addison Wesley.
—— (2001a) ‘Activism, Hacktivism, and Cyberterrorism: The Internet as
a Tool for Influencing Foreign Policy’, in J. Arquilla and J. Ronfeldt
(eds) Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime, and
Militancy, Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
—— (2001b) ‘Is Cyber Terror Next?’, Essays on September 11, Social
Science Research Council, available on <http://www.ssrc.org/
sept11/essays/denning.htm> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Department of Defense (1998) Joint Doctrine for Information Operations.
9 October, available on <http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/new_pubs/
jp3_13.pdf> (25 January 2006).
Der Derian, J. (2000) ‘Virtuous War/Virtual Theory’, International Affairs,
76(4): 771–88.
Deudney D. and Ikenberry, J. (1999) ‘The Nature and Sources of Liberal
International Order’, Review of International Studies, 25(2).
Devji, F. (2005) Landscapes of the Jihad, London: Hurst.
Devost, M.G., Houghton, B.K. and Pollard, N.A. (1997) ‘Information
Terrorism: Political Violence in the Information Age’, Terrorism and
Political Violence, 9(1): 72–83.
Dewey, J. (1929) The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of
Knowledge and Action, New York: G.P. Putnam Capricorn Books.
—— (1948) Reconstruction of Philosophy, Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Dizikes, P. (2001) ‘Clear and Present Danger? Government Warns that its
Computer Systems Need Security Improvements’, ABC News, 29
August.
Bibliography
193

Dolowitz, D. and Marsh, D. (1996) ‘Who Learns What From Whom: 
A Review of the Policy Transfer Literature’, Political Studies,
44: 343–57.
Dornheim, M.A. (1998) ‘Bombs Still Beat Bytes’, Aviation Week & Space
Technology, 19 January.
Downes, L., Mui, C. and Negroponte, N. (1998) Unleashing the Killer
App: Digital Strategies for Market Dominance, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Drezner, D.W. (2001) ‘On the Balance Between International Law and
Democratic Sovereignty’, Chicago Journal of International Law, 2 
(L 321).
DSBTF (2001) ‘Protecting the Homeland: Report of the Defense Science
Board Task Force on Defensive Information Operations’, vol. II,
Washington, DC: Department of Defense. 
Duncan, R.W., Jancar-Webster, B. and Switky, B. (2003) World Politics in
the 21st Century, New York: Longman.
Dunn, M. (2002) Information Age Conflicts: A Study on the Information
Revolution and a Changing Operating Environment, Zürcher Beiträge
zur Sicherheitspolitik und Konfliktforschung, no. 64, Zurich: Center
for Security Studies.
—— (2005) ‘The Socio-Political Dimensions of Critical Information
Infrastructure Protection (CIIP)’, International Journal for Critical
Infrastructure Protection, 1(2/3): 58–68.
—— (2006) ‘Understanding Critical Information Infrastructures: An
Elusive Quest’, in M. Dunn and V. Mauer (eds) The International CIIP
Handbook 2006: Analyzing Issues, Challenges, and Prospects, vol. II,
Zürich: Forschungsstelle für Sicherheitspolitik, 27–53.
Dunn, M. and Wigert, I. (2004) The International CIIP Handbook 2004:
An Inventory of Protection Policies in Fourteen Countries, Zurich:
Center for Security Studies.
Dunning, J. (1992) ‘The Global Economy, Domestic Governance,
Strategies and Transnational Corporations: Interactions and Policy
Implications’, Transnational Corporations, 1(3).
Economides, N. (1996) ‘The Economics of Networks’, International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 14(6): 673–93.
Economist, The (26 October 2002) ‘A Survey of Digital Security’.
—— (25 March 2006) ‘Computing the Future’, 79–80.
—— (29 April 2006) ‘The Party, the People and the Power of Cyber-talk’,
25–26.
Edelman, M. (1964) The Symbolic Uses of Politics, 2nd edn, Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
—— (1977) Political Language: Words that Succeed and Policies that Fail,
New York: Academic Press.
—— (1985) The Symbolic Uses of Politics: With a New Afterword,
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
194
Bibliography

—– (1988) Constructing the Political Spectacle, Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press.
Edwards, J. (2002) Press release for the Cybersecurity Preparedness Act,
January, available on <http://edwards.senate.gov/press/2002/jan28-
pr.html> (accessed 12 June 2006).
Elkady, N. (2006) ‘Reaching for Digital Sky’ Gulf News, 11 January,
available on <http://archive.gulfnews.com/articles/05/30/10001589.
html> (accessed 12 June 2006).
Entman, R.M. (1993) ‘Framing: Toward Clarification of a Fractured
Paradigm’, Journal of Communication 43(4): 51–58.
Erbschloe, M. (2001) Information Warfare: How to Survive Cyber
Attacks, Berkeley, CA: Osborne and McGraw Hill.
Eriksson, J. (2001a) ‘Introduction’, in J. Eriksson (ed.) Threat Politics:
New Perspectives on Security, Risk and Crisis Management, Aldershot:
Ashgate Publishing. 
—— (2001b) ‘Cyberplagues, IT and Security: Threat Politics in the
Information Age’, Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management,
9(4): 211–22.
—— (2006) ‘Power Disparity in the Digital Age’, in O.F. Knudsen (ed.)
Security Strategies, Power Disparity and Identity: The Baltic Sea
Region, Aldershot: Ashgate. 
Eriksson, J. and Giacomello, G. (2006) ‘The Information Revolution,
Security and International Relations: (IR)relevant Theory?’,
International Political Science Review, 27(3): 221–44. 
Essoulami, S. (2000) ‘The Press in the Arab World: 100 Years of
Suppressed Freedom’, available on <http://www.cmfemena.org/
magazine/feature/100years.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Eunjung Cha, A. and Krim, J. (2002) ‘White House Officials Debating
Rules for Cyberwarfare’, Washington Post, 22 August.
European Union (1995) Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament
and the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, Official Journal L281, 23.
Evans, M. (2004) ‘Al-Qaeda Agent’s Laptop Yields Vital Intelligence
Clues’, The Times, 7 August.
Eve, R.A., Horsfall, S. and Lee, M.E. (eds) (1997) Chaos, Complexity, and
Sociology: Myths, Models, and Theories, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Everard, J. (2000) Virtual States: The Internet and the Boundaries of the
Nation-state, London: Routledge.
‘FBI: Al Qaeda may have probed government sites’ (2002) CNN.com,
17 January, available on <http://archives.cnn.com/2002/TECH/
internet/01/17/fbi.alert/index.html> (accessed on 20 October 2006).
Fearon, J. and Wendt, A. (2002) ‘Rationalism and Constructivism: A
Skeptical View’, in W. Carlsnæs, T. Risse and B.A. Simmons (eds)
Handbook of International Relations, London: Sage, 52–72.
Bibliography
195

Fielding, N. (2001) ‘Revealed: The Bloody Pages of Al-Qaeda’s Killing
Manual’, Sunday Times, 4 November.
—— (2004) ‘Al-Qaeda Betrayed by Its Simple Faith in High-Tech’, The
Times, 8 August.
Fielding, N. and Gadhery, D. (2002) ‘Al-Qaeda’s Satellite Phone Records
Revealed – No Calls To Iraq’, Sunday Times, 24 March.
Fink, C. and C. J. Kenny (2003) ‘W(H)Iter the Digital Divide’,
Washington: ITU, available on <http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/
background/themes/digital_divide/fink-kenny.pdf> (accessed on 22
October 2006).
Fischer, F. (1990) Technocracy and the Politics of Expertise, Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Fischer, F. and Forester, J. (1993) The Argumentative Turn in Policy
Analysis and Planning, London: UCL Press.
Foerster H. von and Zopf, G.W. (eds) (1962) Principles of Self-
Organization, New York: Pergamon Press.
Fordahl, M. (2002) ‘White House Cybersecurity Plan Avoids Calls for
New Rules’, Associated Press, 18 September.
Forno, R. (2002) Quotes on ‘Electronic Pearl Harbor’, 25 July, available
on <http://www.soci.niu.edu/~crypt/other/harbor.htm> (accessed 12
June 2006).
Forrester, J. W. (1961) Industrial Dynamics, Massachusetts: Productivity
Press.
Foster, A. M., Wynn, L., Rouhana, A., Polis, C. and Trussell, J. (2005)
‘Reproductive Health, the Arab World and the Internet: Usage Patterns
of an Arabic-Language Emergency Contraception Web Site’,
Contraception, 72: 134.
Fountain, J.E. (2001) Building the Virtual State: Information Technology
and Institutional Change, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Fradkin, H., Haqqani, H. and Brown, E. (eds) (2002) Current Trends in
Islamist Ideology, vol. 1, Washington, DC: Hudson Institute.
Franda, M.F. (2001) Governing the Internet: The Emergence of an
International Regime, Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Freedman, D.H. (2000) ‘How to Hack a Bank’, available on <http://www.
forbes.com/asap/2000/0403/056.html> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Freeh, L.J. (1997) Statement Before the Senate Appropriations Committee
Hearing on Counterterrorism, Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, 13 May.
Freeman, C. and Louca, F. (2002) As Time Goes By: From the Industrial
Revolutions to the Information Revolution, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Friedman, T. L. (1999) The Lexus and the Olive Tree, New York: Farrar,
Strauss & Giroux.
—— (2002) Longitudes and Attitudes: Exploring the World After
September 11, New York: Farrar, Strauss & Giroux.
196
Bibliography

F-secure (2003) ‘Iraq War and Information Security’, available on
<http://www.f-secure.com{virus-info/iraq.shtml> (accessed 27 March
2003).
Fuda, Y. and Fielding, N. (2003) Masterminds of Terror, London:
Mainstream Publishing.
Fukuyama, F. and Ikenberry, G.J. (2005) Report of the Working Group on
Grand Strategic Choices, Princeton, NJ: The Princeton Project on
National Security, September.
‘Fundamentalists: Al-Ayiri was in charge of “Al-Neda” Internet web site,
Al-Qa’idah’s mouthpiece’, Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, 4 June 2003.
Furnell, S. (2002) Cybercrime: Vandalizing the Information Society,
Edinburgh: Pearson Education.
G8 Justice and Interior Ministers (2002) Principles on the Availability of
Data Essential to Protecting Public Safety, Mont-Tremblant: G8
Summit, 13–14 May.
G8 Lyon Group (2000) Un dialogue entre les pouvoirs publics et le secteur
privé sur la sécurité et la confiance dans le cyberespace communiqué du
G8 (Groupe de Lyon), Paris: G8, 17 May.
Garner, R. and Gillingham, M.G. (eds) (1996) Internet Communication in
Six Classrooms, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gaspar, R. (2000) ‘Looking to the Future: Clarity on Communications
Data Retention Law’. A submission to the Home Office for Legislation
on Data Retention, on behalf of ACPO and ACPO(S), HM Customs &
Excise; Security Service; Secret Intelligence Service; and GCHQ, 
21 August.
George, A. and Bennett, A. (2005) Case Studies and Theory Development
in the Social Sciences, Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press.
Gershwin, L.K. (2001) Cyber Threat Trends and US Network Security,
Statement for the Record, United States Congress, Joint Economic
Committee Hearing ‘Wired World: Cyber Security and the US
Economy’, 21 June.
Gertz, B. (2001) ‘Military Fears Attacks from Cyberspace’, Washington
Times, 29 March.
Giacomello, G. (2005) National Governments and Control of the Internet:
A Digital Challenge, London: Routledge.
Giacomello, G. and Mendez, F. (2001) ‘Cuius Regio, Eius Religio,
Omnium Spatio? State Sovereignty in the Age of the Internet’,
Information and Security, 7: 15–27.
Gibson, W. (1984) Neuromancer, New York: Ace.
Gilmore, G.J. (2001) ‘Rumsfeld To NATO: Prepare Now for Emerging
Threats’, American Forces Press Service, 7 June.
Gilpin, R. (1986) ‘The Richness of the Tradition of Political Realism’, in
R.O. Keohane (ed.) Neorealism and its Critics, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Gleick, J. (1987) Chaos: Making a New Science, New York: Penguin
Books.
Bibliography
197

Goffman, E. (1974) Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of
Experience, Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press.
Goldman, E. (2005) Information and Revolution in Military Affairs,
London: Routledge.
Goldman, E. and Mahnken, T.G. (eds) (2004) The Information Revolution
in Military Affairs in Asia, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Goldmann, K. (1999) ‘Issues, Not Labels, Please!: Response to Eriksson’,
Cooperation and Conflict, 34(3): 331–33.
Goldring, J. (1997) ‘Netting the Cybershark: Consumer Protection,
Cyberspace, the Nation-State, and Democracy’, in B. Kahin and C.
Nesson (eds) Borders in Cyberspace, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
322–54.
Goldsmith, J.L. (1998a) ‘Against Cyberanarchy’, University of Chicago
Law Review, 65: 1199–250.
—— (1998b) ‘Symposium on the Internet and Legal Theory: Regulation of
the Internet: Three Persistent Fallacies’, Chicago-Kent Law Review, 73:
1119–31.
Goldstein, J. (1996) ‘International Law and Domestic Institutions:
Reconciling North American “Unfair” Trade Laws’, International
Organization, 50(4): 541–64.
Gomez, P. (2001) ‘Vom Umgang mit Komplexität: Denkfallen und
Entscheidungshilfen’, in H. Mey and D. Lehmann Pollheimer (eds)
Absturz im Freien Fall – Anlauf zu Neuen Höhenflügen: Gutes
Entscheiden in Wirtschaft, Politik und Gesellschaft, Zürich: Vdf
Hochschulverlag AG, 151–66.
Gompert, D.C. (1995) ‘Keeping Information Warfare in Perspective’,
RAND Research Review, 19(Fall).
Gongora, T. and von Riekhoff, H. (eds) (2000) Towards a Revolution in
Military Affairs: Defense and Security at the Dawn of the Twenty-first
Century, London: Greenwood Press.
Goodman, S.E., Hassebroek, P.B., King, D. and Azment, A. (2002)
International Coordination to Increase the Security of Critical Network
Infrastructures, Document CNI/04, paper presented at the ITU
Workshop on Creating Trust in Critical Network Infrastructures, Seoul,
20–22 May. 
Gourevitch, P. (1978) ‘The Second Image Reversed: The International
Sources of Domestic Politics’, International Organization, 32(4):
881–912.
‘Government Not Ready for Cyberattacks’ (2002) Internet News, 26 June,
available on 19 October 2006 at <http://www.internetnews. com/ent-
news/print.php/1377081>.
Greene, T.C. (2001) ‘USA Today as DoD Cyber-war Propaganda
Mouthpiece’,
The Register, 21 June, available on <http://
www.theregister.co.uk/content/6/19884.html> (accessed 12 June 2006).
198
Bibliography

—— (2002) ‘Mock Cyberwar Fails to End Mock Civilization’, The
Register, 14 August, available on <http://www.theregister.co.uk/
content/55/26675.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Gulf News
(2005) ‘Qatar and Cisco Sign Deal to Improve 
IP 
Infrastructure’, 
24 
November, 
available 
on 
<http://
archive.gulfnews.com/articles/05/09/27/184032.html> (accessed 12
June 2006).
Haas, E.B. (1990) When Knowledge is Power: Three Models of Change in
International Organizations, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
—— (1992) ‘Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International
Policy Coordination’, International Organization, 46(1): 1–35.
Haas, E.B. and Haas, P. (2002) ‘Pragmatist Constructivism and the Study
of International Institutions’, Millennium: Journal of International
Studies, 31(3): 573–601.
Habermas, J. and Seideman, S. (1989) Society and Politics: A Reader,
Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Haggard, S. and Simmons, B.A. (1987) ‘Theories of International
Regimes’, International Organization, 41(3): 491–517.
Hall, A. (2005) ‘Al-Qaeda Chiefs Reveal World Domination Design’, The
Age, 24 August.
Hall, E.T. (1976) Beyond Culture, Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Halperin, M. (1974) Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy,
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Hammond, A.L. (2001) ‘Digitally Empowered Development’, Foreign
Affairs, 80(March–April): 96–106.
Hammond, T.H. (1986) ‘Agenda Control, Organizational Structure, and
Bureaucratic Politics’, American Journal of Political Science, 30(2):
379–420.
Harbison J. and Pekar, P. (1998) Smart Alliances, San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Harshberger, E. and Ochmanek, D. (1999) ‘Information and Warfare:
New Opportunities for US Military’, in Z.M. Khalilzad and J.P. White
(eds) Strategic Appraisal: The Changing Role of Information in
Warfare, Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
’t Hart, P. (1993) ‘Symbols, Rituals and Power: The Lost Dimensions of
Crisis Management’, Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management,
1(1): 36–50.
Haufler, V. (1995) ‘Crossing the Boundaries between Public and Private:
International Regimes and Non-State Actors’ in V. Rittberger (ed.)
Regime Theory and International Relations, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
94–111.
Hegghammer, T. (2006) ‘Global Jihadism after the Iraq War’, Middle East
Journal, 60(1): 11–32.
Bibliography
199

Henkin, L. (1995) International Law: Politics and Values. Developments
in International Law, vol. 18, Dordrecht, the Netherlands, and Boston,
MA: M. Nijhoff.
Henry, R. and Peartree, C.E. (eds) (1998) The Information Revolution and
International Security, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and
International Studies.
Herd, G.P. (2000) ‘The Counter-Terrorist Operation in Chechnya:
Information Warfare Aspects’, Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 13(4):
57–84.
Hermann, C.H. (1990) ‘Changing Course: When Governments Choose to
Redirect Foreign Policy’, International Studies Quarterly, 34: 3–21.
Hermann, R. (2002) ‘Linking Theory to Evidence in International Politics’,
in W. Carlsnæs, T. Risse and B. Simmons (eds) Handbook of Political
Science, London: Sage, 119–36.
Herrera, G. (2002) ‘The Politics of Bandwidth: International Political
Implications of a Global Digital Information Network’, Review of
International Studies, 28: 93–122.
Hobart, M.E. and Schiffman, Z.S. (2000) Information Ages: Literacy,
Numeracy, and the Computer Revolution, Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press. 
Hoffman, B. (2006) ‘The Use of the Internet by Islamist Extremists’, CT-
262-1. Testimony presented to the House Permanent Select Committee
on Intelligence on May 4, 2006, Washington, DC.
Holsti, K.J. (1998) ‘The Problem of Change in International Relations
Theory’, Institute of International Relations, The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Working Paper no. 26, December.
Hosein, I. (2004) ‘The Sources of Law: Policy Dynamics in a Digital and
Terrorized World’, The Information Society, 20(3): 187–99.
Hosein, I. and Whitley, E. (2002) ‘The Regulation of Electronic
Commerce: Learning from the UK’s RIP Act’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 17(1): 31–58.
Hudson, M.C. (2000) ‘A “Pan-Arab Virtual Think Tank”: Enriching the
Arab Information Environment’, Middle East Journal, 54(3): 362–77.
Human Rights Watch (2005) ’Internet World Stats, Usage and Population
Statistics’, 
November, 
17(10), 
available 
on 
<http://www.
internetworldstats.com/stats5.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Hunt, K. (2006) ‘Osama Bin Laden Fan Clubs Build Online Communities’,
USA Today, 8 March.
Husain, Khurram N. (2003) ‘The Men Behind the Curtain’, Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists, 59(6): 62–71. 
Huysmanns, J. (1998) ‘Revisiting Copenhagen, or, on the Creative
Development of a Security Studies Agenda in Europe’, European
Journal of International Relations, 4(4). 
IDC (2003) IDC’s Information Society Index, IDC (International Data
Corporation), available on <http://www.idc.com/groups/isi/main.
html> (accessed 9 June 2006).
200
Bibliography

Ikenberry, G.J. (1989) ‘Manufacturing Consensus: The Institutionalization
of American Private Interests in the Tokyo Trade Round’, Comparative
Politics, 21(3): 289–305.
—— (1996) ‘The Future of International Leadership’, Political Science
Quarterly, 111(3): 385–402.
Internet News (2002) ‘Government Not Ready for Cyberattacks’, 26 June,
available 
on 
<http://www.internetnews.com/ent-news/print.php/
1377081> (accessed 6 June 2006). 
‘Is Online Terrorism a Legitimate Threat?’ (2002) Computer Economics,
20 August. 
ITU (2003) ITU Digital Access Index: World’s First Global ICT 
Ranking, 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union, 
available 
on 
<http://www.itu.int/newsarchive/press_releases/2003/30.html>
(accessed 9 June 2006).
Jehel, D. and Ranger, D. (2004) ‘New to the Job, Rice Focused on More
Traditional Threats’, The New York Times, 5 April, A1.
Jervis, R. (1997a) System Effects: Complexity in Political and Social Life,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
—— (1997b) ‘Complex Systems: The Role of Interactions’, in D.S. Alberts
and T.J. Czerwinski (eds) Complexity, Global Politics, and National
Security, Washington, DC: National Defense University Press, 45–71. 
Johnson, D.R. and Post, D.G. (1996) ‘Law and Borders: The Rise of Law
in Cyberspace’, Stanford Law Review, 48: 1367.
Johnson, R.H. (1997) Improbable Dangers: U.S. Conceptions of Threat in
the Cold War and After, London: Macmillan.
Jordan, T. andTaylor, P. (2004) Hacktivism and Cyberwars: Rebels With a
Cause, London: Routledge.
Kaldor, M. (1999) New and Old Wars: Organized Violence in a Global
Era, London: Blackwell.
—— (2001) ‘Beyond Militarism, Arms Races and Arms Control’, essay
prepared for the Nobel Peace Prize Centennial Symposium, 6–8
December, 
available 
on 
<http://www.ssrc.org/sept11/essays/
kaldor.htm> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Kambayashi, N. (2003) Cultural Influences on IT Use: A UK–Japanese
Comparison, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Katz, M. and Shapiro, C. (1985) ‘Network Externalities, Competition and
Compatibility’, American Economic Review, 73(3): 424–40.
Katzenstein, P. (1996) The Culture of National Security: Norms and
Identity in World Politics, New York: Columbia University Press.
Katzenstein, P., Keohane, R.O. and Krasner, S. (1998) ‘International
Organization and the Study of World Politics’, International
Organization, 52(4): 645–85.
Keck, M. and Sikkink, K.A. (1998) Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy
Networks in International Politics, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Keegan, J. (1993) A History of Warfare, London: Hutchinson.
Bibliography
201

Keeler, J.T.S. (1993) ‘Opening the Window for Reform’, Comparative
Political Studies, 25: 433–86.
Kellert, S. H. (1995) ‘When is the Economy Not Like the Weather? The
Problem of Extending Chaos Theory to the Social Sciences’, in 
A. Albert, (ed.) Chaos and Society: Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence
and Applications, vol. 29, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 35–48.
Kelley, J. (2001) ‘Terror groups hide behind Web encryption’, USA Today,
6 February.
—— (2002) ‘Militants Wire Web With Links to Jihad’, USA Today, 9 July.
Keohane, R.O. (1984) After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the
World Political Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
—— (2002) ‘The Globalization of Informal Violence, Theories of World
Politics, and the “Liberalism of Fear”’, International Organization,
Spring: 29–43.
Keohane, R.O. and Nye, J.S., Jr. (eds) (1972) Transnational Relations and
World Politics, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Keohane, R.O. and Nye, J.S., Jr. (1977) Power and Interdependence:
World Politics in Transition, Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
—— (1989)
Power and Interdependence, 2nd edn, New York:
HarperCollins.
—— (1998) ‘Power and Interdependence in the Information Age’, Foreign
Affairs, 77(5): 81–94.
Khalilzad, Z., White, J. and Marshall, A.W. (1999) Strategic Appraisal:
The Changing Role of Information in Warfare, Santa Monica, CA:
RAND.
Kindleberger, C. (1981) ‘Dominance, Leadership and the International
Economy Exploitation, Public Goods, and Free Rides’, International
Studies Quarterly, 25(2): 242–54.
Kingdon, J.W. (1995) Agendas, Alternatives and Public Policy, 2nd edn,
New York: HarperCollins College Publishers.
Kirat, M. (2005) ‘The Information Technology Revolution and the Digital
Divide’, Alkhabar Weekly, (Arabic), No. 336, 6/12 August: 19. 
Klinenberg, E. and Perrin, A. (2000) ‘Symbolic Politics in the Information
Age: The 1996 Presidential Campaign on the Web’, Information,
Communication and Society, 3(1): 17–38.
Knorr Cetina, K. (2005) ‘Complex Global Microstructures: The New
Terrorist Societies’, Theory, Culture & Society, 22(5).
Knox, M. and Murray, W. (eds) (2001) The Dynamics of Military
Revolution, 1300–2005, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kogut, B. (ed.) (2003) The Global Internet Economy, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 
Kohlmann, E. (2004) Al-Qaida’s Jihad in Europe, London: Berg
Publishers.
Kolet, K.S. (2001) ‘Asymmetric Threats to the United States’, Comparative
Strategy, 20(3): 277–92.
202
Bibliography

Koprowski, G.J. (2003) ‘The Web: Terrorists Prove Elusive’, UPI,
23 October.
Koslowski, R. and Kratochwil, F.V. (1996) ‘Understanding Change in
International Politics: The Soviet Empire’s Demise and the International
System’, in R.N. Lebow and T. Risse-Kappen (eds) International
Relations Theory and the End of the Cold War, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Krasner, S. (1983) ‘Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: Regimes
as Intervening Variables’, in S. Krasner (ed.) International Regimes,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
—— (1991) ‘Global Communications and National Power’, World
Politics, 43(3): 336–67. 
—— (1995) ‘Power Politics: Institutions and Transnational Relations’, in
T. Risse-Kappen (ed.) Bringing Transnational Relations Back In,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kratochwil, F. (1989) Rules, Norms and Decisions: On the Conditions of
Practical and Legal Reasoning in International and Domestic Affairs,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kurth Cronin, A. (2006) ‘Cyber-Mobilization: The New Levée en Masse’,
Parameters, Summer: 77–87.
Kyriakopoulos, N. and Wilikens, M. (2000) Dependability and
Complexity: Exploring Ideas for Studying Open Systems, Ispra: Joint
Research Centre.
Lacey, M. (2000), ‘Clinton Gives a Final Foreign Policy Speech’, The New
York Times, 9 December.
Laird, R.F. (1999) Revolution in Military Affairs: Allied Perspectives,
Washington, DC: Institute for National Strategic Studies, National
Defense University.
Laszlo, E. (1991) The Age of Bifurcation: Understanding the Changing
World, The World Futures General Evolution Studies, vol. 3,
Philadelphia, PA: Gordon and Breach.
Latham, R. (ed.) (2003) Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging
Relationship between IT and Security, New York: The New Press.
Lebow, R.N. and T. Risse-Kappen (1995) International Relations and the
End of the Cold War, New York: Columbia University Press.
Leheney, D. (2002) ‘Symbols, Strategies, and Choices for International
Relations Scholarship After September 11’, International Organisation,
Spring: 57–70. 
—— (2005) ‘Terrorism, Social Movements and International Security:
How Al Qaeda Affects Southeast Asia’, Japanese Journal of Political
Science, 6(1).
Lemos, R. (2002) ‘Data On Internet Threats Still Out Cold’, CNET News,
21 
January, 
available 
on 
<http://news.com.com/2100-1001-
819521.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Levenson, M. (2006) ‘Crafts website hacked by terrorists’, Boston Globe,
7 May.
Bibliography
203

Levy, M., Young, O. and Zurn M. (1995) ‘The Study of International
Regimes’,
European Journal of International Relations, 1(3): 
270–73.
Lewis, J.A. (2002) Assessing the Risks of Cyber-terrorism, Cyber War and
Other Cyber Threats, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and
International Studies. 
Lewontin, R.C. (1992) Biology as Ideology: The Doctrine of DNA, New
York: Harper Perennial.
Lia, B. (2006a) The al-Qaida Strategist Abu Mus’ab al-Suri: A Profile,
Working Paper, presented at a OMS-Seminar in Oslo, Norway, 
15 March 2006. 
—— (2006b) ‘Al-Qaeda Online: Understanding Jihadist Internet
Infrastructure’, Jane’s Intelligence Review, January.
Lia, B. and Hegghammer, T. (2004) ‘Jihadi Strategic Studies: The Alleged
Al Qaida Policy Study Preceding the Madrid Bombings’, Studies in
Conflict & Terrorism, 27: 355–75.
Libicki, M. (1995) What is Information Warfare?, Washington, DC:
National Defense University.
—— (1997) Defending Cyberspace and Other Methaphors, Washington,
DC: National Defense University. 
——
(1999)
Illuminating Tomorrow’s War, McNair Paper 61,
Washington, DC: National Defense University. 
Lonsdale, D.J. (1999) ‘Information Power: Strategy, Geopolitics, and the
Fifth Dimension’, Journal of Strategic Studies, 22(2–3): 137–57.
Luard, E. (1992) The Balance of Power, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Luiijf, E.A.M., Burger, H.H. and Klaver, M.H.A. (2003) ‘Critical
Infrastructure Protection in The Netherlands: A Quick-scan’, in U.E.
Gattiker, P. Pedersen and K. Petersen (eds) EICAR Conference Best
Paper Proceedings 2003, Copenhagen: European Institute for
Computer Anti-Virus Research.
Lynch, M. (2006) ‘Al-Qaeda’s Constructivist Turn’, Praeger Security
International, available on < http://psi.praeger.com/commentary/
commentary.aspx> (accessed 9 June 2006).
McAlearney, A.S. (2001) ‘Cyberspace Braces For Escalation And War’,
Information Security, 29 November.
McCullagh, D. (2001) ‘Feds Say Fidel Is Hacker Threat’, Wired News,
9 February, available on <http://www.wired.com/news/politics/
0,1283,41700,00.html> (accessed 12 June 2006).
McGinty, S. (2005) ‘15 Years for Foiled Al-Qaeda Terrorist’, The
Scotsman, 24 September.
McKay, N. (1998) ‘Cyber Terror Arsenal Grows’, Wired News,
16 October, available on <http://www.wired.com/news/politics/
0,1283,15643,00.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
204
Bibliography

McLaughlin, S.W. (2003) ‘The Use of the Internet for Political Action by
Non-state Dissident Actors in the Middle East’, First Monday, available
on <http://www.firstmonday.org/issue8_11/mclaughlin/> (accessed 
12 June, 2006).
McQuail, D. (1994) Masscommunication Theory, London: Sage.
McSweeney, B. (1996) ‘Identity and Security: Buzan and the Copenhagen
School’ Review of International Studies, 22(1): 81–93.
McWilliams, B. (2001) ‘Suspect Claims Al Qaeda Hacked Microsoft –
Expert’,
Newsbytes, 17 December, available on <http://www.
newsbytes.com/news/01/173039.html> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Madsen, W. (1998) ‘Teens a Threat, Pentagon Says’, Wired News, 2 June,
available on <http://www.aec.at/infowar/NETSYMPOSIUM/ ARCH-
EN/msg00142.html> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Mahnaimi, U. and Walker, T. (2005) ‘Al-Qaeda Woos Recruits with
Nuclear Bomb Website’, Sunday Times, 11 May.
Mandaville, P. (2001) ‘Reimagining Islam in Diaspora’, Gazette, 63(2–3).
Manjoo, F. (2002) ‘The Case of the Missing Code’, Salon.Com, 17 July,
available 
on 
<http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2002/07/17/
steganography/index.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Masera, M. and Wilikens, M. (2001) ‘Interdependencies with the
Information Infrastructure: Dependability and Complexity Issues’,
paper given at the 5th International Conference on Technology, Policy,
and Innovation, Ispra, 26/29 June.
Matthews, R. and Tredderick, J. (eds) (2001) Managing the Revolution in
Military Affairs, London and Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Maynes, C. (1998) ‘The Middle East in the Twentieth-First Century’, The
Middle East Journal, 52.
Mearsheimer, J. (1995a) ‘The False Promise of International Institutions’,
in M. Brown, S. Lynn-Jones and S. Miller (eds) The Perils of Anarchy:
Contemporary Realism and International Security, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
—— (1995b) ‘Back to the Future: Instability in Europe After the Cold
War’, International Security, 19(2): 5–56. 
—— (2001) The Tragedy of Great Power Politics, New York: Norton.
Meijer, R. (2005a) ‘Jihadi Opposition in Saudi Arabia’, ISIM Review, 15
(Spring).
—— (2005b) ‘Review Essay – Taking the Islamist Movement Seriously:
Social Movement Theory and the Islamist Movement’, IRSH, 50.
Merelman, R.M. (ed.) (1993) Language, Symbolism, and Politics, Boulder,
CO: Westview Press.
Merry, U. (1995) Coping with Uncertainty: Insights from the New
Sciences of Chaos, Self-organization, and Complexity, Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Metcalfe, B. (1995) ‘Metcalfe’s Law: A Network Becomes More Valuable
as it Reaches More Users’, Infoworld, 2 October, 17. 
Bibliography
205

Metz, S. and Johnson, D.V. (2001) Asymmetry and U.S. Military Strategy:
Definition, Background, and Strategic Concepts, Carlisle, PA: Strategic
Studies Institute.
Michaels, M. (1995) ‘Seven Fundamentals of Complexity for Social
Science Research’, in A. Albert (ed.) Chaos and Society: Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 29, Amsterdam: IOS Press,
15–34.
Middle East, The (2005) ‘Fujitsu Siemens Computers Appoints New
Distributor for Multi$m Gulf Markets’, 41, May.
Middleton, J. (2002) ‘9/11: Cyber Threats Fail to Emerge’, Personal
Computer World, 13 September.
Mihata, K. (1997) ‘The Persistence of ‘Emergence’, in R.A. Eve, S. Horsfall
and M.E. Lee (eds) Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, Models,
and Theories, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 30–38.
Milner, H. (1993) ‘The Assumption of Anarchy in International Relations
Theory: A Critique’, in D. Baldwin (ed.) Neo-realism and
Neoliberalism: The Contemporary Debate, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Milward, B. (2006) ‘Dark Networks as Organizational Problems’,
presentation given at the Cambridge Colloquium on Complexity and
Social Networks, 9 March.
Minihan, K.A. (1998) ‘Prepared Statement before the Senate
Governmental Affairs Committee’, Washington, DC, 24 June.
Moore, C.H. (1997) ‘Promoting Democracy: USAID, at Sea or off to
Cyberspace?’, Middle East Policy, 5(1): 178–89.
Moore, G.E. (1965) ‘Cramming More Components onto Integrated
Circuits’, Electronics, 38(8): 114–17.
Moravcsik, A., (ed.) (1998) Centralization or Fragmentation? Europe
Facing the Challenges of Deepening, Diversity, and Democracy, New
York: Council on Foreign Relations.
—— (ed.) (1999) The Choice for Europe: Social Purpose and State Power
from Messina to Maastricht, London: UCL Press.
Morgenthau, H.J. (1993) Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power
and Peace, brief edn, revised by K. W. Thompson, New York: McGraw
Hill.
Mörth, U. (2000) ‘Competing Frames in the European Commission: The
Case of the Defence Industry and Equipment Issue’, Journal of
European Public Policy, 7: 173–89.
Moteff, J.D. (2003) Critical Infrastructures: Background, Policy, and
Implementation, Congressional Research Report for Congress,
RL30153, 10 February, Washington, DC: Congressional Research
Service.
Moteff, J.D., Copeland, C. and Fischer, J. (2002) Critical Infrastructures:
What Makes an Infrastructure Critical? Congressional Research Report
for Congress, RL31556, 29 January, Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service.
206
Bibliography

Mowlana, H. (1997) Global Information and World Communication:
New Frontiers in International Relations, London: Sage.
Mueller, R.S. III (2002) A New FBI Focus. Statement for the Record of the
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation before the Senate Committee
on the Judiciary, Washington, DC, 6 June.
Müller, H. (2002) ‘Security Cooperation’, in W. Carlsnaes, T. Risse and
B.A. Simmons (eds) Handbook of International Relations, London:
Sage, 367–91. 
Musharbash, Y. (2005a) ‘What al-Qaida Really Wants’, Der Spiegel
online, 12 August, available on <http://service.spiegel.de/cache/
international/0,1518,369448,00.html> (accessed 9 June 2006).
—— (2005b) ‘Terror Television: Al Qaida Launches a Weekly News
Show’, Der Spiegel online, 7 October, available on <http://service.
spiegel.de/cache/international/0,1518,378633,00.html> 
(accessed 
9 June 2006).
Nadelmann, E. (1993) Cops Across Borders: The Internationalization of
US Criminal Law Enforcement, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Nagle, L.E. (2000) ‘United States Mutual Assistance to Colombia: Vague
Promises and Diminishing Returns’, Fordham International Law
Journal, 23 (LJ 1235).
National Academy of Sciences (1991) Computers at Risk: Safe Computing
in the Information Age, Computer Science and Tele-communications
Board, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Neuman, W.R., McKnight, L. and Solomon, R.J. (1997) The Gordian
Knot: Political Gridlock on the Information Highway, Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Newsweek (2002) ‘Islamic Cyberterror: Not a Matter of If But of When’,
20 May.
Nichiporuk, B. and Builder, C.H. (1997) ‘Societal Implications’, in 
J. Arquilla, and D. Ronfeldt (eds) In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for
Conflict in the Information Age, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 295–314.
NIPC (2001a) Daily Report, 9 September, National Infrastructure
Protection Center.
—— (2001b)
ADVISORY 01-020 ‘Increased Cyber Awareness’,
14 September, National Infrastructure Protection Center.
—— (2002a) Advisory 02-001 ‘Internet Content Advisory: Considering
The Unintended Audience’, 17 January, National Infrastructure
Protection Center.
—— (2002b) ‘Terrorist Interest in Water Supply and SCADA Systems’,
Information Bulletin 02-001, 30 January, National Infrastructure
Protection Center.
Non-state Dissident Actors in the Middle East’, First Monday, available on
<http://www.firstmonday.org/issue8_11/mclaughlin/> (12 June, 2006).
Nooteboom, B. (1999) Inter-Firm Alliances, London: Routledge.
Bibliography
207

Norris, P. (2001) Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty,
and the Internet Worldwide, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nye, J.S, Jr. (1990) ‘Soft Power’, Foreign Policy, 80: 153–71.
—— (1998) ‘U.S. Security Policy: Challenges for the 21st Century’, USIA
Electronic Journal, 3(3).
—— (2002) The Paradox of American Power: Why the World’s Only
Superpower Can’t Go It Alone, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— (2003) Understanding International Conflicts: An Introduction to
Theory and History, 4th edn, New York: Pearson and Addison Wesley.
—— (2004a) Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics. New
York: Public Affairs.
—— (2004b) Power in the Global Information Age: From Realism to
Globalization, London: Routledge.
Nye, J.S., Jr. and Owens, W. (1996) ‘America’s Information Edge’, Foreign
Affairs, 75(2): 20–36. 
O’Brien, K.A., Ligtvoet, A., Rathmell, A. and MacKenzie, D. (2003) Using
Scenarios to Support Critical Infrastructure Analysis and Assessment
Work, ACIP, Package 3, Deliverable D3.4.
OCIPEP (2003) Threat Analysis, TBA03-001, 12 March, Office of Critical
Infrastructure Protection and Emergency Preparedness, Government of
Canada, available on 19 October 2006 at <http://ww3.psepc-
sppcc.gc.ca/opsprods/other/TA03-001_e.pdf>.
O’Day, A. (ed.) (2004) Cyberterrorism, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Aquisition, Technology and
Logistics (2001) Protecting the Homeland, Report of the Defense
Science Board Task Force on Defensive Information Operations, 2000
Summer Study, vol. II, Washington, D.C.
Onuf, N.G. (1989) World of Our Making: Rules and Rule in Social
Theory and International Relations, Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press.
Papp, D.S. and Alberts, D.S. (1997) ‘The Impacts of the Information Age
on International Actors and the International System’, in D.S. Alberts
and D.S. Papp (eds) The Information Age: An Anthology of Its Impacts
and Consequences, Washington, DC: National Defense University.
Papp, D.S., Alberts, D.S. and Tuyahov, A. (1997) ‘Historical Impacts of
Information Technologies: An Overview’, in D.S. Alberts and D.S. Papp
(eds) The Information Age: An Anthology of Its Impacts and
Consequences, Washington, DC: National Defense University. 
Parker, C. and Stern, E.K. (2005) ‘Bolt From the Blue or Strategic Failure?
Revisiting September 11 and the Origins of Strategic Surprise’, Foreign
Policy Analysis, 1(3): 301–32.
Parker, D.B. (1983), Fighting Computer Crime, New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons. 
Pasternak, B. and Visco, A. (1998) The Centerless Corporation, New
York: Simon and Schuster.
208
Bibliography

Paul, D. (1999) ‘Sovereignty, Survival and the Westphalian Blind Alley in
International Relations’, Review of International Studies, 25(2).
Paz, R. (2005a) ‘The Impact of the War in Iraq on the Global Jihad’, in 
H. Fradkin, H. Haqqani and E. Brown (eds) Current Trends in Islamist
Ideology, vol. 1, Washington, DC: Hudson Institute, 39–50.
—— (2005b) ‘Rakan ben Williams: The Next Generation of Jihadists in
Europe’, PRISM Occasional Papers, 3(8).
PBS Online (2002) ‘Frontline Hackers’, available on <http://www.pbs.org
/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/hackers/whoare/notable.html> (accessed
25 July 2002).
PCCIP (1997) Critical Foundations: Protecting America´s Infrastructures,
Washington, DC: President’s Commission on Critical Infrastructure
Protection.
—— (2000) ‘Fact Sheet’, President’s Commission on Critical Infrastructure
Protection, 
available 
on 
<http://www.info-sec.com/pccip/web/
backgrd.html> (accessed 20 June 2002).
—— (2002) The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace – For Comment,
Draft, Washington, DC: The White House, The President’s Critical
Infrastructure Protection Board, 18 September.
Peirce, C.S. (1963) Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, vol. 5:
Pragmatism and Pragmaticism, and vol. 6, Scientific Metaphysics, C.
Hartshorne and P. Weiss (eds), Cambridge, MA, and London: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Peled, A. (2000) ‘Debunking the Internet Myth: Technological Prophecies
and Middle East Politics’, Middle East Quarterly, September, available
on <www.meforum.org/pf.php?id=71> (accessed 12 June 2006).
Perritt, H.H., Jr. (1998) ‘Symposium on the Internet and Legal Theory:
The Internet is Changing International Law’, Chicago-Kent Law
Review, 73(4).
Perrow, C. (1984) Normal Accidents: Living with High-Risk
Technologies, New York: Basic Books.
Pfaltzgraff, R.L., Jr. and Shultz, R.H., Jr. (1997) ‘Future Actors in a
Changing Security Environment’, in R.L. Pfaltzgraff Jr. and R.H. Shultz
Jr. (eds) War in the Information Age: New Challenges for US Security
Policy, Washington, DC, and London: Brassey’s.
Philpott, D. (2001) ‘Usurping the Sovereignty of Sovereignty’, World
Politics, 53: 297–324.
Pisani, F. (2002) ‘How to fight the terror networks’, Le Monde
diplomatique,
June, 
available 
on 
< 
http://mondediplo.com/
2002/06/02networks> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Polikanov, D. (ed.) (2001) Information Challenges to National and
International Security, Moscow: PIR Center.
Pollitt, M.M. (1997) ‘Cyberterrorism: Fact or Fancy?’, Proceedings of the
20th National Information Systems Security Conference, 285–89.
Porter, M. (1990) The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York: Free
Press.
Bibliography
209

Poulsen, K. (2001a) ‘Hack Attacks Called the New Cold War’, The
Register, 23 March, available on <http://www.theregister.co.uk/
content/8/17820.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
—— (2001b) ‘Justice Department proposal classifies most computer
crimes as acts of terrorism’, SecurityFocus, 23 September, available on
<http://www.securityfocus.com/news/257> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Prigogine, I. (1981) From Being to Becoming: Time and Complexity in the
Physical Sciences, San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman & Co.
‘Pro-Qa’ida Website Publishes Book On “Ways For Serving Jihad”’
(2003), Al-Sharq Al-Awsat, 14 August.
Provos, N. and Honeyman, P. (2002) ‘Detecting Steganographic Content
on the Internet’, paper presented at the Internet Society NDSS’02, San
Diego, CA, available on <http://niels.xtdnet.nl/papers/ detecting.pdf>
(accessed 18 March 2004).
Puchala, D. and Hopkins R. (1983) ‘International Regimes: Lessons from
Inductive Analysis’, in S. Krasner (ed.) International Regimes, Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 61–91.
Rathmell, D. (2001) Creating a Dependable Information Infrastructure in
Europe, RAND report P-806.
Raufer, X. (2003) ‘Al Qaeda: A Different Diagnosis’, Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism, 26: 391–98.
Rein, M. and Schön, D. (1993) ‘Reframing Policy Discourse’, in F. Fischer
and J. Forester (eds) The Argumentative Turn in Policy Analysis and
Planning, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ridge, T. (2002) Remarks by Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge to
the Electronics Industry Alliance, Grand Hyatt Hotel, 23 April,
Washington, DC: White House, Office of the Press Secretary.
Rinaldi, S., Peerenboom, J. and Kelly, T. (2001) ‘Identifying and
Understanding Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies’, IEEE
Control Systems Magazine, 11–25.
Riptech (2002) Riptech Internet Security Threat Report Volume II,
Alexandria: Symantec, July.
Risse-Kappen, T. (1994) ‘Ideas Do Not Float Freely: Transnational
Coalitions, Domestic Structures, and the End of the Cold War’,
International Organization, 48: 185–214.
—— (ed.) (1995) Bringing Transnational Relations Back In: Non-State
Actors, Domestic Structures, and International Institutions,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rochefort, D.A. and Cobb, R.W. (1994) ‘Problem Definition: An
Emerging Perspective’, in D.A. Rochefort and R.W. Cobb (eds) The
Politics of Problem Definition: Shaping the Policy Agenda, Lawrence,
KS: University Press of Kansas.
Rogan, H. (2006) JIHADISM ONLINE – A Study of How Al-Qaida and
Radical Islamist Groups Use the Internet for Terrorist Purposes,
FFI/Rapport-2006/00915, Kjeller: Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment.
210
Bibliography

Rogers, E.M. (1962) Diffusion of Innovation, New York: The Free Press.
Rohozinski, R. (2004) ‘ “Secret Agents” and “Undercover Brothers: The
Hidden Information Revolution in the Arab World’, Papers presented
at the Fifth Mediterranean Social and Political Research Meeting,
Florence and Montecani Terme, Italy, 24–28 March. 
Ronfeldt, D. (2003) ‘Foreword: Netwar Observations’, in R.J. Bunker
(ed.) Non-State Threats and Future Wars, London: Frank Cass.
—— (2005) ‘Al Qaeda and Its Affiliates: A Global Tribe Waging
Segmented Warfare?’, First Monday, 10(3).
Rosecrance, R.N. (1999) The Rise of the Virtual State: Wealth and Power
in the Coming Century, New York: Basic Books.
Rosenau, J.N. (1990) Turbulence in World Politics: A Theory of Change
and Continuity, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
—— (1992) ‘Governance, Order and Change in World Politics’, in J.N.
Rosenau and E.O. Czempiel (eds) Governance Without Government:
Order and Change in World Politics, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1–29.
—— (1997) Along the Domestic-Foreign-Frontier: Exploring Governance
in a Turbulent World, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—— (1998) ‘Global Affairs in an Epochal Transformation’, in R. Henry
and C.E. Peartrice (eds) The Information Revolution and International
Security, Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International
Studies, 31–57.
Rosenau, J.N. and Singh, J.P. (eds) (2002) Information Technology and
Global Politics: The Changing Scope of Power and Governance,
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Rostamani, N. (2006) ‘The Arab World, Parasites and the E-Revolution’,
Gulf News, 9 January, available on <http:// archive.gulfnews.com/
articles/05/12/06/10002838html> (accessed 12 June, 2006).
Rotenberg, M. (2003) ‘Privacy and Secrecy After September 11’, in R.
Latham (ed.) Bombs and Bandwith: The Emerging Relationship
Between IT and Security, New York: The Free Press.
Rothkopf, D. (1997) ‘In Praise of Cultural Imperialism’, Foreign Policy,
Spring: 38–53.
Rötzer, F. (2001) ‘Banges Warten auf den Cyberwar’, Telepolis, 1 May,
available 
on 
<http://www.telepolis.de/deutsch/special/info/7513/
1.html> (accessed 6 June 2006).
Rowe, P. S. (2001) ‘Four Guys and a Fax Machine? Diasporas, New
Information Technologies, and the Internationalization of Religion in
Egypt’, Journal of Church and State, 43(1): 81–92.
Roy, O. (1994) The Failure of Political Islam, London: I.B. Tauris.
Ruggie, J.G. (1998) Constructing the World Polity: Essays on
International Institutionalism, London: Routledge.
—— (1993) ‘Territoriality and Beyond: Problematizing Modernity in
International Relations’, International Organization, 47: 139–174.
Bibliography
211

Rumsfeld, D.H. (2001) Statement by the US Secretary of Defense at 
the NATO North Atlantic Council (NAC-D) NATO HQ, Brussels, 
18 December.
Russett, B. and Antholis, W. (1993) Grasping the Democratic Peace:
Principles for a Post-Cold War World, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Saco, D. (1999) ‘Colonizing Cyberspace: National Security and the
Internet’, in J. Weldes et al. (eds) Cultures of Insecurity: States,
Communities, and the Production of Danger, Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Sageman, M. (2004) Understanding Terror Networks, Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
—— (2005) ‘Understanding Jihadi Networks’, Strategic Insights, 4(4).
Schmidt, B.C. (2002) ‘On the History and Historiography of International
Relations’, in W. Carlsnæs, T. Risse and B.A. Simmons (eds) Handbook
of International Relations, London: Sage, 3–22.
Schneier, B. (2003) Beyond Fear: Thinking Sensibly About Security in an
Uncertain World, New York: Copernicus Book.
Schwartau, W. (1991) Terminal Compromise, Tampa, FL: Inter-Pact Press.
—— (1994) Information Warfare. Cyberterrorism: Protecting Your
Personal Security in the Electronic Age, 2nd edn, New York:
Thundermouth Press.
—— (1996) Information Warfare, New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press.
—— (1997) ‘An Introduction to Information Warfare’, in R.L. Pfaltzgraff,
Jr. and R.H. Shultz, Jr. (eds) War in the Information Age: New
Challenges for US Security Policy, Washington, DC, and London:
Brassey’s.
—— (2002) Pearl Harbor Dot Com, Tampa, FL: Inter-Pact Press.
Schwartz, J. (2001a) ‘Computer Network System At Risk For Terrorism’,
USA Today, 13 September.
—— (2001b) ‘Cyberspace Seen as Potential Battleground’, The New York
Times, 23 November.
—— (2002) ‘Year After 9/11: Cyperspace Door Is Still Ajar’, New York
Times, 9 September.
Sears, D.O. (1993) ‘Symbolic Politics: A Socio-Psychological Theory’, in S.
Iyengar and W.J. McGuire (eds) Explorations in Political Psychology,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Seffers, G.I. (2001) ‘Spacecom on alert for cyberattacks’, Federal
Computer Week, 11 September, available on <http://www.fcw.com/
fcw/articles/2001/0910/web-cyber-09-11-01.asp> (accessed 9 June
2006).
Slaughter, A-M. (1997) ‘The Real New World Order’, Foreign Affairs, 76
(September–October).
—— (2000) ‘Building Global Democracy’, Chicago Journal of International
Law, 1(233).
212
Bibliography

Slaughter, A-M., Tulumello, A.S. and Wood, S. (1998) ‘International Law
And International Relations Theory: A New Generation Of
Interdisciplinary Scholarship’, The American Journal of International
Law, 92(367).
Sloan, E.C. (2002) Revolution in Military Affairs, Montreal: McGill-
Queen’s University Press.
Smith, G. (1998) ‘An Electronic Pearl Harbor? Not Likely’, Issues in
Science and Technology, 15, available on <http://205.130.85.236/
issues/15.1/smith.htm> (accessed 12 June 2006).
—— (2001) ‘Electronic Pearl Harbor’, Crypt Newsletters´s Guide to Tech
Terminology, available on <http://sun.soci.niu.edu/~crypt/other/
harbor.htm> (accessed 18 March 2006).
Snow, D.A. and Benford, R.D. (1992) ‘Master Frames and Cycles of
Protest’, in A.D. Morris and C. McClurg Mueller (eds) Frontiers in
Social Movement Theory, New Haven, CN, and London: Yale
University Press, 133–55.
Snyder, J. (1991) Myths of Empire, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Sofear, A.D. and Goodman, S.E. (2001) The Transnational Dimension of
Cyber Crime and Terrorism, Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.
Spiegel, P. (2001) ‘FBI Warns on Web Terrorists’, Financial Times,
20 March.
Stern, E. (1999) ‘The Case for Comprehensive Security’, in D. Deudney
and R. Matthew (eds) Contested Grounds: Security and Conflict in the
New Environmental Politics, Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.
Stone, A. (2001) ‘Cyberspace is the Next Battlefield’, USA Today, 19 June. 
‘Substitution for the Testimony of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed’ (2006)
Defendant’s Exhibit 941 US v. Moussaoui Cr. No. 01-455-A.
Sun, J-M. and Pelkmans, J. (1998) ‘Regulatory Competition in the Single
Market’, in R. Baldwin, C. Scott and C. Hood (eds) A Reader on
Regulation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sun Tzu (1963) The Art of War, translated by S.B. Griffith, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Sundelius, B. (1983) ‘Coping with Structural Security Threats’, in O. Höll
(ed.) Small States in Europe and Dependence, Wien: Braumüller.
‘Swiss SIM Cards Slammed’, Intelligence Online, 21 March, available on
<http://www.intelligenceonline.com/archives/p_som_archives.asp?num
=449&year=2003&rub=archives> (accessed 10 June 2006).
Tadros, M. (2005) ‘Arab Women, the Internet, and the Public Sphere’,
paper presented at the Fifth Mediterranean Social and Political
Research Meeting, Florence and Montecani Terme, Italy, 24–28 March.
Tenet, G.J. (1997) ‘Remarks to The University of Oklahoma’, 
12 September.
—— (2002) Worldwide Threat – Converging Dangers in a Post 9/11
World. Testimony of the Director of Central Intelligence, before the
Senate Armed Services Committee, Washington, DC, 19 March.
Bibliography
213

Tengelin, V. (1981) ‘The Vulnerability of the Computerised Society’, in 
H. Gassmann (ed.) Information, Computer and Communication
Policies for the ‘80s, Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company.
Thatcher, M. (2002) ‘Analyzing Regulatory Reform in Europe’, Journal of
European Public Policy, 9(6): 859–72.
Tiboni, F. (2001) ‘Virtually Vulnerable. Civilian Board Warns Pentagon of
Gaps in Computer Security’, Defense News, 25 June.
Trabelsi, H. (2002) ‘Al-Qaeda Wages Cyber War Against US’, Middle East
Times, 27 June.
—— (2005) ‘Al-Qaeda Takes Jihad to Media Four Years After 9/11’,
Middle East online, 9 September, available on <http:// www.middle-
east-online.com/english/?id=14500> (accessed 9 June 2006).
TRC TWW Report (2006) 2nd edn, vol. 20, 19 May, Washington, DC:
Terrorism Research Center.
Trendle, G. (2002) ‘Digital Backlash to War?’, IT-Director, 12 September,
available 
on 
<http://www.it-director.com/article.php?id=3191>
(accessed 18 March 2006).
Tritak, J.S. (1999) Statement before the Senate Judiciary Committee
Subcommittee 
on 
Technology, 
Terrorism 
and 
Government
Information, Director, Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office,
Washington, DC, 6 October.
Tuchman, G. (1978) Making News: A Study in the Construction of
Reality, London: The Free Press.
Tucker, J.B. (1991) ‘Partners and Rivals: A Model of International
Collaboration in Advanced Technology’, International Organisation,
45(1): 83–120.
Tuerkheimer, F. (2002) ‘Globalization of US Law Enforcement: Does the
Constitution Come Along?’, Houston Law Review, 39: 307–73.
Turner, B.A. and Pidgeon, N.F. (1997) Man-Made Disasters, Oxford:
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Turner, F. (1997) ‘Foreword’, in R.A. Eve, S. Horsfall and M.E. Lee (eds)
Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, Models, and Theories,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, xi–xxvii.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1981) ‘The Framing of Decision and the
Psychology of Choice’, Science 211: 453–58.
Ulph, S. (2004) ‘Al-Qaeda’s Ideological Hemorrhage’, Terrorism Focus,
1(2).
United Nations (2005) Global E-Government Readiness Report 2005.
From E-Government to E-Inclusion, New York: United Nations.
US Congress (2001a) Concurrent Resolution, Expressing the Sense of
Congress Regarding Internet Security, and Cyberterrorism, H. CON.
RES. 22, introduced in the House of Representatives; Sponsors: Jim
Saxton and Saxby Chambliss, Washington, DC, 6 February.
214
Bibliography

—— (2001b)
Uniting and Strengthening America By Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of
2001 (USA Patriot Act) Public Law 107–56, Section 814, Washington,
DC, 10 October.
US Department of Defense (2001) Quadrennial Defense Review Report,
Washington, DC: The Pentagon, 30 September.
US Government (2001) Comments of the United States Government on the
European Commission Communication on Combating Computer
Crime, Brussels, December.
US Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence (2001) ‘The Worldwide
Threat in 2001’, Hearing, Washington, DC, 7 February.
Valeri, L. (2000) ‘Securing Internet Society: Toward an International
Regime for Information Assurance’, Studies in Conflict and Terrorism,
23(2): 129–46.
Van Creveld, M. (1991) The Transformation of War, New York: Free
Press.
Van Walsum-Stachowicz, J. (1999) ‘Corporate Diplomacy and European
Community Information Technology Policies: The Influence of
Multinational and Interests Groups’, unpublished PhD dissertation,
London School of Economics and Political Science.
Verton, D. (2001) ‘FBI Issues Cyberthreat Advisory’, Computer World,
12 September.
—— (2002a) ‘White House Cybersecurity Chief Defines Cyberthreat’,
Computer World, 9 June.
—— (2002b) ‘Feds Plan Cybersecurity Center’, Computer World,
2 September.
Vesely, M. (2004) ‘www.irantopsites.com’, The Middle East,
25 November.
Violent Jihad in the Netherlands: Current Trends in Islamist Terrorist
Threats (2005) Netherlands Ministry of the Interior, The Hague,
November.
Visvesvaraya Prasad, R. (2000) ‘Hack the Hackers’, Hindustan Times,
19 December.
—— (2001) ‘Generation Gap’, Hindustan Times, 24 December.
Vlahos, M. (2002) Terror’s Mask: Insurgency Within Islam, Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University, Applied Physics Laboratory.
Vogler, J. (2000) The Global Commons: Environmental and Technological
Governance, 2nd edn, Chichester: John Wiley and Sons. 
Volti, R. (1995) Society and Technological Change, 3rd edn, London: 
St. Martin’s Press.
Wæver, O. (1995) ‘Securitization and Desecuritization’, in R.D. Lipshutz
(ed.) On Security, New York: Columbia University Press.
Wæver, O. et al. (1993) Identity, Migration and the New Security Agenda
in Europe, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Waldrop, M.M. (1992) Complexity: The Emerging Science at the Edge of
Order and Chaos, New York: Simon and Schuster.
Bibliography
215

—— (1998) ‘Is There an Information Revolution?’, in C.R. Henry, and
E.C. Peartree, (eds) Information Revolution and International Security,
Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies Press,
1–9.
Walker, R.B.J. (1993) Inside/Outside: International Relations as Political
Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Walt, S. (1994) ‘The Renaissance of Security Studies’, International Studies
Quarterly, 35(2): 211–39.
Waltz, K. (1979) Theory of International Politics, New York: McGraw
Hill.
—— (2000) ‘Structural Realism After the Cold War’, International
Security, 25(1): 5–41.
Watson, D.L. (2002) ‘The Terrorist Threat Confronting the United States’,
Statement for the Record of the Executive Assistant Director on
Counterterrorism and Counterintelligence, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence,
Washington, DC, 6 February.
WEF (2004) Network Readiness Index, The World Economic Forum,
available on <http://www.weforum.org/pdf/Global_Competitiveness_
Reports/Reports/GITR_2004_2005/Networked_Readiness_Index_Rankin
gs.pdf> (accessed 9 June 2006).
Weimann, G. (2004) ‘Cyberterrorism: How Real is the Threat?’, Special
Report 119 (December) Washington, DC: United States Government.
—— (2006) Terror on the Internet: The New Arena, the New Challenge,
Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.
Wendt, A. (1992) ‘Anarchy Is What States Make of It: The Social
Construction of Power Politics’, International Organization, 46(2):
391–425.
—— (1999) Social Theory of International Politics, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
‘What Are Al Qaeda’s Capabilities?’ (2003) PBS, 24 April, available on
<http://pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/cyberwar/vulnerable/alqa
eda.html> (accessed 10 June 2006).
White House, The (1998) Presidential Decision Directive/NSC-63, Critical
Infrastructure Protection, Washington, DC, 22 May. 
—— (2001a) Review of Critical Infrastructure Protection and Cyber
Security, Statement by the Press Secretary, Washington, DC, 
9 May.
—— (2001b) Fact Sheet on New Counter-Terrorism and CyberSpace
Positions, Washington, DC: Office of the Press Secretary, 9 October.
—— (2003) The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, Washington,
DC.
Wight, C. (2002) ‘Philosophy of Social Science and International
Relations’, in W. Carlsnæs, T. Risse and B.A. Simmons (eds) Handbook
of International Relations, London: Sage, 23–51.
216
Bibliography

Wight, M. (1994) International Theory: The Three Traditions, London:
Leicester University Press for the Royal Institute of International
Affairs.
Wiktorowicz, Q. (2004a) Islamic Activism: A Social Movement Theory
Approach, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
—— (2004b) ‘Framing Jihad: Intramovement Framing Contests and al-
Qaeda’s Struggle for Sacred Authority’, International Review of Social
History, 49: 159–77.
—— (2005) Radical Islam Rising: Muslim Extremism in the West, Oxford:
Rowman & Littlefield.
—— (2006) ‘Anatomy of the Salafi Movement’, Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism, 29: 207–39.
Williams, M.C. (2003) ‘Words, Images, Enemies: Securitization and
International Politics’, International Studies Quarterly, 47(4): 511–31.
Wilson, T.R. (2002) Global Threats and Challenges, Statement for the
Record of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, before the Senate
Armed Services Committee, Washington, DC, 19 March.
Wiser, L.G., Jr. (2001) Cyber Security, Statement for the Record of the
Chief, Training, Outreach, and Strategy Section, National
Infrastructure Protection Center, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
before the House Committee on Government Affairs, San Jose, CA,
Field Hearing, 29 August.
Wolfers, A. (1962) Discord and Collaboration: Essays on International
Politics, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
World Bank, The (2003) ‘The World Bank Development Report’,
Washington, DC.
Worth, R.F. (2005) ‘Insurgents Adopting Defence Tone’, New York Times,
13 March.
Wright, L. (2001) Memorandum for the Chairman, Defense Science
Board, Subject: Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on
Defensive Information Operations, Washington, DC, 3 January.
Wright, S. (2000) ‘Political Control and the Internet’, in S. Hick, E. Halpin
and E. Hoskins (eds) Human Rights and the Internet, New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 200–10.
Wright, V. (1994) ‘The New Role of the State in Telecommunications: An
International Comparison’, West European Politics, 17(3).
Wyn Jones, R. (1999) Security, Strategy, and Critical Theory, London:
Lynne Rienner.
Young, O. (1985) International Co-operation: Building Regimes for
Natural Resources and The Environment, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Yourdon, E. (2002) Byte Wars – The Impact of September 11 on
Information Technology, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
Bibliography
217

Zacher, M.W. (1992) ‘The Decaying Pillars of the Westphalian Temple:
Implications for International Order and Governance’, in J.N. Rosenau
and E-O. Czempiel (eds) Governance Without Government: Order and
Change in World Politics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
58–101.
Zagaris, B. (1998) ‘International Criminal Law’, The Wayne Law Review,
44: 1401.
Zakaria, N., Stanton, J.M. and Sarkar-Barney, S.T.M. (2003) ‘Designing
and 
Implementing 
Culturally-Sensitive 
IT Applications: The
Interactions of Culture Values and Privacy Issues in the Middle East’,
Information Technology & People, 16(1): 49–75.
Zingerg, D. (2000) ‘Will the Internet Become a Crucial Tool in the Middle
East Peace Struggle?’, 3rd edn. Boston Globe, 1 July.
218
Bibliography

Abd al-Nur 124–5
Abu Bakr Naji 43–4
Abu-Ghayth, Sulayman 42
Abu Musab al-Suri 37;
International Islamic Resistance
Call 42
Abu Zubayda 53
activism 8, 112, 121–2
actors: antagonistic 64; and
complexity 101, 102, 103, 104;
framing 62, 80; and
international regimes 135, 
136, 147; networks as 9; non-
state 2, 17, 64, 124–5, 141–2;
securitizing 62; sovereignty-free
64; states as 123–4, 141, 152
Adamson, Fiona B. 55
Adler, E. 18
ADSL see Asymmetric Digital
Subscriber Line
Afghanistan 36, 39, 41, 42;
counter-surveillance techniques
50, 51, 53
agenda-setting theory 62
Algeria 108, 111–12, 113, 130
All4Syria.com 125
Alterman, Jon 116
Alvarez, J.E. 169, 170
anarchy 11, 143–4, 145, 146
Anderson, Jon 115–16, 122
Ansar al-Mujahideen fi Bilad al-
Haramain (publication) 44
Anti-Terrorism Act (draft, USA
2001) 73
Arabian Peninsula 40, 42, 44
Armed Forces, US 67
Arquilla, John 17, 57
As-Sahab Foundation for Islamic
Media Publication 44
Asharq Al-Awsat (newspaper) 116
Assili, Bassam 43
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber
Line (ADSL) 138
asymmetry 9, 93
At-Tiby‰n Publications 41
Atran, Scott 46–7
Atta, Muhammad 38
Attrition.org 69
authoritarianism 126
avalanches (events) 99
al-Ayiri, Sheikh Yusuf Bin-Salih 42
Azzam, Abdallah 36–7
Bak, P. 99
Balkan conflict 36
banks, online 52, 155
Beck, Ulrich 27, 32
behaviour, non-linear 102
bifurcation point 99
bin al-Shib, Ramzi 38
Index
Note: Arabic names with the prefix al- have been indexed under
the second element; e.g. al-Qaeda can be found under ‘Q’

220
Index
Bin Laden, Osama 35, 63, 70;
methods of communication 38,
42, 44, 49, 65, 81; US focus on
73–4
blogs 13, 48–9, 120, 121
blueprinting 158, 162, 171
Boijinka, Operation 50
boundaries (of systems) 101, 102
Brachman, Jarret 32
Braithwaite, J. 161, 167
bread riots 130–1
Bretton Woods agreements 134
British Standard (BS) 7799  150–1
Brown, Tina 31
Burkhart, Grey E. 116–17
Bush, George W. (and
administration): attitude before
9/11 65, 67–71, 78; and data
protection 168; Iowa speech
(2001) 70; post-9/11 change in
focus 71–6, 78–9, 80, 176;
post-2002 reversion 76–8, 79,
80
businesses: and confidentiality
156; cooperation among
(strategic alliances) 148–51,
154–6; focus on integrity and
availability 155–6; influence of
multinational corporations 90,
141; interests in information
assurance 154–7; relationships
with states 141–2, 144, 146,
152; role in ICT development
178; and standards 150–1; see
also industry
Canada 165, 166
Carroll, Allan B. 63
CAS see Complex Adaptive
Systems
case studies, need for 182
Castells, Manuel 4
censorship 113, 125, 127, 128,
161
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
75
Centre for Islamic Studies and
Research 41, 43
Cerf, Vint 175
Cerny, Philip G. 56
Cetina, Knorr 48
Chambliss, Saxby 65
change, nature of 91–2, 105
chaos theory 97–8, 100–1
chat rooms 13, 49, 51
China 21, 68, 69, 74, 123, 180
CI see critical infrastructures
CIA see Central Intelligence
Agency
CII see critical information
infrastructure
CIP see critical infrastructure
protection
civil liberties 165
civil society: and forum shopping
170; growth of 162
CIWG see Critical Infrastructure
Working Group
Clark,Wesley 75
Clarke, Richard A. 73, 76–7, 78
Clausewitz, Karl Marie von 26–7
Clinton, Bill (and administration)
4, 63–7, 71, 73, 79, 80;
farewell lecture 66
CNN 65, 74
CNO see Computer Networks
Operations
codes see cryptography;
encryption
Cold War: compared to ‘war on
terrorism’ 79; distribution of
power in Europe 145; end of 3,
6, 17, 63, 76, 94; policy of
deterrence 69
communication: in the Arab world
117–18; Habermas’ view of
117; see also information and
communications technologies;
telecommunications
Communication Service Providers
159
Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS)
100
complex interdependence 2–3,
14–15, 95–6, 100, 144, 181
complex systems 95–7, 98–100;
self-organization and
fluctuations 98–9
complexity studies 87, 97–105,
180–1, 182

computer games 20–1
Computer Networks Operations
(CNO) 26
computers: distancing effect of
20–1; effects of development of
5–6; as ‘evil’ 5; Middle East
access to 108; modelling 100;
see also information and
communications technologies
computing, quantum 175
confidentiality 153–4, 156; see
also privacy
Conner, Bill 75
constructivism 14, 17–21, 22, 54,
55, 180, 181; and complexity
87, 102; and IT in the Middle
East 108, 123–4, 125, 126; of
al-Qaeda 32
Contemporary Security Studies
(journal) 25
contraception 121
Convention on Cybercrime 164–5,
171, 179
Cook, David 47
cooperation: of businesses 148–51,
154–6; distinction from
harmony and discord 143; of
states 142–4, 145–8, 150, 163
Copenhagen School 19, 60, 62; see
also securitization theory
Copts 121–2
copyright see intellectual property
corporations see businesses;
industry; multinational
corporations
corruption 111–12
Council of Europe 158, 164–5,
168, 171, 179
counter-surveillance techniques
49–54
couriers 50
courts 161, 162
credit cards 52
crime: creation of safe havens 
for 161, 163; high-tech
(international regulation of)
162, 163–4, 165; organized 4;
see also cybercrime; law
enforcement
critical information infrastructure
(CII) 94, 177
critical infrastructure protection
(CIP) 94, 95, 96, 99–100, 103,
177
Critical Infrastructure Working
Group (CIWG) 64
critical infrastructures (CI) 93–4;
and complexity 95–6, 99–100
criticality, self-organized 99
Crypt Newsletter 58
cryptography 161, 167, 172; see
also encryption
Cuba 67–8, 75, 77
cultural modes 116
‘Cyber Awareness’ warning 72
cyberattacks 66, 175, 183; see also
cyberwar; hacking; information
warfare
cybercrime: implications of term
20, 59; opportunities provided
by Internet 6, 132; regulatory
difficulties 158–62; regulatory
strategies 162–71; see also
crime
cyberinvestigations 66
cybermobilisation 32
cyberspace: expansion of 175;
origins of term 4; see also
Internet
cyberterrorism: Clinton
administration’s focus on 63–7;
deprioritized by US after 2002
76–8; post-9/11 focus on 71–6,
78–9; US legislation against 73;
see also al-Qaeda
cyberthreats: compared to
weapons of mass destruction
58, 66; conception of 6–9,
16–17; current decreasing
concern with 176–7; differences
in assessment of 58–9;
difficulties of recognising 61–2;
difficulty of predicting 62;
increasing concern with in
1990s 57–8; as intelligence
problem 173–4; linked with
dependence on ICTs 93;
requirements for direct physical
effects 174–6; states as 7,
Index
221

67–71, 76–8; and US security
policy 57–82; see also
cyberterrorism; cyberwar
cybertraining 53–4
cyberumma 36
cyberwar 21, 57; between China
and US 69; Bush
administration’s focus on
67–71, 76–8, 79; triggered by
focusing event 69; see also
information warfare
dams, threats to 54
data protection 167–8
data retention 167–9, 171–2
dead drops 51
deculturalization 46
Deek, Khalil 50
Defense Intelligence Agency 75
Defense Science Board: 2001
report 68
Deibert, R. J. 55
denial-of-service attacks 183
Denning, Dorothy E. 8, 74, 78
Department of Homeland Security,
US 16, 52
Der Derian, J. 20
deterrence, policy of 69
Deudney, D. 146
Deutch, John 58
Dhurwat al-Sanam (online
magazine) 44
Dick, Ronald 66
diffusion: of IT 118–19, 120;
policy 158
‘Digital Pearl Harbor’ (exercise) 76
discord 143
Drahos, P. 161, 167
Drezner, D.W. 169–70
Dubai 128
Dunning, J. 152
dynamical systems theory 98
eBay.com 52, 53
Eberhardt, General 69
e-books 43
economics 14, 89–90, 113, 119
Edelman, Murray 21
education 113–14, 121, 129–30
e-government 111–12
Egypt 113, 120, 121–2, 128, 130
electricity supplies 54
‘electronic Pearl Harbor’ (scenario)
8, 21, 58, 67, 72, 79, 80, 173,
183
electronic populism 112
e-mail 50, 51, 52, 53, 125
emergence, concept of 100
encryption 49–52, 53, 65–6, 79,
81–2; see also cryptography
Encyclopedia of Jihad 50, 52
Entrust Inc. 75
epistemic communities 161, 162
Eriksson, J. 20
Essoulami, Said 117–18
European Union 179; and data
retention 168, 169, 171–2; and
forum shopping 169–70, 171;
see also Council of Europe
Everard, J. 20
explosive devices: coded
instructions 50, 52
fatwas 40, 41
faxes 50
FBI see Federal Bureau of
Investigation
FCW see Federal Computer Week
fear 61
fear-mongering 58,  74, 183
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) 52, 54, 64, 66, 75; see
also National Infrastructure
Protection Center
Federal Computer Week (FCW) 72
Federation of American Scientists
82
financial institutions, online 52,
155
al-Firdaws (website) 43, 52
forensics tools 66
Forrester, J.W. 96
forum shopping 158, 162, 169–71
‘fragmegration’ 91
frame resonance 48
framing 20, 59–63, 74, 80, 176,
181; contextual conditions
62–3, 80; frame characteristics
61–2, 80; framing actors 62, 80
222
Index

freedom of information policies
161
Friedman, Thomas 32
Gansler, Jacques 63
Gartner Group 8, 76
gas supplies 54
GDP see gross domestic product
G8 see Group of Eight
Gershwin, Lawrence K. 70
Gibson, William 4
Global Information Grid 68
globalization 162; of criminal law
170; and empowerment of
terrorists 32, 38, 56; and IT in
the Middle East 113, 123, 126;
of jihad 54; and liberalism
16–17, 22; and Muslim
networking 36
‘glocalization’ 91
Goldeneye (film) 57
Goldstein, J. 166, 167
Gompert, David 59
Google 180
gross domestic product (GDP) 119
Gross Stein, J. 55
Group of Eight (G8) 158, 163–4,
165, 168, 171
Haas, E.B. and Haas, P. 182
Habermas, Jürgen 117
hacking: and confidentiality
153–4; difficulty of detecting
61; difficulty of regulating 159,
160, 164; as faceless threat 94;
‘hacktivists’ 8, 112; increasing
ease of 77; influence on
development of IT 112; by
juveniles 63, 69; penalties for
73; al-Qaeda and 53–4; seen as
non-lethal 79; states and 21,
69; ‘Solar Sunrise’ incident 26;
surveillance of 66
Haggard, S. 133
hajj 36
Hall, E.T. 116
Hammond, T.H. 62
Hamre, John 8
hardware companies 155
harmonization 171
harmony 143
Haufler, V. 141
Haverford College 121
Al-Hayat (newspaper) 116
Hegghammer, Thomas 40
al-Hesbah (website) 49
Hoffman, Bruce 53
Holsti, K.J. 91
Honeywell 136
Hopkins, R. 133
human rights 113, 124–5, 159,
161
human security 10
Huntington, Samuel 119
Hussein, Fouad 34, 36
Ibis Reproductive Health 121
ICAO see International Civil
Aviation Organization
ICTs see information and
communications technologies
Idarat al-Tawahhush (Abu Bakr
Naji) 43–4
idealism 14, 15
identity warfare 20
idiot-codes 50
IGOs see intergovernmental
organizations
Ikenberry, G. J. 146, 166
India 21, 74, 154
individual 90, 116
Indonesia 54
industrialization 115–16
industry 161, 162, 165, 167; see
also businesses
information age: use of term 88
information assurance see
international regime for
information assurance
information and communications
technologies (ICTs) 1, 88;
dependence on 93, 96, 175,
178; as power source 89, 90;
from quantitative change to
qualitative consequences 91–2;
see also computers; information
revolution; Internet
information infrastructure 86, 94,
95–6
Information Operations (IO) 25–6
Index
223

information revolution 2, 4–5,
87–9, 90, 92–3, 94, 95, 105;
impact on security 173–9
information society: origins of
term 4; past research into 4–6
information warfare (IW) 12, 20,
21, 22, 178; implications of
term 59; renamed by US and
NATO 25–6; and rogue states
68; see also cyberwar
infowar.com 57
InfraGuard program 72
infrastructure 64–5; see also
critical information
infrastructure; critical
infrastructure protection;
critical infrastructures;
information infrastructure
institutions: international 166,
167; limitations 62; Young’s
theory of 135–6; see also
international organizations;
neo-liberal institutionalism
intellectual property 164, 167
intelligence 39, 173–4
intercultural communication
model 116
interdependence, complex 2–3,
14–15, 95–6, 100, 144, 181
intergovernmental organizations
(IGOs) 90, 161, 162, 166, 169,
171
International Accounting
Standards 150
International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) 169
international organizations 133,
134, 163–5, 167; see also
intergovernmental
organizations; nongovernmental
organizations
international regime for
information assurance 132,
133–7, 140, 141–2; and
anarchy of the international
system 143–4, 145, 146;
business interests in 154–7;
consensus definition
(comprising principles, norms,
rules, decision making
processes) 133, 134–5, 136–7,
140–1, 148, 153; dead letter
regimes 134; distinguished from
international organizations 133,
134; inter-state cooperation
142–4, 145–8, 150, 163; main
players 141–2; neo-liberal
institutionalist approach 147–8,
151; neo-realist approach
145–6; states’ interests in
141–2, 152–4; tacit regimes
134; see also regulation,
international
international relations theory (IR)
2–3, 4, 11–23; application to
digital-age security 86–7, 105,
179–82; and complexity 96–7;
and critical infrastructure
protection 85–105; fitting al-
Qaeda into 54–6; and nature of
change 91–2; and policy
diffusion approach 158;
pragmatic approach to 22–3;
problem of dualism in 22, 23;
relevance to IT in the Middle
East 108, 122–7; security
studies as branch of 9–11; and
universalism 92; see also
constructivism; liberalism;
realism
Internet: and academic
cooperation 121; anarchical
nature 144, 146; as arena for
symbolic politics 21; and
breaking of taboos 120–1; and
concept of an international
regime for information
assurance (including OCI
model) 137–42, 151; dynamism
of 136, 146, 151; effect of
inter-state cooperation 148;
enables challenges to US and
corporate dominance 136; and
encryption 49–52; and fund-
raising 52; future development
175; growth 1; and inter-
business cooperation 154–5;
jihadi websites and publications
39–45; languages 41; malicious
activities and systems outages
224
Index

132, 140, 153–4, 155; in
Middle East 117, 119–22,
124–5, 126–8, 130; and need to
overcome state-centrism 141–2;
new communications
techniques 52-3; nomadic
approach to 42; openness 6;
and operations planning 53; al-
Qaeda’s use of 31–2, 40–54;
and radicalization 45–8; and
recruitment 48–9; role of state
152, 153; semi-anonymity of
46–7; website defacing 8, 21,
73, 82
Internet cafés 51, 53, 121
Internet Security Policy Forum 69
internet service providers (ISPs)
127, 139
IO see Information Operations
IR see international relations
theory
Iran 42, 77, 121, 125, 126
Iraq: as focus for jihad 34, 44; IT
in 109; propaganda videos 39,
48, 53
Islam: websites promoting 126
Islamist movements 126, 127, 130
ISPs see internet service providers
Israel 21, 35, 109, 111
Issues in Science and Technology
58
IW see information warfare
al-Jazeera 44
jihad, Salafist: and the Internet
31–2, 39–45, 54, 127;
networks 33; radicalization and
recruitment 45–9; women and
41; see also al-Qaeda
Joint Task Force-Computer
Network Defense  (JTF-CND)
72
Jordan 35, 43, 50, 120, 130
Jordan, Tim 112
July 7th bombings (2005) 44
Kahn, Robert 175
Keohane, Robert O. 2–3, 14–15,
55, 90, 134–5, 141, 144
Khalid Sheikh Mohammad 35, 37,
38, 51
Khan, Mohammed Naeem Noor
50
Khan, Muhammad Siddique 44
al-Khansa (online publication) 41
khutbas 40
King Abdul Aziz City of Science
and Technology 127
Krasner, Stephen 133, 134, 135–6
‘laundry lists’ 50
law enforcement 159–62, 164,
165, 167, 168, 170
Leheney, David 56
Lia, Brynjar 37, 42, 45
liberalism 12–17, 19, 22, 108,
123, 180; see also neo-liberal
institutionalism
libraries, public 53
lobbying 159, 161
London bombings (2005) 44
LophtCrack 53
Lynch, Marc 32, 55
Lyon Group on Transnational
Organised Crime 165
McLaughlin, S.W. 119, 120
‘malware’ technologies 78
Managing Savagery see Idarat al-
Tawahhush
Mandaville, Peter 47
manuals 52
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) 137
Mauritania 113, 129
Mawsu’at al-jihad see
Encyclopedia of Jihad
Mearsheimer, J. 11, 145
media: fear-mongering by 74; as
framing agents 63, 65, 80; mass
57; in Middle East 116,
117–18; resistance to data
retention 167; see also press
Metcalfe’s Law 95
Microsoft 74, 136
Middle East (IT and security in)
106–131, 180; applicability of
IT 115–18, 129; diffusion as
measure of change 118–19;
Index
225

economics 113; empirical
research and theory 114–22;
impact as measure of change
119–22; importance of
multidisciplinary studies 129;
IR theories and 122–7; need to
focus on end-users 129–30;
penetration of IT 109–14;
political elites 113; production
as measure of change 122; slow
evolution of IT theory 106–8;
universities 113–14; see also
jihad, Salafist; al-Qaeda
Milan 52
military sphere: confidentiality
problem 153; and information
warfare 20, 178; power 89;
relationship with civil sphere
15, 16; strategy 10, 12
Millennium (journal) 25
Milner, H. 143–4
MIT see Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
mi2g Digital Solutions Engineering
82
MNCs see multinational
corporations
mobile phones 51, 52, 108, 139
modelling 100
modernization 14, 118–19
Moore’s Law 95
Morocco 41, 113, 121
Morpheus 52
Movement for Islamic Reform 120
Mowlana, Hamid 4
Muaskar al-Battar (website) 41–2,
44
Mujahideen 41, 44, 45, 46, 49, 53
multilateralism 163
multinational corporations
(MNCs) 90, 141; see also
businesses; industry
Muslim Brotherhood 120
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
175
National Academy of Sciences 57,
58
National Infrastructure Protection
Center (NIPC) 63, 64, 66, 69,
71, 72
National Infrastructure Simulation
and Analysis Center (NISAC)
99
National Intelligence Council 57
National Plan for Information
Systems Protection (2000) 64
National Research Council 7
National Security Council (NSC)
67, 73
National Strategy to Secure
Cyberspace 16, 78
NATO see North Atlantic Treaty
Organization
Naval War College, US 8, 76
al-Neda (website) 41, 42
neo-liberal institutionalism 142–3,
144–5, 146, 147–8, 150, 151,
152, 156–7
neo-realism 2, 3, 11, 22, 142,
144–6, 147, 152
Netforce (Clancy & Pieczenik) 57
Netherlands 37–8, 45, 46; Hofstad
network 47
networks 9, 33, 36; externalities
139–41; social 52
Newsbytes 74
Newsweek 74
NGOs see nongovernmental
organizations
Nimda virus 78, 80–1
9/11 see September 11th attacks
NIPC see National Infrastructure
Protection Center
NISAC see National Infrastructure
Simulation and Analysis Center
nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) 17, 79, 90, 103, 167,
179
North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) 70, 75,
145, 161
NSC see National Security Council
nuclear safety 54, 62–3
Nye, Joseph 2–3, 14–15, 55, 90,
141, 144
226
Index

OCI see Open Communication
Infrastructure
OECD see Organization for
Economic Cooperation and
Development
Office for Cyber Security 76
Office of Cyberdefense 73
Office of Population Research 121
offline-online interaction 180
oil: as target 43
Oklahoma City bombing (1995)
63, 64
Older, Susan 116–17
Open Communication
Infrastructure (OCI) model
137–41, 142, 151
order, nature of 98–9
organization, nature of 98–9
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development
(OECD) 167, 172
Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe 14
Orkut 52
Pakistan 21, 42, 43, 53, 54
PalTalk 52
pandemics 61
Paul, D. 152
PCCIP see President’s Commission
on Critical Infrastructure
Protection
Peled, Alon 117
photocopies 116
Pisani, Francis 32
policy entrepreneurs 62
policy laundering 158, 162,
166–9, 171
policy making 62, 103, 176–7
policy studies 158, 162
politics: bureaucratic 62, 178;
panic 67; of protection 176,
177–8; symbolic 21; of threats
176
pornography: coded information
in 52, 65, 81; difficulty of
regulating 159, 160, 164
positive network externalities
139–41
postmodernism 14, 18, 104
power: changing nature of 89–90;
and the Internet 146;
redistribution of 90–2;
soft/hard 15, 16, 55
pragmatism 22–3
Presidential Decision Directive
NSC-63 64
President’s Commission on Critical
Infrastructure Protection
(PCCIP) 64, 78
press: Arab 116, 117–18, 120; see
also media; USA Today
Princeton University 121
privacy 165, 179; see also
confidentiality; data retention
process tracing 181
producers 122
P2P networking 52
psychological warfare 12
public–private partnership 15, 16,
132–57; see also international
regime for information
assurance
Puchala, D. 133
al-Qaeda 31–56, 114; counter-
surveillance techniques and use
of encryption 49–52, 53, 65–6;
doctrinal and military
instructions 41–5; fund-raising
52; grand strategy 34–7;
hacking abilities 53–4; and the
Internet 31–2, 40–54; operating
system 37–40; radicalization
and recruitment 45–9; relevance
of IR to 54–6; remote
operations planning 53–4;
surveillance and reconnaissance
by 53–4; uncertainty over the
nature of 32–4; US fear of after
9/11 74; use of new
communication methods 52–3;
youth training 41–2
al-Qa’ida fi Jazirat al-‘Arabiyya
40–1
Al-Qaidah University for jihad
sciences 52
Quadrennial Defense Review
(2006) 54
quantitative/qualitative link 91–2
Index
227

Al-Quds Al-Arabi 116
al-Qurashi, Ubeid 37
radicalization 45–9
radio 5, 25
rationalism 17
realism 11–12, 13–14, 17, 19, 22;
and IT in the Middle East 108,
123, 125, 126–7, 128, 130,
180; in political science 89; see
also neo-realism
reality 103; material/social 18–19
recruitment 48–9
regulation, international 158–72,
179; competition 163;
difficulties of 158–62; strategies
162–71; see also blueprinting;
forum shopping; international
regime for information
assurance; policy laundering
Reno, Janet 64
research, past 3–11; information
society literature 4–6; literature
on digital-age security 6–9;
security studies 9–11
Revolution in Military Affairs
(RMA) 6
Rhodes, Keith 70–1
ribat 36
Rice, Condoleezza 69, 79
Ridge, Tom 7, 16
Riptech Internet Security Threat
Report (2002) 77
rituals 181
Riyadh attacks (2003) 42
RMA see Revolution in Military
Affairs
Rohozinski, Rafal 121
Ronfeldt, David 17, 33, 38
Rosenau, James N. 13, 64
Roszak, Theorode 112
Rove, Andrew 50
Rowe, Paul S. 121–2
Roy, Oliver 47
Rumsfeld, Donald 70, 75, 79
Russia 177–8, 179
Sageman, Marc 33
satellite phones 49, 51
satellite technology 116, 138, 139,
175
Saudi Arabia: IT and Internet in
110, 120, 126, 127; press 116;
and al-Qaeda 41, 42, 43, 44,
53, 54; Riyadh attacks (2003)
42
Sawt al-Jihad (website) 40–1, 43,
44
Sawt al-Khilafah (web-cast) 45
Saxton, Jim 65
scenario building 183
Schneck, Phyllis 72
Schwartau, Winn 57
search engine companies 155
‘securing’: distinguished from
‘security’ 87
securitization theory 19–20, 60,
61, 62, 179; applicability to US
policy 66–7, 68–71, 72, 75–6,
79–80
security, definitions of 85–7
security studies 9–11; future
requirements 182–3;
traditionalists 9–10; wideners
10
self-organization 98–9
Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence 67–8
‘sensitive classified’ information 75
September 11th attacks (2001):
and coded communications 38;
commission report 53; effect on
international system 55; effect
on UK policy 168; effect on US
policy 71–6, 80; as ghazwah
(sacred raid) 34; initial purpose
of 35; subsequent proliferation
of jihadi websites 39, 54, 127;
testimonies of hijackers 44
Shannon, Claude Elwood 97
shell game techniques 51
SIM cards 51
Simmons, B.A. 133
skill revolution 90
Skype 52
Smith, George 58
social movement theory (SMT)
47–8, 56
228
Index

social sciences 100, 126, 129,
180–1, 182
software: companies 154, 155;
social 52
Solar Sunrise 26
South Africa 124
sovereignty: limitations as a
concept 152; states’ loss of 4, 9,
13, 64, 103–4
Space Command, US 69, 72
speech acts 19
standards 150–1, 161
state-centrism 141–2, 144
states: cooperation among 142–4,
145–8, 150, 163; as cyberthreat
7, 67–71, 76–8; effect of
information revolution 4–5;
egoism of 144; identity
threatened 20; interests in
information assurance 152–4;
and international regulatory
strategies 162–71; and law
enforcement 158–62; loss of
power 90–1; loss of sovereignty
4, 9, 13, 103–4; Middle East
123–4, 125, 126–8; problems
of definition 152; rationality of
144; relationships with
businesses 141–2, 144, 146;
rogue 63, 67, 70, 77, 81;
security role threatened 1–2; see
also cyberwar
steganography 65–6
strategic alliances 148–51, 155
Sudan 77
Sun Tzu 12
surveillance: policies 161; by al-
Qaeda 53–4; by USA 66; see
also counter-surveillance
Sweden 20, 177, 183
symbols 21, 181
Syria 35, 109, 124–5, 129
system administrators 182–3
tax collection, online 154
Taylor, Paul 112
technology: advances in 138–9,
174–5; emphasis on (for
solutions) 177
telecommunications: and
international cooperation 146,
149, 153; and Internet access
138–9; military use 16; mobile
phones 51, 52, 108, 139; al-
Qaeda and 49, 50, 51, 52–3,
54
television 5, 25; cable 138; satellite
116, 138
Tenet, George J. 58, 75
Tengelin Report 5
terrorism see cyberterrorism; al-
Qaeda
theory of everything, search for
184
threat see cyberthreats; framing
tourism 43
trade 16, 161, 162
transnationalization 13, 16, 64,
123–4, 158–60, 181
treaties, international 161, 162–3,
169
Trompenaar, Fons 116
Tunisia 127, 130–1
United Arab Emirates 109, 111,
128, 129
United Kingdom: and policy
laundering and data retention
167–9
United Nations 10, 14, 169;
Development Program Report
114; Global E-Government
Readiness Report 111; Security
Council 161, 170
United States of America 57–82,
178; and asymmetrical
vulnerability 93; and data
protection 168, 169; dominance
challenged 136; and forum
shopping 169–71; and hacker
attacks 21; influence of Silicon
Valley model 131; and
information assurance 177,
179; and international treaties
161; as observer at Council of
Europe 165; and policy
laundering 166, 167; and
public–private partnership 16;
strategic alliances of businesses
Index
229

in 149; and telecommuications
146; universities 114; ‘war on
terrorism’ 16, 72, 73, 75, 79,
178; see also Bush, George W.;
Clinton, Bill; September 11th
attacks
universalism 92
universities: Middle East 113–14,
129; USA 114
Unix Security Guards 82
USA Patriot Act (2001) 73
USA Today 65, 70, 72, 116
Vesely, M. 120–1
videos 44–5, 116; games 53; news
programmes 45; training 50
Violent Jihad in the Netherlands
37–8, 45, 46
virtual cells 53
viruses, computer 77, 78, 79,
80–1, 82
Visvesvaraya Prasad, Ravi 74
Vogler, J. 135, 141
vulnerabilities 78, 92, 94, 178,
179; asymmetrical 93
Wadih El Hage 50
al-wala’ wa’l-bara (doctrine) 48
Waltz, Kenneth 2, 11, 97
‘war on terrorism’ 16, 72, 73, 75,
79, 178
Washington Times 75
water supplies 54
‘weapons of mass disruption’ 58
Weaver, Warren 97
web-casts 45
weblogs see blogs
websites: attacks on 183; defacing
8, 21, 73, 82; jihadi 39–45; see
also Internet
West Virginia Information
Assurance and Computer
Security Alliance 73
Wi-Fi 139
Wight, M. 143
Wiktorowicz, Quintan 47–8, 56
Wilson, Thomas R. 67–8, 75
Windows XP 74
Wiser, Leslie G. 71
Wolfers, Arnold 2
women: constructivist focus on
126; and the Internet 120–1;
and jihad 41, 47
Women’s Media Bureau 41
World Bank 119–20, 129, 164
World Trade Center: 1993 attack
64; see also September 11th
attacks
Wright, V. 153
Yahoo 180
Year 2000 (‘Y2K’) bug 7, 19
Yemen 41, 43, 109, 113
Young, O. 135–6
Yousef, Ramzi 49–50
YOUSSENTIIT.com 52
youth: radicalization 41–2, 43,
45–6, 47
Zagaris, B. 164
Zakaria, Norhayati 116
al-Zawahiri, Ayman 44, 50, 54
230
Index
View publication stats

