REDUCTION IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
 
by 
 
ROBERT BEDDOR 
 
A dissertation submitted to the 
 
Graduate School-New Brunswick 
 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
 
In partial fulfillment of the requirements 
 
For the degree of 
 
Doctor of Philosophy 
 
Graduate Program in Philosophy 
 
Written under the direction of 
 
Andy Egan and Alvin Goldman 
 
And approved by 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Brunswick, New Jersey 
 
May, 2016 
 

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Reduction in Epistemology
by BOB BEDDOR
Dissertation Directors:
Andy Egan and Alvin Goldman
This dissertation centers on two questions: (1) Can we explain epistemic facts in terms of
non-epistemic facts? (2) What is the most explanatorily basic notion within the epistemic
realm?
Many philosophers are attracted to the idea that the epistemic is reducible to the natural:
facts about epistemic justiﬁcation, knowledge, and the like can be explained in terms of
non-epistemic facts. How could such a reduction be achieved? Chapter One explores the
two leading proposals in the literature: process reliabilism and mentalist evidentialism. I
argue that both of these approaches ﬂounder when it comes to explaining epistemic defeat
(cases where an individual gets some evidence in favor of a belief, which is then trumped
by countervailing evidence).
The standard process reliabilist treatment of defeat faces
counterexamples, and leading evidentialist treatments of defeat either fall victim to the
same fate or fail to be reductive.
Chapter Two explores a di↵erent reductive strategy. I suggest that we should pursue
the path of semantic ascent: we should focus on epistemic linguistic expressions and seek to
deﬁne them without recourse to epistemic notions. Speciﬁcally, I develop an ‘attitudinal’
semantics for a variety of epistemic expressions, according to which epistemic expressions are
analyzed in terms of the conative attitudes that give rise to them. The resulting semantics
is reductive; in addition, it o↵ers to explain some of the striking commonalities between
epistemic and ethical discourse.
Chapter Three considers reduction within the epistemic domain. Recent epistemology
ii

has seen the rise of ‘Knowledge First’ epistemology, according to which knowledge is the
most basic explanatorily basic epistemic notion. I advance an alternative picture, according
to which epistemic certainty is explanatorily fundamental.
After developing a context-
sensitive semantics for certainty ascriptions, I go on to put certainty to explanatory work.
I argue that a wide range of epistemic phenomena—including epistemic modals, evidential
probability, and knowledge itself—can be proﬁtably analyzed in terms of certainty.
iii

Acknowledgements
I am extremely grateful to all of the people who have supported me on this long journey.
As an undergraduate at Brown I had the good fortune to have two outstanding thesis
advisors, Charles Larmore and Josh Schechter, who were extremely generous with their time
and comments. Over the course of long meetings in their oﬃces they coaxed my inchoate
ideas on skepticism into a more-or-less focused undergraduate thesis. More importantly,
they helped me see how exciting—and how challenging—it can be to do philosophy at a
serious level.
At Rutgers I have learned from some truly fantastic philosophers. My greatest debt is
to my dissertation directors, Andy Egan and Alvin Goldman. During my graduate career
I developed a rather wide range of interests, spanning epistemology, semantics, metaethics,
and metaphysics. Alvin and Andy were unfailingly supportive of all of my wide-ranging
and occasionally idiosyncratic projects. Conversations with them were invariably helpful,
regardless of whether I was thinking through an idea for the ﬁrst time or showing them the
latest draft of a paper that they had commented on umpteen times before. Their probing
questions and thoughtful suggestions have shaped this dissertation—and my approach to
philosophy—in more ways than I can acknowledge.
I also owe heartfelt thanks to my other committee members.
Without exception,
Jonathan Scha↵er’s comments cut to the heart of the issues, which forced me to clarify
my thoughts on every chapter of this dissertation. Throughout my graduate career, Ernie
Sosa has been extraordinarily supportive. He was kind enough to invite me to join his dis-
sertation group; the feedback from Ernie and the other members proved extremely helpful
in developing the ideas in these pages. Chapter three of this dissertation was inﬂuenced
iv

in many ways by Brian Weatherson’s work, and I am thrilled that he agreed to come on
board as my external committee member. I consider myself tremendously lucky to have had
committee members who are both incredibly good philosophers and very generous human
beings.
I also received a great deal of help and support from faculty who were not on my
dissertation committee, in ways that often went well above and beyond the call of the
duty. Special thanks to Holly Smith, who gave me detailed, insightful comments on both
my teaching and chapter three. I also want to thank Branden Fitelson, for inviting me to
present chapter three in his reading group, and Ernie Lepore, for all his professional advice
and support.
During graduate school I probably learned the most from my fellow graduate students.
When I ﬁrst arrived at Rutgers I was amazed to ﬁnd myself surrounded by so many smart
people who enjoyed talking philosophy. That sense of amazement has yet to wear o↵. Among
the students whose conversations I found particularly helpful, I’d like to thank David Black,
Pavel Davydov, Marco Dees, Tom Donaldson, Mike Hicks, Nico Kirk-Giannini, Stephanie
Leary, Mark Lee, Lisa Mirracchi, Pamela Robinson, Mary Salvaggio, and Tobias Wilsch.
Special thanks go to Carlotta Pavese and Simon Goldstein.
My long discussions with
Carlotta helped form many of my views and philosophical interests. Simon’s conversations—
and extensive comments on paper drafts—helped me clarify my thoughts on crucial issues
and to appreciate many points that I had overlooked.
Many thanks to my parents, who never questioned my less-than-lucrative decision to go
to grad school in philosophy, and who were always there with love, support, and proofreading
services over the years. And, ﬁnally, special thanks go to Laura Willson. Laura’s sense of
humor, her willingness to discuss ideas with me, and, most importantly, her unwavering
love and support have made the years I’ve spent writing this dissertation truly happy.
v

Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iv
Introduction
viii
1
Reductive Accounts of Justiﬁcation
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Why Process Reliabilists Need a Story about Defeat . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
The Alternative Reliable Process Account of Defeat
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
A Counterexample to Suﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
A Counterexample to Necessity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6
Looking Forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.7
Appealing to Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.8
Three Attempts to Reduce Evidence Possession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.9
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2
Towards a Reductive Metaepistemology
24
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2
Epistemic Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3
An Attitudinal Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3.1
An Attitudinal Semantics for Deontic Modals . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.2
An Attitudinal Semantics for Justiﬁcation Ascriptions . . . . . . . .
42
2.3.3
Beyond Modals and Justiﬁcation Ascriptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
vi

2.4
Advantages of an Attitudinal Metaepistemology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.4.1
Value-Ladenness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.4.2
Connection with Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
2.5
Comparison with a First-Order Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3
The Centrality of Certainty
63
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.2
Certainty: A Schematic Account
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.2.1
Subjective vs. Epistemic Certainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
3.2.2
In Favor of Scarce
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.2.3
Against Scarce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
3.2.4
The Best of Both Worlds: Max Adjectives Without Scarce . . . . . .
70
3.2.5
Puzzling Pos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
3.2.6
Taking Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
3.3
Evidential Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
3.3.1
Evidential Probabilities and Degrees of Certainty . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.3.2
Epistemological Advantages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
3.3.3
Further Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
3.3.4
Objections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
3.4
Epistemic Modals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.4.1
Two Analyses of Epistemic Modals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.4.2
In Favor of the Certainty Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
3.4.3
An Objection to the Certainty Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
3.4.4
Taking Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
3.5
Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
3.6
Certainty and Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
3.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
vii

Introduction
This dissertation consists of three papers on reduction in epistemology. The ﬁrst two pa-
pers explore whether it’s possible to give reductive analyses of epistemic notions such as
justiﬁcation, evidence, and knowledge. Chapter One argues that traditional attempts to
give a reductive account of justiﬁcation face hurdles when it comes to cases of defeat. I
start by focusing on the most prominent reductive account of justiﬁcation in the literature:
process reliabilism. I argue that in order to avoid counterexamples, process reliabilists need
to invoke a “No Defeaters” clause; in order to qualify as reductive, they need to go on
to cash out defeat in non-epistemic terms. After raising counterexamples to the standard
process reliabilist account of defeat (the Alternative Reliable Process account), I argue that
the problem generalizes beyond process reliabilism: all would-be reductive accounts of jus-
tiﬁcation need to accommodate cases of defeat—a task that turns out to be surprisingly
diﬃcult.1
Chapter Two suggests tackling the problem of reduction from a di↵erent angle. Perhaps
we should focus on the linguistic expressions that we use to make epistemic evaluations (e.g.,
terms like justiﬁed, knows, etc.), and try to analyze the meanings of these expressions in
non-epistemic terms. What would such a reductive semantics look like? In the metaethics
literature, there is a long tradition of explaining the meanings of ethical expressions in
terms of agents’ conative attitudes. Chapter Two explores how to extend this strategy to
the epistemic domain.
I start by focusing on epistemic evaluations involving modals (e.g., ought, should, must,
may). The leading approach to modals in the semantics literature (due to Kratzer) takes
1Chapter One contains material from Beddor 2015a,b.
viii

modals to quantify over the ‘best’ of a set of conversationally relevant worlds (the modal
base). However, Kratzer’s semantics never tells us what makes a certain set of worlds the
‘best’—she leaves this job to the conversational context. On my proposal, we can use certain
agents’ attitudes to determine what count as the ‘best’ worlds. Speciﬁcally, I suggest that
there is a particular desire-like attitude—‘epistemic approval’—involved in epistemic eval-
uations; this attitude provides the relevant ranking over worlds when it comes to epistemic
evaluations involving modals. Thus a sentence such as: ‘Poirot ought to believe the butler
did it’ will be true i↵Poirot believes the butler did it in all of the worlds in the modal base
ranked highest by certain agents’ states of epistemic approval. I go on to show how this
approach can be extended to other fragments of epistemic discourse, such as justiﬁcation as-
criptions.2 The resulting analysis is reductive: epistemic evaluations are analyzed in terms
of epistemic approval, which can be characterized without recourse to epistemic notions.
What’s more, it ﬁts naturally with a parallel analysis of moral evaluations, according to
which claims such as ‘You (morally) ought to save the drowning child’ are analyzed in terms
of a ranking provided by states of moral approval. I go on to show how this analysis sheds
light on some of the commonalities between moral and epistemic evaluations—for example,
the fact that both are connected with motivation.
Chapter Three shifts gears and explores reduction within the epistemic domain. Speciﬁ-
cally, it explores the question: which epistemic notion is explanatorily fundamental (if any)?
According to my proposal, the answer is: certainty. While the notion of epistemic certainty
played a central role in the epistemology of the medieval and early modern periods, recent
epistemology has tended to dismiss certainty as an unattainable ideal, focusing on knowl-
edge instead. I argue that this is a mistake. Building on recent work on the semantics of
gradable expressions, I develop a context-sensitive semantics for certain, according to which
much of our everyday knowledge qualiﬁes—in suitable contexts—as certain. Next, I argue
that if we take certainty as our primitive notion in the epistemic domain, we can get con-
siderable explanatory mileage out of it. A wide range of epistemic phenomena—evidential
probability, epistemic modals, knowledge, and the normative constraints on credence, action
and assertion—can be proﬁtably analyzed in terms of certainty.
2The treatment of justiﬁcation ascriptions contains material from Beddor forthcoming.
ix

These three papers are to some extent independent of one another. The reader could
endorse my criticisms of traditional reductive analyses in Chapter One without buying into
the reductive metaepistemology developed in Chapter Two. Similarly, the reader could en-
dorse my views on the centrality of certainty in Chapter Three while eschewing the reductive
project pursued in the ﬁrst two chapters. That said, the papers taken in conjunction provide
a consistent, uniﬁed framework for thinking of reduction in epistemology. On the picture
that emerges, a variety of epistemic notions are analyzed in terms of epistemic certainty,
and certainty ascriptions (together with other epistemic expressions) are analyzed in terms
of conative attitudes (speciﬁcally, states of epistemic approval).
x

1
Chapter 1
Reductive Accounts of Justiﬁcation
1.1
Introduction
Epistemic facts supervene on the non-epistemic facts. Suppose one holds ﬁxed all the facts
about how an agent S formed a belief B at time t at a world w. And suppose one also holds
ﬁxed all the further facts about S’s mental states at t, together with B’s truth-value at w
(as well, perhaps, as B’s truth-value at nearby worlds). Then it seems plausible that one
will have thereby settled a supervenience base for all of the facts about the epistemic status
of B—e.g., whether it’s epistemically justiﬁed, whether it counts as knowledge, etc.
Given this, it’s natural to endorse the following idea:
Reducibility: Epistemic facts are—in some sense—reducible to the non-epistemic facts.1
Suppose we accept Reducibility. This in turn prompts the question: “How exactly does
the reduction go? How do facts about justiﬁcation, evidence, and knowledge reduce to non-
epistemic facts?” It’s natural to think that one our jobs as epistemologists is to answer this
question. In particular, it’s natural to hope that when we as epistemologists are o↵ering an
analysis of a given epistemic property or state x (e.g., justiﬁcation, evidence, knowledge),
1For present purposes, I won’t take a stand on exactly what sense of reducibility is at issue. However,
one natural option is to spell out the reducibility in question in terms of grounding, which is taken to be a
form of metaphysical determination corresponding to the “in virtue of” relation. According to this proposal,
Reducibility amounts to the idea that all epistemic facts are fully grounded in non-epistemic facts. (For
important work on grounding, see Fine 2001, 2012; Scha↵er 2009; Rosen 2010. For useful overviews, see
Clark and Liggins 2012; Trogdon 2013.)

2
the analysis in question will explain how the x-facts can be reduced to non-epistemic facts.
Thus Reducibility motivates the goal of a reductive epistemology. Following tradition,
let us suppose our epistemological analyses take the form of universally quantiﬁed bicondi-
tionals. Thus an analysis of justiﬁcation will be of the form:
Necessarily, for any subject S and any proposition p:
S is justiﬁed in believing p i↵conditions C1...Cn obtain.2
Call an analysis of some epistemic state or property reductive just in case the right-hand
side of the biconditional can be speciﬁed in non-epistemic terms.
A number of epistemologists have sought to provide reductive analyses along these
lines. This reductive ambition is perhaps clearest in the writings of process reliabilists.
For example, Goldman (1979) writes: “I want a theory of justiﬁed belief to specify in
non-epistemic terms when a belief is justiﬁed” (90). The theory that Goldman goes on to
develop is tailored to make good on this reductive ambition: facts about justiﬁcation are
understood in terms of facts about the reliability of an agent’s belief-forming processes,
where “reliability” is taken to be a non-epistemic notion.3
While reliabilists have been particularly explicit about their reductive ambitions, a num-
ber of other epistemological views seem to owe their appeal, at least in part, to their reduc-
tive potential. Consider, for example, certain versions of mentalist internalism, according
to which epistemic justiﬁcation and rationality can be explained in terms of an agent’s
non-factive mental states (e.g., experiences, seemings, and beliefs).4 Or consider various
truth-tracking theories of knowledge, which seek to explain knowledge in terms of modal
properties such as sensitivity, adherence, and safety.5 Arguably, one appealing feature of
such views is that they o↵er to show how epistemic properties and states reduce to non-
epistemic properties and states.
2Plausibly, there will be some constraints on what counts as an adequate analysis.
Presumably the
conditions on the right-hand side need to be ﬁnite, and not too horribly disjunctive. More controversially,
one might insist that any such biconditional should be really regarded as shorthand for a thesis about
the metaphysical grounds of justiﬁcation ascriptions (Beddor 2015a). For present purposes, I will set such
complications aside.
3In the subsequent literature, many have taken this ambition to be central to the spirit of reliabilism (see
e.g., Conee and Feldman 1998: 4-5).
4See, for example, Lewis 1996; Conee and Feldman 2004, 2008.
5See, for example, Nozick 1981; Sosa 1999, 2004; Pritchard 2005; Lasonen-Aarnio 2010.

3
While I certainly agree that it would be nice to give reductive accounts of various epis-
temic phenomena, I think that providing reductive accounts is much more diﬃcult than
many have thought. In this chapter, I raise some general obstacles for reductive accounts in
epistemology. For concreteness, I will focus on attempts to give a reductive account of epis-
temic justiﬁcation. I argue that extant attempts to give a reductive account of justiﬁcation
have diﬃculty handling cases of defeat (cases in which an agent is prima facie justiﬁed in
believing some proposition p, but this prima facie justiﬁcation is swamped by countervail-
ing evidence). While I take justiﬁcation as my focus, I argue that the diﬃculties I raise also
apply to reductive accounts of other epistemic states. In particular, they create diﬃculties
for attempts to give a reductive analysis of any epistemic state that is incompatible with
defeat—for example, knowledge or evidence possession.
This chapter is structured as follows. I start with process reliabilist accounts of justi-
ﬁcation, since process reliabilists have been particularly vocal about their reductive goals.
I ﬁrst show why process reliabilists need to supplement their view with a ‘No Defeaters’
clause (§1.2); I then argue, by way of counterexample, that the standard process reliabilist
account of defeat (the ‘Alternative Reliable Process’ account) fails to articulate either neces-
sary or suﬃcient conditions on defeat (§§1.3-1.5). I go on to generalize my argument: every
extensionally adequate account of justiﬁcation needs to deliver the right results in cases of
defeat, and it is far from clear how to develop a reductive account that does so (§§1.6-1.8).
I conclude by discussing the upshot for a reductive epistemology more generally (§1.9).
1.2
Why Process Reliabilists Need a Story about Defeat
To see why process reliabilists need a story about defeat, consider a simple version of process
reliabilism that lacks any “No Defeaters” clause:
Simple Process Reliabilism: S’s belief that p is justiﬁed at t i↵S’s belief that p at t
is the result of a reliable belief-forming process (or reliable belief-forming processes).6
6Despite the amount of press it’s received, it’s not clear whether anyone has endorsed Simple Process
Reliabilism, so it may be something of a strawperson.
Nonetheless, it provides a useful entry point for
exploring process reliabilists’ diﬃculties with defeat.

4
To see why such an account proves inadequate, consider a stock example of defeat:
Consuela and the Vase: Consuela sees a red vase in good lighting conditions at t1.
Consequently, she comes to believe Red: hThere’s a red vase in front of mei. At t2,
a usually reliable informant tells Consuela that she’s actually looking at a white vase
illuminated by a red light. Consuela has no reason to distrust this informant; nonetheless,
she disregards his testimony and continues to believe Red.
Fill in the details in the right way, and most people have the intuition that Consuela’s
belief in Red is defeated at t2: though it may be prima facie justiﬁed, it’s not ultima facie
justiﬁed (that is, it’s not justiﬁed full stop). But Simple Process Reliabilism predicts pre-
cisely the opposite. After all, Consuela’s belief in Red at t2 is the result of vision operating
in good lighting conditions—a paradigmatic example of a reliable cognitive process.
Is there any way to defend Simple Process Reliabilism from this objection? One might
be inclined to reply as follows:
“Everyone knows that process reliabilists face the Generality Problem: they face the
notoriously diﬃcult problem of typing belief-forming processes.7
You’ve picked a fairly
coarse-grained way of typing Consuela’a belief-forming process at t2: you’ve characterized
it as vision (or vision operating in good lighting conditions). But perhaps we should appeal
to a more ﬁne-grained characterisation of the process responsible for Consuela’s belief. Let
T be a function that takes as input visual experiences together with testimony that those
experiences are misleading and produces as output belief in the content of those experiences.
If we take T to be the correct way of typing Consuela’s belief-forming process, it’s not clear
that her belief in Red was formed by a reliable process.”
Call this the ‘Typing Defense.’ In evaluating the Typing Defense, we should ﬁrst note
that Consuela’s case is just one among many. Indeed, we can concoct an inﬁnite variety
of cases with the following structure: S forms an intuitively justiﬁed belief that p at time
t1. Then, at t2, S acquires a good reason to abandon her belief that p. Nonetheless, S
sticks to her guns and continues to believe p anyway. And so the proponent of the Typing
Defense has her work cut out for her: for each such case, her proposed method for typing
7For a seminal statement of the Generality Problem, see Conee and Feldman 1998.

5
belief-forming processes will need to deliver the result that S’s belief-forming process at t1
is reliable and that S’s belief-forming process at t2 is unreliable.
If we turn to some of the leading attempts to solve the Generality Problem in the liter-
ature, we ﬁnd that they don’t deliver these results. For example, one popular approach to
the Generality Problem is to type belief-forming processes in accordance with the “common
sense” classiﬁcations that the folk employ in ordinary life.8 Any such constraint on typing
belief-forming processes bodes ill for the Typing defense. After all, the folk are far more
likely to classify belief-forming processes as instances of vision or vision operating in good
lighting conditions than they are to classify belief-forming processes as instances of vision
together with testimony that those visual experiences are misleading.9
Of course, one might respond by simply rejecting such approaches: one might insist that
the only adequate solution to the Generality Problem is a solution that’s consistent with
the Typing Defense. But I see no reason to impose such a stringent adequacy condition
on solutions to the Generality Problem. Typing belief-forming processes is diﬃcult enough
without worrying about defeat. Thus it would be nice if process reliabilists could give an
independent treatment of defeat—a treatment of defeat that’s compatible with a variety of
solutions to the Generality Problem.
Most process reliabilists agree with me on this front. Most process reliabilists reject
Simple Process Reliabilism, and many of them do so—at least in part—because of Simple
Process Reliabilism’s acknowledged diﬃculties handing cases of defeat.10 Instead of Simple
Process Reliabilism, most process reliabilists opt for what we can call a ‘Two Step’ version
of process reliabilism.
By a ‘Two Step’ theory of justiﬁcation, I mean any theory that comprises two separate
components: a prima facie justiﬁcation condition and a ‘No Defeaters’ condition. Process
8Some of Goldman’s remarks in his (1979) paper suggest an approach along these lines. J¨onsson (2013a,b)
and Olsson (forthcoming) both defend versions of this approach.
9Another attractive approach to the Generality Problem is to type belief-forming processes causally. (See
e.g. Goldman 1986; Becker 2008.) A natural way of developing a causal approach to the Generality Problem
is to insist that if a feature f doesn’t causally a↵ect whether S believes p at t, our way of typing the belief-
forming process responsible for S’s belief that p at t shouldn’t mention f. Any such solution also stands in
tension with the Typing Defense, since there’s no guarantee that defeaters will always causally a↵ect the
target belief. For example, in the case of Consuela and the Vase, we can imagine Consuela (unjustiﬁably)
regards her interlocutor as completely unreliable; hence his testimony doesn’t causally a↵ect her credence
in Red.
10See e.g. Goldman 1979; Lyons 2009, forthcoming; Grundmann 2009; Bedke 2010.

6
reliabilists who pursue a Two Step theory typically take Simple Process Reliabilism (or
some close variant) and convert it into an account of prima facie justiﬁcation. For instance,
the following is a straightforward version of Two Step Process Reliabilism:
S’s belief that p is (ultima facie) justiﬁed at t i↵
1. S’s belief that p is the result of a reliable belief-forming process (or belief-forming
processes) at t
2. S’s belief that p isn’t defeated at t.
A Two Step process reliabilist will allow that Consuela’s belief in RED is prima facie
justiﬁed at t2, but deny that it’s ultima facie justiﬁed at t2, since it doesn’t satisfy condition
(2).11
However, process reliabilists who go down this road face an obvious challenge. Defeat is
an epistemic notion par excellence. Thus, on pain of abandoning their reductive aspirations,
Two Step process reliabilists need to provide a reductive account of defeat.
1.3
The Alternative Reliable Process Account of Defeat
To their credit, process reliabilists have acknowledged this obligation and tried to discharge
it. The classic process reliabilist story about defeat was ﬁrst proposed by Goldman (1979),
and has found a recent champion in Lyons (2009, forthcoming). It goes like this:
Alternative Reliable Process Account of Defeat (ARP): S’s belief that p is de-
feated at t i↵there’s some reliable or conditionally reliable process available to S at t
which, if it had been used by S in addition to the process actually used, would have
resulted in S’s not believing p at t.12
11In addition to its superior handling of Consuela and the Vase, Two Step Process Reliabilism may
fare better than Simple Process Reliabilism when it comes to dealing with Bonjour’s case of Norman the
clairvoyant (Bonjour 1985) and Lehrer’s case of Truetemp (Lehrer 1990). As Goldman (1986) suggests, one
option is to say that these characters’ beliefs are prima facie justiﬁed but defeated. (Though see Lyons
(2009) for a version of process reliabilism that precludes Norman and Truetemp’s beliefs from possessing
prima facie justiﬁcation.)
12Grundmann (2009) and Bedke (2010) defend similar counterfactual accounts of defeat.
While their
accounts (particularly Grundmann’s) di↵er from ARP in some important details, I’ll forego a discussion
of such details since—di↵erences notwithstanding—the counterexamples I o↵er to ARP straightforwardly
generalize to their proposals.

7
How does ARP handle Consuela and the Vase? I take it that proponents of ARP will
o↵er the following diagnosis: Consuela’s belief in Red is defeated at t2 because she could
have given weight to her interlocutor’s testimony. More precisely: there’s a possible process
that takes his testimony as input and outputs a fairly high credence in the content of that
testimony.
Plausibly, this process is either reliable or conditionally reliable (or at least
there’s a natural way of typing this process that makes it either reliable or conditionally
reliable). Consuela could have used this process in addition to visual perception; had she
done so, she would have abandoned her belief in Red.
I’m happy to grant that ARP is capable of explaining our intuition about Consuela and
the Vase. Unfortunately, there are at least some cases where ARP clearly delivers the wrong
results.
For ease of exposition, it will be useful to explicitly distinguish ARP’s suﬃciency con-
dition for defeat from ARP’s necessity condition:
Suﬃciency: If there’s some reliable or conditionally reliable process available to S
at t which, if it had been used by S in addition to the process actually used, would
have resulted in S’s not believing p at t, then S’s belief that p is defeated at t.
Necessity: If S’s belief that p is defeated at t, there’s some reliable or conditionally
reliable process available to S at t which, if it had been used by S in addition to the
process actually used, would have resulted in S’s not believing p at t.
In what follows, I ﬁrst present a counterexample to Suﬃciency (§1.4); next, I o↵er a
counterexample to Necessity (§1.5).
1.4
A Counterexample to Suﬃciency
Before presenting what I take to be a convincing counterexample to Suﬃciency, I’ll brieﬂy
mention an unconvincing counterexample. Kvanvig (2007) asks us to imagine that “[T]here
is a competent cogniser who disagrees with you about something you know to be true...
There is a reliable process which if you had used it would have resulted in a di↵erent belief:
namely, ask this cogniser and believe what is reported.” (2007: 1-2)

8
The reason I take Kvanvig’s counterexample to be unconvincing is that Goldman’s
initial (1979) discussion of ARP makes it clear he doesn’t intend the alternative processes
in question to include consulting new interlocutors. Goldman writes:
[I]t seems implausible to say all ‘available’ processes ought to be used, at least
if we include such processes as gathering new evidence.
Surely a belief can
sometimes be justiﬁed even if additional evidence-gathering would yield a dif-
ferent doxastic attitude. What I think we should have in mind here are such
additional process as calling previously acquired evidence to mind, assessing the
implications of that evidence, etc. (Goldman 1979)
It seems clear that Goldman intends ARP to be restricted to alternative reliable cognitive
processes that are in an important sense internal; they do not involve further research. And
so the process suggested by Kvanvig—consulting competent cognizers who disagree with
you—won’t qualify as ‘available’ in the relevant sense.13
Nonetheless, I think there are other cases with a similar structure that do present
compelling counterexamples to Suﬃciency. Here’s one:
Thinking About Unger: Harry sees a tree in front of him at t. Consequently, he comes
to believe the proposition Tree: hThere is a tree in front of mei at t. Now, Harry happens
to be very good at forming beliefs about what Peter Unger’s 1975 time-slice would advise
one to believe in any situation. Call this cognitive process his “Unger Predictor”: for
any proposition p, any agent A, and any situation s, Harry’s Unger Predictor spits out
an accurate belief about what doxastic attitude Unger’s 1975 time-slice would advise A
to take towards p in s.
13Given this restriction of what counts as an alternative reliable process ‘available’ to the agent, it’s not
clear that Goldman is entitled to his later verdict on Kornblith’s (1983) case of Jones, “a headstrong young
physicist” who gives a talk wherein he announces his belief that p. Jones is unable to withstand any sort of
criticism, and consequently doesn’t listen to his colleague’s devastating objection. (It’s crucial to Kornblith’s
case that Jones doesn’t even hear the colleague’s objection, and so does not possess the counterevidence
that it furnishes.) Goldman (1992) seems to concur with Kornblith’s assessment that the physicist’s belief
that p is defeated in this case. But it’s not clear that ARP can deliver this verdict, since the reliable process
involved in listening to his colleague’s testimony wouldn’t be entirely internal—it would, in an important
sense, involve engaging in further research.
I won’t press this objection, however, since I don’t ﬁnd Kornblith’s case entirely convincing. While I
certainly concur that there’s something epistemically defective about the physicist’s overall state, it’s not
clear to me that this defect defeats his belief that p. (It seems plausible to me that a person can have
justiﬁed beliefs, even though those beliefs are sustained, at least in part, by a variety of epistemic vices.)

9
What’s more, Harry has a very high opinion of Unger’s 1975 time-slice: whenever it
occurs to Harry that Unger would advise him (Harry) to suspend judgement about p,
this causes Harry to become chagrined and suspend judgement about p. So if Harry had
used his Unger Predictor, he would have come to believe Suspend: hUnger would advise
me (Harry) to suspend judgement regarding Treei. This would, in turn, have caused
Harry to suspend judgement regarding Tree.
Suﬃciency predicts that Harry’s belief in Tree is defeated at t. After all, his Unger
Predictor is a reliable process: it systematically produces true beliefs about the advice of
Unger’s 1975 time-slice. It’s also an internal, cognitive process that’s available to him at t.
So there’s a reliable, internal belief-forming process that’s available to Harry at t, which, if
it had been used by Harry, would have resulted in him not believing Tree at t.
However, this verdict about the case strikes me as wrong: my intuition is that Harry’s
belief in Tree is justiﬁed at t. After all, at t, Harry isn’t thinking about Unger, or en-
tertaining any sceptical doubts; indeed, we can stipulate he hasn’t engaged in sceptical
ruminations in a very long time. At t, it seems that he has every reason to think that
there’s a tree in front of him and no good reason to suspend judgement. The mere fact
that if he were to engage in reﬂection about what Unger would think about his situation,
he would suspend judgement regarding Tree shouldn’t deprive his belief of justiﬁcation.
Thus I take it that Thinking About Unger is a counterexample to Suﬃciency, and hence
ARP. Is there any way of repairing ARP to get around this counterexample? When faced
with this case, it’s natural to feel that there’s something ﬁshy about the connection between
Harry’s Unger Predictor and his belief in Tree. And thus it’s natural to suspect that if we
can ﬂesh out this worry—if we can articulate in what sense this connection is ﬁshy—we’ll
be able to revise ARP in a way that avoids generating the prediction that Harry’s belief in
Tree is defeated.
So what exactly is ﬁshy about the connection between Harry’s Unger Predictor and his
belief in Tree? It seems to me that there are two natural hypotheses. The ﬁrst is that
causal indirectness is to blame. If Harry were to use his Unger Predictor, this wouldn’t
directly cause him to suspend judgement about Tree. The only immediate e↵ect of his

10
Unger Predictor would be a belief in Suspend; the actual suspension of judgement regarding
Tree would occur as a further, downstream e↵ect.
A second, closely related hypothesis is that a subject matter mismatch is the culprit.
According to this hypothesis, Harry’s Unger Predictor doesn’t produce beliefs about the
right sort of subject matter: it produces beliefs about what Unger would advise, not about
whether there are trees in front of Harry.
These two hypotheses suggest two di↵erent ways of trying to repair ARP. The ﬁrst
hypothesis suggests a version of ARP that includes a causal directness requirement:
ARP*: S’s belief that p is defeated at t i↵there’s some reliable or conditionally reliable
process available to S at t which, if it had been used by S in addition to the process
actually used, would have directly resulted in S’s not believing p at t.
The second hypothesis suggests a version of ARP that includes a subject matter re-
quirement. A natural way of spelling out this requirement is to insist that the alternative
process must produce a doxastic attitude towards p:
ARP**: S’s belief that p is defeated at t i↵there’s some reliable or conditionally reliable
process X available to S at t such that:
1. The output of X is a doxastic attitude towards p
2. If X had been used by S in addition to the process actually used, it would have
resulted in S’s not believing p at t.
Will either ARP* or ARP** work? I think not. To see why, imagine that Harry had
used his Unger Predictor, and hence had come to suspend judgement regarding Tree. Now,
presumably there is some process that directly results in this suspension of judgement; it’s
just a two-component process. The ﬁrst component is his Unger Predictor, which outputs a
belief in Suspend; the second component is a process we can call his ‘Unger Implementer’:
it takes as input a belief in Suspend, and produces suspension of judgement regarding
Tree. Call this two-component process Harry’s ‘Unger Emulator’ (depicted in ﬁg. 1.1).
Now, Harry’s Unger Emulator is a reliable process. After all, it produces no beliefs; a

11
Beliefs about a situation
e.g. I seem to see a tree
in normal lighting condi-
tions
Predictions about what
Unger would advise
e.g. Unger would advise
me to suspend judgement
regarding whether there’s
a tree in front of me
Conformity to Unger’s
predicted advice
e.g. Suspension of judge-
ment regarding whether
there’s a tree in front of
me
Input to Unger Predictor/
Unger Emulator
Output of Unger Predictor/
Input to Unger Implementer
Output of Unger Imple-
menter/ Unger Emulator
Unger Predictor
Unger Implementer
Figure 1.1: Unger Emulator
fortiori, it doesn’t produce any false beliefs. So it seems Harry has an alternative reliable
belief-forming process available to him (his Unger Emulator) which, if he had used it in
addition to the process actually used (visual perception), would have directly resulted in
him suspending judgement about Tree. Hence, ARP* delivers the result that his belief
in Tree is defeated at t.14 What’s more, the output of his Unger Emulator is a doxastic
attitude towards Tree (suspension of judgement is, after all, a doxastic attitude); hence
ARP** also delivers the verdict that his belief in Tree is defeated at t.
One might object to my claim that Harry’s Unger Emulator is a reliable belief-forming
process. There are at least two ways one might try to motivate this objection. First, one
could point out that since the Unger Emulator doesn’t produce any beliefs, it doesn’t count
as a belief-forming process at all. Second, one could dispute the assumption that failure
to produce false beliefs is suﬃcient for reliability. On a suﬃciently nuanced conception of
reliability, suspending judgement on a truth will count as worse than believing a truth.15
Since the Unger Emulator suspends judgements on all truths, it’s not a particularly reliable
process.
14Could one insist that, strictly speaking, the process that would have directly resulted in his suspension
of judgement wouldn’t have been his Unger Emulator; rather, it would have been just the second stage of
the Unger Emulator (the Unger Implementer)? Even if this view could be motivated (which I doubt), it will
be of no help to the proponent of ARP*; after all, the Unger Implementer produces no beliefs either, hence
it too is reliable.
15The best candidates for nuanced conceptions of reliability along these lines come from the literature
on scoring rules, where the discussion is usually couched in terms of credences rather than the tripartite
distinction between belief, suspension, and disbelief. See, for example, Joyce 1998; Gibbard 2007; Moss 2011.
(Goldman also discusses such scoring rules in places (Goldman and Shaked 1991, Goldman 1999, Goldman
2010), though he presents such scoring rules as measures of “degrees of truth possession” or “veritistic value”
rather than reliability.)

12
But even if we grant this objection, we can amend the case. Imagine an epistemologist—
call her Shmunger—whose scepticism is much more circumscribed than that of Unger’s 1975
time-slice. Shmunger has lots of true beliefs about math, physics, history—you name it.
Shmunger is only a sceptic about trees: in any given situation, she suspends judgement on
whether trees are present.
Suppose, furthermore, that Shmunger wants others to share her doxastic attitudes: she
wants others to hold her (entirely accurate) beliefs about math, physics, etc.; she also wants
everyone to share her arboreal scepticism. Now we can reproduce the counterexample using
Shmunger:
Thinking About Shmunger: Harry’s twin Larry has an highly reliable Shmunger Pre-
dictor: given any scenario, Larry’s Schmunger Predictor reliably predicts what Shmunger
would advise Larry to believe in that scenario. Larry’s Shmunger predictor is also part
of a Shmunger Emulator: whenever Larry predicts that Shmunger would advise Larry
to take up a particular doxastic attitude towards a proposition, he invariably takes up
that attitude. Now Larry sees a tree in normal lighting conditions. Since Larry isn’t
thinking about Shmunger, he comes to believe Tree: hThere is a tree in front of mei.
But if he had used his Shmunger Emulator, he wouldn’t have done so.
Clearly, Larry’s Shmunger Emulator is a belief-forming process: it produces lots of beliefs on
sundry topics. What’s more, the beliefs in question are always true. Consequently, it seems
to qualify as a reliable belief-forming process, even given a suitably nuanced conception
of reliability.
If Larry had used this process, it would have directly resulted in Larry’s
suspending judgement about Tree. So ARP* predicts that Larry’s belief that there’s a
tree in front of him is defeated. And since the output of Larry’s Schmunger Emulator is a
doxastic attitude towards Tree, ARP** delivers the same prediction.
So it seems that the most natural ways of revising ARP to get around the counterexam-
ples to Suﬃciency prove unsuccessful.16 And it’s worth noting that nothing hinges on the
16For those who suspected that some sort of subject matter mismatch was to blame, a natural next attempt
at patching ARP would be the following:
ARP***: S’s belief that p is defeated at t i↵there’s some process X available to S at t such that:
(i) X is reliable about p-related matters

13
details of Thinking About Unger/Shmunger; we can construct many more counterexamples
with the same general structure. Here’s the formula:
Step 1: Describe a case where an agent S has a prima facie justiﬁed belief that p.
Step 2: Endow S with a dormant reliable belief-forming process X that meets the fol-
lowing conditions:
1. If S were to use X, the output of X would be suspension of judgement about p
2. The mere availability of X does not, intuitively, give S a good reason to cease
believing p.
What’s more, even if we can revise ARP in a way that avoids every case of this form, ARP
won’t be in the clear: as we’re about to see, there are also counterexamples to Necessity.
Any satisfactory revision of ARP will have to deal with these as well.
1.5
A Counterexample to Necessity
Here’s a counterexample that shows that ARP fails to articulate necessary conditions for
defeat:
Job Opening: Masha tells Clarence that her department will have a job opening in the
fall. Clarence believes Masha; assuming that Masha is usually reliable, Clarence’s belief
(ii) If X had been used by S in addition to the process actually used, it would have resulted in S’s not
believing p at t.
If we coupled ARP*** with a nuanced conception of reliability, we could capture the intuition that Larry’s
belief in Tree is justiﬁed. After all, though his Schmunger Emulator is generally reliable, it isn’t reliable
about Tree-related matters: it systematically recommends suspending judgements about the presence of
trees, hence isn’t reliable about their presence.
However, proponents of this account face the diﬃcult task of specifying what counts as a “p-related
matter.” (As an anonymous referee at The Philosophical Quarterly helpfully observed, this could be viewed
as a “second round” of the Generality Problem.) If in Thinking About Shmunger we take a “Tree-related
matter” to include any proposition about the presence of trees (as the foregoing paragraph suggests), then
the envisioned ﬁx won’t be able to handle cases of even more circumscribed scepticism. (Imagine Shmunger
isn’t a wholesale sceptic about the presence of trees; indeed, she’s generally quite reliable about the presence
of trees. She’s only a sceptic about the presence of, say, birch trees when viewed from such-and-such an
angle.) To deal with such cases, we’d need to give a more restrictive account of “Tree-related matters.”
But the more we restrict what counts as a “p-related matter”, the more diﬃculty we’ll have capturing
intuitions about mundane cases of defeat. For instance, in Consuela and the Vase, we’d like to say that
Consuela’s belief in Red is defeated even though her interlocutor isn’t reliable about whether the particular
vase Consuela is looking at is red.

14
counts as prima facie justiﬁed. Sometime later, Clarence speaks with the head of Masha’s
department, Victor, who informs him that the job search was cancelled due to budget
constraints. Now suppose that Clarence harbors a deep-seated hatred of Victor that
causes him to disbelieve everything that Victor says; what’s more, no amount of rational
reﬂection would rid Clarence of this inveterate distrust. Consequently, he continues to
believe that there will be a job opening in the fall.
Intuitively, Clarence’s belief that there will be a job opening in the fall is defeated.17
But it doesn’t seem that Necessity delivers this result. Consider: is there some alternative
reliable process available to Clarence such that, if Clarence had used it in addition to the
process he actually used (namely, trusting Masha’s testimony), he wouldn’t have believed
that there will be a job opening in the fall? It doesn’t seem so. After all, we’ve stipulated
that Clarence has an intractable distrust of Victor—one that no amount of reﬂection or
therapy could dislodge. So it doesn’t seem that there’s any process available to Clarence
that takes Victor’s testimony as input and outputs a fairly high credence in that testimony.
One might insist that Clarence has a very general process (GP) available to him, which
takes any testimony t he’s received as input and produces an increased credence in t as
output. It’s just that Clarence isn’t capable of employing this process for every value of t.
But even if we grant that he has such a process available to him, this won’t be enough to
rescue Necessity. In order to rescue Necessity, the following counterfactual would need to
be true:
If Clarence had used GP, he wouldn’t have believed there will be a job opening in the
fall.
But given the way the case is set up, this counterfactual is false. After all, Clarence has
only received two pieces of testimony regarding the potential job opening: Masha’s and
Victor’s. He can’t plug Victor’s testimony into GP, and plugging Masha’s testimony into
GP was what caused him to believe that there will be a job opening in the ﬁrst place.
17It would be di↵erent if Clarence had good reason to deem Victor’s testimony unreliable, but in our
scenario this isn’t the case.

15
Of course, one could part ways with Goldman and opt for a less restrictive conception
of the belief-forming processes ‘available’ to an agent. Someone who takes this approach
could point out that Clarence is capable of asking other people whether the department
will have a job opening in the fall; if Clarence had pursued such inquiries, he would have
presumably acquired independent evidence that the job search was canceled. Our defender
of Necessity could then insist that this suﬃces for Clarence to have an alternative reliable
process available to him which, if used in addition to the process actually used, would have
resulted in him abandoning the belief that there will be a job opening in the fall.
However, there are at least two problems with this maneuver. First, we can set up the
case in such a way that Clarence’s independent investigations would have been fruitless:
simply stipulate that, despite persistent inquiries, Clarence would have been unable to un-
earth any further evidence regarding the potential job opening. Second, a process reliabilist
who makes this maneuver will open herself up to a host of additional counterexamples to
Suﬃciency. For instance, she’ll fall prey to Kvanvig’s counterexample (discussed in §1.4):
if engaging in further inquiry counts as a belief-forming process available to an agent, Suﬃ-
ciency entails that S’s belief that p will be defeated whenever there’s some reliable cognizer
with whom S is acquainted who believes ¬p.
Here too nothing hinges on the details of case; it’s easy to cook up similar examples.
Here’s the recipe:
Step 1: Describe a case where an agent S has a prima facie justiﬁed belief that p.
Step 2: Stipulate that S receives strong evidence e that p is false.
Step 3: Stipulate that, due to hatred, prejudice, or just some psychological quirk, S is
cognitively incapable of responding appropriately to e, and hence persists in believing p.
Every case we cook via this recipe will put defenders of Necessity in a similar bind.
For every such case, defenders of Necessity may be tempted to insist that even though
S is unable to respond appropriately to e, S is capable of pursuing further inquiries into
the truth of p; had she done so, she would have unearthed some further evidence e* that
would have caused her to suspend judgement on p. This, they may be tempted to insist, is
all that it takes for S to satisfy Necessity, given a suitably liberal conception of ‘availabil-

16
ity.’ But broadening our conception of availability will invariably lead from frying pan to
ﬁre: any such broadened conception of availability will give rise to legions of Kvanvig-style
counterexamples to Suﬃciency.
1.6
Looking Forward
Where does this leave us? We’ve seen that process reliabilists need an account of defeat
(§2). What’s more, the standard process reliabilist account of defeat—ARP—falls victim
to counterexamples. Thus process reliabilists must either supply an alternative reductive
account of defeat or renounce their reductive ambitions altogether.
While I’ve been focused on process reliabilism, I should note that the diﬃculties I’ve
raised aren’t just a problem for process reliabilism. They are, at the very least, problems
for any attempt to give a reductive ‘Two Step’ theory of justiﬁcation (where a Two Step
theory of justiﬁcation is any theory that analyzes justiﬁcation in terms of the satisfaction
of two conditions: a prima facie justiﬁcation condition and a ‘No Defeaters’ condition).
For example, consider the dogmatist view that whenever it perceptually appears to S that
p, S is prima facie justiﬁed in believing p (Pryor 2000).
Or consider the more general
‘phenomenal conservative’ position that whenever it seems to S that p, S is prima facie
justiﬁed in believing p (Huemer 2007). Clearly, the mere fact that it perceptually appears
to S that p is not suﬃcient for S to be ultima facie justiﬁed in believing p. To see this, we
need look no further than the case of Consuela: it perceptually appears to her that there’s
a red vase in front of her, but—as we’ve seen—she isn’t ultima facie justiﬁed in believing
this. Thus, any such view needs a ‘No Defeaters’ clause as well. And if such a view is
intended to be reductive, then it will need to explain defeat in non-epistemic terms.
At this point, some may argue that what we’ve been missing is any appeal to the notion
of evidence. As Comesa˜na (2010) and Goldman (2011) observe, the notion of evidence is
conspicuously lacking from traditional reliabilist accounts. Perhaps this notion gives us just
what we need to arrive at a counterexample-free view of ultima facie justiﬁcation.
In the next two sections, I consider this idea in depth. I argue that in order for this
move to do the desired work, we’ll need to cash out the notion of evidence possession in

17
non-epistemic terms. Moreover, I argue that this is no easy task. Indeed, it is arguably just
as diﬃcult as explicating the notions of justiﬁcation and defeat in non-epistemic terms.
1.7
Appealing to Evidence
There are two main strategies for enlisting the notion of evidence into a theory of justiﬁca-
tion. The ﬁrst is to use evidence to explain defeat.18 For example, one could propose an
account of defeat along the following lines:
Evidential Account of Defeat: S’s belief that p is defeated at t i↵S’s total evidence
at t doesn’t support p at t.
One could then combine the Evidential Account of Defeat with some account of prima
facie justiﬁcation to deliver a Two Step theory of ultima facie justiﬁcation. For example,
we could combine the Evidential Account of Defeat with a process reliabilist account of
prima facie justiﬁcation, resulting in a hybrid of process reliabilism and evidentialism. (For
recent defenses of a synthesis of process reliabilism and evidentialism, see Comesa˜na 2010;
Goldman 2011; and Tang forthcoming.)
A second strategy is to abandon the ‘Two Step’ structure altogether.
Rather than
trying to explain epistemic justiﬁcation in terms of a combination of (i) an account of
prima facie justiﬁcation, (ii) a ‘No Defeaters’ condition, perhaps we should instead give a
‘One Step’ analysis of epistemic justiﬁcation in terms of evidence. This would result in a
‘pure’ evidentialist view. While there are di↵erent ways of spelling out such a view, here is
a characteristic statement:
Evidentialism about Justiﬁcation: S is (ultima facie) justiﬁed in believing p at t i↵
S’s total evidence supports p at t.19
(Note that evidentialism, thus formulated, is a thesis about propositional justiﬁcation.
Typically, evidentialists go on to analyze doxastic justiﬁcation in terms of propositional
18See e.g., Conee and Feldman 2005 for the view that defeat is best characterized in terms of evidence.
19See Conee and Feldman 2004, 2008. (For formulations of evidentialism as a supervenience thesis, see
Fantl and McGrath 2002; Weatherson 2005.)

18
justiﬁcation plus the basing relation—e.g., S’s belief that p is doxastically justiﬁed i↵(i)
it’s based on body of evidence e that propositionally justiﬁes believing p, (ii) there’s no
more inclusive body of evidence e0 possessed by S that doesn’t propositionally justify S in
believing p (Conee and Feldman 2004). Whether such an analysis of doxastic justiﬁcation
will work is controversial: see Turri 2010 for putative counterexamples; see Goldman 2011
for the view that any such account will need to be supplemented with constraints on the
processes that produce the target belief. For present purposes, I will set such worries aside.)
There is an obvious hurdle to using either of these strategies in service of a reductive
account of justiﬁcation: the notion of possessing evidence is clearly an epistemic notion.
(Arguably, the notion of supporting a proposition is an epistemic notion as well.) Thus,
evidentialists with reductive ambitions need to provide a reductive account of evidence
possession.20 But providing such an account is easier said than done. To see why, let us
start by considering a plausible constraint on a theory of evidence possession:
Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link: If S has p as evidence at t, then S is (ultima facie)
justiﬁed in believing p at t.
To see this plausibility of the Evidence Possession-Justiﬁcation Link, suppose it were
false. Then we should expect it to be perfectly ﬁne to say things like:
(1)
? The detective’s evidence entails that the butler did it, but the detective isn’t
justiﬁed in believing the butler did it.
(2)
? Given John’s evidence, there’s no possibility that Jane is in the oﬃce. Still, John
shouldn’t think that Jane isn’t in the oﬃce.
20Goldman (2011) articulates a closely related worry: namely, that evidentialists owe us an account of
evidence.
As Goldman observes, the threat of circularity looms.
After all, some characterize evidence
as whatever justiﬁes belief (Kim 1988: 290-291). And another popular approach—discussed in detail in
Chp.3—identiﬁes one’s evidence with one knows (Williamson 2000a). If one conjoins this approach with the
traditional view that knowledge can only be analyzed in terms of justiﬁcation, then evidentialists will be
saddled with a circular account of justiﬁcation.
My challenge here is subtly di↵erent: evidentialists with reductive ambitions owe us not just an account
of evidence; they also owe us an account of evidence possession. Even if the former can be explicated in
non-epistemic terms, it’s not clear that the latter can be. To see this, consider Goldman’s own suggestion
that evidence is best understood in terms of reliable indication: e is evidence for p i↵e reliably indicates p
(Goldman 2011). Clearly, something can be evidence in this sense, even if no one ‘possesses’ this evidence.
(Consider, e.g., the number of rings on an undiscovered tree, which reliably indicate the tree’s age.) Thus even
if Goldman’s suggestion gives an adequate reductive account of unpossessed evidence, reductive evidentialists
will still need to tell us what is required for an agent to ‘possess’ a body of evidence.

19
But such discourses strike me as incoherent, or at least borderline incoherent. This suggests
that our ordinary intuitions about evidence possession conform to the Evidence-Justiﬁcation
Link.21
Our argument for the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link need not rest entirely on intuitions
about evidence possession.
We can instead appeal to the connection between evidence
possession and evidential support. Consider the following plausible principle:
Evidence-Support Link: If S has p as evidence at t, then S’s total evidence supports
p at t.
Most leading accounts of evidential support validate this principle. Consider, for exam-
ple, probabilistic theories of support, according to which the degree to which S’s evidence
supports p at t is given by a probability function Pr that reﬂects the probability of p con-
ditional on S’s total evidence e at t (e.g., Williamson 2000a). On any such theory, if p2e,
then Pr(p|e) = 1, and so S’s evidence will support p to the greatest degree possible. Or
consider modal accounts of evidential support, according to which S’s evidence e supports
p i↵in every normal world where e obtains, p obtains (e.g., Smith 2010). Clearly if p2e,
then in every world where e obtains, p obtains. And so modal accounts also validate the
Evidence-Support Link.
But if evidence is to explain defeat and/or ultima facie justiﬁcation, one can’t accept the
Evidence-Support Link while denying the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link. After all, suppose
the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link were false. In particular, suppose there is some subject S
who has some proposition q as evidence, even though S’s belief in q is defeated. Given the
Evidence-Support Link, S’s evidence supports q. Given either the Evidential Account of
Defeat or Evidentialism about Justiﬁcation, it follows that S belief in q isn’t defeated—
which contradicts our initial supposition. Thus those who seek to explain justiﬁcation in
terms of evidence must either accept the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link or they must develop
a non-standard account of evidential support that invalidates Evidence-Support Link.
Giving a reductive account of evidence possession that validates the Evidence-Justiﬁcation
Link is no trivial task. In the following section, I consider three initially promising strate-
21For further arguments for the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link, see Beddor 2015a.

20
gies for developing a reductive account of evidence possession and argue that each fails to
undewrite the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link. It remains to be seen whether some alternative
reductive strategy fares better.
1.8
Three Attempts to Reduce Evidence Possession
The ﬁrst reductive strategy is mentalist: it seeks to characterize evidence possession in
terms of an agent’s non-factive mental states.22
How exactly do an agent’s non-factive
mental states determine the facts about evidence possession? Mentalists are often cagey
when it comes to answering this question. But here are some natural accounts that can be
gleaned from the literature:
Conscious Beliefs: S has p as evidence i↵S consciously believes p.23
Experiences and Memories: S has p as evidence i↵p is the content of one of S’s
perceptual experiences or apparent memories.24
Module Outputs: S has p as evidence i↵p is the output of one S’s modules.25
One could also combine these proposals in various ways. For example, Schroeder (2011b)
defends the view that S has p as evidence i↵S has a “presentational attitude” towards
p, where a “presentational attitude” is any attitude that represents its content as true.
Schroeder’s discussion makes it clear that he takes both belief and perceptual experience to
be presentational attitudes.
None of these accounts are consistent with the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link. To see this,
consider again Consuela’s belief in Red. Even after receiving her interlocutor’s testimony,
she consciously believes Red; moreover, on many views of perceptual content, Red is also
the content of her visual experience. And, given the assumption that vision is a module,
22See e.g., Lewis 1996; Conee and Feldman 2004. (The ‘non-factive’ qualiﬁcation is meant to exclude non-
reductive views such as Williamson 2000a, which identiﬁes evidence with knowledge, but takes knowledge
to be a mental state.)
23See Feldman 1988 for the view that S has p as evidence at t i↵S is thinking of p at t.
24For a classic account of evidence in terms of perceptual experiences and apparent memories, see Lewis
1996.
25See Weatherson 2009. (Weatherson understands modules in roughly the sense of Fodor 1983.)

21
it is also the output of one her modules. Nonetheless, she isn’t ultima facie justiﬁed in
believing Red.26
A second reductive strategy attempts to analyze evidence possession in terms of beliefs
that track the truth in certain ways—e.g., beliefs that are safe or sensitive.27 Such views
also run afoul of the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link. To see this, consider the following simple
truth-tracking approach:
Safe Belief: S has p as evidence i↵S safely believes p
where S safely believes p =def in all nearby worlds where S believes p on the same
basis, p is true.
Note that Consuela’s belief in Red could well be safe: we can stipulate that in all suﬃciently
nearby worlds where she uses vision to arrive at the belief that there is a red vase in front
of her, this belief is true. Still, her belief in Red isn’t ultima facie justiﬁed.28
A third strategy is to try to use the resources of virtue epistemology to give a reductive
account of evidence. For example, one could hold that S has p as evidence i↵S is disposed
26Given this, some mentalists may be inclined to retreat to a more austere conception of evidence. For
example, rather than taking an agent’s evidence to be the contents of her perceptual experiences, some may
be inclined to hold that her evidence consists entirely in propositions about how things appear to her at a
time. On this proposal, Consuela’s evidence doesn’t include Red; rather, it includes a proposition of the
form: hIt appears to me that Redi. Perhaps, mentalists may suggest, any such proposition is guaranteed to
be ultima facie justiﬁed.
However, this manuever faces at least two diﬃculties. First, it’s doubtful that beliefs about appearances
are immune to defeat. Suppose the vase’s color is a borderline shade of red: it is red, but a slight change
in its hue would make it orange. And suppose a trustworthy oracle informs Consuela that she regularly
makes mistakes about how color properties appear to her in borderline cases, and that in this very case,
she’s making a mistake. Arguably, her belief that it appears to her that there’s a red vase in front of her is
defeated.
Second, this route seems to lead towards skepticism. If our evidence only consists in an extremely austere
class of propositions—propositions about appearances—it’s unclear how we could be justiﬁed in forming
beliefs about the external world. For further development of this idea that an austere conception of evidence
leads to skepticism, see Williamson 2000a.
27Here one could either give a ‘direct’ reduction and simply deﬁne S’s evidence as S’s beliefs that possess
some truth-tracking property T, or one could give an ‘indirect’ reduction and analyze evidence in terms of
some further epistemic state—e.g., knowledge—and then analyze this further epistemic state in terms of
beliefs that possess T.
28One might try to avoid this result by insisting on a particularly ﬁne-grained way of typing Consuela’s
basis for believing Red. However, this is tantamount to reverting back to the Typing Defense, which, as
we’ve already seen (§1.2), faces diﬃculties. For further criticism of this manuever, see Lasonen-Aarnio 2010.
(Note that while Aarnio’s conclusion is largely congenial to mine, she seems to think that defeat poses a
special problem for externalists. If my arguments in this chapter are correct, this is mistaken: defeat is a
general problem for all reductive accounts of justiﬁcation, be they externalist or internalist.)

22
to competently assent to p.29 Those who prefer a factive conception of evidence could hold
that S has p as evidence i↵S aptly believes p, where S’s belief that p is apt i↵it is successful
(i.e., true) because of the exercise of a belief-forming competence.30
In order to evaluate this strategy, we need to say more about epistemic competences.
One option is to understand epistemic competences in epistemically loaded terms, for ex-
ample, as dispositions to form justiﬁed beliefs, or as dispositions to know (Millar 2009;
Miracchi 2015). But clearly this is tantamount to abandoning a reductive epistemology.
Alternatively, we could opt for a reductive conception of epistemic competences, identifying
them with dispositions to form true beliefs (where perhaps these dispositions are relativized
to particularly methods of belief formation). But if we go this route, then once again we’re
forced to deny the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link. After all, Consuela’s belief in Red is the
result of vision operating in good lighting conditions, which presumably qualiﬁes as a dispo-
sition to form true beliefs, and hence as an epistemic competence (at least on this reductive
understanding of epistemic competences). Moreover, the truth of her belief in Red is the
result of an exercise of this epistemic competence. And so it seems that on the reductive
virtue epistemological approach, she has this proposition as evidence, even though she is
not ultima facie justiﬁed in believing it.31
1.9
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have argued that leading attempts to provide a reductive account of
justiﬁcation—as well as their natural successors—ﬂounder when it comes to dealing with
29See Sylvan and Sosa (2014) for an account of epistemic reasons along these lines. (Note that Sylvan and
Sosa are noncommittal on whether all epistemic reasons can be identiﬁed with evidence.)
30See Sosa 2007. There are a variety of slightly di↵erent ways of cashing out this idea. For example, we
might follow Turri (2011b) and Sosa (2010, 2015) and instead focus on whether the belief is true because of the
“manifestation” of an epistemic competence. The di↵erences between these formulations, while interesting
in their own right, should not matter for my purposes.
31Sosa (2010, 2015) distinguishes three features of a competence such as archery: (i) the constitution
or seat (which is retained even when the archer is asleep), (ii) an appropriate inner condition or “shape”
(e.g., being awake and sober), (iii) an appropriate situation or environment (e.g., good lighting conditions).
Whether this “triple S” account of competences qualiﬁes as reductive depends on how we understand the
notion of “appropriate” inner conditions and situations in the case of epistemic competences. Once again
we face a dilemma. On the one hand, we could understand these in an epistemically loaded fashion—e.g.,
by deﬁning “appropriate” conditions and situations as those in which the competence will produce justiﬁed
beliefs—in which case the resulting account will fail to be reductive. Or we can try to cash them out in
non-epistemic terms, in which case it’s not clear how we’ll be able to deliver the right results in cases like
Consuela and the Vase.

23
cases of epistemic defeat. Such attempts either fall victim to counterexample or invoke
some unanalyzed epistemic notion (e.g., defeat, evidence) and hence fail to be reductive.
Of course, I have no proof that a reductive account of justiﬁcation is impossible. Thus
one option at this point is to press forward, and try to give some better reductive account
of justiﬁcation. However, I will confess that it is far from clear to me what such an account
will look like.
A second option is to abandon our aspirations of giving a reductive account of justiﬁ-
cation, but to insist that the problems that arose for reductive accounts of justiﬁcation do
not undermine reductive accounts of other epistemic notions—e.g., knowledge and evidence.
However, I think there is reason to ﬁnd this response both unappealing and unconvincing.
To see why this response is unappealing, recall our original motivation for giving a reductive
epistemology. We started with the observation that all epistemic facts seem to supervene
on non-epistemic facts. This in turn motivated Reducibility: the thesis that all epistemic
facts are reducible to the non-epistemic facts (§1.1). If we can only reduce some epistemic
notions to the non-epistemic, this won’t suﬃce to underwrite the Reducibility.
Moreover, the second option is unconvincing in light of the arguments in §§1.7-1.8.
There I argued that possessing p as evidence entails being ultima facie justiﬁed in believing
p (§1.7). Furthermore, I argued that this entailment imposes a signiﬁcant constraint on any
adequate account of evidence, and indeed that many leading accounts in the literature fail to
satisfy it (§1.8). Similar remarks apply to knowledge. According to a venerable—though by
no means uncontested—view, knowing p entails being ultima facie justiﬁed in believing p.
If this is right, then this clearly places an important constraint on any adequate analysis of
knowledge. Thus the problems for reductive accounts of justiﬁcation threaten to generalize
to reductive accounts of other epistemic notions.
A third—and, in my eyes, more attractive—option is to conclude we’ve been pursuing
the wrong sort of reductive analysis. To put the idea in very general terms, we should
continue to try to analyze justiﬁcation and other epistemic notions in non-epistemic terms,
but we should pursue analyses that take a rather di↵erent form than those pursued so far.
In the next chapter, I explore one way of developing this option in more detail.

24
Chapter 2
Towards a Reductive
Metaepistemology
2.1
Introduction
The analyses of justiﬁcation that we explored in Chapter One were couched in the material
mode. That is, they were of the form:
(3)
S is justiﬁed in believing p i↵...
In this chapter, I explore what happens if we take the path of semantic ascent, and
couch reductive analyses in the formal mode. That is, I will focus on epistemic linguistic
expressions and try to analyze such expressions in non-epistemic terms. Thus I will be
pursuing analyses of the form:
(4)
“S is justiﬁed in believing p” is true (relative to parameters σ1...σn) i↵...
where the right-hand side of the biconditional is couched in non-epistemic terms.1
1Of course, it is often harmless to semantically ascend and descend. For example, it would be harmless
to recast Simple Process Reliabilism in the formal mode: “S’s belief that p is justiﬁed” is true at t i↵
S’s belief that p at t is the result of a reliable belief-forming process. However, some expressions block
any straightforward attempt to semantically descend. Context-sensitive expressions are a familiar example.
Consider a simple semantic analysis of “here” talk: “x is here” is true in a context of utterance c i↵x is
located in the vicinity of the speaker in c. There is however, no straightforward way of restating this analysis
in the material mode. According to the account developed in this chapter, epistemic expressions are similar
to “here” talk in this regard.

25
How should we understand the di↵erence between analyses that take the form of (3)
and those that take the form of (4)? In the ethical domain, philosophers often distinguish
between ﬁrst-order ethics and metaethics. First-order ethics attempts to specify the condi-
tions under which an act (or person, or state of a↵airs) instantiates some moral property.
For example, utilitarianism is a ﬁrst-order theory: it says that an action is right i↵it max-
imizes utility. By contrast, metaethics investigates the nature of our moral thought and
talk (as well as the nature of the properties that such thought and talk picks out). At least
one important branch of metaethics—what we might call, ‘semantic metaethics’—focuses
on moral language, and attempts to specify the meanings of moral linguistic expressions
(e.g., terms such right, wrong, good). By analogy, moving from (3) to (4) can be viewed as
moving from ﬁrst-order epistemology to metaepistemology.2
What would a reductive metaepistemology look like? The particular reductive strategy I
will explore in this chapter takes its cue from the metaethics literature. In metaethics, there
is a rich tradition of analyzing moral expressions in terms of agents’ desire-like attitudes.3
One attractive feature of this approach is its reductive potential: given the assumption
that the desire-like attitudes can be understood without recourse to normative notions,
this approach delivers an analysis of moral expressions in non-normative terms. While this
‘attitudinal’ approach has long been popular in metaethics, relatively few have tried to
extend this approach to metaepistemology.4 And of the few who have, relatively few have
tried to work out the semantic details in a convincing fashion. In this chapter, I explore
how this can be done: I analyze a variety of epistemic linguistic expressions in terms of
agents’ desire-like attitudes.
Here is the plan for the chapter. In §2.2 I develop a preliminary account of a distinc-
tive desire-like attitude that is involved in epistemic evaluations—an attitude that I call
‘epistemic approval.’ In §2.3 I show how we can enlist this attitude into semantic service.
Speciﬁcally, I develop an attitudinal semantics for a variety of epistemic expressions, focus-
2My claim is not that the only task of metaepistemology is to give analyses of epistemic linguistic expres-
sions; I only claim that this is a task for metaepistemology—what we might call, ‘semantic metaepistemology’.
3See e.g., Ayer 1936; Stevenson 1944, 1963; Blackburn 1984, 1998; Brogaard 2008; Dreier 1990; Gibbard
1990, 2003, 2008; Harman 1975; Horgan and Timmons 2006; Ridge 2006; Prinz 2007; Egan 2012; Starr
forthcoming, among many others.
4Though the recent surge of interest in epistemic expressivism marks an important exception: see e.g.
Gibbard 2003; Ridge 2007; Field 2009; Kappel 2010; Chrisman 2007, 2012a; Grajner 2015.

26
ing on epistemic evaluations involving deontic modals (e.g., “You ought to believe in global
warming”) and epistemic justiﬁcation ascriptions. (I also brieﬂy discuss how the approach
can be extended to knowledge ascriptions and evidence possession ascriptions.) Along the
way, I suggest how parallel attitudinal semantics can be developed for a variety of moral
expressions—including moral evaluations involving deontic modals and moral justiﬁcation
ascriptions. In §2.4 I advertise the advantages of the resulting metaepistemology. The main
advantage, from the present perspective, is its reductive potential: epistemic expressions
can be understood in terms of the psychological attitude of epistemic approval, which can
be understood in non-epistemic terms. Moreover, the reduction in question nicely parallels
attitudinal reductions in metaethics, thereby o↵ering a uniﬁed strategy for reducing the
normative to the non-normative. But there are further advantages to boot. In particular,
this approach explains some of the striking commonalities between epistemic and ethical
expressions—for example, the fact that both are value-laden and the fact that both are
connected to motivation. §2.5 concludes by discussing the relations between metaepistemo-
logical reductions and ﬁrst-order epistemological reductions.
2.2
Epistemic Approval
Folk psychology contains a variety of closely related conative attitudes: e.g., desire, prefer-
ence, intention, and approval. And each of these conative attitudes can in turn be divided
into various subspecies. Take, for instance, approval. We can distinguish between approving
of something all things considered and approving of something from a particular point of
view.
An example may help. Imagine an avaricious business mogul who reads Singer’s “Famine,
A✏uence, and Morality.” Try as he might, he cannot identify any ﬂaws in Singer’s argument.
And so he becomes reluctantly convinced that ought to give donate most of his fortune to
charity. As a result, he has some pro-attitude towards a state of a↵airs in which he donates
most of his income to charity: when he contemplates this state of a↵airs, it strikes him as
being morally commendable. We can say that he ‘morally approves’ of this state of a↵airs:
he approves of it from a moral point of view.

27
Still, he may not approve of it all things considered. Suppose our mogul has a soft spot
for the ﬁner things in life, and would be loath to forego the various luxuries to which he
has grown accustomed. From a purely prudential point of view, he does not approve of
giving away most of his fortune. What’s more, we may well imagine that for our mogul,
the prudential point of view trumps the moral: all things considered, he most approves of
hanging onto his riches.
In addition to approving of something from a moral point of view, it seems we sometimes
approve of something from an epistemic point of view. Suppose that Shelly thinks that,
given the evidence available to Fred, he ought to believe in global warming. It seems to
follow that she has some pro-attitude towards a state of a↵airs in which Fred believes in
global warming. As we can put it, she ‘epistemically approves’ of this state of a↵airs.
Epistemic approval can come apart from both moral approval and all things considered
approval. To see this, consider mediocre Mel, who believes he is a talented musician, despite
all the evidence to the contrary. Suppose, moreover, that Mel’s belief in his musical abilities
is central to his wellbeing: it is a source of pride and hope; without it, he would despair.
Shelly might well epistemically disapprove of Mel’s belief that he is a talented musician:
she might think that, given all his evidence, it is irrational for him to hold this belief.
Nonetheless, she does not morally disapprove of this belief: she does not think there is
anything immoral with his believing as he does. And she might not all things considered
disapprove of this belief. Indeed, she might think that, all things considered, it is best for
Mel to go on believing as he does.
So far I have introduced the notions of moral approval and epistemic approval through
examples. But what is it, exactly, to approve of something from the moral or the epistemic
point of view?5 One might well worry we cannot answer this question without relying on
moral or epistemic notions. If this turns out to be the case, then even if we can analyze
moral and epistemic linguistic expressions in terms of moral and epistemic approval, the
5In the metaethics literature, the problem of identifying some distinctively moral conative attitude is
known as the ‘moral attitude problem.’ (The label is due to Miller (2003), who argues against a number
of putative solutions. For relevant discussion, see Kauppinen 2010; K¨ohler 2013; Bj¨ornsson and McPherson
2014.) While this is often raised as a problem for noncognitivists, it seems a version of the moral attitude
problem—and its epistemic analogue, which we might call the ‘epistemic attitude problem’—arises for anyone
who thinks that distinctive conative attitudes are typically involved in moral and epistemic judgment.

28
reductive bona ﬁdes of the resulting analysis will be in question.
However, I think this pessimism is unwarranted. There are at least three promising
strategies for developing reductive accounts of moral and epistemic approval. I will mention
each in turn.
The ﬁrst strategy is to analyze di↵erent subspecies of approval as dispositions towards
all things considered approval—dispositions that have distinctive bases.
In the case of
moral approval, the basis might be a pro tanto desire for fairness or the wellbeing of sen-
tient creatures. According to this proposal, our avaricious mogul has a disposition to all
things considered approve of donating his fortune to charity—a disposition that’s based in
a pro tanto desire to alleviate su↵ering. However, this disposition is masked by prudential
considerations—considerations that prevent him from all things considered approving of
donating his fortune.
In the case of epistemic approval, the distinctive basis might be a pro tanto desire for
the attainment of truth and the avoidance of error.
According to this proposal, Shelly
is disposed to all things considered approve of Mel abandoning his belief in his musical
abilities—a disposition that’s based in a pro tanto desire for error avoidance. However, this
disposition is masked by her concern for Mel’s wellbeing.
A second strategy is to analyze di↵erent subspecies of approval in terms of their causal
connections with both (i) other psychological attitudes, (ii) behaviors.6 For example, one
might hold that moral approval is distinguished by the fact that is intimately connected
with the ‘reactive attitudes’ (Strawson 1974) such as guilt, shame, and blame. For example,
if S morally approves of φ-ing in circumstances c, then it seems natural to expect S to be
disposed to feel some degree of guilt if she recognizes that she is in c, but nonetheless doesn’t
6One way of embedding this strategy in a more general framework for understanding psychological states
is to adopt the picture in Lewis 1972, 1994, according to which folk psychology can be regarded as a theory,
consisting in various platitudes about the causal connections between di↵erent mental states. To deﬁne a
particular mental state term t (e.g., belief, desire), we can then collect up the platitudes and ‘Ramsify’ over
them—that is, conjoin them in a long sentence φ, replace every occurrence of t in φ with a variable x, and
then deﬁne t as the unique entity that makes the resulting sentence true.
Of course, applying this strategy to moral and epistemic approval may be somewhat dicey, since ‘moral
approval’ and ‘epistemic approval’ aren’t familiar terms of folk psychology. However, I’m hopeful that my
initial description of moral and epistemic approval struck a chord with readers: the states are familiar, even if
folk psychology doesn’t contain commonly accepted names for them. If this is right, then the Ramsiﬁcation
strategy for moral and epistemic approval may indeed hold promise.
For further discussion of how the
Ramsiﬁcation strategy might help solve the moral attitude problem, see K¨ohler 2013.

29
attempt to φ. And it would likewise be natural to expect S to be disposed to blame others
who are in c, but do not attempt to φ.7
In a similar vein, we might propose that epistemic approval is distinguished by the fact
that it is intimately connected with patterns of belief formation and revision. To see the
appeal of this proposal, imagine a character—call him ‘Ted’—who epistemically disapproves
of atheism. According to Ted, various considerations (the ontological argument and the
like) make it epistemically obligatory to be a theist. We’d naturally expect Ted to be a
theist: were we to learn that he’s a staunch atheist, his epistemic disapproval of atheism
notwithstanding, we would be surprised. And if at some later time Ted changes his mind
and comes to epistemically disapprove of theism (due to the problem of evil and the like),
we would presumably revise our expectations concerning Ted’s theism (or lack thereof): we
would now expect Ted to be an atheist or an agnostic. More generally, it seems that if S
epistemically approves of having some doxastic attitude D towards p in circumstances c,
we expect S to be disposed to adopt D towards p upon coming to learn that she is in c.
According to the proposal under consideration, this intimate connection with our doxastic
attitudes is partially constitutive of epistemic approval.8
Yet another strategy is to analyze moral and epistemic approval in terms of the functions
they serve. Borrowing from Gibbard (1990)’s account of ‘accepting a norm’, one might
suggest that the function of moral approval is to foster coordination among our attitudes,
expectations, and behaviors. Similarly, one might follow Dogramaci (2012) and hold that
the function of epistemic approval is to foster coordination in our belief-forming methods
(coordination which, Dogramaci argues, helps ensure that testimony is reliable).9
7Kauppinen (2010) also invokes the reactive attitudes in his account of moral approval/disapproval, but he
puts them to rather di↵erent use. According to Kauppinen, moral disapproval is “an attitude of disapproval
that characteristically results from impartially placing oneself in the shoes of those primarily a↵ected by the
action and sharing their negative reactive attitudes.” Kauppinen’s proposal thus uses the reactive attitudes
in specifying a characteristic basis for moral approval/disapproval. For discussion of Kauppinen’s proposal,
see Bj¨ornsson and McPherson 2014.
8Some authors deny that epistemic akrasia—that is, cases where one does not believe in accordance
with how one thinks one epistemically ought to believe—is possible.
(See e.g., Hurley 1989; Pettit and
Smith 1996.) This strong position strikes me as implausible: consider, for example, the undergraduate who,
after reading Descartes’ Meditations, becomes convinced that it’s irrational to believe in the existence of an
external world, but nonetheless goes around believing in tables and chairs. (For other examples, see Greco
2014.) But while cases of epistemic akrasia seem to be possible, they also seem highly unusual: our default
expectation is that people will be epistemically enkratic. According to the present proposal, this observation
reveals something important about the nature of epistemic approval.
9Dogramaci (2012) focuses on the function of our epistemic evaluations, which for him are various lin-

30
I’ve brieﬂy sketched three strategies for analyzing subspecies of approval: (i) analyzing
them as dispositions towards all things considered approval—dispositions which are individ-
uated by their bases, (ii) analyzing them in terms of their causal connections with various
states and behaviors, (iii) analyzing them in terms of the functions they serve. Each of these
strategies strikes me as promising. And there is no need to choose between them: perhaps
all three are required for a full picture of moral and epistemic approval. For example, here’s
a toy example of the sort of deﬁnitions of moral and epistemic approval that might result
from combining them:
Toy Theory of Moral Approval:
Moral approval =def the psychological relation R that meets the following conditions:
1. Anyone who stands in R towards p is disposed to all things considered approve of
p—a disposition that’s based in a pro tanto desire for fairness and/or wellbeing.
2. Ceteris paribus, a psychologically normal agent who stands in R towards p will
be disposed to feel some degree of remorse upon realizing that she could have
easily brought p about, but failed to do so.
3. The function of R is to coordinate various expectations, attitudes, and behaviors.
Toy Theory of Epistemic Approval:
Epistemic approval =def the psychological relation R that meets the following condi-
tions:
1. Anyone who stands in R towards p is disposed to all things considered approve
of p—a disposition that’s based in a pro tanto desire for the attainment of truth
and avoidance of error.
2. Ceteris paribus, a psychologically normal agent who stands in R towards p will
be disposed to bring her doxastic policies in accordance with p.
3. The function of R is to coordinate various belief-forming methods.
guistic acts.
However, it would be natural to extend his account to the underlying conative attitudes
that—according to the present proposal—we give voice to when we perform these linguistic acts.

31
These toy deﬁnitions are almost certainly too simple. However, they should at least give
the reader a sense for the sort of deﬁnitions of moral and epistemic approval that might
emerge from a combination of the three strategies I’ve outlined. And they should license
optimism about the possibility of characterizing moral and epistemic approval without re-
liance on any unanalyzed moral or epistemic notions. If such a characterization can be
given, then epistemic and moral approval can be used as the foundation for a reductive
metaepistemology and metaethics.
2.3
An Attitudinal Semantics
Equipped with an account of epistemic approval, I now explore how we can put this attitude
to work in our semantics for various epistemic linguistic expressions.
I start by looking at epistemic evaluations involving deontic modals (e.g., ought, should,
must, may). Consider, for example:
(5)
a. You ought to believe in global warming.
b. You shouldn’t take a stand on whether the butler did it—you should wait until
we gather more evidence.
Both (5a) and (5b) have natural readings on which they make epistemic evaluations (as
opposed to say, moral or prudential evaluations). The reading in question can be made
explicit using phrases such as in view of the evidence and the somewhat more cumbersome,
from an epistemic point of view:
(6)
a. In view of the evidence, you ought to believe in global warming.
b. From an epistemic point of view, you shouldn’t take a stand on whether the
butler did it.10
I start by focusing on epistemic evaluations involving deontic modals because deontic
modals have been well-studied in the linguistics literature, and there is by now a fairly
10These epistemic evaluations involving deontic modals should not be conﬂated with what are sometimes
called, ‘epistemic modals’—that is, uses of might, may, ought and must to convey whether some proposition
is compatible with (or entailed by) some agents’ epistemic state. (For example, “It might rain later”.) I
o↵er an analysis of epistemic modals in Chp.3.

32
standard (though not entirely uncontroversial) semantic analysis of such expressions (due
to Kratzer 1981, 1991, 2012). This makes them a natural starting place: I can piggyback
on the standard semantic analysis of deontic modals in developing my attitudinal approach.
After laying out my treatment of such expressions (§§2.3.1), I turn to consider how this
approach can be extended to other epistemic linguistic expressions, such as justiﬁcation
ascriptions, evidence ascriptions, and knowledge ascriptions (§§2.3.2–2.3.3).
2.3.1
An Attitudinal Semantics for Deontic Modals
Deontic Ought (First Pass)
According to the standard treatment, modals are sentential operators.11 Thus (5a) is ana-
lyzed as:
(7)
Ought (You believe in global warming).
The next step in the standard analysis is to relativize the truth of modals to two con-
textually determined parameters: a modal base and an ordering source. The modal base is
a function f from a world to a set of accessible worlds.12 Exactly which worlds f delivers
will vary with context: in some cases, the modal base will deliver the set of all worlds (W);
in some cases, it will deliver the set of worlds that resemble the actual world in certain rel-
evant respects; in some cases, it will deliver the set of worlds compatible with the speaker’s
epistemic state, etc. The ordering source is a function g from a world to a set of proposi-
tions that serve to ‘rank’ the worlds in the modal base along some dimension: it says which
worlds in the modal base are ‘better’ (along the relevant dimension) than others. Exactly
what sort of ‘betterness’ is in play will also vary with context: some ordering sources will
care about which worlds are morally better than others; some will care about which worlds
are more normal than others; some will care about which worlds conform to certain laws
or regulations better than others, etc.
11The idea that modals function as sentential operators is widely endorsed in the literature, though see
Schroeder 2011a for the view that at least some modals have a reading that relates agents directly to actions.
For a reply to Schroeder, see Chrisman 2012b.
12Oﬃcially, Kratzer takes the modal base to deliver a set of propositions; we get a set of accessible worlds
by intersecting these propositions.

33
Putting all of this together, modals quantify over the ‘best’ worlds in the modal base.
For example, ought is analyzed as a universal quantiﬁer: “Ought φ” says that all of the
best worlds in the modal base are worlds where the prejacent (φ) is true.
One standard way of formalizing this is to assume that g(w) induces a preorder (a
reﬂexive and transitive relation) ⌫g(w) over W. This preorder corresponds to the “at least
as good as” relation (determined by g(w)): for any worlds v and u, v⌫g(w)u i↵v is at least
as good as u according to g(w). We can use this preorder to deﬁne the ‘best’ worlds in the
modal base as follows:
Bestg(w),f(w) = {v : v2f(w) and 8u2f(w): v⌫g(w) u}
We can then formulate Kratzer’s semantics for ought as follows:
Kratzer’s Semantics for Ought:
JOught φKc,f,g,w = 1 i↵8w02Bestg(w),f(w) : JφKc,f,g,w0 = 1
To illustrate, Kratzer’s semantics predicts that (5a)/(7) will be true in a context of ut-
terance i↵all of the best worlds in the modal base are worlds where the addressee believes
in global warming. To capture the reading where (5a)/(7) makes a distinctly epistemic eval-
uation, we will presumably use an ordering source that ranks the worlds in the modal base
from an epistemic point of view. On this reading, (5a)/(7) says that all of the epistemically
best worlds in the modal base are worlds where the addressee believes in global warming.
Kratzer’s semantics is an impressive apparatus. To mention one particularly attractive
feature, it o↵ers a uniﬁed semantics for modals in natural language: it explains why the
same modal expression (e.g., ought) can be used to make very di↵erent claims—for example,
an epistemic evaluation, a moral evaluation, or a prudential/bouletic evaluation. Each of
these di↵erent claims will be modeled using a di↵erent ordering source, which ranks the
worlds in the modal base along a di↵erent dimension—the epistemic point of view, the
moral point of view, the prudential point of view, etc.
Despite this, it’s important to note that Kratzer never gives us a substantive, philo-
sophically illuminating account of the ordering sources. In particular, she never answers
the following question:

34
Q: What it is for a particular set of worlds to be epistemically best?
This is all well and good for Kratzer’s purposes: after all, she wants a story about modals
that’s general enough to handle all ﬂavors of modals—deontic, bouletic, teleological, etc.
But those who are interested in a reductive metaepistemology will want something more:
they’ll want a substantive answer to Q. Here’s where the attitudinal framework comes
in: it says that certain agents’ states of epistemic approval determine what count as the
epistemically best worlds.
Here’s a simple way of implementing this idea. Let ew
S denote a subject S’s epistemic
approval proﬁle at a world w: a complete speciﬁcation of all the states of a↵airs that
S epistemically approves of at w, together with various degrees to which S epistemically
approves of these states of a↵airs.
We can use an agent’s epistemic approval proﬁle to
induce an ordering ⌫ew
S over W: for any worlds v and u, v⌫ew
S u if and only if v is at least
as good, from the point of view of S’s epistemic approval proﬁle at w, as u. We now let the
ordering source used for the epistemic evaluation reading of deontic ought be the epistemic
approval proﬁle of some contextually selected subject (e.g., the speaker). According to this
proposal, (5a)/(7) will be true (on the reading where it makes an epistemic evaluation) if
and only if all of the worlds in the modal base that are ranked highest by the contextually
selected subject’s epistemic approval proﬁle are worlds where the addressee believes in global
warming.
This strategy can be easily extended to handle moral evaluations using deontic modals,
such as:
(8)
You (morally) ought to save the drowning child.
All that’s required is that we posit a moral approval proﬁle (mw
S )—a speciﬁcation of the
states of a↵airs that S morally approves of at w (together, perhaps, with the degree to which
S morally approves of those states of a↵airs). Then we can suggest that when it comes
to moral evaluations involving deontic modals, the ordering source is some contextually
selected subject’s moral approval proﬁle. According to this proposal, (8) will be true if and
only if all of the worlds that are ranked highest by the contextually selected subject’s moral
approval proﬁle are worlds where the addressee saves the drowning child. Thus the current

35
approach o↵ers to give us a reductive semantics for both epistemic and moral evaluations
involving deontic ought.
Potential Revisions and Reﬁnements
There are number of ways in which one could modify my reductive semantics for epistemic
and moral evaluations involving deontic ought without departing from the guiding idea.
Here I’ll mention a few such modiﬁcations.
On the simple approach sketched above, the context of utterance always selects a par-
ticular subject whose epistemic approval proﬁle determines the ordering when it comes to
epistemic evaluations involving deontic ought.
But this could be rejected: perhaps the
context sometimes selects a group of agents, whose aggregate state of epistemic approval
determines the ordering when it comes to epistemic evaluations involving deontic ought.
(Perhaps these are the agents are the speakers’ interlocutors; perhaps they are the agents
who share the speaker’s values; perhaps they are the agents that the speaker aspires to
resemble in certain respects, etc.) And there is no need to assume that there will always
be a unique group selected by the context of utterance. Borrowing a move from von Fintel
and Gillies (2011), we could say that sometimes an utterance of an epistemic evaluation
involving a deontic modal doesn’t assert a single determinate proposition; instead, it “puts
in play” a cloud of propositions. Thus an utterance of (5a)/(7) might put in play (i) the
proposition that all of the worlds in the modal base ranked highest by the speaker’s state
of epistemic approval are worlds where the addressee believes in global warming, (ii) the
proposition that all of the worlds in the modal base ranked highest by the conversational
participants are worlds where the addressee believes in global warming, etc.
Another potential modiﬁcation is to inject a relativist element into our semantics. Thus
far, our semantics has been contextualist: we have only relativized the semantic values
of deontic modals to contexts of utterance (and parameters determined by the context of
utterance). According to relativists about deontic modals, further relativization is needed.
Relativists insist that even if we hold ﬁxed the context of utterance, a sentence containing
a deontic modal could have di↵erent truth-values relative to di↵erent assessors (that is,

36
di↵erent individuals who are assessing the sentence for truth or falsity).13 For instance,
consider a sentence such as:
(9)
Everyone ought to believe in the external world.
According to relativists, (9) might be true relative to an assessor who epistemically approves
of everyone believing in the external world (say, G.E. Moore), but false relative to a skeptic,
who epistemically disapproves of so believing.
A simple way of implementing this relativist idea in the present framework is to take
our indices to be not just worlds, but centered worlds: that is, world, assessor pairs. When
it comes to epistemic evaluations, the ordering source is not simply a function from a world
to the epistemic approval proﬁle of some subject; rather, it’s a function from a w, a pair to
the epistemic approval proﬁle of some subject (or some group of subjects). In the simplest
case, the subject in question will just be the assessor. This gives us the following semantics:
Relativist Semantics for Ought:
JOught φKc,f,g,w,a = 1 i↵8w02Bestg(w,a),f(w) : JφKc,f,g,w0,a = 1
According to this semantics, (9) will be true relative to some index w, a i↵all of the worlds
in the modal base that are ranked highest by the epistemic approval proﬁle of the w, a-
determined subject are worlds where everyone believes in the external world. Those at-
tracted to moral relativism could easily extend the present treatment to moral uses of
deontic ought: the moral ordering source will be a function from a world, assessor pair to
the moral approval proﬁle of some subject(s).14
What would decide between our original contextualist semantics and this relativist vari-
ant? Thus far most of the dispute between contextualists and relativists has centered on
disagreement data. Consider, for instance, a dispute such as:
(10)
a. Moore: Everyone ought to believe in the external world.
13For relativist treatments of various expressions, see Lasersohn 2005; Egan et al. 2005; Egan 2007, 2010,
2012, 2014; Stephenson 2007a,b,c; MacFarlane 2011, 2014.
14Note that this semantics for deontic ought is only relativist about the ordering source, not the modal
base. However, it’s certainly open to take the modal base to vary with the assessor as well. For relevant
discussion, see Kolodny and MacFarlane 2010.

37
b. Skeptic:
(
That’s false!
Nuh uh!
)
We ought to suspend judgment.
Relativists will typically allege that a simple version of contextualism—say, one that
holds that the ordering source is always the epistemic approval proﬁle of the speaker—has
diﬃculty accounting for the intuition that the skeptic disagrees with Moore’s claim (since
presumably the skeptic doesn’t disagree with the claim that Moore epistemically approves
of believing in the external world). By contrast, relativists predict that Moore’s utterance
was false for the skeptic. Hence relativists claim that they have an easier time capturing
the disagreement data.
Whether relativists have a genuine advantage over contextualists when it comes to ac-
counting for disagreement is highly controversial, and will not be settled here.15 My point is
simply that those who are persuaded by the arguments for relativism can easily implement
my semantics in a relativist framework.
One further potential modiﬁcation is worth mentioning. In the metaethics literature, the
most popular version of an attitudinal semantics is neither contextualism nor relativism, but
rather expressivism. Expressivism about some sentence φ holds that utterances of φ do not
serve to “represent” anyone (a speaker, or group of agents, etc.) as having certain conative
attitudes; rather, they directly express these attitudes. Applied to epistemic evaluations
involving deontic modals, the view would be that the epistemic evaluation reading of a
sentence such as (9)/(10a) directly expresses epistemic approval of everyone believing in
the external world.
Stated thus, expressivism is rather vague, and there are various ways of cashing it
out more precisely. One option, advocated by Yalcin (2012a), construes expressivism as a
pragmatic thesis. Applied to epistemic evaluations involving deontic modals, the view is
that the conventional conversational e↵ect of asserting a sentence such as (9)/(10a) is to
try to get one’s interlocutors to epistemically approve of a state of a↵airs in which everyone
believes in the external world. For the sake of perspicuity, I will adopt this conception of
expressivism in what follows.
15For contextualist rejoinders to the argument from disagreement, see de Sa 2008; Cappelen and Hawthorne
2009; Sundell 2011; Pearson 2013; Plunkett and Sundell 2013, among others.

38
Even if expressivism is a pragmatic thesis, it places important constraints on this se-
mantics. One way to semantically implement this thesis is to take semantic contents to be
sets of world, epistemic approval proﬁle pairs.16 Importantly, our epistemic approval states
here will not be indexed to any particular agents; rather, they are speciﬁcations of states
of a↵airs that are epistemically approved of to various degrees—speciﬁcations that could
model the epistemic approval state of multiple agents, provided those agents epistemically
approve of the same states of a↵airs to the same degrees. These epistemic approval proﬁles
can serve as ordering sources, determining what count as the ‘best’ worlds in the modal
base. Letting e stand for any such epistemic approval proﬁle, we can state the semantics as
follows:
Expressivist Semantics for Ought (First Pass):
JOught φKc,f,w,e = 1 i↵8w02Beste,f(w) : JφKc,f,w0,e = 1,
where Beste,f(w) = {v : v2f(w) and 8u2f(w): v⌫e u}
According to this approach, the content of an assertion of e.g., (9)/(10a) will be the set
of w, e pairs such that e assigns highest ranking to those worlds in the modal base where
everyone believes in the external world. And since the goal of an assertion is to get one’s
interlocutors to accept its content, the goal of asserting (10a) is to get one’s interlocutors
to epistemically approve of believing in the external world.
Those attracted to moral expressivism could adopt a natural extension of the present
approach.
The obvious move is to take indices to be sets of ordered triples of worlds,
epistemic approval proﬁles, and moral approval proﬁles. The ordering for a deontic modal
can be provided by either the epistemic approval proﬁle in the index or by the moral approval
proﬁle. When the deontic modal is used to make an epistemic evaluation, the ordering will
be provided by the epistemic approval proﬁle (as before). When the modal is used to make
a moral evaluation, the ordering will be provided by the moral approval proﬁle. (Whether
a particular use of deontic modal is making a moral or epistemic evaluation will be left to
context.) Let m stand for a moral approval proﬁle, the semantics can be stated as follows:
16This strategy is similar to Gibbard’s suggestion that the contents of normative sentences are sets of
world, norm pairs (1990) (or world, hyperplan pairs (2003)).

39
Extended Expressivist Semantics for Ought:
JOught φKc,f,w,e,m = 1 i↵8w02Bestc,e,m,f(w) : JφKc,f,w0,e,m = 1.17
The viability of expressivism is ﬁercely debated in the current literature, and it is not
my goal to settle this issue here. Rather, my aim is simply to advertise the ﬂexibility of
my attitudinal metaepistemology: it can be implemented in a contextualist, relativist, or
expressivist setting. This ﬂexibility strikes me as a mark in its favor.
Other Modals
So far I have sketched an attitudinal semantics for epistemic and moral evaluations involving
deontic ought. But this approach can easily be extended to other modals.
Ought and should are typically classiﬁed as weak necessity modals, in contrast to strong
necessity modals (must, have to, need to).18 As their name suggests, weak necessity modals
are weaker than strong necessity modals: (11) entails (12), but not vice versa.
(11)
(
Must
Has to
)
φ.
(12)
(
Should
Ought to
)
φ.
As evidence for this, consider:
(13)
Tony
( X should
# has to
)
mow the lawn, but he doesn’t have to.
(13) is felicitous when the ﬁrst conjunct contains a weak necessity modal, but contradictory
when this is replaced by a strong necessity modal.
For further evidence, compare:
17This is just one way of developing an expressivist semantics. Another promising strategy is to imple-
ment expressivism using the resources of dynamic semantics. Charlow (2015) and Starr (forthcoming) take
precisely this line. For example, Starr takes deontic modals to perform tests on conversational states, where
a conversational state c is an ordered pair of a set of worlds cs and a desirability ordering ≻over cs. A state
c passes the test imposed by “Ought φ” i↵the most desirable worlds (according to ≻) in cs are φ-worlds.
Starr’s proposal can easily be developed in a way that implements my attitudinal metaepistemology. All
we’d need to do is replace the desirability ordering ≻with an epistemic approval ordering (provided by the
conversational participants’ epistemic approval proﬁle).
18See Sloman 1970; Horn 1972, 1989; Harman 1993; McNamara 1996; von Fintel and Iatridou 2005, 2008;
Copley 2006; Portner 2009; Lassiter 2011; Chrisman 2012c, among others.

40
(14)
?? Tony ought to mow the lawn; in fact, he should mow the lawn.
(15)
X Tony ought to mow the lawn; in fact, he
(
must
has to
)
mow the lawn.
(14) is infelicitous, unlike (15). A natural explanation of the infelicity of (14) is that it’s
infelicitous to reinforce a sentence φ with a sentence that is obviously entailed by φ.19 If
must were equivalent to should, (15) would be similarly infelicitous.20
How should we model the meanings of strong necessity modals? This is controversial,
but here’s a natural picture, inspired by Sloman (1970) and developed recently by von Fintel
and Iatridou (2005, 2008). Suppose that in addition to distinguishing between the very best
worlds and the suboptimal worlds, the ordering source distinguishes between the acceptable
worlds are the unacceptable worlds in the modal base. Intuitively, a world is acceptable as
long as it is good enough from the point of view of the ordering source, where what’s good
enough may—in at least some contexts—fall short of the best. We then say that strong
necessity modals universally quantify over the acceptable worlds in the modal base:
JMust φKc,f,g,w = 1 i↵8w02Acceptableg(w),f(w) : JφKc,f,g,w0 = 1
Clearly, the best worlds will always be a subset of the acceptable worlds, but not vice versa:
there will often be acceptable worlds that still fall short of being optimal. And so this view
correctly predicts that (11) entails (12), but not vice versa.
Suppose we accept this way of modeling the distinction between weak and strong ne-
cessity modals. Then this could easily be implemented using my attitudinal metaepiste-
mological framework. The idea would be that certain agents’ states of epistemic approval
distinguish not only between the best worlds and the suboptimal worlds; they also distin-
guish between the acceptable worlds and the unacceptable worlds. (One way of developing
this idea would be to say that a world is acceptable as long as it’s consistent with the things
19See Sadock 1978; Stanley 2008; Littlejohn 2011.
20There is an interesting question as to whether the distinction between weak and strong necessity modals
is cross-linguistically robust. At least some other languages, such as German, also lexicalize the distinction
between weak and strong necessity modals (e.g., sollen (weak) vs. mussen (strong)). von Fintel and Iatridou
(2008) argue that a number of languages express weak necessity by augmenting a strong necessity modal
with counterfactual morphology (e.g., French Il devrait faire la vaisselle (weak) vs. Il doit faire la vaisselle
(strong)).

41
that the relevant agents approve of to a suﬃciently high degree.) This gives us the resources
to capture epistemic evaluations that are expressed using strong necessity modals, e.g.:
(16)
You must not believe contradictions.
On the simple contextualist version of our semantics, (16) will be true if and only if there are
no acceptable worlds (from the point of view of the contextually selected agent’s epistemic
approval proﬁle) in the modal base in which the addressee believes contradictions.21
This approach can also be extended to handle epistemic evaluations involving expressions
of permission, e.g.:
(17)
Given the evidence, it’s (epistemically) permissible for the jurors to believe that the
defendant is guilty.
It’s commonly thought that expressions of permission are the duals of strong necessity
modals:
Permission–Strong Necessity Duality:
Permitted φ i↵¬(Must ¬φ)
As evidence for Permission–Strong Necessity Duality, note that the following sounds con-
tradictory:
(18)
# You must not believe contradictions. But you may believe contradictions.
If we conjoin Permission-Strong Necessity Duality with our analysis of strong necessity
modals, we get the view that expressions of permission are existential quantiﬁers over the
acceptable worlds in the modal base:
21It’s somewhat diﬃcult to ﬁnd any clear cases where what you epistemically must believe comes apart
from what you epistemically ought to believe. (This is closely related to the question of whether there is
epistemic supererogation—see e.g., Tidman 1996; Hedberg 2014.) But even if there are no such cases, it
seems we should recognize at least a conceptual or semantic di↵erence between strong and weak necessity
modals, and hence between the epistemic evaluations that use the former and those that use the latter.
(Compare: on some versions of utilitarianism, you morally ought to φ in exactly those circumstances where
you morally must φ—namely, the circumstances in which φ-ing maximizes utility. But even if some such
version of utilitarianism is true, there is still a di↵erence in felicity between “You ought to give all of your
disposable income to charity, but you don’t have to” and “You must give all of your disposable income to
charity, but you don’t have to.” We’d like our semantics for modals to explain this di↵erence.)

42
JPermitted φKc,f,g,w = 1 i↵9w02Acceptableg(w),f(w) : JφKc,f,g,w0 = 1
Given our attitudinal interpretation of ordering sources, this delivers the result that (16)
is true i↵there is at least one acceptable world in the modal base (from the point of view
of the contextually selected agent’s epistemic approval proﬁle) in which the jurors believe
that the defendant is guilty.
2.3.2
An Attitudinal Semantics for Justiﬁcation Ascriptions
Thus far I have been focusing on epistemic evaluations involving deontic modals. In this
section, I consider two strategies for extending my attitudinal metaepistemology to justiﬁ-
cation ascriptions such as:
(19)
The jurors are justiﬁed in believing the defendant is guilty.
(20)
Consuela is justiﬁed in believing there’s a red vase in front of her.
The ﬁrst strategy analyzes justiﬁcation ascriptions in terms of deontic modals, thereby
enabling us to leverage our analysis of deontic modals into an analysis of justiﬁcation as-
criptions. The second strategy analyzes justiﬁed as a degree expression, and analyzes jus-
tiﬁcation ascription in terms of a suﬃciently high degree of epistemic approval.
The Deontological Approach
According to what are sometimes called deontological approaches to justiﬁcation, we can
analyze justiﬁed in deontic terms.22 How, exactly, does the analysis go? Proponents of
deontological approaches are not always clear on this point.23 However, three natural op-
tions present themselves, corresponding to the three types of deontic modals that we have
identiﬁed thus far. The options are: (i) the Weak Necessity View, which takes justiﬁca-
tion ascriptions to be equivalent to epistemic evaluations involving weak necessity modals,
22By now there’s a large literature on deontological approaches to justiﬁcation. See e.g. Alston 1988;
Plantinga 1993: chp.1; the papers in Steup 2001; Littlejohn 2012: chp.1.
23Thus far, most of the literature on deontological approaches to justiﬁcation has focused on the question of
whether any form of a deontological approach to justiﬁcation is in principle viable. In particular, most of the
literature focuses on Alston’s (1988) objection, according to which deontological approaches to justiﬁcation
entail an implausible form of doxastic voluntarism. For present purposes, I’ll set Alston’s challenge aside.
For relevant discussion, see Kim 1994; Chuard and Southwood 2009; Nottelman 2013.

43
(ii) the Strong Necessity View, which takes justiﬁcation ascriptions to be equivalent to
epistemic evaluations involving strong necessity modals, (iii) the Permissive View, which
takes justiﬁcation ascriptions to be equivalent to epistemic evaluations involving permissive
expressions. To illustrate, these three views will analyze (20) as (21a)-(21c), respectively:
(21)
a. Consuela (epistemically) ought to believe there’s a red vase in front of her.
b. Consuela (epistemically) must believe there’s a red vase in front of her.
c. Consuela is (epistemically) permitted to believe there’s a red vase in front of
her.
In addition to these options, Beddor (forthcoming) argues that there is a fourth possi-
bility that has been overlooked by the literature—namely, that justiﬁcation ascriptions are
to weak necessity modals as expressions of permissions are to strong necessity modals. To
elaborate this possibility, let us posit a faultlessness operator, deﬁned as the dual of weak
necessity modals:
Faultlessness–Weak Necessity Duality:
Faultless φ i↵¬(Ought ¬φ)
When conjoined with our semantics for deontic ought, Faultlessness-Weak Necessity Duality
leads to the view that expressions of faultlessness are existential quantiﬁers over the best
worlds in the modal base:
JFaultless φKc,f,g,w = 1 i↵9w02Bestg(w),f(w) : JφKc,f,g,w0 = 1
According to what we can call the ‘Faultlessness View’, justiﬁed functions as a fault-
lessness operator. And so on this approach, (20) is equivalent to:
(22)
¬(Consuela (epistemically) ought not believe that there’s a red vase in front of her).
In other words: at least one of the epistemically best worlds in the modal base is a world
where Consuela believes there’s a red vase in front of her.24 For a visual comparison of
these four deontic statuses, see ﬁg. 2.1.
24My notion of faultlessness shouldn’t be conﬂated with more familiar hypological notions, such as blame-
lessness. (Here I borrow the term ‘hypological’ from Zimmerman (2002), who uses it refer to notions relating

44
φ
¬φ
Must φ = true
φ
¬φ
Should φ = true
φ
¬φ
Permitted φ = true
φ
¬φ
Faultless φ = true
acceptable worlds
optimal worlds
accessible worlds
Key
Figure 2.1: Four Deontic Operators.
Which of these four versions of a deontological approach is the most promising? This
is a diﬃcult question, and not one that I will try to fully settle here. However, it is worth
raising a couple of pieces of data that may help decide among our four candidates. (I develop
these arguments in more detail in Beddor forthcoming.) The ﬁrst concerns the entailments
of justiﬁed under negation. The following inference seems valid:
(23)
a. S isn’t justiﬁed in believing p. )
b. S (epistemically) shouldn’t believe p.
For instance, if I tell you that Consuela isn’t justiﬁed in believing there’s a red vase in front
of her, then I seem to have committed myself to the claim that she shouldn’t believe that
there is a red vase in front of her.
This suggests that justiﬁed does not function as a necessity modal (either weak or
strong). After all, the corresponding inference involving a necessity modal is invalid:
to responsibility.) Suppose the speed limit is 45 mph. Suppose that Shelly is driving 50 mph, but that she
has a reasonable false belief that she’s doing 40 (perhaps because her speedometer has unforeseeably mal-
functioned). In this case, she’s doing something that she ought not do (relative to the normative standard
provided by the speed limit), hence her action is not faultless in our sense. But presumably her action
is blameless. More generally, a distinction between faultlessness and blamelessness will arise whenever it’s
possible to have reasonable false beliefs about whether one is doing what one should do.

45
(24)
a. ¬
⇢Ought
Must
$
φ. 6)
b.
⇢Ought
Must
$
¬φ.
For example, it’s not the case that I should eat Cornﬂakes for breakfast; eating Raisin Bran
would be just as good. But it doesn’t follow that I shouldn’t eat Cornﬂakes for breakfast.
This leaves us with either the Permissive View or the Faultlessness View, both of which
validate the inference from (23a) to (23b).25 Is there any data that favors one over the
other? One argument in favor of the Faultlessness View is that instances of the following
schema sound very odd:
(25)
S is justiﬁed in believing p, but S (epistemically) should suspend judgment on p.
To my ears—and those of many that I’ve polled—the following sound infelicitous:
(26)
?? Kwame is justiﬁed in believing it will rain, but Kwame should suspend judgment
on whether it will rain.
(27)
?? Kendra is justiﬁed in believing the restaurant is open, but Kendra should suspend
judgment about whether the restaurant is open.26
The Faultlessness View explains this sense of incoherence. According to the Faultless-
ness View, the ﬁrst conjunct of (25) says that it’s not the case that S shouldn’t believe p,
which contradicts the second conjunct. By contrast, the Permissive View has a harder time
explaining this data. As we’ve seen, weak necessity modals don’t entail strong necessity
25According to the Permissive View, (23a) is analyzed as: ‘¬(S is permitted to believe p)’, which simpliﬁes
to: ‘S must not believe p’, which in turn entails (23b). According to the Faultlessness View, (23a) is analyzed
as: ‘¬(¬(S should not believe p))’, which simpliﬁes to (23b). (Note that while both the Permissive View and
the Faultlessness View validate this entailment, the Faultlessness View is the logically strongest semantics
for justiﬁed that does so. After all, on the Faultlessness View, (23a) isequivalent to (23b). Since negation
reverses logical strength, any stronger semantics for justiﬁed would entail that (23a) is weaker than (23b).)
26A caveat: these sentences are only infelicitous if the modal in the second conjunct (should) is interpreted
as making an epistemic (rather than, say, a bouletic or prudential) evaluation. For example, if Kwame will
gain a million dollars if he suspends judgment on whether it will rain, we can access a coherent reading
of (26) on which the second conjunct says that, given his interest in gaining a million dollars, he should
suspend judgment. For my purposes, the important data point is that these sentences are infelicitous when
the modal is interpreted as making a distinctly epistemic evaluation. For further discussion of this issue, see
Beddor forthcoming.

46
modals, and permission is the dual of strong necessity modals. So ‘Permitted φ’ is com-
patible with ‘Ought ¬φ’—both will be true in a situation where φ obtains in at least one
acceptable world, but no optimal world. For a concrete example, consider the following case
due to Elizabeth Harman:
Feedback Quandary: Amanda is a philosophy professor who has a two-year-old
daughter. It is 11pm. Amanda receives an email from her undergraduate student
Joe, with a third draft of a paper that’s due tomorrow at noon. She has already
commented on the ﬁrst two drafts. Joe is struggling in the class, but she can tell
he is on the verge of some kind of breakthrough. If Joe fails the class, he will lose
his scholarship and have to drop out of school. It would take half an hour to read
the draft and write the comments, and Amanda is tired. Her daughter will wake up
early. Amanda realizes that she is not morally obligated to spend the thirty minutes
to give Joe comments, but nevertheless she deliberates about whether to do it. Upon
reﬂection, Amanda thinks, ‘I should do it!’ (Harman 2016)
Harman o↵ers the following verdict about this case:
(28)
Amanda should give Joe comments, but it would be permissible not to.27
This judgment strikes me as plausible. At the very least, it is perfectly coherent. And so
proponents of the Permissive View are faced with a puzzle as to why instances of (25) sound
worse than (28)—a puzzle that proponents of the Faultlessness View avoid.
For these reasons, I am inclined to think that the Faultlessness View is the most promis-
ing version of a deontological approach. But regardless of which version of a deontological
approach we settle upon, it should be clear that a deontological approach can be combined
with an attitudinal metaepistemology to deliver a reductive semantics for justiﬁcation as-
criptions. According to each version of a deontological approach, justiﬁed quantiﬁes over
a set of accessible worlds ranked by an ordering source. And according to the attitudinal
metaepistemology developed in §2.3.1, the ordering source is provided by certain agents’
states of epistemic approval.
27Harman (2016) calls cases along these lines, ‘morally permissible mistakes.’

47
How exactly does a deontological approach (conjoined with an attitudinal metaepiste-
mology) handle cases of defeat? According to the approach developed here, the semantics
speciﬁes truth conditions for justiﬁcation ascriptions in terms of agents’ states of epistemic
approval. But it does not tell us what the agents in question epistemically approve of. This
is a question to be settled by the psychology, not the semantics. It is thus in an impor-
tant sense a ‘black box’, one that we can help ourselves to when applying the semantic
framework.
To illustrate, let us walk through Consuela and the Vase again. Consider the initial time
t1 when Consuela ﬁrst sees a red vase in front of her (prior to receiving her interlocutor’s
testimony). Now suppose that the agent supplied by the context of utterance is just you,
dear reader. Now ask yourself: Do you epistemically approve of Consuela’s belief that the
vase in front of her is red? If you’re anything like me, the answer is ‘Yes’. And so, according
the deontological approach, (20) (‘Consuela is justiﬁed in believing that there’s a red vase
in front of her’) will be true at t1.28
Now consider the later time t2, after Consuela has received her interlocutor’s testimony.
Do you still epistemically approve of Consuela’s belief that the vase in front of her is red?
Presumably, the answer is ‘No’. And so the deontological approach predicts that (20) is
false at t2.
While I have focused on epistemic justiﬁcation ascriptions, the deontological approach
can be easily extended to handle moral justiﬁcation ascriptions, as in:
(29)
Sasha was justiﬁed in injuring her assailant.29
For example, proponents of the Faultlessness View will analyze (29) as saying that it’s
not the case that Sasha (morally) shouldn’t have injured her assailant. And for proponents
of an attitudinal metaethics, this deontic claim can in turn be analyzed in terms of existential
28Of course, the di↵erent versions of the deontological approach will yield di↵erent predictions depending
on exactly which worlds are consistent with your epistemic approval proﬁle. As long as every world that is
acceptable, from the point of view of your epistemic approval proﬁle, is a world where Consuela holds the
belief in question, then all versions of the deontological approach will predict that (50) is true at t1. By
contrast, if Consuela only holds this belief in some of the epistemically acceptable worlds but none of the
epistemically optimal worlds (again, from the point of view of your epistemic approval proﬁle), then only
the Permissive View predicts that (20) is true at t1.
29Corpus searches suggest that moral uses of justiﬁed are far more common in ordinary English than
epistemic uses.

48
quantiﬁcation over the worlds in the modal base that are ranked highest by certain agents’
moral approval proﬁles.
A Scalar Semantics for Justiﬁed
A di↵erent strategy for analyzing justiﬁed starts from the observation that justiﬁed is a
gradable adjective. The two general diagnostics for whether an adjective A is gradable is
whether it admits of degree modiﬁers (very, fairly, etc.) and whether it admits of compar-
atives. The term justiﬁed passes both of these diagnostics with ﬂying colors:
(30)
The jurors are very justiﬁed in believing the defendant is guilty.
(31)
Given the evidence, we’re justiﬁed in believing that all of the search committee
members are corrupt. But we’re even more justiﬁed in believing that at least one
of them is corrupt.
More speciﬁcally, justiﬁed seems to function as a relative gradable adjective—an adjective
that is associated with some contextually determined threshold.30 The main test for whether
A is a relative gradable adjective is whether we can coherently say things like, ‘x is A, but
it could be more (/less) A.’ For example, tall is a relative gradable adjective, as evidenced
by the felicity of the following:
(32)
Sarah is tall, but she could be even taller (if, for example, she grew a couple of
inches).
(33)
Sarah is tall, but she could get shorter (if, for example, she shrunk a couple of
inches).
The term justiﬁed seems to work similarly:
(34)
Poirot is justiﬁed in believing the butler did it, but he could be even more justiﬁed
in this belief (if, for example, he gathered more evidence that the butler is guilty).
(35)
Poirot is justiﬁed in believing the butler did it, but he could be less justiﬁed in this
belief (if, for example, he acquired a defeater).
30Relative adjectives are typically contrasted with absolute gradable adjectives, which will be discussed in
Chp.3.

49
In the semantics literature, the most popular analysis of gradable adjectives is a scalar
semantics.31 On this approach, every gradable adjective A is associated with a scale ⇥A,
where a scale is a set of degrees ordered along some dimension. In the case of tall, the
scale might be height; in the case of expensive, the scale will be cost, etc. According to the
standard approach, an ascription of a relative gradable adjective of the form, ‘x is A’ will
be true if and only if x’s degree on the A-associated scale ⇥A exceeds some contextually
determined threshold.
To illustrate, consider again tall. Let ⇥tall be the scale associated with tall (presumably,
a scale consisting of various heights). Let tall be a measure function that, for any object
x, yields x’s value on ⇥tall (that is, x’s height). Then we can o↵er the following semantics
for tallness ascriptions:
Jx is tallKc,w = 1 i↵tall(x) > d
(where d is some c-determined threshold)
One way of developing a scalar semantics for justiﬁed in the context of an attitudinal
metaepistemology is to let the underlying scale be degrees of epistemic approval. Here’s a
simple contextualist implementation of this analysis. Let Ew
A be a measure function that,
for any proposition p, delivers the degree to which A epistemically approves of p at w. Then
we can o↵er the following semantics for justiﬁcation ascriptions:
JS is (epistemically) justiﬁed in φ-ingKc,w = 1 i↵Ewc
A ({w0: JS φ’sKc,w0 = 1}) > d
(where A is some c-determined subject, and d is some c-determined threshold).
Now consider the special case of this where the value of ‘φ-ing’ is ‘believing p.’ We get
the following analysis:
JS is justiﬁed in believing pKc,w = 1 i↵Ewc
A ({w0: S believes p at w0}) > d.
According to this semantics, a sentence such as (20) (‘Consuela is justiﬁed in believing
there’s a red vase in front of her’) will be true in a context c i↵the degree to which some
31See Cresswell 1977; Kennedy and McNally 2005; Kennedy 2007; Lassiter 2011, among many others.

50
contextually determined subject epistemically approves of Consuela believing there’s a red
vase in front of her exceeds the contextually determined threshold. (As in the case of modals,
we could also tweak this proposal in various ways—for example, by putting a relativist or
an expressivist spin on it.)32
How does this approach handle cases of defeat?
In much the same manner as the
deontological approach. Suppose again that the contextually determined agent is just you,
the reader. Presumably, at t1 you epistemically approve of Consuela believing that there’s
a red vase in front of her, and you do so to a suﬃciently high degree. Presumably, at t2
you do not. Given this, the scalar approach agrees with the deontological approach: (20)
is true at t1 and false at t2.
2.3.3
Beyond Modals and Justiﬁcation Ascriptions
So far I’ve shown how one can develop an attitudinal semantics for epistemic evaluations in-
volving deontic modals (§2.3.1) and justiﬁcation ascriptions (§2.3.2). The present approach
can also be extended to other epistemic appraisals.
Take, for example, knowledge ascriptions. Suppose we adopted the toy view that knowl-
edge is justiﬁed safe belief. Then, we would wind up with the view that an ascription of the
form, ‘S know p’ is true in a context c i↵(i) S couldn’t easily have falsely believed p, (ii)
‘S’s belief that p is justiﬁed’ is also true in c. Then we could use our reductive semantics
for justiﬁcation ascriptions to give a reductive treatment of knowledge ascriptions.
Of course, a simple analysis of knowledge as justiﬁed safe belief may well be mistaken.
Indeed, it may turn out that knowledge is unanalyzable (Williamson 2000a).33
Still, it
seems plausible that knowledge entails justiﬁcation, i.e.:
(36)
a. S know p. )
b. S is (epistemically) justiﬁed in believing p.
And if this is right, then at the very least we can use our reductive semantics for justiﬁcation
ascriptions to give a reductive account of one important facet of knowledge.
32In Chp.3 I develop the view that degrees of justiﬁcation are best understood in terms of degrees of
epistemic certainty. This proposal could be rendered extensionally equivalent to the current approach if we
analyze degrees of epistemic certainty in terms of degrees of epistemic approval.
33I discuss this issue in more detail in chp.3, where I suggest an account of knowledge as near certainty.

51
Similar remarks apply to ascriptions of evidence possession (that is, sentences of the
form: ‘S has p as evidence’). If we understand evidence as justiﬁed belief, or as justiﬁed
safe belief, etc., then we can leverage our reductive semantics for justiﬁcation ascriptions
into a reductive semantics for evidence possession ascriptions. And even if such a simple
analysis turns out be mistaken, then as long as we accept the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link
(Chp. 1), we can use our reductive semantics for justiﬁcation ascriptions to get a partial
purchase on evidence possession ascriptions.
2.4
Advantages of an Attitudinal Metaepistemology
From the present perspective, the main advantage of an attitudinal metepistemology is
its reductive payo↵: we can give semantic analyses of a variety of epistemic linguistic
expressions in terms of conative attitudes, which themselves can be understood without
reliance on any unreduced epistemic notions. Moreover, as we’ve seen, the basic strategy
here nicely parallels the strategy behind an attitudinal metaethics: we reduce the normative
to the non-normative by way of the psychological.
But there are additional beneﬁts to be had. In particular, an attitudinal metaepistemol-
ogy, when conjoined with an attitudinal metaethics, illuminates many of the close parallels
between epistemic and moral discourse. It’s to these parallels that I now turn.
2.4.1
Value-Ladenness
Both moral and epistemic evaluations appear to be value-laden.34 If I say that the U.S.
(morally) ought to allocate more money to foreign aid, it seems my claim commits me to
valuing a state of a↵airs in which the U.S. allocates more money to foreign aid. Similarly,
if I claim that we (epistemically) ought to believe in the external world, it seems my claim
commits me to valuing a state of a↵airs in which we believe in the external world. In this
regard, moral and epistemic evaluation seem to di↵er from purely descriptive claims (‘Grass
is green’ and the like) which don’t seem to commit speakers to valuing any particular state
34Arguably, this is equivalent to saying that moral and epistemic evaluations are both normative. However,
due to the controversy over how to deﬁne normativity, I’ll use the less theoretically fraught locution ‘value-
laden’ instead.

52
of a↵airs.
Proponents of an attitudinal semantics have a straightforward explanation of the value-
ladenness of epistemic and moral evaluations. The explanation goes like this: moral and
epistemic approval are both evaluative attitudes; to morally approve of something is to value
it in a certain way, to epistemically approve of something is to value it in a di↵erent way.
Moral and epistemic evaluations count as value-laden in virtue of the evaluative nature of
the moral and epistemic attitudes that are intimately involved in their truth-conditions.
One attractive feature of this explanation of the value-ladenness of moral and epistemic
evaluations is that it extends to other value-laden evaluations.
Consider, for example,
prudential evaluations such as:
(37)
Given her interests, she ought to take Chemistry.
The natural way of analyzing prudential evaluations in the current framework is to posit
a further conative attitude: approval of some state of a↵airs insofar as that state of a↵airs is
conducive to a particular agent’s interests. Arguably, we’ve already looked at some examples
of this attitude: Shelly approves mediocre Mel’s belief that he’s a talented musician insofar
as this belief is conducive to Mel’s interests, and the avaricious business mogul approves
of hoarding his wealth insofar as this is conducive to his own interests. We can then use
this attitude to provide the ordering source for prudential uses of ought. On the picture
that emerges, all value-laden discourse is analyzed in terms of certain conative attitudes.
Di↵erent ﬂavors of value-ladenness (moral value vs. epistemic value vs. prudential value)
are explained in terms of di↵erences between these conative attitudes.
2.4.2
Connection with Motivation
Many metaethicists have been attracted to the view that moral judgments are intimately
bound up with motivation.35 To see the appeal of this thesis, imagine encountering someone
who insists that everyone is morally obligated to give to charity. We’d naturally expect her
35Moral judgment internalists hold that there is a necessary connection between moral judgment and
motivation: see Dreier 1990; Smith 1994; Korsgaard 1996, Blackburn 1998; Gibbard 2003; Wedgwood 2007;
van Roojen 2010; Egan 2012, among many others. Even moral judgment externalists typically grant that
there is a close connection between moral judgment and motivation; they just deny that this is a necessary
connection.

53
to be at least somewhat disposed to give to charity.
Of course, we should be careful not to exaggerate the connection between moral judg-
ment and motivation; as our avaricious business mogul shows, akrasia is a familiar phe-
nomenon.36 In order to avoid counterexample, our statement of the connection between
moral judgment and motivation had better be suitably qualiﬁed.
The literature o↵ers a variety of proposals for how to formulate a suitably qualiﬁed
connection between moral judgment and motivation. For my purposes, I will operate with
the following fairly weak statement of the connection:
Moral Judgment-Motivation Connection: Typically, if a psychologically normal
agent believes that she’s morally obligated to φ, then she’ll be at least somewhat disposed
to φ.37,38
(The details of this formulation won’t matter for my purposes; if you prefer a somewhat
di↵erent formulation of the connection between moral belief and motivation, most of what
I say in the following should still go through.)
Just as there is pressure to accept some connection between moral judgment and mo-
tivation, there’s pressure to accept an analogous connection in the epistemic domain. In
the epistemic domain, the connection seems not to be between epistemic judgments and
actions, but rather between epistemic judgments and doxastic attitudes. We already ob-
served (§2.2) that it would be rather surprising to aﬃrm that one is epistemically obligated
to adopt some doxastic attitude D towards p, while exhibiting no inclination whatsoever to
adopt D towards p. Here is one way of formulating such a connection between epistemic
judgment and motivation:
Epistemic Judgment-Motivation Connection: Typically, if a psychologically nor-
mal agent sincerely judges that she’s epistemically obligated to adopt doxastic attitude
36For discussion of the diﬃculties that akratic subjects pose for strong versions of internalism, see Stocker
1979; Smith 1994; Mele 1996; Svavarsd´ottir 1999.
37For formulations of internalism in terms of what’s ‘psychologically normal,’ see Dreier 1990; Blackburn
1998, among others.
38Note that since this statement of the connection is formulated in terms of what typically holds (rather
than what necessarily holds), it’s a thesis that even motivational externalists can get on board with.

54
D towards p, then she’ll be at least somewhat disposed to adopt D towards p.39
In short, it’s plausible that there’s at least some connection between one’s moral judgments
and one’s motivation to act—a connection of the sort articulated by Moral Judgment-
Motivation Connection. However, it’s equally plausible that there’s a similar connection
between epistemic evaluations and one’s motivation to believe—a connection of the sort
described by Epistemic Judgment-Motivation Connection.
Many philosophers hope to provide a metaethical explanation of the connection between
moral judgment and motivation.40 It seems just as natural to hope for a metaepistemolog-
ical explanation of the connection between epistemic judgment and motivation. Perhaps
if an attitudinal metaethics can underwrite the Moral Judgment-Motivation Connection,
an attitudinal metaepistemology can underwrite the Epistemic Judgment-Motivation Con-
nection. The basic idea would be this: just as we can appeal to the motivational eﬃcacy
of moral approval to explain the motivational pull of moral judgments, we can appeal to
the motivational eﬃcacy of epistemic approval to explain the motivational pull of epistemic
judgments.
This strikes me as a promising explanatory strategy. But how exactly should we spell
out the details? Expressivism o↵ers what is perhaps the most well-known way of using
an attitudinal metaethics to explain the Moral Judgment-Motivation connection. Expres-
sivists typically embrace the idea that moral beliefs are ﬁrst-order states: to believe that p
(morally) ought to be the case is not to believe that certain agents morally approve of p,
or would morally approve of p in such-and-such conditions. Rather, it’s just to stand in a
desire-like relation (e.g., moral approval) towards p itself. Thus a sentence such as:
(38)
Jane believes that everyone (morally) ought to give to charity.
does not say that Jane believes some proposition of the form: hI morally approve of everyone
giving to charityi. Rather, it ascribes to Jane a ﬁrst-order state of mind: it says that Jane
morally approves of everyone giving to charity.
39Some might be wary of any talk of ‘motivation’ to believe, since motivation seems intimately bound up
with volition, and it’s highly controversial whether we have volitional control over our beliefs. To allay this
worry, I should stress that nothing hinges on my use of ‘motivation’ talk; one should feel free to regard this
talk as a convenient metaphor for dispositions to belief.
40See Stevenson 1963; Blackburn 1984; Smith 1994; Dreier 1990; Egan 2012, among others.

55
Extended to epistemic expressivism, the idea would be that epistemic judgments are
also ﬁrst-order states: all it is to have an epistemic belief is to be in a desire-like state (e.g.,
epistemic approval). For example, according to epistemic expressivism:
(39)
Jane believes that everyone (epistemically) ought to believe in the external world.
does not say that Jane believes that she epistemically approves of everyone believing in the
external world. Rather, it just says that Jane epistemically approves of everyone believing
in the external world.
Here’s one way of semantically implementing this idea within the present framework.
Start with the familiar idea that believes quantiﬁes over a subject’s doxastic alternatives,
where a subject S’s doxastic alternatives at a world w (Doxw
S ) are the worlds compatible
with what S believes at w (Hintikka 1962). However, we add a tweak: the verb believes also
shifts the ordering source, which—on the current framework—is provided directly by moral
and epistemic approval states in the index. In particular, it shifts these parameters so that
the ordering is provided directly by the believer’s states of moral and epistemic approval,
i.e.:
Expressivist Semantics for Believes:
JS believes φKc,f,w,e,m = 1 i↵8w02 Doxw
S : JφKc,f,w0,ew
S ,mw
S = 1.
By combining this with the Extended Expressivist Semantics for Ought, we get the
desired predictions. (38) ascribes to Jane a ﬁrst-order state of mind: roughly, the state of
morally approving of everyone giving to charity.41 And (39) also ascribes to Jane a ﬁrst-
order state of mind: roughly, the state of epistemically approving of everyone believing in
the external world.
Equipped with this semantics for belief reports, we can give a uniﬁed expressivist ex-
planation of the motivational eﬃcacy of moral and epistemic judgments. To see this, let’s
start with epistemic judgments. As we’ve already seen, it’s arguably part of the functional
role of epistemic approval that, ceteris paribus, a psychologically normal agent who believes
41More precisely, the Expressivist Semantics for Believes says that to compute the truth conditions for
(38), we take each of Jane’s doxastic alternatives w0 and plug it into the modal base function, getting a
set of worlds (f(w0)). If for every such set of worlds, the worlds that are ranked highest by Jane’s moral
approval proﬁle are worlds where everyone gives to charity, then (38) is true.

56
that she ought to have doxastic attitude D towards p will be disposed to adopt D towards
p. And so if it is indeed true that Jane epistemically approves of everyone believing in the
external world, then, ceteris paribus, Jane will—if psychologically normal—be disposed to
believe in the external world.
The same basic story can be told in the moral domain.
Plausibly, it’s part of the
functional role of moral approval that psychologically normal agents who morally approve
of φ-ing in circumstances σ will be disposed to try to φ if they take themselves to be in
σ. And so if it is indeed true that Jane morally approves of giving to charity, then, ceteris
paribus, Jane will—if psychologically normal—be disposed to give to charity.
Thus, by combining an expressivist metaepistemology with an expressivist metaethics,
we can give the uniﬁed explanation that we sought. Can we run a similar explanation in the
contextualist or relativist framework? Typically, contextualists and relativists have denied
that normative beliefs are ﬁrst-order states of mind. For example, Egan (2012), building
on Lewis (1989), takes value judgments to be de se attitudes: speciﬁcally, self-ascriptions
of properties such as: being disposed to undergo certain responses in certain circumstances
(e.g., if idealized in certain ways).
Here’s a simple semantic implementation of this idea. Suppose we follow Lewis (1979a)
and take doxastic alternatives to be centered worlds (where, as before, a centered world is
an ordered pair of a world and some agent). As before, we say that believes universally
quantiﬁes over the believer’s doxastic alternatives. However, we add that believes shifts the
assessor parameter, so that the complement clause is evaluated relative to the center of each
of these alternatives:
Relativist Semantics for Believes (First Pass):
JS believes φKc,f,g,w,a = 1 i↵8hw0, ii2 Doxw
S : JφKc,f,g,w0,i = 1,
where Doxw
S = {hw0, ii: it’s compatible with what S believes at w that S is i at w0}.42
By combining this semantics for believes with the Relativist Semantics for Ought, we get
what Egan takes to be the right result: (38) (‘Jane believes that everyone (epistemically)
42Here I draw on Stephenson (2007a,c), who o↵ers a similar treatment of attitude reports embedding taste
predicates and epistemic modals.

57
ought to believe in the external world’) says that Jane self-ascribes the property of being
someone who epistemically approves of everyone believing in the external world (or the prop-
erty of being someone who, if idealized in ways x, y, and z, would epistemically approve of
everyone believing in the external world, etc.). Similarly, (39) (‘Jane believes that everyone
(morally) ought to give to charity’) says that Jane self-ascribes a certain property, e.g., the
property of being someone who morally approves of everyone giving to charity.
Does this semantics for believes underwrite the connection between the normative judg-
ment and motivation? This is less clear. Unlike the expressivist semantics for believes, our
ﬁrst pass relativist approach does not treat normative belief as a ﬁrst order state: to hold a
normative belief is not to be in a desire-like state, but rather to have a de se belief that one
is in such a state. Thus our ﬁrst pass relativist approach allows for a distinction between
the good case, in which one is in the desire-like state in question, and the bad case, in which
one isn’t. Underwriting the connection with motivation in the good case is easy: if Jane
does indeed instantiate the property of being someone who epistemically approves of every-
one believing in the external world, then we can once again appeal to the functional role of
epistemic approval to explain why we’d expect Jane to be at least somewhat disposed to
believe in the external world. By contrast, underwriting the connection with motivation in
the bad case is more diﬃcult: if Jane isn’t someone who epistemically approves of everyone
believing in the external world, then we can’t appeal to the functional role of epistemic
approval to explain why her normative belief seems to carry motivational pull.
How worrisome should we ﬁnd this lacuna?
This isn’t entirely clear to me.
There
are various ways that proponents of an Egan-style view might try to handle the bad case.
First, they might point out that we typically presume that people have fairly reliable (albeit
fallible) introspective access to their own conative attitudes. And so perhaps we have a
presumption that the good case is the default: if Jane self-ascribes the property of being
in a certain state of epistemic or moral approval, we’ll typically presume that she is in
the state in question. Alternatively, they might appeal to the idea that most people have
higher-order desires to act in accordance with their states of moral or epistemic approval.
(Most people want to be enkratic.) And so perhaps if Jane mistakenly self-ascribes the
property of morally approving of giving to charity, we would expect this self-ascription to

58
combine with her desire to act in accordance with her states of moral approval in order to
generate some disposition to give to charity.
Adjudicating whether these strategies suﬃce to underwrite the connection with motiva-
tion is a diﬃcult matter. Much here depends on exactly how strong a connection between
normative judgment and motivation one endorses: the stronger the connection, the more
diﬃcult it will be for our ﬁrst pass relativist semantics for believes to underwrite it. For
those who are pessimistic about the relativist’s prospects here, it is worth noting that rel-
ativists are not wedded to an Egan-style view on which normative beliefs are second-order
states. Instead, they could tweak their semantics for believes so as to deliver the result that
normative beliefs are ﬁrst-order states.
Here’s a simple way to do this. As in the expressivist framework, let an agent’s doxastic
alternatives just be worlds (rather than centered worlds). We then propose that believes
simply shifts the value of the assessor parameter to the believer, i.e.:
Relativist Semantics for Believes (Second Pass):
JS believes φKc,f,g,w,a = 1 i↵8w0 2 Doxw
S : JφKc,f,g,w0,S = 1.
This approach delivers the same predictions as the expressivist approach when it comes
to normative belief reports. In particular, it predicts that (38) and (39) ascribe to Jane
ﬁrst-order states of moral and epistemic approval.
There is an interesting moral to be extracted from this. In the metaethics literature,
most have assumed a tight connection between expressivism (construed as either a semantic
or a pragmatic thesis) and the thesis that moral beliefs are ﬁrst-order states. However, the
latter thesis is in principle compatible with semantic and pragmatic theses that, at least
historically, have been considered rivals to expressivism: namely, relativism and contextu-
alism.43
43Here’s one way of getting the result that normative beliefs are ﬁrst-order states within a contextualist
framework. Let gw
S be a constant function that takes worlds as inputs and yields S’s epistemic or moral
approval proﬁle at w. (Which it delivers will depend on the ﬂavor of deontic modality in question, which
will be determined by the context.) The contextualist can now propose the following semantics for believes:
JS believes φKc,f,g,w = 1 i↵8w0 2 Doxw
S : JφKc,f,gw
S ,w0 = 1.
This also delivers the same result as our Expressivist Semantics for Believes and our second pass relativist
semantics: moral and epistemic beliefs are just ﬁrst-order states.

59
Let’s take stock. It’s plausible that there is some close connection between moral belief
and motivation to act, and that there’s a similarly close connection between epistemic
judgment and motivation to believe/disbelieve. (Though exactly how close of a connection
is open to dispute.) By adopting an attitudinal metaethics and metaepistemology, we can
give a uniﬁed explanation of these two connections: both are explained in terms of the
motivational pull of the underlying psychological states. Exactly how the explanation goes
will depend on one’s semantics for belief reports (and, more generally, whether one takes
ethical and epistemic beliefs to be ﬁrst-order or second-order states). While I have not tried
to settle the question of what is the right attitudinal semantics for belief reports, I hope
to have shown that there are some promising options on the table, options that—when
combined with our expressivist, relativist, or contextualist semantics (§2.3)—ensure that
the desired connections between normative belief and motivation hold.
2.5
Comparison with a First-Order Reduction
I’ve been arguing that an attitudinal metaepistemology can deliver what we failed to ﬁnd
in the ﬁrst chapter: an account of how the epistemic reduces to the non-epistemic. But
some may question whether it really delivers that much.
Here’s one way of developing the worry.
Suppose that someone utters an epistemic
evaluation such as (30):
(30)
The jurors are justiﬁed in believing the defendant is guilty.
Suppose moreover that this epistemic evaluation is true (relative to whatever the relevant
parameters are). Now a question arises:
Grounding Question: What makes this epistemic evaluation true?
Presumably, it’s wrong to say that this evaluation is true in virtue of certain agents’ states
of epistemic approval. Or at least, even if it’s true partially in virtue of such states, that’s
not the full story: presumably there’s some further explanation to be given.
In trying to give this further explanation, the natural thing to do is ﬁnd some further
facts f1...fn about the jurors’ situation in virtue of which the relevant agents epistemically

60
approve of the jurors believing that the defendant is guilty. Now, our objector may observe,
the attitudinal framework I’ve developed gives us no guidance as to what these further facts
are. Indeed, for all I’ve said, f1...fn could correspond to any of the ﬁrst-order reductions
discussed in the previous chapter: they could be facts about the reliability of the jurors’
belief-forming processes, or facts about jurors’ non-factive mental states, etc. A fully sat-
isfactory reductive account would give us some general formula for identifying such facts.
Only once we have such a formula will we have made good claim to vindicating Reducibility.
It is certainly true that I haven’t given any recipe for identifying which facts ground
various agents’ states of epistemic approval or disapproval. But perhaps it is too much to
ask for such a recipe. Plausibly, agents di↵er in terms of what facts elicit their states of
epistemic approval/disapproval (as evidenced by conﬂicts in people’s epistemic intuitions).
And even if we hone in on a single agent (for example, you, the reader), it may well prove
diﬃcult or impossible to specify, in non-epistemic terms, which facts about a situation elicit
their states of epistemic approval/disapproval. Indeed, this may be precisely the lesson we
should draw from our failure—in the ﬁrst chapter—to come up with a counterexample-free
ﬁrst-order reductive epistemology: if we’re unable to specify in non-epistemic terms the
conditions under which a subject S is justiﬁed in believing p, we’ll likewise be unable to
specify in non-epistemic terms the conditions under which we epistemically approve of S
believing p.
This suggests the following possibility: whenever we do epistemically approve or disap-
prove of some particular subject adopting some doxastic attitude towards some proposition,
our epistemic approval or disapproval is responsive to certain non-epistemic facts about that
subject’s situation. Still, it may be that any general speciﬁcation of the non-epistemic facts
that are necessary and suﬃcient to elicit our epistemic approval of a subject’s belief will
be highly disjunctive, and hence that all ﬁrst-order reductions are bound to fail. To put it
in terms drawn from the moral particularism literature, it might be that grounds for our
states of epistemic approval are “uncodiﬁable.” While this possibility would be somewhat
disappointing, the attitudinal framework developed here o↵ers some consolation.
If the
attitudinal framework developed here is right, we can still give a high-level, non-disjunctive
account of the relation between the epistemic and the non-epistemic. It’s just that the

61
account in question doesn’t take the form of a speciﬁcation of the grounds for epistemic
facts; rather, it takes the form of a semantic theory mapping epistemic sentences to their
meanings, where these meanings are characterized in non-epistemic terms.44
This possibility stands in stark contrast to Goldman’s opening remarks on epistemic
reduction in his classic paper, “What is Justiﬁed Belief?”. There he writes:
The term ‘justiﬁed’, I presume, is an evaluative term, a term of appraisal. Any
correct deﬁnition or synonym of it would also feature evaluative terms. I assume
that such deﬁnitions or synonyms might be given, but I am not interested in
them. I want a set of substantive conditions that specify when a belief is justiﬁed.
Compare the moral term, ‘right’. This might be deﬁned in other ethical terms
or phrases, a task appropriate to metaethics. The task of normative ethics, by
contrast, is to state substantive conditions that determine whether an action is
right. (Goldman 1979: 90)
In this passage, Goldman suggests that any correct semantic analysis of epistemic ex-
pressions such as justiﬁed would have to invoke some normative notions, and hence fail to
be reductive. However, Goldman is considerably more optimistic about the prospects for
a ﬁrst-order reduction. According to the possibility that I am suggesting, the situation is
precisely the opposite: we can give a semantic reduction (of the attitudinal variety); but
the prospects for a ﬁrst-order reduction are bleak.
Now, it may turn out that my pessimism about ﬁrst-order reductions is premature.
Perhaps with time we’ll be able to develop a suﬃciently reﬁned version of ARP that avoids
44Some may question the extent to which this is a genuine consolation. After all, a semantic reduction
seems to be a very di↵erent sort of reduction than that o↵ered by a ﬁrst-order account. In what sense, then,
does it answer the same questions that prompted the search for the latter?
Admittedly, it is rather diﬃcult to say precisely how a semantic reduction relates to a ﬁrst-order reduction.
But here is a stab at spelling out the connection.
One motivation for some sort of reductive analysis
is the desire to understand how the epistemic relates to the non-epistemic. One face of the epistemic is
linguistic (and, more generally, conceptual): it consists in the terms and concepts we use in making epistemic
appraisals. And so one way of relating the epistemic to the non-epistemic is to show how epistemic terms
and concepts can themselves be understood in non-epistemic terms. (Here too, it is worth stressing the
comparison with attitudinal accounts in metaethics. For example, Blackburn (1998) and Gibbard (2008)
both take themselves to be explaining the relation between the normative and the natural, the place of
oughts in the world of iss.) Another face of the epistemic is metaphysical: it consists in the properties
and states denoted by our epistemic terms and concepts. And so another way of relating the epistemic to
the non-epistemic is to show how epistemic properties and states metaphysically reduce to non-epistemic
properties and states. What unites the two reductive projects, according to this proposal, is that both are
prompted by a desire to understand the relation between the epistemic and the non-epistemic.

62
the counterexamples in chp.1, or a reductive account of evidence possession that validates
the Evidence-Justiﬁcation Link. If so, then such an account could be combined with the
attitudinal framework in a way that answers the Grounding Question: the right ﬁrst-order
account (whatever that is) could be used to provide a general formula for specifying which
non-epistemic facts ground the relevant agents’ states of epistemic approval/disapproval.
But if some such ﬁrst-order reduction were forthcoming, wouldn’t this undermine the
motivation for an attitudinal metaepistemology? The answer is: “Only to some extent.” We
would no longer need to give a reductive metaepistemology as a consolation prize for failing
to have arrived at a ﬁrst-order reductive account. However, a reductive metaepistemology
seems worthwhile in its own right: if, on top of being able to specify the grounds of epistemic
facts in non-epistemic terms, we can also specify the meanings of epistemic expressions in
non-epistemic terms, so much the better. What’s more, I have argued that the attitudinal
framework holds attractions above and beyond its reductive bona ﬁdes (§2.4). In particular,
it sheds light on some of the commonalities between epistemic and moral language, providing
a uniﬁed explanation of both (i) the value-ladenness of epistemic and moral expressions,
and (ii) their shared connection with motivation. This is an advantage that should make the
attitudinal framework appealing even to those who are conﬁdent in the prospects of a ﬁrst-
order reductive account, and even for those who are uninterested in reduction altogether.

63
Chapter 3
The Centrality of Certainty
3.1
Introduction
For much of its history, epistemology focused on certainty. In the medieval and early modern
periods, epistemological discussions centered on scientia, conceived as the highest grade of
knowledge. Most authors in this tradition explicitly associated scientia with certainty. For
example, we ﬁnd Aquinas, Scotus, and Descartes all characterizing scientia in terms of
‘certain [certa] cognition.’1
For these authors, scientia—and more speciﬁcally, certainty—is the optimal epistemic
status: it is ‘perfect cognition.’ And while certainty was conceived as the epistemic ideal, it
was deemed an attainable ideal. This epistemic optimism is perhaps clearest in Descartes,
who urged that by properly directing our reason, we can elevate much of our everyday
knowledge to the status of scientia.
But as time went on, this optimism waned. According to an emerging consensus, most of
our knowledge only approaches the optimal epistemic status; precious little actually reaches
this ideal. Thus we ﬁnd Russell (1912) concluding that only our knowledge of our sensory
states makes the cut—all else is merely probable. In a similar vein, Reichenbach concludes
that all attempts to achieve certainty have failed: “The search for certainty had to burn
itself out” (1963: 49). A sophisticated development of this line of thought is found in Unger
1Aquinas 1970; Scotus 1987, V; Descartes 1983, X: 362. See Pasnau (2014a,b) for detailed discussion of
the connection between scientia and certainty in the medieval and early modern tradition.

64
1971, 1975, who argues that certain functions as an absolute term, which only applies to a
proposition if that proposition has the maximal degree of certainty. This is then conjoined
with a general argument that absolute terms almost never apply to anything in the world.
If certainty is so rarely attained, it is natural to wonder whether it should matter
much for epistemology. For many contemporary epistemologists, the answer seems to be
‘No.’ According to a common line of thought, while certainty is largely beyond our reach,
knowledge is much more easily attained; consequently, it’s better-suited to play a central role
in epistemology. This shift in focus from certainty to knowledge is perhaps most apparent in
the ‘Knowledge First’ program in epistemology. For Knowledge Firsters, knowledge is the
central epistemic notion: it can be used to illuminate other epistemic notions (e.g., evidence,
evidentiality probability, justiﬁcation) and to provide normative constraints on assertion,
belief, and action.2 Typically, Knowledge Firsters devote scant space to certainty; certainly
the notion doesn’t play an important explanatory role in extant knowledge-centric accounts.
In this chapter, I seek to restore certainty to its former centrality. I open by inquiring
into the nature of certainty. I argue that attempts to reduce certainty to knowledge ﬂounder:
certainty is a sui generis epistemic notion. At the same time, I contest the perception of
certainty as an unattainable ideal. I argue that much—though by no means all—of our
ordinary knowledge qualiﬁes, in appropriate contexts, as certain.
Having laid the groundwork, the rest of the chapter explores how much explanatory
mileage we can get out of certainty: if we were to take certainty as our primitive, how
far could this take us? Surprisingly far, it turns out. Certainty can be used to provide
illuminating accounts of a variety of other epistemic notions, including evidential proba-
bility, epistemic modals, and knowledge. It also provides plausible normative constraints
on credence, assertion, and action. I suggest that these results warrant cautious optimism
about the prospects of a ‘Certainty First’ epistemology. At the very least, they show that
certainty has a relatively high degree of explanatory priority in the epistemic realm, and
hence should play a central role in epistemology.
2See Williamson 1996, 1997, 1998, 2000a,b, 2011, 2013; Hawthorne 2004; Hawthorne and Stanley 2008;
Stanley 2005a; Sutton 2005, 2007; Smithies 2012; Littlejohn forthcoming.

65
3.2
Certainty: A Schematic Account
3.2.1
Subjective vs. Epistemic Certainty
It’s common to distinguish between subjective and epistemic certainty.3 Subjective certainty
is a matter of strength of conviction. A belief can be subjectively certain even if it’s held
for no good reason. By contrast, if a belief is epistemically certain, the believer must stand
in a strong epistemic relation to its content.
While certain and its cognates are ambiguous between these two senses, certain con-
structions favor one reading over the other (Moore 1959; Stanley 2008; DeRose 2009).
Claiming that a person is certain of something usually conveys subjective certainty:
(40)
I’m certain/sure that the butler did it.4
(40) can be true even if the speaker falsely and irrationally believes the butler did it.
Claiming that a proposition is certain usually conveys epistemic certainty:
(41)
It’s certain that the butler did it.
(41) seems to entail that the speaker is in a strong epistemic position with regards to the
proposition that the butler did it.
What sort of epistemic position? Some might suggest it’s knowledge. But this suggestion
has trouble explaining the fact that knows for certain is not redundant. To see this, imagine
that it’s the ﬁrst day of Epistemology 101, and you’re trying to get your students to feel
the pull of Descartes’ project. Most likely, you’d ask (42a) rather than (42b):
(42)
a. What can we know for certain/with certainty?
b. What can we know?5
3See e.g. Moore 1959; Klein 1981; Stanley 2008; DeRose 2009; Reed 2011.
4I’ll assume that certain and sure are roughly synonymous, despite subtle di↵erences in their distributions.
For a corpus-based discussion of such di↵erences, see Simon-Vandenbergen and Aijmer 2007.
5Arguably, asking (42a) rather than (42b) ﬁts better with Descartes’ own views on knowledge. While
Descartes is widely interpreted as holding that knowledge requires certainty, Descartes’ discussion of the
atheist mathematician in the Second Replies casts doubt on this interpretation. In his discussion, Descartes
draws a distinction between cognitio and scientia: the atheist’s belief that three angles of a triangle are
equal to two right angles amounts to cognitio, but not scientia (AT VII 141). On a natural reading, cognitio
still amounts to a species of knowledge, it is simply a lower grade than scientia. For further discussion, see
Sosa 1997; Wykstra 2008; Pasnau 2014a.

66
For another illustration of the non-redundancy of knows for certain, note that (43a)
seems to make a stronger claim than (43b):
(43)
a. Alex knows for certain/sure that Jean was at the store last night.
b. Alex knows that Jean was at the store last night.
One might try to account for the non-redundancy of knows for certain by insisting that
whenever certain combines with knows, it conveys subjective rather than epistemic certainty.
But this seems wrong. It seems that there’s a very natural reading of (43a) on which the
speaker isn’t claiming that Alex knows Jean was at the store and that, furthermore, Alex is
extremely conﬁdent of this fact. Rather, the speaker is claiming that Alex knows this fact
with a particularly high degree of justiﬁcation or warrant.6
For further evidence that epistemic certainty is a more demanding state than knowledge,
consider the following examples from the wild:
(44)
[W]e know without certainty, but with a high degree of probability, that returns
over the next 10 years or so will be very poor.7
(45)
When [a false ID] is handed to a cop, he knows with near certainty the guy before
him is not the guy identiﬁed on the ﬂimsy piece of paper.8
If epistemic certainty were the same as knowledge, such claims would be incoherent.
6Some might try to resist this argument by maintaining that both certain and knows are context-sensitive
expressions, and that combining them in a complex phrase such as, knows for certain drives up the standards
for both knowledge and certainty. However, it proves diﬃcult to produce a plausible general principle to
explain why this would be the case. In general, if two expressions are broadly synonymous, preposition
or conjunction phrases combining them are not naturally interpreted as invoking heightened standards.
For example, saying that the detective is sure and certain sounds redundant; it’s not naturally interpreted
as saying that the detective is certain to an unusually high degree.
(For further illustration, consider
how we would interpret the claim that something is likely and probable, or that someone understands with
comprehension.)
Alternatively, one might maintain that knows for certain is an idiom, and consequently that its meaning is
not determined compositionally from the meanings of knows and certain. One diﬃculty with this hypothesis
is that idioms tend not to be cross-linguistically widespread: in English, kick the bucket is an idiom for
dying, but its literal translations in, say, French or Mandarin have no such idiomatic meaning. By contrast,
a wide variety of languages use the equivalent of knows with certainty to denote a state more demanding
than run-of-the-mill knowledge. (Thanks to Jonathan Scha↵er and Tim Williamson (p.c.) for raising these
issues.)
7‘A case of panic now, not later’, http://www.smithers.co.uk/news_article.php?id=16&o=50.
8Geeting, Truckers and Troopers, p.96

67
Could one understand epistemic certainty as iterated knowledge, that is, knowing that
one knows, or knowing that one knows that one knows?9 One diﬃculty for this suggestion
is that epistemic certainty—like subjective certainty—comes in degrees, whereas knowledge
does not (Stanley 2005a; Pavese MS):
(46)
It’s fairly
⇢X certain
# known
$
that the butler did it.
(47)
It’s 95%
⇢X certain
# known
$
that global warming has human causes.
An adequate account of epistemic certainty will account for the fact that it comes in
degrees. However, it’s highly doubtful that there’s any one-to-one mapping between degrees
of certainty and iterations of knowledge. (It’s not as though 99% certainty corresponds to
knowing that you know, and 99.9% certainty corresponds to knowing that you know that
you know, etc.)10
How should we understand epistemic certainty, if not in terms of knowledge? Let’s start
by considering how to understand degrees of epistemic certainty. For the purposes of this
chapter, I propose to oﬃcially take degrees of epistemic certainty as primitive. However, we
can get an intuitive grip on the notion by relating it to epistemic justiﬁcation or evidential
support: the more epistemically certain a proposition is for someone, the more justiﬁcation
they have for believing it.
(The reason I do not present this as an analysis of degrees
of certainty is that I’ll ultimately be arguing that degrees of justiﬁcation and evidential
support can be proﬁtably understood in terms of degrees of certainty.)11
9See Turri (2010) for the view that, in most contexts, a certainty ascription is roughly equivalent to a
second order knowledge ascription. See Avicenna for the view that certainty is to ‘know that you know, and
to know that you know that you know, ad inﬁnitum.’ (Quoted in Black 2006.)
10Another way to attack analyses of certainty in terms of iterated knowledge is via counterexample.
Suppose that Mary and Harry both know that Nairobi is in Kenya, but for some reason fail to know that
they know it. (Perhaps after the ﬁrst day of Epistemology 101 they have come to doubt whether knowledge
is possible, hence they no longer believe that they know Nairobi is in Kenya.) Still, it seems Mary could
know that Nairobi is in Kenya with greater epistemic certainty than Harry if she has stronger grounds for
her belief (e.g. Harry’s belief is based on testimony, whereas Mary lives Nairobi).
11While I am taking degrees of epistemic certainty as a primitive, I want to leave open the possibility of
giving some further, reductive account of degrees of certainty. If the view developed in Chapter Two is on
the right track, then the prospects for a reductive ﬁrst-order account of degrees of epistemic certainty is
bleak; however, we could still give a metaepistemological reduction of ‘degrees of certainty’ talk. To apply
the attitudinal framework developed there, ascriptions of degrees of epistemic certainty would be analyzed
in terms of degrees of epistemic approval.

68
We can go on to use our understanding of degrees of epistemic certainty to get a purchase
on knowing with certainty. To know p with epistemic (as opposed to merely subjective)
certainty is to know p with a particularly high degree of epistemic certainty—higher than
that typically required for knowledge.
Such an account seems plausible in light of the
minimal pairs we’ve considered ((42a) vs. (42b); (43a) vs. (43b)).
This account also ﬁts with the traditional understanding of certainty as a particularly
exalted form of knowledge. Of course, as noted in §3.1, many writers within this tradition
go further, regarding certainty as the epistemic ideal. According to this view, certainty is
not merely knowledge that reaches a particularly high threshold of justiﬁcation or support;
it is knowledge that reaches the highest possible degree thereof. And this in turn invites the
worry that hardly any of our knowledge will attain this lofty status.
In the rest of this section, I examine what I take to be the most sophisticated version of
this worry. I argue that this worry turns out to be unwarranted. According to the account
I suggest, a belief qualiﬁes as epistemically certain as long at it comes close enough to
the epistemic ideal. If we allow for contextual variation in what counts as ‘close enough’
to the ideal, we can hold that much of our ordinary knowledge qualiﬁes—in appropriate
contexts—as certain.
3.2.2
In Favor of Scarce
Call the thesis that either subjective or epistemic certainty is an extreme rarity, ‘Scarce.’
In my eyes, the most compelling argument for Scarce starts from the observation that cer-
tain—on both its subjective and epistemic uses—is a maximum standard absolute gradable
adjective.
First, some background. Gradable adjectives denote properties that come in degrees.
As noted in Chapter Two, they admit of degree modiﬁers (e.g., very, extremely) and com-
paratives (e.g., x is taller than y, p is more certain than q). Within the class of gradable
adjectives, maximum standard absolute gradable adjectives (max adjectives, hereafter) form
a semantically uniﬁed subclass.12 Typically, max adjectives are characterized as adjectives
that require their arguments to have the maximal degree of the denoted property.
For
12See Unger 1975; Kennedy and McNally 2005; Kennedy 2007.

69
example, straight is a max adjective: something is straight i↵it has the maximal degree of
straightness. Hence the infelicity of (48):
(48)
? The stick is straight, but it’s slightly crooked.
As a number of authors have noted, certain functions as a max adjective.13 This explains
the infelicity of (49) and (50):
(49)
? Fred is certain it’s going to rain, but he’s not entirely certain it’s going to rain.
(50)
? It’s certain to rain, but it’s not entirely certain to rain.
The interactions between certain and degree modiﬁers provide further evidence that
certain is a max adjective. Max adjectives tolerate maximizing modiﬁers (e.g., completely,
perfectly) to a much greater degree than relative gradable adjectives (e.g., long, tall) (Rot-
stein and Winter 2004; Kennedy 2007):
(51)
The road is completely/perfectly
⇢?? long
X straight
$
.
This diagnostic gives further evidence that certain is a max adjective:
(52)
XSandy’s completely/perfectly certain that the Mets will win.
(53)
XIt’s completely/perfectly certain that the Mets will win.
Once we accept that certain is a max adjective, it seems we have an easy argument for
Scarce. If certain is a max adjective, then whenever S is subjectively certain that p, S has
the maximal degree of subjective certainty that p. Similarly, whenever p is epistemically
certain (for S), p has the maximal degree of epistemic certainty (for S). But this is a high
bar—one that precious little of our everyday knowledge seems to meet. Take, for instance,
my knowledge that Marseilles is in France. While I’m very conﬁdent of this fact, it seems
wrong to say that I assign the maximal degree of subjective certainty to this fact. Surely
I’m not as certain of this fact as I am of the disjunction: Either Marseilles is in France or
it isn’t. The same goes for epistemic certainty: the disjunction is more certain than either
disjunct.
13Unger 1975; Lassiter 2010, 2011; Klecha 2012.

70
3.2.3
Against Scarce
But perhaps we shouldn’t be so quick. After all, if asked, I’d readily assert both:
(54)
I’m certain that Marseilles is in France.
(55)
It’s certain that Marseilles is in France.
More generally, people are fairly liberal in their certainty ascriptions: they don’t reserve
certain for a tiny sliver of their knowledge.
Thus, our everyday ascriptions of certainty count against Scarce.
Of course, those
impressed with the argument in §3.2.2 might simply say that all such ascriptions are false.14
But this seems like a rather desperate and undesirable maneuver. Ceteris paribus, it would
be nice if we could ﬁnd a way to make sentences such as (54) and (55) come out true.15
3.2.4
The Best of Both Worlds: Max Adjectives Without Scarce
A natural way of reconciling the thesis that certain is a max adjective with the truth of
(54) and (55) is to relativize the semantic values of gradable expressions to contextually
determined standards of precision or levels of granularity.16 Consider straight. Some con-
texts involve strict standards: when constructing a satellite, a slight dent might preclude
an antenna from falling under the extension of straight. In more permissive contexts, we
can truthfully apply straight to the same antenna, since it comes close enough to having
the maximum degree of straightness.
Here’s one way of developing this idea. Assume a scalar semantics for gradable adjec-
tives, according to which every gradable adjective A is associated with a scale ⇥A, where a
scale is a set of degrees totally ordered along some dimension. For any max adjective Amax:
Close Enough: ‘x is Amax’ is true in a context c i↵x’s degree on ⇥A is close enough
for the purposes of c to the maximal element of ⇥A.17
14See Unger 1975; Lasersohn 1999.
15As Unger (1975) observes, the argument for Scarce generalizes far beyond the case of certain; it seems
to show that almost all of our ordinary utterances involving absolute gradable adjectives are false. Even
those who aren’t particularly worried about ensuring the truth of (54) and (55) might well recoil from the
conclusion that such a large swath of ordinary discourse is false.
16Lewis (1979b) sketches a response to Unger along these lines. For recent work on levels of granularity,
see Krifka 2007; Sauerland and Stateva 2007; van Rooij 2011.
17Here’s one way to formalize this. Let A be a function that takes an entity and delivers its degree on

71
A gloss on ‘close enough’: a degree is close enough to the maximal element of the scale,
given a context, as long as any di↵erence between the two is ignorable (i.e. can be appro-
priately ignored). In many a conversation, the di↵erence between the antenna’s degree of
straightness and the maximum degree of straightness is ignorable.
How can we extend this treatment to certain? Assume that subjective uses of certain
are associated with a scale of degrees from 0 to 1 (the subjective certainty scale). Next, we
postulate a function that, given a subject S, a time t, and a proposition p, delivers the degree
to which S is subjectively certain that p at t. I’ll call this the ‘subjective certainty function’
(SC), but, as far as I’m concerned, the di↵erence between this and the more familiar notion
of a credence function is merely terminological. Similarly, assume that epistemic uses of
certain are associated with a scale of degrees from 0 to 1 (the epistemic certainty scale),
and an epistemic certainty function (EC). Given any S, t, p, EC delivers the degree to
which p is epistemically certain for S at t. We then say that a positive form18 subjective
certainty ascription, ‘S is (subjectively) certain that p’ is true in a context c i↵S’s degree
of subjective certainty in p is close enough for the purposes of c to 1. Likewise, a positive
form epistemic certainty ascription, ‘p is (epistemically) certain (for S)’ is true in c i↵the
degree to which p is epistemically certain for S is close enough for the purposes of c to 1.19
This enables us to reject Scarce: in most contexts, the degree of subjective and epistemic
certainty of Marseilles is in France is close enough to the maximum. Hence most utterances
of (54) and (55) are true.
However, we can still explain the data that motivated the
classiﬁcation of certain as a max adjective. Take (50) (repeated here as (56)):
⇥A. Let max be a function that takes a scale and delivers the highest degree on that scale. Finally, let g
be a function that, for any entity x, context c, scale ⇥A, and degree d 2 ⇥A gives you the set of all degrees
Γ s.t. if A(x)2 Γ, this counts as close enough to d for the purposes of c. We then give the following lexical
entry for a max adjective Amax:
Jis AmaxKc = [λxe . A(x) 2 g(x, c, ⇥A,max(⇥A)]
Note that this way of formulating the semantics allows that what’s ‘close enough’ can vary with x: within
a given context, the standards for a full wine glass might di↵er from the standards for a full gas tank. (See
Foppolo and Panzeri 2010 for experimental data indicating that judgments about the applicability of a max
adjective to an object are sensitive to the object in question.)
18The ‘positive’ or unmarked form of a gradable adjective lacks any overt degree morphology. Compare,
for example, I’m certain (positive) with I’m fairly/entirely/95% certain (marked).
19One way to formalize this would be to o↵er separate lexical entries for the two uses of certain:
Jis certainsubjKc = [λphs,ti [λti [λxe . SCx,t(p) 2 g(hx, t, pi, c, ⇥SC, max(⇥SC)] ] ]
Jis certainepiKc = [λphs,ti [λti [λxe . ECx,t(p) 2 g(hx, t, pi, c, ⇥EC, max(⇥EC)] ] ]
(Here ⇥SC is the subjective certainty scale and ⇥EC is the epistemic certainty scale.)

72
(56)
? It’s certain to rain, but it’s not entirely certain to rain.
Assume that the maximizing modiﬁer entirely is also sensitive to standards: feed it an
adjective A and it will deliver the set of degrees on ⇥A that are close enough to the max-
imum. Then (56) is inconsistent, provided we hold the standards ﬁxed: the ﬁrst conjunct
asserts that It will rain comes close enough to the maximal degree of epistemic certainty;
the second conjunct denies this. At the same time, our account has the resources to explain
why (56) doesn’t sound as bad as overt contradictions such as:
(57)
# It’s certain to rain, but it’s not certain to rain.
After all, one e↵ect of maximizing modiﬁers is to raise the standards of precision (Sassoon
and Zevakhina 2012). And this makes a ‘repair’ reading, according to which the second
conjunct is interpreted using heightened standards, more readily available for (56) than for
(57).
3.2.5
Puzzling Pos
One might worry that our semantics has diﬃculty explaining some of the entailments of
positive form (pos form, hereafter) epistemic certainty ascriptions. In particular, one might
worry that it has trouble explaining why such ascriptions are factive (Moore 1959):
(58)
a. It’s certain that the Mets will win. )
b. The Mets will win.20
Suppose that Sal has good but not conclusive evidence that the Mets will win: for him,
the degree of epistemic certainty that the Mets will win is .8. Furthermore, suppose that
Sal is in a conversation governed by low standards of precision (he’s in a pub, not an
epistemology seminar). Still, if Sal asserts (58a) and the Mets in fact lose, it seems that
Sal said something false. To see this, consider how natural it would be for a chagrined Sal
20Like many philosophers, I call a verb ‘factive’ if it entails the truth of its complement clause. Semanticists
would prefer the term ‘veridical’, reserving the term ‘factive’ for a verb that presupposes the truth of its
complement clause.

73
to retract his assertion: ‘I guess I was wrong when I said that it was certain that the Mets
will win.’21
How can our scalar semantics explain the factivity of pos form epistemic certainty ascrip-
tions? One could try building factivity into the epistemic certainty scale: perhaps whenever
ECS,t(p) ≥.8, p is guaranteed to be true. But the entailment patterns of graded certainty
ascriptions cast doubt on this strategy:
(59)
a. It’s 99.9% certain that the Mets will win. 6)
b. The Mets will win.
Even if (59a) is uttered in a context with high standards, we can’t infer (59b).
We face a seemingly inconsistent triad: (i) no degree of epistemic certainty less than
1 suﬃces for factivity; (ii) in some contexts, the degree of certainty required for pos form
epistemic certainty ascriptions to be true is less than 1; (iii) in all contexts, pos form
epistemic certainty ascriptions are factive. I suggest resolving this apparent inconsistency by
imposing constraints on when a degree can be close enough to the maximum. In particular,
I suggest a Truth Constraint: if p is false, it’s never appropriate to ignore the di↵erence
between p’s degree of epistemic certainty and the maximum. And so no degree of epistemic
certainty shy of 1 counts as close enough to 1. If p is true, greater latitude is permitted.22
We can handle other puzzling entailments of pos form epistemic certainty ascriptions
in similar fashion. Arguably, pos form epistemic certainty ascriptions don’t merely entail
the truth of the embedded proposition; they also entail that the embedded proposition is
known. The linguistic data here is not entirely clear-cut, and intuitions may vary across
speakers. However, it seems to me that in any situation where a knowledge ascription is
false, the corresponding pos form epistemic certainty ascription is also false. Consider a
standard Gettier case: Jessie comes to believe that it’s 3pm on the basis of a stopped clock.
It just so happens that it is 3pm (Russell 1948). If Jessie were to claim that it’s certain
21By contrast, pos form subjective certainty ascriptions are not factive: I’m certain the Mets will win 6)
The Mets will win.
22Readers may note a resemblance between this proposal and Lewis’ (1996) treatment of knows, which
captures the entailments of knowledge ascriptions via constraints on when a possibility is properly ignored.
In particular, the Truth Constraint resembles Lewis’ ‘Rule of Actuality’, according to which the actual world
is never properly ignored.

74
that it’s 3pm, I think there’s some tendency to regard her utterance as false. Likewise in
lottery cases: suppose we all believe, on statistical grounds, that a given lottery ticket T is
a loser. Suppose that T does indeed lose. Still, it seems that there’s an inclination to deny
that, prior to the draw of the winning ticket, it was certain that T was a loser.
Our strategy for handling factivity extends to handle the knowledge entailment. Let
C be any necessary condition on knowledge. If no degree of epistemic certainty shy of 1
guarantees that C obtains, we can preserve our scalar semantics for certain by converting
C into a constraint on the ‘close enough’ relation: if C isn’t satisﬁed, no di↵erence between
p’s degree of epistemic certainty for S and the max is ignorable. For example, suppose one
adopts the popular view that a safety requirement on knowledge explains the intuition that
the protagonists of Gettier and lottery cases lack knowledge.23 We could then convert this
requirement into a Safety Constraint: if S’s belief in p could have easily been held falsely,
there’s no context in which a di↵erence between p’s degree of epistemic certainty for S and
the maximum is appropriately ignored.24
To illustrate the strategy, suppose The Mets will win is epistemically certain for both
Sue and Sal to degree .8. Sue is in the good case: for any necessary condition on knowledge
C, Sue’s belief that the Mets will win satisﬁes C. Sal is in the bad case: his belief that the
Mets will win doesn’t satisfy C. In Sue’s context, a degree of .8 epistemic certainty counts as
close enough to the maximum; hence she can truly assert (58a). In Sal’s context, no degree
of epistemic certainty shy of 1 counts as close enough to the max; hence his utterance of
the same sentence is false. (See Figure 3.1.)25
23See Sosa 1999, 2004; Williamson 2000a; Pritchard 2005; Lasonen-Aarnio 2010.
24Of course, the idea that knowledge requires safety is controversial. (For putative counterexamples, see
Neta and Rohrbaugh 2004; Comesa˜na 2005; Kelp 2009; Bogardus 2014. For the view that many of the
counterexamples can be avoided by reﬁning our understanding of ‘close’ possibilities, see Williamson 2009.)
However, for present purposes the Safety Constraint merely serves as a useful illustration of a more general
strategy: whatever one’s preferred conditions on knowledge, we can construe these conditions as constraints
on the ‘close enough’ relation. In doing so, we’ll be able to reconcile the knowledge entailment with our
scalar semantics for certain.
25The strategy of imposing substantive constraints on the ‘close enough’ relation could also be used to
underwrite a multi-premise closure principle on epistemic certainty (e.g., if (i) p1...pn are certain, (ii) p1...pn
entail q, (iii) one competently deduces q from p1...pn, then q is also certain). To reconcile such a principle
with a scalar semantics for certain, one can convert one’s preferred solution to the lottery paradox into a
constraint on the ‘close enough’ relation. For example, Leitgeb (2014) proposes to solve the lottery paradox
via a ‘stability’ constraint on belief. According to this approach, for S to believe p is for S’s credence in
p to remain suﬃciently high even when conditionalized on any proposition that is both consistent with p
and assigned some non-zero credence by S. Those attracted to Leitgeb’s solution could transpose it into
our framework: in order for p’s degree of epistemic certainty to be close enough to the max, p’s degree of

75
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ignorable Di↵erences
in the Good Case
Ignorable Di↵erences
in the Bad Case
Figure 3.1: Good vs. Bad.
Let me brieﬂy address two worries one might have about the current strategy for recon-
ciling our scalar semantics for certain with the entailments of pos form epistemic certainty
ascriptions. First, one might worry that this strategy presupposes that epistemic certainty
is analyzable—that it’s possible to state non-circular necessary and suﬃcient conditions
for the truth of pos form epistemic certainty ascriptions. If so, isn’t this presupposition
overly optimistic? After all, recently some philosophers have suggested that the analysis of
knowledge is a quixotic endeavor.26 If knowledge is unanalyzable, then, given the knowledge
entailment, it’s natural to worry that epistemic certainty is similarly unanalyzable.
However, even if epistemic certainty turned out to be unanalyzable, this wouldn’t un-
dermine the current strategy. What this would mean (on the current approach) is that we
won’t be able to give any non-circular statement of the conditions under which some degree
of epistemic certainty counts as close enough to the max. While this might be disappointing
for those with reductive aspirations, it does not pose any problems for our basic account of
certainty. After all, we’ll still be able to maintain Close Enough. In doing so, we’ll still be
able to accept that certain is a max adjective while resisting the siren song of Scarce.
Second, one might worry that even if we can account for the entailments of pos form
epistemic certainty ascriptions by imposing substantive constraints on the ‘close enough’
epistemic certainty must remain suﬃciently high even when p is conditionalized on any proposition q such
that (i) q is consistent with p, (ii) EC(q) > 0.
26See, in particular, Williamson 2000a.

76
relation, this strategy proves ad hoc. By contrast, an austere semantics for max adjectives
that dispenses with standards of precision and embraces Scarce (Unger 1971, 1975; Kennedy
2007) seems like it can avoid such ad hockery. Perhaps this gives us reason to reconsider
our rejection of Scarce.
But closer inspection gives reason to doubt that austere views have any advantage here.
Even those who accept Scarce will presumably admit that in ordinary contexts speakers are
willing to assert (55), and listeners are willing to regard this assertion as true. Even if this
is just ‘loose talk’, any adequate account of our linguistic practice will include a theory of
this ‘loose talk’, and this theory will include a speciﬁcation of the conditions under which
we’re willing to regard (55) as true. Presumably, any such theory will look a lot like Close
Enough, recast as a pragmatic story: we regard an utterance of ‘It is certain that p’ as true
i↵p’s degree of epistemic certainty (for the speaker) is close enough to the max.27 Such
theories will still face the diﬃcult task of explaining why, in ordinary contexts, we regard an
utterance of ‘It is certain that p’ as false if p is false (and, more generally, if p isn’t known).
It is unclear how they could accomplish this task without imposing substantive constraints
on the ‘close enough’ relation.
3.2.6
Taking Stock
I’ve argued that we should resist two impulses: the impulse to analyze certainty in terms
of knowledge, and the impulse to dismiss certainty as unattainable.
According to the
treatment of certainty o↵ered here, certainty comes in two forms: subjective and epistemic.
The former consists in a strong conviction; the latter consists in a strong epistemic position,
not reducible to knowledge. What’s more, while certain is a max adjective, this does not
entail Scarce: in many contexts, a non-negligible subset of our everyday knowledge qualiﬁes
as both subjectively and epistemically certain.
By showing that certainty is not scarce, we’ve paved the way for putting certainty
to work in epistemological theorizing. But before getting down to brass tacks, it’s worth
highlighting that my account of certainty really involves two sets of distinctions. In addition
27The theory of ‘pragmatic halos’ in Lasersohn (1999) can be understood as a pragmatic story along these
lines.

77
to the subjective/epistemic certainty distinction, there’s the distinction between degrees of
certainty and certainty full-stop (the sort that’s picked out by pos form ascriptions). In what
follows, these di↵erent facets of certainty will serve di↵erent explanatory roles. Degrees of
epistemic certainty are used to explain evidential probability (§3.3), whereas certainty full-
stop is used to explain epistemic modals (§3.4) and knowledge (§3.5). Finally, both degrees
of certainty and certainty full stop feature in the account of the normative constraints on
action (§3.6).
Does this mean the Certainty First program is fundamentally disjunctive? I think not.
Degrees of certainty and certainty full-stop are two sides of the same coin. If the discussion in
§§3.2.4-3.2.5 is correct, certainty full-stop can be understood in terms of degrees of certainty
that come close enough to the maximum. And even if this analysis requires revision, it seems
extremely plausible that our grasp on certainty full-stop depends on our awareness that
certainty comes in degrees. The fact that we’ll be exploiting the full explanatory resources
that certainty o↵ers should not obscure the underlying unity of the resulting account.
3.3
Evidential Probability
In everyday conversation, we frequently use probability operators: expressions such as likely
and probable. One common use of such operators is to convey evidential probability: the
probability of a hypothesis given a body of evidence. For example:
(60)
It’s 99% likely that the Mets will win.
(60) has a natural reading on which it says that, given the available evidence, there’s a 99%
chance that the Mets will win.
In this section, I argue that evidential probability ascriptions are best analyzed in terms
of epistemic certainty. I begin by providing linguistic data that establish a close connection
between evidential probability ascriptions and epistemic certainty ascriptions. A natural ex-
planation for this connection is that evidential probabilities are degrees of certainty (§3.3.1).
Not only does this hypothesis explain our linguistic practice, it also does epistemological
work: I show that the resulting account of evidential probability has important epistemolog-

78
ical advantages over rival accounts that explain evidential probability in terms of knowledge
(§3.3.2).
3.3.1
Evidential Probabilities and Degrees of Certainty
Both likely and probable accept proportional modiﬁers (e.g., 99%, 95%). And when both
are embedded under the same proportional modiﬁer, they seem to be equivalent. To see
this, compare (60) with (61):
(61)
It’s 99% certain that the Mets will win.
(60) and (61) seem interchangeable, at least when (60) is interpreted in terms of evidential
(as opposed to, say, objective) probability. Indeed, it would be quite odd to aﬃrm one while
denying the other:
(62)
?? It’s 99% certain that the Mets will win. But it’s only 98% likely that they’ll win.
(63)
?? It’s 98% certain that the Mets will win. But it’s 99% likely that they’ll win.
To my ears, (62) and (63) are only coherent if we impose some non-evidential interpretation
on the probability operators.
This close connection cries out for explanation. A natural explanation is that evidential
probabilities simply are degrees of epistemic certainty. Here’s one way of spelling this out.
Following recent work on the semantics of probability operators, let us hypothesize that the
meaning of a probability operator can be modeled by a probability function.28 Let PrS,t be
a probability function that, for any proposition p, assigns p a number in [0, 1] representing
that probability of p given S’s total evidence at t.29 I propose that we can simply identify
Pr with the epistemic certainty function EC:
Evidential Probabilities are Degrees of Epistemic Certainty (EP=EC):
For any proposition p, any subject S, and any time t, PrS,t(p)=ECS,t(p).
28See Swanson 2006; Yalcin 2007, 2010, 2011; Lassiter 2010; Lassiter and Goodman 2015; Moss 2015b.
29Relativization to subjects is needed, since something that is likely given one person’s body of evidence
can be unlikely given another’s. Where it won’t cause confusion, I will omit the subscripts.

79
EP=EC explains why (60) and (61) are interchangeable, and why (62) and (63) are
incoherent.
This strikes me as an important mark in its favor.
What’s more, as we’ll
see shortly, EP=EC enjoys epistemological advantages over rival accounts of evidential
probability in terms of knowledge. But before turning to a comparison with the Knowledge
First account, I want to tackle a natural objection that may seem, at ﬁrst blush, to render
hopeless any reduction of evidential probabilities to degrees of certainty.
According to the objection in question, I’ve cherry-picked my data: the equivalence
between graded epistemic certainty ascriptions and graded evidential probability ascriptions
only holds for proportional modiﬁers that denote very high degrees on the corresponding
scale. But when we look at mid-scale proportional modiﬁers (e.g., 60%) the equivalence
breaks down:
(64)
It’s 60%
⇢X likely
? certain
$
the Mets will win.
While it’s perfectly felicitous to talk of 60% probability, talk of 60% certainty sounds bizarre.
The objection can be generalized by looking at other modiﬁers. We’ve seen that certain
accepts maximizing modiﬁers. However, probability operators do not:
(65)
? It’s completely likely/probable the Mets will win.
Should we conclude that EP=EC must be abandoned?
I think not.
We’ve already
seen that a max adjective targets the upper end of its scale. What (71) reveals is that our
tendency to reserve certain for the upper end of the epistemic certainty scale persists even
under proportional modiﬁers: we are happier with 99% certain than 70% certain, and less
happy still with 60% certain.
By contrast, probable and likely are relative gradable adjectives: they do not target the
upper end of the probability scale, but rather some contextually determined point along
it.30 Thus if there’s a 70% chance that it will rain today and an 80% chance that it will
rain tomorrow, one can say:
(66)
It’s likely to rain today, but it’s more likely that it will rain tomorrow.
30Cf. Yalcin 2010: p.930.

80
This explains why probable and likely do not accept maximizing modiﬁers: as we saw in
§3.2.2, relative adjectives resist maximizing modiﬁers. And since probable and likely have
no tendency to target the upper end of their scale, they happily combine with mid-scale
proportional modiﬁers.
The suggestion, then, is that two adjectives can denote points on the same scale, even
if those two adjectives tolerate di↵erent modiﬁers. In case this seems ad hoc, it’s worth
noting that there is independent reason to accept this suggestion. Presumably, ﬁlthy and
dirty denote points on the same scale: the di↵erence between being dirty and being ﬁlthy
is a di↵erence in degree, not in kind. But they accept di↵erent modiﬁers:
(67)
Your shirt is completely
⇢X ﬁlthy
? dirty
$
.
(68)
Your shirt is slightly
⇢? ﬁlthy
X dirty
$
.
We can also illustrate this point using ‘extreme adjectives’ (e.g., gigantic, huge). Intu-
itively, gigantic occupies the same scale as big: to be gigantic is just to be extremely big.
But gigantic doesn’t accept the same modiﬁers as big:
(69)
King Kong is very/extremely
⇢X big
?? gigantic
$
.31
Thus we can maintain EP=EC by denying the underlying assumption that two adjectives
can only be scale-mates if they accept the same modiﬁers—an assumption that we have
independent reason to reject ((67)-(69)).32
On the picture that emerges, absolute and
relative gradable adjectives can co-habit the same scale; when they do, we should expect
them to tolerate di↵erent modiﬁers.
Adopting this picture enables us to explain further inferences linking evidential proba-
bility talk and epistemic certainty ascriptions. For example, pos form evidential probability
ascriptions typically implicate that the corresponding pos form epistemic certainty ascrip-
tion doesn’t hold:
31See Morzycki (2012) for a degree-based semantics for extreme adjectives designed to explain this di↵er-
ence in modiﬁer distribution.
32For further arguments against the view that scale-mates always accept the same modiﬁers, see Lassiter
(2010); Lassiter and Goodman (2015).

81
(70)
a. It’s likely the butler did it  
b. It’s not certain the butler did it.
As Lassiter (2010) observes, this seems to be a scalar implicature, akin to the implicature
from some to not all. And this fact is naturally explained by holding that while certain is
a max adjective and likely is a relative adjective, they nonetheless occupy the same scale.
3.3.2
Epistemological Advantages
One task for a theory of evidential probability is to capture the meaning of everyday eviden-
tial uses of probability operators. Another task is to provide an epistemologically serviceable
account of evidential probability—that is, an account that can be put to use in epistemo-
logical theorizing. It is not a priori obvious that these two tasks will coincide: it may turn
out that our everyday notion of evidential probability is ill-suited to perform the jobs that
epistemologists demand of it.
Thus far, I’ve focused on the ﬁrst task, arguing that an analysis of evidential probability
in terms of degrees of epistemic certainty sheds light on the close connections between
evidential probability talk and epistemic certainty talk. I now turn to the second. I show
that by understanding evidential probabilities in terms of degrees of certainty, we avoid two
serious obstacles for ‘Knowledge First’ accounts of evidential probability.
In order to lay out the advantages, I begin by reviewing the Knowledge First treatment
of evidential probability. Williamson famously proposes that evidence is knowledge:
E=K: For any subject S and any time t, S’s total evidence at t = {p: S knows p at t}.33
Williamson goes on to suggest that the evidential probability of a proposition p is the prob-
ability of p conditional on one’s total evidence (2000a: chp.10). Let KS,t be the conjunction
of everything S knows at t. Williamson’s account amounts to the following:
Knowledge Account of Evidential Probability:
PrS,t(p) = PrS,t(p|KS,t),
where PrS,t(p|KS,t) 6= 0.34
33See Williamson 1997, 2000a: chp.9.
34This is Williamson’s synchronic characterization of evidential probability. He also o↵ers a diachronic

82
An immediate consequence of this is that all knowledge has evidential probability 1:
Knowledge has Evidential Probability 1: PrS,t(p) = 1 if S knows p at t.
While the Knowledge Account is deservedly inﬂuential, this particular consequence gives
rise to two serious diﬃculties—diﬃculties that a Certainty First account of evidential prob-
ability neatly avoids. I will lay out each diﬃculty in turn.
At least one goal of an epistemologically serviceable theory of evidential probability is
to model our intuitive notion of strength of epistemic position: the stronger my epistemic
position with regards to p, the higher its evidential probability (for me) should be. However,
it seems that I stand in a better epistemic position with regards to some propositions I know
than I do towards others. Consider the following propositions:
Snow: It will snow in NY sometime in the next year.
Snow or no snow: Either it will snow in NY sometime in the next year or it won’t.
Assuming inductive skepticism is false, I know both propositions. But, intuitively, I
stand in a stronger epistemic position towards Snow or no snow than I do towards Snow.
And so Snow or no snow should receive a higher evidential probability than Snow. But
this conﬂicts with the Knowledge Account, which assigns both propositions probability 1.
If we take evidential probabilities to be degrees of epistemic certainty, we avoid this
diﬃculty. After all, I can know some propositions with a higher degree of epistemic certainty
than others. In particular, Snow or no Snow has a higher degree of epistemic certainty for
me than than Snow does. Given EP=EC, Pr(Snow or no Snow)>Pr(Snow).35
The second diﬃculty for the Knowledge Account comes from considering the relation
between evidential probabilities and credences.
At least as far back as Locke’s Essay,
epistemologists have been attracted to the view that rationality requires one proportion
characterization, according to which there is an initial evidential probability function that reﬂects the ‘intrin-
sic plausibility of various hypotheses’ (Williamson 2000a: 211), which is then updated by conditionalization
as new evidence is acquired. Here I focus on the synchronic aspect of his account.
35It is worth highlighting a closely related advantage of the Certainty First account. Many epistemologists
have been attracted to the fallibilist idea that one can know p even if the evidential probability of p is less
than 1. The Knowledge Account precludes fallibilism, thus construed. By contrast, EP=EC makes room
for fallibilism: fallible knowledge will be present whenever p’s degree of epistemic certainty is high enough
to allow for knowledge, while still falling short of the maximum.

83
one’s degree of belief to the evidence.36 This suggests that an epistemologically serviceable
account of evidential probability will provide normative constraints on credences. Here’s a
natural way of formulating such a constraint more precisely:
Credal Constraint: For any S, t, p: S’s credence in p at t should equal PrS,t(p).
Why does this cause trouble for the Knowledge Account? Intuitively, I should be more
conﬁdent of some of the things I know than others. For example, my credence in Snow or
no snow should be 1, whereas it seems that my credence in Snow should be slightly lower.
Given the Credal Constraint, it follows that the evidential probability of the disjunction
should be higher than the probability of the disjunct. But once again this is inconsistent
with the Knowledge Account, which assigns both propositions probability 1.37
Here too, taking evidential probabilities to be degrees of certainty enables us to avoid
the diﬃculty. We’ve seen that EP=EC allows for Pr(Snow or no snow) to exceed Pr(Snow),
since the former is more epistemically certain than the latter. From the Credal Constraint,
it follows that my credence in the former should exceed my credence in the latter.
Indeed, combining the Credal Constraint with EP=EC delivers an elegant picture of the
normative links between the two species of certainty, epistemic and subjective. As noted in
§3.2.4, the subjective certainty function seems to be equivalent to a credence function. If
this is right, conjoining EP=EC with the Credal Constraint entails:
Matching Requirement: Your degree of subjective certainty in p should equal the
degree to which p is epistemically certain for you.
We can provide independent motivation for the Matching Requirement. Suppose that
it’s 99% certain that the Mets will win. What should your credence be that the Mets will
win? There seems to be an obvious answer: .99. Consider how odd the following sounds:
(71)
?? It’s 99% certain that the Mets will win. But I’m only 98% certain that they’ll
win.
36Williamson also endorses this requirement (2000a: p.223).
37See Kaplan 2003, 2009 for a closely related objection.

84
The Matching Requirement explains these intuitions: (71) is odd because no one could truly
assert it without violating a basic requirement of rationality.
3.3.3
Further Issues
I’ve laid out the bare bones of a theory of evidential probability. On my theory, certainty
plays a starring role: evidential probabilities are degrees of epistemic certainty, and these
impose normative constraints on our degrees of subjective certainty. In the course of devel-
oping my theory, I skirted a number of points of detail. Here I’ll brieﬂy take up two such
points.
First, I haven’t yet taken a stand on what’s involved in possessing evidence. There are
various ways of developing a theory of evidence possession within the present framework,
but one attractive option is to adopt a gradational conception. According to a gradational
conception, whether p is part of a subject’s evidence isn’t an all or nothing matter; instead,
it comes in degrees. Joyce articulates the idea thus:
On a categorical conception, the question of whether a belief has evidential
standing has an unqualiﬁed yes/no answer... On a gradational view, one speaks
not of evidential status tout court, but of the degree to which a believed propo-
sition counts as evidence. Evidential status falls along a spectrum that ranges
from the best sort of evidence, through intermediate grades, to beliefs that are
not evidence at all. (Joyce 2004: 298-299)
As Williamson (2004) observes, gradationalists owe us a story about how to understand
di↵erences in evidential status. The present perspective provides such a story: degrees of
evidential status just are degrees of epistemic certainty. Thus, if p is evidence for S at t
to degree .6, and q is evidence for S at t to degree .7, this is because ECS,t(p)=.6 and
ECS,t(q)=.7.38
A second point of detail concerns the diachronic dimension of evidential probability:
are there any update rules governing how evidential probabilities evolve over time? This
38Arguably, this conception of degrees of evidence was anticipated by Hume: Schmitt interprets Hume as
identifying degrees of evidence with “grades of certainty” (2014: 77).

85
is a vexed question, and the present account is compatible with either a negative or an
aﬃrmative answer. If we answer in the negative, the result is a ‘time-slice epistemology’
(Hedden 2015; Moss 2015a), according to which the only rational constraints on credences
are synchronic (speciﬁcally, the constraints provided by the Matching Requirement). If we
answer in the aﬃrmative, then we can avail ourselves of any number of di↵erent update
rules in the literature.
To give just one example, the present account could be combined with the view that the
evidential probability function is updated via Je↵rey Conditionalization (Je↵rey 1965). To
see how this would work, let us deﬁne S’s unimpeachable evidence at t as the set of propo-
sitions that are maximally certain for S at t ({p : ECS,t(p) = 1}). Let Ei be a partition
over the worlds compatible with S’s unimpeachable evidence at t. Je↵rey Conditionalization
amounts to the following update rule:
Je↵rey Conditionalization: PrS,t2(p) = P
i
PrS,t1(p | Ei)PrS,t2(Ei)
While the account of evidential probability defended here is by no means committed to
Je↵rey Conditionalization, it does provide Je↵rey Conditionalizers with resources to defuse
at least one persistent criticism—speciﬁcally, that we lack an independent account of the
probabilities in question. As Williamson (2000a) puts it: “Je↵rey conditionalization is hard
to integrate with any adequate epistemology, because we have no substantive answer to the
question: what should the new weights [i.e. Pr(S,t2)(Ei)] be?” (2000a: 216) The present
approach gives a substantive answer to this question: it says that the new weights are
degrees of epistemic certainty.39
3.3.4
Objections
I’ve argued that evidential probabilities should be understood in terms of degrees of cer-
tainty. The resulting analysis explains the close connections between epistemic certainty
39Of course, Je↵rey Conditionalization faces further challenges. Perhaps the most well-known worry is
that Je↵rey Conditionalization is non-commutative: the order in which one receives new evidence a↵ects how
evidential probabilities get updated. (For versions of this objection, see Levi 1967; Domotor 1980; Skyrms
1986; van Fraassen 1989. For an argument that the non-commutativity countenanced by Je↵rey Conditional-
ization is unproblematic, see Lange 2000.) Since my account is not committed to Je↵rey Conditionalization,
I will avoid taking a stand on whether such further challenges can be resolved.

86
ascriptions and evidential uses of probability operators (§3.3.1); it also enjoys important
advantages over the Knowledge Account (§3.3.2). In the rest of this section, I defend my
account against two natural objections.
First, one might question my account’s supposed advantages over the Knowledge Ac-
count. Didn’t I say that my knowledge that Marseilles is in France counts as epistemically
certain, at least in ordinary contexts? And if both Marseilles is in France and Marseilles is
in France or it isn’t qualify as epistemically certain in a context, how do we avoid assigning
them the same evidential probability?
In response, it’s important to emphasize that, according to my view, a proposition p’s
evidential probability does not depend on whether p falls under the extension of certain in
a context; rather, it depends on p’s position on the epistemic certainty scale. Thus while
certain is context-sensitive, evidential probabilities are not.40 Even though in most contexts
Marseilles is in France will qualify as certain, its degree of certainty will still be less than
1. And so my account can capture the fact that Pr(Marseilles is in France)<Pr(Marseilles
is in France or it isn’t).
One might worry that the objection is not so easily evaded. After all, my account makes
use of an evidential probability function, which presumably obeys the Kolmogorov axioms.
So won’t all logical truths be assigned evidential probability 1? If so, then it seems the
problem re-emerges: intuitively, my epistemic position with respect to simple tautologies is
stronger than my epistemic position with respect to complex logical theorems. Similarly, it
seems I should have a higher credence in the former than the latter.
While I agree that there’s at least a prima facie diﬃculty here, I think it’s important
to be clear about the source of the problem. The problem doesn’t stem from my claim that
our intuitive notion of evidential probability maps onto the notion of degrees of certainty.
Even when it comes to logical truths, these two notions march hand-in-hand: intuitively,
a complex logical conjecture that turns out to be true has a lower evidential probability
than a simple tautology. (‘This conjecture is likely to be true, but we won’t know for sure
40Of course, if we adopt a contextualist attitudinal semantics for “degrees of certainty” talk, then this isn’t
quite right, since di↵erent speakers will assert di↵erent things when they say things like: “It’s .99% certain
for S that p.” Still, while there will be inter-subject variations in the extensions of evidential probability
ascriptions, there will not be intra-subject variations.

87
until we have a proof.’) Rather, the problem arises from thinking that our ordinary notion
of evidential probability can be modeled using a probability function that treats all logical
truths on a par.
This problem is closely connected to the familiar problem of logical omniscience, and the
literature on the problem of logical omniscience o↵ers various strategies that—if successful—
could be borrowed to resolve our present diﬃculty. For instance, one could borrow Garber
(1983)’s strategy and assign evidential probabilities not to subsets of the logically possible
worlds, but rather to sentences in a language generated from the logical closure of certain
atomic sentences. Or one could take a page from Stalnaker (1999): for every logical truth
L that we intuitively want to assign an evidential probability less than 1, we could take our
intuitions to be tracking the evidential probability of the diagonal of some sentence that
actually expresses L.41 But note that neither of these strategies will help rescue the Knowl-
edge Account of Evidential Probability, since it is a direct consequence of the Knowledge
Account that all knowledge gets assigned evidential probability 1.
A second objection to my account focuses on my proposed direction of explanation.
Suppose we grant that the evidential probability of a proposition equals its degree of epis-
temic certainty. Still, the objection runs, it doesn’t follow that degrees of certainty are
explanatorily prior to evidential probabilities. Perhaps evidential probabilities should be
used to explain degrees of certainty, or perhaps neither has priority.
Questions about the direction of explanation are diﬃcult to adjudicate. In my eyes,
the main reason for being attracted to the direction of explanation advocated here is that
epistemic certainty can be used to illuminate a wide variety of epistemic phenomena, not
just evidential probability.42 Of course, it’s one thing to assert that certainty can be used
to explain various epistemic phenomena, it’s another thing to show it. It’s to this task that
I now turn. In the rest of this chapter, I use certainty to shed light on epistemic modals,
knowledge, and the normative constraints on action. In doing so, I aim to build a strong
41The diagonal of a sentence φ is the proposition that, for any world w in the context set, is true at w i↵
the proposition expressed by φ at w is true at w (i.e., λc . JφKc,wc = 1).
42Compare with the Knowledge Account: while Williamson does not o↵er E=K as a conceptual analysis,
he does take knowledge to explain evidence, rather than the other way around (2000a: 185-186).
And
presumably one reason for taking this to be the correct direction of explanation is that (according to
Knowledge Firsters) we can use knowledge to explain so much else in the epistemic domain.

88
case that certainty plays a central explanatory role in epistemology more generally.43
3.4
Epistemic Modals
3.4.1
Two Analyses of Epistemic Modals
We often use modals (might, possibly, must, etc.) to convey information about our epistemic
state. Sometimes these epistemic modals occur with restrictor phrases (e.g., In light of the
evidence, he must be the culprit), but they frequently occur bare, as in:
(72)
It might/must be raining.
The standard analysis of bare epistemic modals treats them as quantiﬁers over the possi-
bilities compatible some relevant epistemic state:
‘Might φ’ is true at a point of evaluation i i↵φ is compatible with the relevant epistemic
state.
‘Must φ’ is true at i i↵the relevant epistemic state entails φ.44
Much of the literature on epistemic modals focuses on whose epistemic state is relevant.
Is it some group determined by the context of utterance, as contextualists maintain? Or is
the relevant group determined, at least in part, by the context of assessment, as relativists
insist? For present purposes, I want to set this question aside, and focus on the question of
what sort of epistemic state is relevant.
The most common view is that the relevant epistemic state is knowledge. Call this the
‘Knowledge Analysis’:
‘Might φ’ is true at i i↵φ is compatible with what the relevant agents know (or are in a
position to know).
43Note that even those who are unconvinced by my claims about the direction of explanatory priority can
still accept much of what is said in this section. Even if we deny that either side of EP=EC is explanatorily
prior to the other, EP=EC still provides an important and interesting connection between certainty and
evidential probability. By establishing this connection, we’ll have already provided some motivation for the
thesis that certainty plays a relatively central role in the epistemic realm.
44For the sake of simplicity, I omit the role of the ordering source. I’ll also ignore the fact that some take
‘might’ and ‘must’ to carry presuppositions of indirectness—see e.g. von Fintel and Gillies 2010.

89
‘Must φ’ is true at i i↵φ is entailed by what the relevant agents know (or are in a position
to know).45
By contrast, I advocate a ‘Certainty Analysis’, according to which the relevant state
is certainty.46 There are a couple of ways of developing a Certainty Analysis, depending
on whether one thinks that epistemic modals are sensitive to agents’ states of epistemic
certainty, their states of subjective certainty, or both. For present purposes, I’ll operate
with a simple account, according to which epistemic modals are analyzed only in terms of
agents’ states of epistemic certainty:
‘Might φ’ is true at i i↵φ is compatible with the set of propositions that are epistemically
certain for the relevant agents.
‘Must φ’ is true at i i↵φ is entailed by the set of propositions that are epistemically
certain for the relevant agents.47
In what follows, I motivate the Certainty Analysis by pointing to linguistic data that
suggest a close connection between epistemic certainty and epistemic modals. The Certainty
Analysis illuminates this connection, whereas the Knowledge Analysis leaves it unexplained.
3.4.2
In Favor of the Certainty Analysis
Suppose a detective asserts:
45For endorsements of the Knowledge Analysis of Epistemic Modals, see Hacking 1967; Kratzer 1981,
2012; DeRose 1991; Egan et al. 2005; Stanley 2005b; Stephenson 2007a; Hawthorne 2007, 2012; Egan and
Weatherson 2011; Dorr and Hawthorne 2013.
46Only a couple of authors have entertained something like the Certainty Analysis. DeRose suggests that
might is the dual of it is certain that (1998; 2009: 20). However, he seems to think certainty should be
analyzed in terms of knowledge, indicating that he doesn’t take this approach to be an alternative to the
Knowledge Analysis (which he explicitly endorses in DeRose 1991). As far as I’m aware, the only author who
explicitly defends a Certainty Analysis of modals as an alternative to the Knowledge Analysis is Littlejohn
(2011). On Littlejohn’s proposal, p is epistemically possible for S i↵¬p is not obviously entailed by something
S knows with certainty. While my proposal di↵ers from Littlejohn’s in certain points of detail, in large part
this section can be seen as making an extended case for Littlejohn’s thesis, and embedding this thesis within
the broader framework of a Certainty First epistemology.
47There are di↵erent ways of ﬂeshing this out, depending on which standards of certainty we take to be in
play. For those attracted to a contextualist account of modals, it’s natural to take the standards of certainty
to be ﬁxed by the context of utterance. More precisely:
J⌃φKc,w = 1 i↵\{p: Jp is certainKc,w = 1} \ JφKc 6= ;
J⇤φKc,w = 1 i↵\{p: Jp is certainKc,w = 1} ✓JφKc
Relativists can take the standards of certainty to be ﬁxed by the context of assessment.

90
(73)
The butler must have done it.
We’d expect her to be also willing to assert:
(74)
It’s certain that the butler did it.
Indeed, it seems incoherent to assert (73) while denying (74):
(75)
# The butler must have done it. But it’s not certain that the butler did it.
The Certainty Analysis o↵ers a straightforward explanation of this data. According
to the Certainty Analysis, (73) says that it’s epistemically certain that the butler did it
(or that it’s entailed by what’s epistemically certain that the butler did it). And so (73)
commits the detective to (74). For the same reason, (75) is predicted to be incoherent.
It’s worth noting that we can reproduce the data using subjective certainty:
(76)
# The butler must have done it. But I’m not certain that the butler did it.
One option for explaining the infelicity of (76) is to reﬁne our analysis of epistemic
modals, making them sensitive to both epistemic and subjective certainty (as in Littlejohn
2011). But another option is to retain our original analysis and explain the infelicity of (76)
by appealing to the Matching Requirement. We expect that if p is epistemically certain for
an agent, then that agent will be subjectively certain that p (as the Matching Requirement
dictates). This expectation, together with our original Certainty Analysis, suﬃces to explain
the bizarreness of (76).
Whereas the Certainty Analysis straightforwardly predicts the close connection between
epistemic modals and certainty ascriptions, the Knowledge Analysis leaves this connection
unexplained. According to the Knowledge Analysis, (73) says that the relevant folks’ knowl-
edge entails the butler did it. Since knowledge doesn’t entail certainty, the fact that (73) is
assertible is no guarantee that (74) is assertible. Similarly, we’d expect (75) to be coherent:
it will be true whenever it is known but not certain that the butler did it.
Some might think this is too quick. One way proponents of the Knowledge Analysis
might seek to explain these data is by appealing to the idea that we are reluctant to let the
“contextually set standards for knowledge and certainty diverge” (Williamson 2000a: 204).

91
On this view, while knowledge doesn’t entail either epistemic certainty or subjective cer-
tainty, a knowledge ascription will typically be true in a context c only if the corresponding
epistemic and subjective certainty ascriptions are also true in c.
However, the same considerations that count against the idea that knowledge entails
certainty cast doubt on the idea that we’re reluctant to tolerate much separation between
the standards for knowledge and the standards for certainty. Take, for example, the fact
that knows for certain is not redundant: claiming that someone knows something with
certainty is naturally interpreted as claiming that they know it with an unusually high
degree of certainty (§3.2.1). This suggests that the standards for certainty ascriptions are
generally higher than those for knowledge ascriptions. Moreover, there are cases where it
seems natural to describe an agent as knowing a proposition without being certain of it.
Consider the unconﬁdent examinee, who reliably but hesitantly gives correct answers on an
exam (Woozley 1952; Radford 1966). It seems that the examinee knows the answer to the
examiner’s question; however, it doesn’t seem that the examinee knows the answer with
either subjective or epistemic certainty (Armstrong 1969; Stanley 2008; McGlynn 2014:
chp.5).
Alternatively, proponents of the Knowledge Analysis might try to explain the data by
suggesting that while one can know p even though p isn’t certain, knowing that p isn’t
certain precludes one from knowing that one knows p. If we assume that one can only
felicitously assert what one is in a position to know, it follows that (75) is never assertable.
However, there are reasons for resisting an explanation along these lines. First, such
an explanation would at most explain the oddity of (75). It wouldn’t explain the intuition
that whenever one is in a position to assert (73), one is also in a position to assert (74).
Second, there remains a question as to why recognizing that p isn’t certain would preclude
one from knowing that one knows p. It seems that proponents of the Knowledge Analysis
owe us a story here. Whatever story is o↵ered, the resulting explanation of the infelicity
of (75) will be less parsimonious than that o↵ered by the Certainty Analysis, which treats
(75) as a straightforward contradiction.
A further diﬃculty for pragmatic explanations of the data is that the connection between
epistemic certainty and modals persists under embeddings. First, consider attitude verbs:

92
(77)
??
The detective thinks/knows the butler must have done it.
But she doesn’t
think/know it’s certain that he did it.
(78)
?? Suppose the butler must have done it but it’s not certain whether he did it.
Second, consider conditionals:
(79)
# If the butler must have done it and it’s not certain whether he did it...
All of these sentences sound odd, if not downright incoherent. This provides further evidence
that the connection between epistemic modals and epistemic certainty is not merely a
pragmatic phenomenon, but calls for a semantic explanation. Again, a Certainty Analysis
is in a better position than the Knowledge Analysis to explain the data.
For those who remain unconvinced, it is worth developing a ﬁnal argument in favor
of the Certainty Analysis—an argument from modal concord. Modal concord occurs when
two modals occur near each other, but seem to only contribute the force of a single modal
(Halliday 1970; Geurts and Huitink 2006; Huitink 2012). Consider:
(80)
You may possibly have read my little monograph on the subject.48
(81)
You may have read my little monograph on the subject.
(80) is naturally interpeted as equivalent to (81) (or a slightly hedged version thereof). It
is not naturally given a ‘cumulative’ reading, according to which it’s possible that there is
a possibility that the addressee has read the speaker’s monograph.
It is a matter of debate how best to analyze modal concord. However, it’s widely agreed
that in order for modal concord to arise, the two modals must be equivalent. This explains
why a concord reading is available for (80), but not for (82) or (83):
(82)
? Possibly you must have read my monograph.
(83)
? You may certainly have read my monograph.49
48Geurts and Huitink 2006 take (80) from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s The Hound of the Baskervilles.
49Arguably, we can access some coherent readings of these sentences. For instance, there seems to be a
coherent reading of (83) on which it says that it is possible that it is certain that the addressee has read the
speaker’s monograph. However, this would be a cumulative reading rather than a concord reading.

93
This provides further reason to think that must and certain are equivalent. After all,
must and certainly generate modal concord:
(84)
You must certainly have read my monograph.
(85)
You must have read my monograph.
(84) is naturally interpreted as equivalent to (85) (or a slightly strengthened version
thereof). It is far less natural to give (84) a cumulative reading, according to which it is
epistemically necessary that it is certain that the addressee read the monograph. Those who
reject the Certainty Analysis will thus be forced to reject the well-supported generalization
that modal concord is only possible when both modals are equivalent.50
3.4.3
An Objection to the Certainty Analysis
I’ve argued that the Certainty Analysis accounts for a range of linguistic data that de-
fenders of rival analyses—in particular, the Knowledge Analysis—will be hard-pressed to
explain. However, some might object that the Certainty Analysis ﬂounders when it comes
to epistemic contradictions and concessive knowledge attributions:
(86)
# It’s raining but it might not be raining.
(87)
# I know that it’s raining. But it might not be.51
According to the Certainty Analysis, It might not be raining is true as long as it’s not
certain that it’s raining. Since knowledge doesn’t require certainty, it’s not clear why a
speaker couldn’t both know that it’s raining and also know that it’s not certain (for her)
that it’s raining. And so it’s unclear why (86) and (87) are infelicitous.
50Geurts and Huitink 2006 suggest that modal concord may only require that the two modals are nearly
equivalent. If this is right, then one could deny the Certainty Analysis while maintaining that the meaning
of must is suﬃciently close to the meaning of certainly to enable modal concord. Geurts and Huintink
motivate their suggestion on the basis of sentences such as:
(iv) ? Pain in these diseases may probably inﬂuence the sleep process.
However, (iv) strikes me as odd. Insofar as I can interpret it, I ﬁnd myself accessing a cumulative rather
than a concord reading. (Informal polling suggests that a number of others share this judgment.) If this is
right, then (iv) conﬁrms rather than refutes the generalization that modal concord requires equivalence in
meaning.
51Yalcin (2007) calls sentences such as (86), ‘epistemic contradictions.’ Rysiew (2001) calls discourses such
as (87), ‘concessive knowledge attributions.’

94
By contrast, the Knowledge Analysis seems to be in a comparatively good position to
explain these data (Stanley 2005b). On the Knowledge Analysis, It might not be raining
entails that the relevant agents don’t know that it’s raining. If we assume the ‘Speaker
Inclusion Constraint’, according to which the speaker is always one of the relevant agents
(Egan et al. 2005), (87) is contradictory.
While (86) is not contradictory on the Knowlege Analysis, proponents of the Knowl-
edge Analysis arguably have a plausible pragmatic explanation of its infelicity. Recently, a
number of authors have advocated the idea that knowledge is the norm of assertion:
Knowledge Norm of Assertion (KA): Assert p only if you know p.52
By conjoining the Knowledge Analysis with KA, (87) is guaranteed to be unassertable.
Since knowledge is factive, knowing the ﬁrst conjunct (It’s raining) precludes knowing the
second conjunct (It might not be). On the face of it, this is an elegant result, since many
have motivated KA on the grounds that it can explain the infelicity of Moorean assertions
(Moore 1962), e.g.:
(88)
# It’s raining but I don’t believe/know it’s raining.
Hence by appealing to KA, proponents of the Knowledge Analysis can give a uniﬁed account
of the infelicity of epistemic contradictions and Moorean assertions.
There are two ways that proponents of the Certainty Analysis could respond to this
objection. The ﬁrst is to replace KA with a certainty norm for assertion, e.g.:
Certainty Norm of Assertion (CA): Assert p only if p is epistemically certain for
you.53,54
52See, in particular, Williamson 1996, 2000a. Unger (1975), Slote (1979), Reynolds (2002), DeRose (2002,
2009), Hawthorne (2004), Sutton (2005, 2007), Scha↵er (2008), and Turri (2011a) all endorse versions of
KA.
53The idea for such a norm can be traced to Moore (1959), who claims that when I assert p, I imply that
p is certain. However, Moore thought that knowledge entailed certainty. As far as I know, the only author
who explicitly advocates a certainty norm as an alternative to KA is Stanley (2008). (I should note that
since writing his 2008 paper, Stanley has expressed reservations about a certainty norm of assertion (p.c.),
and it is doubtful whether he still endorses it.)
54As Stanley (2008) observes, a norm along these lines seems most plausible if the standards of certainty
are taken to be set by the asserter’s context. On this construal, the norm says that you should only assert
p in a context c if p counts as epistemically certain in c.

95
Armed with CA, advocates of the Certainty Analysis can give a pragmatic explanation
of the oddity of (86). In order to felicitously utter the ﬁrst conjunct (It’s raining), it would
need to be certain that it’s raining. In order to felicitously utter the second conjunct (It
might not be raining), it would need be epistemically certain that it’s not certain that it’s
raining. Since pos form epistemic certainty ascriptions are factive, a speaker could never
satisfy both of these requirements. And since knowledge is factive, the same explanation
generalizes to explain the infelicity of (87).
Some may worry that CA is ad hoc. But it can be motivated on independent grounds.
As Unger (1975) and Stanley (2008) note, it sounds odd to say:
(89)
?? It’s raining but it’s not certain that it’s raining.
What’s more, such sentences seem to be defective in a way that closely resembles the original
Moorean assertions (e.g., (88)). It would be nice to give a uniﬁed explanation of their oddity.
Given that knowledge doesn’t entail epistemic certainty, KA doesn’t explain the oddity
of (89). CA does: it would be impossible to utter (89) while obeying CA. Hence (89) su↵ers
from the same ailment as (86).
Given the assumption that epistemic certainty entails
knowledge (§3.2.5), CA also accounts for the original Moorean assertions that motivated
KA.
It is worth mentioning a further advantage of CA. Given our analysis of certain as a
max adjective (§3.2), CA also explains the oddity of:
(90)
? It’s raining but it’s not absolutely certain that it’s raining.
According to CA, it’s only felicitous to assert the ﬁrst conjunct of (90) if the degree of
epistemic certainty that it’s raining is close enough to the max. If maximizing modiﬁers
such as absolutely are also sensitive to standards of precision, then the second conjunct
of (90) says that the degree of epistemic certainty that it’s raining is less than whatever
counts as close enough to the max. At the same time, we can explain why (90) sounds less
bizarre than other Moorean assertions. After all, maximizing modiﬁers typically raise the
standards of precision (§3.2.3). And this enables us to access a ‘repair’ interpretation of
(90): perhaps the speaker is communicating that it is certain to rain, given low standards

96
of precision, but not given high standards.55
An alternative strategy for explaining the infelicity of epistemic contradictions and con-
cessive knowledge attributions is to modify the Certainty Analysis so as to predict that
both (86) and (87) are semantically defective. For example, one could recast the Certainty
Analysis as a version of update semantics (Veltman 1996). According to update semantics,
the meaning of a sentence is a function from information states to information states, where
an information state is a set of worlds compatible with the epistemic state of some relevant
agent(s). An atomic sentence such as It’s raining updates an information state s by re-
moving any not-raining worlds from s. By contrast, sentences containing epistemic modals
are tests on an information state. Asserting It might not be raining tests to see whether s
contains at least one world where it isn’t raining. If so, s passes the test, and is returned
unscathed. If not, s crashes, returning the absurd information state (;). Similarly, asserting
It must be raining tests whether s contains only worlds where it’s raining.56
Where does certainty come in? Formulations of update semantics rarely take a stand
on what sort of epistemic state information states are supposed to model. We can recast
the Certainty Analysis as an answer to this question: an information state just is the set of
possibilities compatible with the propositions that are epistemically certain for the relevant
agents. Note that this ‘Updated Certainty Analysis’ still accounts for the close connection
between epistemic modals and certainty that motivated our original Certainty Analysis
(§3.4.2).
55This raises a subtle di↵erence between the current proposal and Stanley’s. While Stanley agrees that
certain is an absolute gradable adjective, by this he seems to mean only that certain accepts the modiﬁer
absolutely; he denies that p is certain entails p is absolutely certain (Stanley 2008: 53-54).
And so his
account doesn’t explain the oddity of (90).
56To state this more precisely, let s be any information state, ↵be any atomic sentence, and φ and  be any
sentences. Update semantics can be characterized by a function [·] from information states to information
states, deﬁned recursively as follows:
1. s[↵] = s \ {w : w(↵) = 1}
2. s[φ ^  ] = s[φ][ ]
3. s[¬φ] = s −s[φ]
4. s[⌃φ] = {w 2 s : s[φ] 6= ;}.
5. s[⇤φ] = {w 2 s : s ✓s[φ]}.
For discussion and development of update semantics, see Gillies 2001; Yalcin 2012b, 2015; Willer 2013.

97
Recasting the Certainty Analysis in an update semantics framework enables a semantic
diagnosis of the infelicity of epistemic contradictions and concessive knowledge attributions.
Consider again (86) (It’s raining and it might not be raining). Updating an information
state with the ﬁrst conjunct results in an information state that contains only worlds where
it’s raining. And so this information state is bound to fail the test imposed by the second
conjunct. Therefore (86) comes out as semantically—not merely pragmatically—defective
(Veltman 1996; Gillies 2001). Given the factivity of knowledge, this explanation generalizes
to predict that (87) will also crash any information state.
Thus while the infelicity of epistemic contradictions and concessive knowledge attribu-
tions is a prima facie hurdle for the Certainty Analysis, there are two natural strategies for
explaining the data: one pragmatic, one semantic. Which of these strategies is preferable?
This is a diﬃcult matter to adjudicate. On the one hand, we saw that a certainty norm
for assertion can be motivated on independent grounds (speciﬁcally, its ability to explain
the full range of Moorean assertions). This seems to be an important point in favor of the
pragmatic strategy. On the other hand, Yalcin (2007) argues that epistemic contradictions
are infelicitous in embedded contexts, unlike Moorean assertions. According to Yalcin, this
creates a diﬃculty for purely pragmatic explanations of the infelicity of epistemic contra-
dictions. If this is right, then this may count in favor of a semantic explanation of the data
of the sort provided by the Updated Certainty Analysis.57
For present purposes, we need not choose between the two strategies. (It may even turn
out that both an update semantics for modals and a certainty norm for assertion are needed
to account for the full range of data.) The important point is that these strategies o↵er
ample resources for warding o↵the main objection to analyzing epistemic modals in terms
of certainty.
57More speciﬁcally, Yalcin argues that a pragmatic account of the infelicity of epistemic contradictions
won’t explain the oddity of:
(v) ?? Suppose it’s raining and it might not be raining.
(vi) # If it’s raining and might not be raining...
For a reply to Yalcin, see Dorr and Hawthorne 2013.

98
3.4.4
Taking Stock
Our ordinary uses of epistemic modals suggest that they’re closely tied to certainty. This
motivates a Certainty Analysis, according to which epistemic modals quantify over a set of
possibilities whose domain is restricted by the propositions that are epistemically certain.
The Certainty Analysis also ﬁts naturally with the treatment of evidential probability
developed in §3.3. Evidential uses of probabilistic language seem to be closely related to
epistemic modals.
Earlier, we saw that Probably φ generates a scalar implicature that
It’s not certain that φ (§3.3.1). Similarly, probability claims implicate the falsity of the
corresponding strong necessity claims:
(91)
a. It’s likely the butler did it.  
b. ¬(The butler must have done it).
And possibility claims implicate the falsity of the corresponding probability claims (Horn
1972):
(92)
a. The butler might have done it.  
b. ¬(The butler probably did it).
On the picture that emerges, epistemic certainty ascriptions, epistemic modals, and ev-
idential uses of probability operators all reside on the epistemic certainty scale. Pos form
epistemic certainty ascriptions and strong necessity modals target the top of the scale: both
are used to indicate that a proposition is maximally certain (or close enough thereto). Epis-
temic probability operators tend to live lower on the scale: they indicate that a proposition
has a fairly high degree of epistemic certainty. Finally, epistemic possibility modals inhabit
the bottom of scale: they indicate that a proposition isn’t ruled out by what’s epistemically
certain.
3.5
Knowledge
Where does knowledge ﬁt into this picture? Saying someone knows something with certainty
seems to convey that she knows it on particularly strong grounds, or with a particularly

99
high degree of justiﬁcation. (Recall again our minimal pairs from §3.2.1: (42a) vs. (42b);
(43a) vs. (43b).) This suggests the following possibility: while knowledge requires a fairly
high degree of epistemic certainty, the degree required isn’t always as high as the degree
required for the truth of a pos form epistemic certainty ascription. Perhaps knowledge is
near epistemic certainty.58
According to the account developed in §3.2, ‘p is certain for S’ is true as long as p’s
degree of epistemic certainty is close enough to the maximum degree of epistemic certainty.
Thus saying that knowledge is near certainty amounts to the following:
Close to Close: ‘S knows p’ is true in c i↵p’s degree of epistemic certainty (for S) is
close enough to being close enough (for the purposes of c) to the maximum.
Here’s another way of putting it. According to the treatment in §3.2, there will be an
interval of degrees of epistemic certainty that are indistinguishable from the maximum for
the purposes of the context. Any di↵erence between them and the maximum is ignorable.
On the present proposal, there will often be another interval adjacent to the ﬁrst. This is
the range of tolerable di↵erences: they’re not indistinguishable from the max, but they’re
nearly indistinguishable. ‘S knows p’ is true i↵p’s degree of epistemic certainty (for S) is
at least tolerable.
How does this analysis handle false beliefs and Gettier cases? In the same way that our
treatment of pos form epistemic certainty ascriptions did. Recall that I proposed explaining
the puzzling entailments of pos form epistemic certainty ascriptions by imposing substantive
constraints on the ‘close enough’ relation (§3.2.5). For example, to explain why pos form
epistemic certainty ascriptions are factive, we imposed a Truth Constraint: if p is false,
then no degree of epistemic certainty less than 1 is ignorable. We can likewise impose a
Truth Constraint on the ‘close to close’ relation: if p is false, then no degree of epistemic
certainty less than 1 is tolerable.
Similarly, for any anti-Gettier condition C, we can regard C as a constraint on both
the ‘close enough’ relation and the ‘close to close’ relation. For example, those attracted to
58Obviously, this slogan needs to be understood in such a way that epistemic certainty trivially counts as
near epistemic certainty.

100
the idea that a safety condition on knowledge explains why Gettier subjects lack knowledge
could impose a Safety Constraint on the ‘close to close’ relation: if S’s belief that p is unsafe,
then no degree of epistemic certainty less than 1 is tolerable. (See Figure 3.2.)
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Ignorable Di↵erences
Tolerable Di↵erences
C obtains
C doesn’t obtain
Ignorable & Tolerable Di↵erences
Figure 3.2: Certainty & Near Certainty.
What if it turns out that there’s no anti-Gettier condition? This would mean that there’s
no non-circular speciﬁcation of the conditions under which a degree of epistemic certainty
counts as close to close enough to the max. But even if this turns out to be the case,
the present account is still illuminating. While we won’t have given a reductive analysis
of knowledge, we’ll still have shed light on the structural relations between knowledge and
certainty: to know p is for p’s degree of epistemic certainty to come close to that which
suﬃces for certainty (full stop). This is an interesting, substantive connection—one that
does not emerge from rival accounts.
3.6
Certainty and Action
Thus far, I’ve argued that certainty can be used to shed light on evidential probability,
epistemic modals, and knowledge. I’ve also suggested that some important normative con-
straints are best articulated in terms of certainty. In particular, I’ve argued that our degrees

101
of subjective certainty ought to align with the degrees of epistemic certainty (the Matching
Requirement); I’ve also highlighted the attractions of a certainty norm of assertion (§3.4.3).
In this section, I explore whether we can use certainty to provide normative constraints on
action.
One attractive picture of the normative constraints on action is provided by Bayesian
decision theory: agents ought to maximize expected utility.
What probability function
should be used when calculating expected utilities?
A natural option is to employ an
agent’s evidential probability function (Hawthorne 2005; Greco 2013). Given our earlier
arguments for interpreting evidential probabilities as degrees of epistemic certainty (§3.3),
this suggests one role for certainty in constraining action: degrees of certainty feature in
the interpretation of expected utilities.59
Recently, a number of authors have suggested that while Bayesian decision theory may
be correct, it does not provide the complete story about the normative constraints on action.
In the real world, we often take some premises for granted. In deciding when to leave my
apartment, I do not typically calculate the probability that my car will start; instead, I
simply rely on the premise that my car will start. This raises the question: what sort of
epistemic relation does one need to stand in towards a premise in order to appropriately
rely on it in practical reasoning?
According to many authors in the recent literature, the answer is: ‘Knowledge.’60 Here’s
a simple way of formulating this idea:
Knowledge Norm of Action (KN): It is appropriate for S to rely on p in practical
reasoning i↵S knows p.
KN holds considerable prima facie appeal. As Hawthorne and Stanley note, we often
criticize others for acting on the basis of propositions that they don’t know: “If a parent
59Greco (2013) argues that if we (i) calculate expected utility using the evidential probability function,
(ii) adopt the Knowledge Account of Evidential Probability, we’ll be led to recommend accepting irrational
bets—e.g., bets where I gain a penny if Snow (the proposition that it will snow in NY sometime this year) is
true, and where the world is destroyed if Snow is false. This reveals a further advantage of taking evidential
probabilities to be degrees of certainty: no such bets are recommended, because even though I know Snow,
its degree of epistemic certainty—and hence its evidential probability for me—is less than 1.
60While they di↵er on points of detail, Hawthorne (2004); Williamson (2005); Fantl and McGrath (2002,
2009); Hawthorne and Stanley (2008); Weatherson (2012); and Ross and Schroeder (2014) all defend the
idea that knowledge places an important constraint on action.

102
allows a child to play near a dog and does not know whether the dog would bite the child,
and if a doctor uses a needle that he did not know to be safe, then they are prima facie
negligent” (2008: 572).
But while KN explains such criticisms, it doesn’t explain the fact that we’re often
willing to criticize agents for acting on the basis of uncertain premises (Brown 2008a,b,
2012b; Gerken 2011):
(93)
You shouldn’t let your child play there, since we don’t know for sure whether that
dog is friendly.
(94)
You shouldn’t use that needle, since it’s not certain whether it’s safe.
Confronted with the naturalness of criticizing people for their lack of certainty, one might
conclude that we shouldn’t lean too heavily on our ordinary patterns of criticism (Gerken
2011), or that the epistemic state required for appropriate action varies with circumstances
(Brown 2008a,b, 2012b). But another option is to explain these criticisms via a certainty
norm:
Certainty Norm of Action (CN): It is appropriate for S to rely on p in practical
reasoning i↵p is certain for S.61
CN straightforwardly explains the naturalness of criticizing actions on the basis of un-
certain premises. Assuming that epistemic certainty entails knowledge, CN also explains
the naturalness of criticizing people for acting on the basis of unknown propositions. Thus
CN holds out the promise of a general explanation of our ordinary patterns of criticism.62
A separate argument for CN starts from the question: ‘What is to rely on a proposition
in practical reasoning?’ It seems plausible that when I rely on p in practical reasoning, I
treat any ¬p possibilities as ignorable, at least for the purposes of deliberation. (If I didn’t
treat such possibilities as ignorable, then it seems I wouldn’t be relying on p; instead, I
61As in the case of a Certainty Norm of Assertion, a Certainty Norm of Action is most plausible if the
standards for certainty are provided by S’s context.
62CN is thus a factive (and, indeed, knowledge-entailing) norm of assertion. In this regard, it is importantly
di↵erent from non-factive norms of action, for instance, the sort of variable justiﬁcation/warrant norm
defended by Gerken (2011, forthcoming) and Locke (2015), which holds (roughly) that it is appropriate
to act on the basis of p i↵S is justiﬁed/warranted in believing p to the degree that is required by the
circumstances.

103
would be relying on a proposition of the form: hIt’s very likely that pi.) This conception
of what it is to rely on a proposition in practical reasoning in turn motivates the following
idea: it’s appropriate for S to rely on p in a context c i↵it’s appropriate for S to ignore
any ¬p possibilities in c.63 And it seems very natural to hold that it’s appropriate for S to
ignore any ¬p possibilities in c i↵any di↵erence between p’s degree of certainty (for S) and
the maximum can be appropriately ignored in c. Given Close Enough (§3.2.4), this obtains
i↵‘It is certain that p’ is true in c.
CN also o↵ers to handle some of the counterexamples to KN in the literature. Consider,
for instance, Brown (2008a)’s surgeon case:
A student observes a surgeon examining patient A who has a diseased left kidney. The
decision is taken to remove it that afternoon. Later, the student observes the surgeon
preparing to operate. As patient A lies on the table, the surgeon consults the patient’s
notes. The student turns to one of the nurses:
Student: I don’t understand. Why is she looking at the patient’s records? She was in
clinic with the patient this morning. Doesn’t she even know which kidney it is?
Nurse: Of course she knows which kidney it is. But, imagine what it would be like
if she removed the wrong kidney. She shouldn’t operate before checking the patient’s
records.64
CN explains the nurse’s appraisal. Even though the surgeon knows that the left kidney is
diseased, she shouldn’t rely on this proposition, since it isn’t epistemically certain for her:
its degree of certainty isn’t close enough to the maximum.
According to this diagnosis of Brown’s surgeon case, practical factors can a↵ect whether
p’s degree of epistemic certainty is close enough to the maximum in a given context. (It’s the
disastrous consequences of removing the wrong kidney which ratchet up the standards for
certainty in the surgeon’s context of deliberation.) Thus we are led to a sort of ‘impurism’
about certainty ascriptions, according to which the truth-value of ‘It’s certain that p’ in a
63Or to frame this in the terms suggested by Weatherson (2012), one can appropriately rely on p i↵one
can appropriately leave any ¬p possibilities o↵of a decision table.
64See Lackey 2010 and Reed 2010 for other counterexamples to the suﬃciency direction of KN.

104
context partially depends on the practical consequences of being wrong about p. (Similar
remarks seem to apply to pos form subjective certainty ascriptions.)65 However, this does
not seem to be a special feature about certainty per se: in general, practical factors inﬂuence
the resolution of gradable adjectives. Consider, for example, clean. Whether a knife’s degree
of cleanness counts as close enough to the max depends on how important it is that the
knife is completely free of dirt: surgery calls for higher standards of precision than carrot-
chopping. Arguably, then, impurism about certainty ascriptions is a less surprising doctrine
than impurism about knowledge ascriptions. The general observation that practical features
a↵ect the standards of precision for gradable expressions leads us to expect impurism about
the former, but not the latter (since, after all, knows isn’t gradable).66
In summary, the hypothesis that certainty has a close connection with action holds
considerable appeal. This connection emerges at two levels. It ﬁrst emerges in our inter-
pretation of Bayesian decision theory: rational agents maximize expected utility, and the
probability function used to determine expected utilities is plausibly identiﬁed with the
epistemic certainty function. The connection emerges a second time when it comes to ar-
ticulating the conditions under which it’s appropriate to rely on a proposition in practical
reasoning. A certainty norm (CN) provides a uniﬁed account of our patterns of criticism;
it meshes naturally with the view that relying on p involves ignoring any ¬p possibilities;
it also accommodates some of the counterexamples to knowledge norms of action.67
Is there any reason to resist CN? Perhaps the most natural concern is that CN imposes
too demanding a standard on practical reasoning (Weatherson 2012: 80-81). However, given
65For defenses of impurism about knowledge ascriptions, see Fantl and McGrath 2002, 2009; Hawthorne
2004; Stanley 2005a; Weatherson 2011, 2012.
66It’s worth noting that if we replace KN with CN, we undercut one popular argument for impurism about
knowledge. The argument in question starts with the observation that whether you can appropriately act
on the basis of p varies with practical factors. It then appeals to KN in order to derive the conclusion
that knowledge varies with practical factors. (For versions of this argument, see Stanley 2005a; Fantl and
McGrath 2009; Weatherson 2012.) That said, CN is certainly compatible with impurism about knowledge.
And impurism about knowledge ﬁts fairly naturally with the picture of knowledge developed in §3.5: if
the ‘close enough’ relation is a↵ected by practical factors, it seems natural to think that the ‘close to close
enough’ relation is a↵ected by practical factors as well.
67Arguably, CN gains further appeal in light of our earlier arguments for a certainty norm of assertion
(§3.4.3). Of course, it is controversial whether the norm of assertion is derivable from the norm of action.
(See Brown 2012a; Montminy 2013; McGlynn 2014: chp.6.) But even if we can’t derive the former from the
latter, the view that a single epistemic state imposes normative constraints on both assertion and action is
arguably more elegant than a disjunctive picture, according to which di↵erent epistemic states govern the
two.

105
the context-sensitive account of certainty advanced here, this worry loses much of its bite.
Since much of our everyday knowledge counts—in ordinary contexts—as certain, much of
our everyday knowledge will serve—again, in ordinary contexts—as an appropriate basis for
action. And even when some ordinary item of knowledge p does not meet the contextual
standards for certainty, this need not render us paralyzed: we can still use p’s high degree of
certainty to calculate the expected utilities of various actions, as recommended by decision
theory.68
3.7
Conclusion
In this chapter, I’ve argued that certainty should occupy a central role in epistemology. I
began by disputing the common view that certainty is scarce. According to the context-
sensitive semantics for certainty ascriptions developed here, many of our beliefs qualify—
in appropriate contexts—as both subjectively and epistemically certain. Having laid the
foundation, I went on to put certainty to work in epistemology. I suggested that a variety of
topics—evidential probability, epistemic modals, knowledge, and the normative constraints
on credence, assertion, and action—can be fruitfully understood in terms of certainty.
Of course, there are a number of epistemological topics I have not broached in this
chapter. It is natural to wonder which of these can also be understood in terms of certainty.
Take, for example, the nature of belief.
Knowledge Firsters often try to explain belief
in terms of knowledge. According to a simple version of a Knowledge First treatment of
belief, to believe p is to treat p as though you know it: merely believing is a sort of “botched
knowing” (Williamson 2000a: 47).69 From the present perspective, it’s natural to trade this
knowledge-centered analysis for an analysis in terms of degrees of subjective certainty. Just
as knowledge is near epistemic certainty, belief is near subjective certainty: one believes
p i↵one’s degree of subjective certainty in p is close enough to being close enough to the
maximum. In slogan form: epistemic certainty is to knowledge as subjective certainty is to
belief. I hope to explore the viability of this approach in future work.70
68Compare with Hawthorne and Stanley 2008, who argue that we often act on our knowledge of the
evidential probabilities of various propositions.
69For a similar account, see Adler 2002: 36, 275. For objections, see McGlynn 2013.
70One interesting consequence of this proposal, when combined with CN, is that appropriately believing p

106
It is too early to tell whether a Certainty First program—or indeed any ‘X First’
program—should be embraced in full generality. However, I hope that this chapter has
given grounds for cautious optimism. At the very least, I hope to have shown that certainty
enjoys a relatively high degree of explanatory priority: we can make considerable progress
by taking certainty as our primitive and using it explain other epistemological phenomena.
does not put one in a position to appropriately act on the basis of p. After all, if believing p only requires near
subjective certainty, then one can rationally believe p even though p isn’t quite certain. This consequence
seems plausible in light of discourses such as the following: ‘I believe our plane leaves at seven, but we had
better check.’ In making this utterance, the speaker avows a belief that the plane leaves at seven, while
at the same time denying that it would be appropriate to act on the basis of this proposition. (For an
independent and complementary argument that appropriately believing p does not put one in a position to
appropriately assert p, see Hawthorne et al. 2016.)

Bibliography
Jonathan Adler. Belief’s Own Ethics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2002.
William Alston. The deontological conception of epistemic justiﬁcation. Philosophical Per-
spectives, 2:115–152, 1988.
Thomas Aquinas. Commentary on the Posterior Analytics of Aristotle. Magi Books Inc.,
New York, 1970.
D.M. Armstrong. Does knowledge entail belief? Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 70:
21–36, 1969.
A.J. Ayer. Language, Truth, and Logic. Dover, New York, 1936.
Kelly Becker. Epistemic luck and the generality problem. Philosophical Studies, 139:353–
366, 2008.
Bob Beddor. Evidentialism, circularity, and grounding. Philosophical Studies, 172:1847–
1868, 2015a.
Bob Beddor. Process reliabilism’s troubles with defeat. The Philosophical Quarterly, 65
(259), 2015b.
Bob Beddor. Justiﬁcation as faultlessness. Philosophical Studies, forthcoming.
Matthew Bedke. Developmental process reliabilism: on justiﬁcation, defeat, and evidence.
Erkenntnis, 73(1):1–17, 2010.
Gunnar Bj¨ornsson and Tristram McPherson. Moral attitudes for non-cognitivists: Solving
the speciﬁcation problem. Mind, 123(408):1–38, 2014.
Deborah Black. Knowledge (‘ilm) and certitude (yaqin). Arabic Sciences and Philosophy,
16(1):11–45, 2006.
Simon Blackburn. Spreading the Word. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1984.
107

108
Simon Blackburn. Ruling Passions. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1998.
Tomas Bogardus. Knowledge under threat. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 86
(1):289–313, 2014.
Laurence Bonjour. The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, 1985.
Berit Brogaard. Moral contextualism and moral relativism. Philosophical Quarterly, 58:
385–409, 2008.
Jessica Brown. Subject-sensitive invariantism and the knowledge norm for practical reason-
ing. Noˆus, 42(2):167–189, 2008a.
Jessica Brown.
Knowledge and practical reason.
Philosophy Compass, 3(6):1135–1152,
2008b.
Jessica Brown. Assertion and practical reasoning: Common or divergent standards? Phi-
losophy and Phenomenological Research, 84(1):123–157, 2012a.
Jessica Brown. Practical reasoning, decision theory and anti-intellectualism. Episteme, 9
(1):43–62, 2012b.
Herman Cappelen and John Hawthorne. Relativism and Monadic Truth. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2009.
Nate Charlow. ‘prospects for an expressivist theory of meaning’. Philosophers’ Imprint, 15
(23), 2015.
Matthew Chrisman. From epistemic contextualism to epistemic expressivism. Philosophical
Studies, 135(2):225–254, 2007.
Matthew Chrisman. Epistemic expressivism. Philosophy Compass, 7(2):118–126, 2012a.
Matthew Chrisman. ‘ought’ and control. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 90(3):433–451,
2012b.
Matthew Chrisman. On the meaning of ‘ought’. In Russ Shafer-Landau, editor, Oxford
Studies in Metaethics, volume 7. Oxford University Press, New York, 2012c.
Philippe Chuard and Nicholas Southwood.
Epistemic norms without voluntary control.
Noˆus, 43(4):599–632, 2009.
Michael J. Clark and David Liggins. Recent work on grounding. Analysis, 72(4):812–823,
2012.

109
Juan Comesa˜na. Unsafe knowledge. Synthese, 146:395–404, 2005.
Juan Comesa˜na. Evidentialist reliabilism. Noˆus, 44(4):571–600, 2010.
Earl Conee and Richard Feldman. The generality problem for reliabilism. Philosophical
Studies, 89(1):1–29, 1998.
Earl Conee and Richard Feldman. Evidentialism: Essays in Epistemology. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, New York, 2004.
Earl Conee and Richard Feldman. Some virtues of evidentialism. Veritas, 50:95–108, 2005.
Earl Conee and Richard Feldman. Evidence. In Smith, editor, Epistemology: New Essays.
Oxford University Press, New York, 2008.
Bridget Copley. What should should mean?, 2006. URL http://copley.free.fr/copley.
should.pdf.
M.J. Cresswell. The semantics of degree. In Barbara Partee, editor, Montague Grammar.
Academic Press, New York, 1977.
L´opez de Sa. Presuppositions of commonality: An indexical relativist account of disagree-
ment. In Garc´ıa Carpintero and K¨olbel, editors, Relative Truth. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2008.
Keith DeRose. Epistemic possibility. Philosophical Review, 100:581–605, 1991.
Keith DeRose. Simple ‘might’s, indicative possibilities, and the open future. Philosophical
Quarterly, 48:67–82, 1998.
Keith DeRose. Assertion, knowledge, and context. Philosophical Review, 111(2):167–203,
2002.
Keith DeRose. The Case for Contextualism: Knowledge, Skepticism, and Context. Claren-
don Press, Oxford, 2009.
Rene Descartes. Rules for the Direction of the Mind. In Adam and Tannery, editors, Oeuvres
De Descartes. Libraire Philosophique, Paris, 1983.
Sinan Dogramaci. Reverse engineering epistemic evaluations. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, 84(3):513–530, 2012.
Zoltan Domotor. Probability kinematics and representation of belief change. Philosophy of
Science, 47, 1980.
Cian Dorr and John Hawthorne. Embedding epistemic modals. Mind, 2013.

110
Jamie Dreier. Internalism and speaker relativism. Ethics, 101(1):6–26, 1990.
Andy Egan. Epistemic modals, relativism, and assertion. Philosophical Studies, 133(1):
1–22, 2007.
Andy Egan. Disputing about taste. In Feldman and Warﬁeld, editors, Disagreement. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2010.
Andy Egan. Relativist dispositional theories of value. Southern Journal of Philosophy, 50
(4):557–582, 2012.
Andy Egan. There’s something funny about comedy: A case study in faultless disagreement.
Erkenntnis, 79(1):73–100, 2014.
Andy Egan and Brian Weatherson. Epistemic modals and epistemic modality. In Egan and
Weatherson, editors, Epistemic Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
Andy Egan, John Hawthorne, and Brian Weatherson. Epistemic modals in context. In
Preyer and Peter, editors, Contextualism in Philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2005.
Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath. Evidence, pragmatics, and justiﬁcation. Philosophical
Review, 111(1):67–94, 2002.
Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath. Knowledge in an Uncertain World. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2009.
Richard Feldman. Having evidence. In Austin, editor, Essays Presented to Edmund Gettier.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1988.
Hartry Field. Epistemology without metaphysics. Philosophical Studies, 143(2):249–290,
2009.
Kit Fine. The question of realism. Philosophers’ Imprint, 1(1):1–30, 2001.
Kit Fine. Guide to ground. In Correia and Schneider, editors, Metaphysical Grounding.
Cambridge University press, Cambridge, 2012.
Jerry Fodor. The Modularity of Mind. MIT Press, 1983.
Francesca Foppolo and Francesca Panzeri. Do children know when their room counts as
clean? MS, University of Milano-Bicocca, 2010.
Daniel Garber. Old evidence and logical omniscience in bayesian conﬁrmation theory. In

111
Earman, editor, Testing Scientiﬁc Theories. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis,
1983.
Mikkel Gerken. Warrant and action. Synthese, 178(3):529–547, 2011.
Mikkel Gerken.
Against knowledge ﬁrst epistemology.
In Carter and Gordon, editors,
Knowledge First Epistemology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, forthcoming.
Bart Geurts and Janneke Huitink. Modal concord. In Concord Phenomena and the Syntax-
Semantics Interface. ESSLLI, 2006.
Allan Gibbard. Wise Choices, Apt Feelings. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
1990.
Allan Gibbard. Thinking How to Live. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
Allan Gibbard.
Rational credence and the value of truth.
In Gendler and Hawthorne,
editors, Oxford Studies in Epistemology, volume 2. Oxford University Press, New York,
2007.
Allan Gibbard. Reconciling Our Aims. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2008.
Thony Gillies. A new solution to moore’s paradox. Philosophical Studies, 105:237–250,
2001.
Alvin Goldman. What is justiﬁed belief? In Pappas, editor, Justiﬁcation and Knowledge.
Reidel, Dordrecht, 1979.
Alvin Goldman. Epistemology and Cognition. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
1986.
Alvin Goldman. Epistemic folkways and scientiﬁc epistemology. In Liasons: Philosophy
Meets the Cognitive and Social Sciences. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
Alvin Goldman. Knowledge in a Social World. Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.
Alvin Goldman.
Epistemic relativism and reasonable disagreement.
In Feldman and
Warﬁeld, editors, Disagreement, pages 187–215. Oxford University Press, New York, 2010.
Alvin Goldman. Towards a synthesis of reliabilism and evidentialism. In Dougherty, editor,
Evidentialism and its Discontents, pages 254–280. Oxford University Press, New York,
2011.
Alvin Goldman and Moshe Shaked. An economic model of scientiﬁc activity and truth
acquisition. Philosophical Studies, 63(1):31–55, 1991.

112
Martin Grajner. Hybrid expressivism and epistemic justiﬁcation. Philosophical Studies, 172
(9):2349–2369, 2015.
Daniel Greco. Prodigality and probability. In Gendler and Hawthorne, editors, Oxford
Studies in Epistemology, volume 4, pages 82–107. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2013.
Daniel Greco. A puzzle about epistemic akrasia. Philosophical Studies, 167(2):201–219,
2014.
Thomas Grundmann.
Reliabilism and the problem of defeaters.
Grazer Philosophische
Studien, 79(1):65–76, 2009.
Ian Hacking. Possibility. Philosophical Review, 76:143–168, 1967.
Michael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday.
Functional diversity in language as seen from a
consideration of modality and mood in english. Foundations of Language, 6:322–261,
1970.
Elizabeth Harman. Morally permissible moral mistakes. Ethics, 126(2):366–393, 2016.
Gilbert Harman. Moral relativism defended. Philosophical Review, 84:3–22, 1975.
Gilbert Harman. Stringency of rights and ’ought’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search, 53:181–185, 1993.
John Hawthorne. Knowlege and Lotteries. Oxford University Press, New York, 2004.
John Hawthorne. Knowlege and evidence. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 70
(2):452–458, 2005.
John Hawthorne. Eavesdroppers and epistemic modals. Philosophical Issues, 17:92–101,
2007.
John Hawthorne. Knowledge and epistemic necessity. Philosophical Studies, 158(3):493–501,
2012.
John Hawthorne and Jason Stanley. Knowlege and action. Journal of Philosophy, 105(10):
571–590, 2008.
John Hawthorne, Daniel Rothschild, and Levi Spectre. Belief is weak. Philosophical Studies,
173:1393–1404, 2016.
Trevor Hedberg. Epistemic supererogation and its implications. Synthese, 2014.
Brian Hedden. Time-slice rationality. Mind, 124(494):449–491, 2015.
Jaakko Hintikka. Knowledge and Belief. Cornell University Press, 1962.

113
Terry Horgan and Mark Timmons. Cognitivist expressivism. In Horgan and Timmons,
editors, Metaethics Afrer Moore. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006.
Laurence Horn. On the Semantic Properties of the Logical Operators in English. UCLA
PhD dissertation, 1972.
Laurence Horn. A Natural History of Negation. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1989.
Michael Huemer. Compassionate phenomenal conservatism. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, 74:30–55, 2007.
Janneke Huitink. Modal concord: A case study in dutch. Journal of Semantics, 29(3):
403–437, 2012.
Susan Hurley. Natural Reasons. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989.
Richard Je↵rey. The Logic of Decision. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1965.
Martin J¨onsson. A reliabilism built on cognitive convergence: An empirically grounded
solution to the generality problem. Episteme, 10(3):241–268, 2013a.
Martin J¨onsson. Linguistic convergence in verbs for belief-forming processes. Philosophical
Psychology, 28(1):114–138, 2013b.
James Joyce. A nonpragmatic vindication of probabilism. Philosophy of Science, 65(4):
575–603, 1998.
James Joyce. Williamson on evidence and knowledge. Philosophical Books, 45(4):296–305,
2004.
Mark Kaplan. Who cares what you know? Philosophical Quarterly, 53:105–116, 2003.
Mark Kaplan. Williamson’s casual approach to probabilism. In Greenough and Pritchard,
editors, Williamson on Knowledge. Oxford University Press, New York, 2009.
Klemens Kappel. Expressivism about knowledge and the value of knowledge. Acta Analyt-
ica, 25(2):175–194, 2010.
Antti Kauppinen.
What makes a sentiment moral?
In Shafer-Landau, editor, Oxford
Studies in Metaethics, volume 1. Oxford University Press, New York, 2010.
Christoph Kelp. Knowledge and safety. Journal of Philosophical Research, 34:21–31, 2009.
Chris Kennedy. The semantics of relative and absolute gradable adjectives. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 30:1–45, 2007.

114
Chris Kennedy and Louise McNally. Scale structure, degree modiﬁcation, and the semantics
of gradable predicates. Language, 81:345–381, 2005.
Jaegwon Kim. What is ‘naturalized epistemology’? Philosophical Perspectives, 2:381–405,
1988.
Kihyeon Kim. The deontological conception of epistemic justiﬁcation and doxastic volun-
tarism. Analysis, 54(4):282–284, 1994.
Peter Klecha. Positive and conditional semantics for gradable modals. In Guevara et al,
editor, Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung 16, volume 2, pages 363–376. MIT Working
Papers in Linguistics, 2012.
Peter Klein. Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism. University of Minnesota Press, Min-
neapolis, 1981.
Sebastian K¨ohler. Do expressivists have an attitude problem? Ethics, 123(3):479–507, 2013.
Niko Kolodny and John MacFarlane. Ifs and oughts. Journal of Philosophy, 107(3):115–143,
2010.
Hilary Kornblith. Justiﬁed belief and epistemically responsible action. The Philosophical
Review, 92(1):33–48, 1983.
Christine Korsgaard. Creating the Kingdom of Ends. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1996.
Angelika Kratzer. The notional category of modality. In Eikmeyer and Rieser, editors,
Words, Worlds, and Contexts: New Approaches in Word Semantics. W. de Gruyter,
Berlin, 1981.
Angelika Kratzer.
Modality.
In von Stechow and Wunderlich, editors, Semantics: An
International Handbook of Contemporary Research. W. de Gruyter, Berlin, 1991.
Angelika Kratzer. Modals and Conditionals. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012.
Manfred Krifka. Approximate interpretations of number words: A case for strategic com-
munication. In Bouma, Kramer, and Zwarts, editors, Cognitive Foundations of Commu-
nication. Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschapen, Berlin, 2007.
Jonathan Kvanvig. Two approaches to epistemic defeat. In Baker, editor, Alvin Plantinga.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007.
Jennifer Lackey. Acting on knowledge. Philosophical Perspectives, 24:361–382, 2010.

115
Marc Lange. Is je↵rey conditionalization defective by virute of being non-commutative?
remarks on the sameness of sensory experience. Synthese, 123, 2000.
Peter Lasersohn. Pragmatic halos. Language, 75:522–551, 1999.
Peter Lasersohn.
Context dependence, disagreement, and predicates of personal taste.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 28:643–686, 2005.
Maria Lasonen-Aarnio. Unreasonable knowledge. Philosophical Perspectives, 24:1–21, 2010.
Daniel Lassiter. Gradable epistemic modals, probability, and scale structure. In Li and
Lutz, editors, Semantics and Linguistic Theory (SALT), volume 20, pages 197–215. CLC
Publications, Ithaca, New York, 2010.
Daniel Lassiter. Measurement and modality: The scalar basis of modal semantics, 2011.
Daniel Lassiter and Noah Goodman. How many kinds of reasoning? inference, probability,
and natural language semantics. Cognition, 136:123–134, 2015.
Keith Lehrer. Theory of Knowledge. Routledge, New York, 1990.
Hannes Leitgeb. The stability theory of belief. Philosophical Review, 123(3):131–171, 2014.
Isaac Levi.
Probability kinematics.
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 18:
197–209, 1967.
David Lewis. Psychophysical and theoretical identiﬁcations. Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy, 50:249–258, 1972.
David Lewis. Attitudes De Dicto and De Se. Philosophical Review, 88:513–543, 1979a.
David Lewis. Scorekeeping in a language game. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8(1):339–
359, 1979b.
David Lewis. Dispositional theories of value. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 63,
1989.
David Lewis. Reduction of mind. In Guttenplan, editor, A Companion to Philosophy of
Mind. Blackwell, Oxford, 1994.
David Lewis. Elusive knowledge. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 74(4):549–567, 1996.
Clayton Littlejohn.
Concessive knowledge attributions and fallibilism.
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 83(3):603–619, 2011.
Clayton Littlejohn. Justiﬁcation and the Truth Connection. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2012.

116
Clayton Littlejohn.
How and why knowledge is ﬁrst.
In Carter and Gordon, editors,
Knowledge First Epistemology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, forthcoming.
Dustin Locke. Practical certainty. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 90(1):72–95,
2015.
Jack Lyons. Perception and Basic Beliefs. Oxford University Press, New York, 2009.
Jack Lyons. Goldman on evidence. In Kornblith and McLaughlin, editors, Goldman and
his Critics. Blackwell, Oxford, forthcoming.
John MacFarlane. Epistemic modals are assessment sensitive. In Egan and Weatherson,
editors, Epistemic Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
John MacFarlane.
Assessment-Sensitivity: Relative Truth and its Applications.
Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2014.
Aidan McGlynn. Believing things unknown. Noˆus, 47(2):385–407, 2013.
Aidan McGlynn. Knowledge First? Palgrave McMillian, New York, 2014.
Paul McNamara. Must I do what I ought (or will the least I can do do)? In Brown and
Carmo, editors, Deontic Logic, Agency, and Normative Systems. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1996.
Alfred Mele. Internalist moral cognitivism and listlessness. Ethics, 106:727–753, 1996.
Alan Millar. What is it that cognitive abilities are abilities to do? Acta Analytica, 24(4):
223–236, 2009.
Alexander Miller. Introduction to Contemporary Metaethics. Polity, Cambridge, 2003.
Lisa Miracchi. Competence to know. Philosophical Studies, 172:29–56, 2015.
Martin Montminy. Why assertion and practical reasoning must be governed by the same
epistemic norm. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 94:57–68, 2013.
G.E. Moore. Certainty. In Philosophical Papers. Allen and Unwin, London, 1959.
G.E. Moore. Commonplace Book: 1919-1953. Allen and Unwin, London, 1962.
Marcin Morzycki. Adjectival extremeness: Degree modiﬁcation and contextually restricted
scales. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 30(2):567–609, 2012.
Sarah Moss. Scoring rules and epistemic compromise. Mind, 120(480):1053–1069, 2011.
Sarah Moss. Time-slice epistemology and action under indeterminacy. In Hawthorne and
Gendler, editors, Oxford Studies in Epistemology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2015a.

117
Sarah Moss. On the semantics and pragmatics of epistemic vocabulary. Semantics and
Pragmatics, 8(5):1–81, 2015b.
Ram Neta and Guy Rohrbaugh. Luminosity and the safety of knowledge. Paciﬁc Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 85(4):396–406, 2004.
Nikolaj Nottelman. The deontological conception of epistemic justiﬁcation: A reassessment.
Synthese, 190(12):2219–2241, 2013.
Robert Nozick. Philosophical Explanations. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
Erik J. Olsson.
A naturalistic approach to the generality problem.
In Kornblith and
McLaughlin, editors, Goldman and his Critics. Blackwell, Oxford, forthcoming.
Robert Pasnau. Epistemology idealized. Mind, 122:987–1021, 2014a.
Robert Pasnau. After certainty: A history of our epistemic ideals and illusions. Isaiah
Berlin Lectures, 2014b.
Carlotta Pavese. Know how and gradability, MS.
Hazel Pearson. A judge-free semantics for predicates of personal taste. Journal of Semantics,
30:103–154, 2013.
Philip Pettit and Michael Smith. Freedom in belief and desire. Journal of Philosophy, 93
(9):429–449, 1996.
Alvin Plantinga. Warrant: The Current Debate. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993.
David Plunkett and Timothy Sundell. Disagreement and the semantics of normative and
evaluative terms. Philosophers’ Imprint, 13:1–37, 2013.
Paul Portner. Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
Jesse Prinz. The Emotional Construction of Morals. Oxford University Press, New York,
2007.
Duncan Pritchard. Epistemic Luck. Oxford University Press, New York, 2005.
James Pryor. The skeptic and the dogmatist. Noˆus, 34(4):517–549, 2000.
Colin Radford. Knowledge: By examples. Analysis, 27:1–11, 1966.
Baron Reed. A defense of stable invariantism. Noˆus, 44(2):224–244, 2010.
Baron Reed. Certainty. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, winter 2011.
Hans Reichenbach. The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy. University of California Press, 1963.

118
Steven Reynolds. Testimony, knowledge, and epistemic goals. Philosophical Studies, 110:
139–161, 2002.
Michael Ridge. Ecumenical expressivism: Finessing frege. Ethics, 116:302–336, 2006.
Michael Ridge. Expressivism and epistemology: Epistemology for ecumenical expressivists.
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume, 81(1):83–108, 2007.
Gideon Rosen. Metaphysical dependence: Grounding and reduction. In Modality: Meta-
physics, Logic, and Epistemology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010.
Jacob Ross and Mark Schroeder. Belief, credence, and pragmatic encroachment. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, 88(2):259–288, 2014.
Carmen Rotstein and Yoad Winter. Total adjectives vs. partial adjectives: Scale structure
and higher order modiﬁers. Natural Language Semantics, 12:259–288, 2004.
Bertrand Russell. The Problems of Philosophy. Henry Holt and Company, New York, 1912.
Bertrand Russell. Human Knowledge: Its Scope and its Limits. George Allen & Unwin,
London, 1948.
Patrick Rysiew. The context-sensitivity of knowledge attributions. Noˆus, 35(4):477–514,
2001.
Jerry Sadock. On testing for conversational implicature. In P. Cole, editor, Syntax and
Semantics 9: Pragmatics, pages 281–297. 1978.
Galit Sassoon and Natalia Zevakhina. Granularity shifting: Experimental evidence from
degree modiﬁers. Proceedings of SALT, 22:226–246, 2012.
Uli Sauerland and Penka Stateva. Scalar vs. epistemic vagueness: Evidence from approxi-
mators. Proceedings of SALT, 17, 2007.
Jonathan Scha↵er. Knowledge in the image of assertion. Philosophical Issues, 18(1):1–19,
2008.
Jonathan Scha↵er. On what grounds what. In Chalmers and Wasserman, editors, Metameta-
physics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
Frederick Schmitt. Hume’s Epistemology in the Treatise. Oxford University Press, New
York, 2014.
Mark Schroeder. Ought, agents, and actions. Philosophical Review, 120(1):1–43, 2011a.

119
Mark Schroeder. What does it take to ‘have’ a reason? In Reisner and Steglich-Peterson,
editors, Reasons for Belief. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2011b.
Duns Scotus. Philosophical Writings. Hackett, Indianapolis, 1987.
Anne-Marie Simon-Vandenbergen and Karin Aijmer. The Semantic Field of Modal Cer-
tainty: A Corpus-Based Study of English Adverbs. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 2007.
Brian Skyrms. Choice and Chance. Wadsworth Publishing Co., Belmont, CA, 3rd edition,
1986.
Aaron Sloman. ‘ought’ and ‘better’. Mind, 79:385–394, 1970.
M.A. Slote. Assertion and belief. In Dancy, editor, Papers on Language and Logic. Keele
University Library, Keele, 1979.
Martin Smith. What else justiﬁcation could be. Noˆus, 44:10–31, 2010.
Michael Smith. The Moral Problem. Blackwell, Oxford, 1994.
Declan Smithies. The normative role of knowledge. Noˆus, 46(2):265–288, 2012.
Ernest Sosa. How to resolve the pyrrhonian dialectic: A lesson from descartes. Philosophical
Studies, 85:229–249, 1997.
Ernest Sosa. How to defeat opposition to moore. Philosophical Perspectives, 13:137–149,
1999.
Ernest Sosa.
Relevant alternatives, contextualism included.
Philosophical Studies, 119:
35–65, 2004.
Ernest Sosa. Apt Belief and Reﬂective Knowledge, volume 1. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2007.
Ernest Sosa.
How competence matters in epistemology.
Philosophical Perspectives, 24:
465–476, 2010.
Ernest Sosa. Judgment and Agency. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2015.
Robert Stalnaker. Context and Content. Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.
Jason Stanley. Knowlege and Practical Interests. Oxford University Press, New York, 2005a.
Jason Stanley. Fallibilism and concessive knowledge attributions. Analysis, 65(2):126–131,
2005b.
Jason Stanley. Knowledge and certainty. Philosophical Issues, 18(1):35–57, 2008.

120
Will Starr.
Dynamic expressivism about deontic modality.
In Charlow and Chrisman,
editors, Deontic Modality. Oxford University Press, New York, forthcoming.
Tamina Stephenson. Judge dependence, epistemic modals, and predicates of personal taste.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 30(4):487–525, 2007a.
Tamina Stephenson. Indicative conditionals have relative truth conditions. Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, 43(1):231–242, 2007b.
Tamina Stephenson. Towards a Theory of Subjective Meaning. Ph.D. Thesis, MIT, 2007c.
Matthias Steup. Knowledge, Truth, and Duty: Essays on Epistemic Justiﬁcation, Respon-
sibility, and Virtue. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001.
C.L. Stevenson. Ethics and Language. Yale University Press, New Haven, 1944.
C.L. Stevenson. Facts and Values. Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, 1963.
Michael Stocker. Desiring the bad: An essay in moral psychology. The Journal of Philoso-
phy, 76:738–753, 1979.
P.F. Strawson. Freedom and resentment. In Freedom and Resentment and other Essays,
pages 1–25. Methuen, London, 1974.
Timothy Sundell. Disagreement about taste. Philosophical Studies, 39(3):359–396, 2011.
Jonathan Sutton. Stick to what you know. Noˆus, 39(3):359–396, 2005.
Jonathan Sutton. Without Justiﬁcation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2007.
Sigrun Svavarsd´ottir. Moral cognitivism and motivation. The Philosophical Review, 108:
161–219, 1999.
Eric Swanson. Interactions with Context. Diss., MIT, 2006.
Kurt Sylvan and Ernest Sosa. The place of reasons in epistemology. In Star, editor, The
Oxford Handbook of Reasons and Normativity. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2014.
Weng Hong Tang. Reliability theories of justiﬁed credence. Mind, forthcoming.
Paul Tidman. Critical reﬂection: An alleged epistemic duty. Analysis, 56(4):268–276, 1996.
Kelly Trogdon. An introduction to grounding. In Hoeltje and Steinberg, editors, Varieties
of Dependence. Philosophia Verlag, Munich, 2013.
John Turri. Prompting challenges. Analysis, 70(3), 2010.
John Turri. The express knowledge account of assertion. Australasian Journal of Philosophy,
89(1):37–45, 2011a.

121
John Turri. Manifest failure: The gettier problem solved. Philosophers’ Imprint, 11(8):
1–11, 2011b.
Peter Unger. A defense of skepticism. The Philosophical Review, 80(2):198–219, 1971.
Peter Unger. Ignorance. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975.
Bas van Fraassen. Laws and Symmetry. Oxford University Press, New York, 1989.
Robert van Rooij. Vagueness and linguistics. In Ronzitti, editor, The Vagueness Handbook,
pages 123–170. Springer, Dordrecht, 2011.
Mark van Roojen. Moral rationalism and rationalist amoralism. Ethics, 120:495–525, 2010.
Frank Veltman. Defaults in update semantics. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 25(3):221–
261, 1996.
Kai von Fintel and Thony Gillies. Must... stay... strong! Natural Language Semantics, 18
(4):351–383, 2010.
Kai von Fintel and Thony Gillies. Might made right. In Egan and Weatherson, editors,
Epistemic Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
Kai von Fintel and Sabine Iatridou. What to do if you want to go to harlem: Anankas-
tic conditionals and related matters, 2005.
URL http://web.mit.edu/fintel/www/
harlem.pdf.
Kai von Fintel and Sabine Iatridou. How to say ‘ought’ in foreign: the composition of
weak necessity modals. In Gu´eoron and Lecarme, editors, Time and Modality (Studies
in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 75). Springer, 2008.
Brian Weatherson. Can we do without pragmatic encroachment? Philosophical Perspectives,
19:417–443, 2005.
Brian Weatherson. E6=K, 2009. URL http://brian.weatherson.org/EK.pdf.
Brian Weatherson. Defending interest-relative invariantism. Logos and Episteme, 2:591–609,
2011.
Brian Weatherson. Knowledge, bets, and interests. In Brown and Gerken, editors, Knowl-
edge Ascriptions, pages 75–103. Oxford University Press, New York, 2012.
Ralph Wedgwood. The Nature of Normativity. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2007.
Malte Willer. Dynamics of epistemic modality. Philosophical Review, 122(1):44–92, 2013.
Timothy Williamson. Knowing and asserting. Philosophical Review, 105(4):489–523, 1996.

122
Timothy Williamson. Knowledge as evidence. Mind, 106(424):1–25, 1997.
Timothy Williamson. Conditionalizing on knowledge. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 49(1):89–121, 1998.
Timothy Williamson. Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000a.
Timothy Williamson. Scepticism and evidence. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
60(3):613–628, 2000b.
Timothy Williamson. Replies to commentators. Philosophical Books, 45(4):313–323, 2004.
Timothy Williamson. Contextualism, subject-sensitive invariantism and knowledge. The
Philosophical Quarterly, 55(219):213–235, 2005.
Timothy Williamson. The Amherst Lecture in Philosophy 4, 2009.
Timothy Williamson. Knowledge ﬁrst epistemology. In Bernecker and Pritchard, editors,
The Routledge Companion to Epistemology. Routledge, New York, 2011.
Timothy Williamson. Knowledge ﬁrst. In Steup, Turri, and Sosa, editors, Contemporary
Debates in Epistemology. Blackwell, Oxford, 2 edition, 2013.
A.D. Woozley.
Knowing and not knowing.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 53:
151–172, 1952.
Stephanie Wykstra. A Defense of Cartesian Certainty. Rutgers PhD dissertation, 2008.
Seth Yalcin. Epistemic modals. Mind, 116(464):983–1026, 2007.
Seth Yalcin. Probability operators. Philosophy Compass, 5(11):916–937, 2010.
Seth Yalcin. Nonfactualism about epistemic modality. In Egan and Weatherson, editors,
Epistemic Modality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
Seth Yalcin. Bayesian expressivism. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 112(2):123–160,
2012a.
Seth Yalcin. Context probabilism. Proceedings of the 18th Amsterdam Colloquium, pages
12–21, 2012b.
Seth Yalcin. Epistemic modality De Re. Ergo, 2(19):475–527, 2015.
Michael Zimmerman. Taking luck seriously. Journal of Philosophy, 99(11):555–576, 2002.

