Etymography IMEs 
 
Sky Darmos 
05.11.2022 
 
In the years 2006 – 2008, my work on Etymography was on paper only. From 2009 – 2011 it was 
online, on a Wikimedia platform which no longer exists. Then from 2012 – 2019 it was mainly in 
form of my book “The German language in Chinese script”.  
 
I had completed the first edition of my book in 2014. In that same year my friend Nguyễn Quốc 
Trung (阮國忠) created a single morpheme online IME for my German Etymography: 
 
https://chunom.org/media/ime/german/index.html 
 
This IME has only single morphemes, which are all just single syllables. That means one has to 
enter each morpheme separately. For instance, the word ‘Kanal’ has to be entered as follows:  
 
1. Type ‘kan’.  
2. Choose the character ‘管’ by pressing its list number. For number ‘1’ we can also press the 
space-key instead.  
3. Type ‘al’.  
4. Choose the character ‘也’ by pressing its list number. The IME remembers the most 
frequent choice, and so after a few times of choosing a certain character it will appear at 
the top of the list.  
 
Since 2020, my focus has shifted from writing about etymography to writing source code for 
etymography IMEs (input method editors). In 2021, my friend Nguyễn Việt Khôi (阮越魁) created 
this IME for both my German and my English Etymography:  
 
https://skydarmos.github.io/Etymography/ 
 
One can choose between English and German in the bottom left corner of this online IME:  
 
 
 
This is a full-word Etymography IME. That means we don’t have to choose every morpheme 
character ourselves. Instead, we just enter the full word and press ‘enter’, or, if we also want to 
create a space after the word, we directly press ‘space’.  

 
When there is more than one word for a certain phonography, then we might have to first choose 
the right character, if the one that is listed first is not the intended one.  
 
For instance, ‘can’ as a noun is not the same word as the auxiliary verb ‘can’. The one listed first 
in this online IME is ‘權’, which is the auxiliary verb. For choosing the noun ‘can’ we press the 
‘down-arrow key’ and then enter. Now the character ‘罐’ instead. This IME unfortunately does 
not have memory, and so it won’t remember the most common choice of the user.  
 
 
 
This IME is also capable of automatically transforming whole phonographic texts into 
etymography. For that, one copies the text into the IME, clicks on the ‘阿a’-icon on the bottom 
right hand corner, and then choose ‘文’, which stands for etymography:   
 
 
 
For transforming etymography into phonography we choose ‘abc’ instead, which stands for 
phonography.  
  
Since 2020 the focus has completely shifted from German etymography to English etymography. 
Already in 2018, I had added etymographies for all the English content of my German 
etymography book. I was often asked to write a similar book for English etymography, with an 
English etymography radical index. Knowing that this would be too much of a distraction from 
my physics research, I decided to just directly write the source code of an English etymography 
IME.  
 
My source file, which is an Excel file, not only contains my etymographies, but also proposed 
cognates from all other scholars that do research in etymography. Those are 張聰東 (1988), 周及
徐 (2001), 談濟民 (2002), 高晶一 (2008) and 張思澤 (2010 – 2019). I won’t publish the source 
file, as I want to remain in control of my source data. However, there is always the possibility that 

I will create a large website which will not only show the etymography for each word, but also 
discovery dates, previous etymographies or cognates from other researchers, as those are all in my 
source file.  
 
Currently my Github-IME has 20,343 etymographies for English (as of the 05.11.2022).  
 
Other IMEs 
 
Nguyễn Việt Khôi (阮越魁) has created an IME for Vietnamese Hán-Nôm, Sawndip, Korean 
Hanja, and Chinese script in Modern Chinese varieties and Middle Chinese:  
 
https://nguyenvietkhoi.github.io/SinicIME/ 
 
Nguyễn Quốc Trung (阮國忠) has created an IME for Vietnamese Hán-Nôm script:  
 
https://chunom.org/pages/ime/ 
 
They function analogous to the two IMEs they created for my Western Etymographies.  
 
In the more distant future, I might also create an IME for Greek etymography.  
 
If someone wants to join forces and help me with creating etymographies for their own languages, 
they can contact me under:  
 
Skydarmos@protonmail.com 
 
https://www.facebook.com/sky.darmos 
 
Or:  
 
Skydarmos@zohomail.eu 

