XI
EUCLID
Date and traditions.
WE have very few particulars of the lives of the great
mathematicians of Greece. Even Euclid is no exception.
Practically all that is known about him is contained in a few
sentences of Proclus's summary:
6 Not much younger than these (sc. Hermotimus of Colophon
and Philippus of Mende or Medma) is Euclid, who put to-
gether the Elements, collecting many of Eudoxus's theorems,
perfecting many of Theaetetus's, and also bringing to irre-
fragable demonstration the things which were only somewhat
loosely proved by his predecessors. This man lived in the
time of the first Ptolemy. 
For Archimedes, who came
immediately after the first (Ptolemy), makes mention of
Euclid; and further they say that Ptolemy once asked him if
there was in geometry any shorter way than that of the
Elements, and he replied that there was no royal road to
geometry. He is then younger than the pupils of Plato, but
older than Eratosthenes and Archimedes, the latter having
been contemporaries, as Eratosthenes somewhere says.'1
This passage shows that even Proclus had no direct know-
ledge of Euclid's birthplace, or of the dates of his birth and
death; he can only infer generally at what period he nourished.
All that is certain is that Euclid was later than the first
pupils of Plato and earlier than Archimedes. As Plato died
in 347 B.C. and Archimedes lived from 287 to 212 B.C., Euclid
must have flourished about 300 B.C., a date which agrees well
with the statement that he lived under the first Ptolemy, who
reigned from 306 to 283 B.C.
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 68. 6-20.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DATE AND TRADITIONS 
355
More particulars are, it is true, furnished by Arabian
authors. 
We are told that
' Euclid, son of Naucrates, and grandson of Zenarchus [the
Fihrist has ' son of Naucrates, the son of Berenice (?)'], called
the author of geometry, a philosopher of somewhat ancient
date, a Greek by nationality, domiciled at Damascus, born at
Tyre, most learned in the science of geometry, published
a most excellent and most useful work entitled the foundation
or elements of geometry, a subject in which no more general
treatise existed before among the Greeks: nay, there was no
one even of later date who did not walk in his footsteps and
frankly profess his doctrine. 
Hence also Greek, Roman,
and Arabian geometers not a few, who undertook the task of
illustrating this work, published commentaries, scholia, and
notes upon it, and made an abridgement of the work itself.
For this reason the Greek philosophers used to post up on the
doors of their schools the well-known notice, "Let no one
come to our school, who has not first learnt the elements
of Euclid'V1
This shows the usual tendency of the Arabs to romance.
They were in the habit of recording the names of grand-
fathers, while the Greeks were not; Damascus and Tyre were
no doubt brought in to gratify the desire which the Arabians
always showed to connect famous Greeks in some way or other
with the east (thus they described Pythagoras as a pupil of the
wise Salomo, and Hipparchus as ' the Chaldaean'). We recog-
nize the inscription over the doors of the schools of the Greek
philosophers as a variation of Plato's firjdels dyecofjLeTprjTos
ela-LToo; the philosopher has become Greek philosophers in
general, the school their schools, while geometry has become
the Mements of Euclid. The Arabs even explained that the
name of Euclid, which they pronounced variously as Uclides or
Icludes, was compounded of Ucli, a key, and Dis, a measure, or,
as some say, geometry, so that Uclides is equivalent to the
hey of geometry!
In the Middle Ages most translators and editors spoke of
Euclid as Euclid of Megara, confusing our Euclid with Euclid
the philosopher, and the contemporary of Plato, who lived about
400 B.C. The first trace of the confusion appears in Valerius
1 Casiri, Bibliotheca Ardbico-Hispana Escurialensis, i, p. 339 (Casiri's
source is the TcCrikh al-Hukama of al-Qifti (d. 1248).
A a 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

356 
EUCLID
Maximus (in the time of Tiberius) who says1 that Plato,
on being appealed to for a solution of the problem of doubling
the cube, sent the inquirers to ' Euclid the geometer \ The
mistake was seen by one Constantinus Lascaris (d. about
1493), and the first translator to point it out clearly was
Commandinus (in his translation of Euclid published in 1572).
Euclid may have been a Platonist, as Proclus says, though
this is not certain. In any case, he probably received his
mathematical training in Athens from the pupils of Plato;
most of the geometers who could have taught him were of
that school. But he himself taught and founded a school
at Alexandria, as we learn from Pappus's statement that
Apollonius ' spent a very long time with the pupils of Euclid
at Alexandria'.2 
Here again come in our picturesque
Arabians,3 who made out that the Elements were originally
written by a man whose name was Apollonius, a carpenter,
who wrote the work in fifteen books or sections (this idea
seems to be based on some misunderstanding of Hypsicles's
preface to the so-called Book XIV of Euclid), and that, as
some of the work was lost in course of time and the rest
disarranged, one of the kings at Alexandria who desired to
study geometry and to master this treatise in particular first
questioned about it certain learned men who visited him, and
then sent for Euclid, who was at that time famous as a
geometer, and asked him to revise and complete the work
and reduce it to order, upon which Euclid rewrote the work
in thirteen books, thereafter known by his name.
On the character of Euclid Pappus has a remark which,
however, was probably influenced by his obvious animus
against Apollonius, whose preface to the Conies seemed to him
to give too little credit to Euclid for his earlier work in the same
subject. Pappus contrasts Euclid's attitude to his predecessors.
Euclid, he says, was no such boaster or controversialist: thus
he regarded Aristaeus as deserving credit for the discoveries
he had made in conies, and made no attempt to anticipate
him or to construct afresh the same system, such was his
scrupulous fairness and his exemplary kindliness to all who
1 viii. 12, ext. 1. 
2 Pappus, vii, p. 678. 10-12.
3 The authorities are al-Kindi, De institute libri Euclidis and a commen-
tary by Qadizade on the Ashkal at-tctsis of Ashraf Shamsaddin as-Samar-
qandi (quoted by Casiri and Haji Khalfa).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DATE AND TRADITIONS 
357
could advance mathematical science to however small an
extent.1 Although, as I have indicated, Pappus's motive was
rather to represent ApoUonius in a relatively unfavourable
light than to state a historical fact about Euclid, the state-
ment accords well with what we should gather from Euclid's
own works. These show no sign of any claim to be original;
in the Elements, for instance, although it is clear that he
made great changes, altering the arrangement of whole Books,
redistributing propositions between them, and inventing new
proofs where the new order made the earlier proofs inappli-
cable, it is safe to say that he made no more alterations than
his own acumen and the latest special investigations (such as
Eudoxus's theory of proportion) showed to be imperative in
order to make the exposition of the whole subject more
scientific than the earlier efforts of writers of elements. His
respect for tradition is seen in his retention of some things
which were out of date and useless, e. g. certain definitions
never afterwards used, the solitary references to the angle
of a semicircle or the angle of a segment, and the like; he
wrote no sort of preface to his work (would that he had!)
such as those in which Archimedes and Apollonius introduced
their treatises and distinguished what they claimed as new in
them from what was already known: he plunges at once into
his subject, * A point is that which has no part'!
And what a teacher he must have been! One story enables
us to picture him in that capacity. According to Stobaeus,
fsome one who had begun to read geometry with Euclid,
when he had learnt the first theorem, asked Euclid, " what
shall I get by learning these things ? " Euclid called his slave
and said, " Give him threepence, since he must make gain out
of what he learns ".'2
Ancient commentaries, criticisms, and references.
Euclid has, of course, always been known almost exclusively
as the author of the Elements. From Archimedes onwards
the Greeks commonly spoke of him as 6 <rToixti<*>Ty?> the
writer of the Elements, instead of using his name. 
This
wonderful book, with all its imperfections, which indeed are
slight enough when account is taken of the date at which
1 Pappus, vii? pp. 676. 25-678. 6. 
* Stobaeus, Floril iv. p. 205.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

358 
EUCLID
it appeared, is and will doubtless remain the greatest mathe-
matical text-book of all time. 
Scarcely any other book
except the Bible can have circulated more widely the world
over, or been more edited and studied. Even in Greek times
the most accomplished mathematicians occupied themselves
with it; Heron, Pappus, Porphyry, Proclus and Simplicius
wrote commentaries; Theon of Alexandria re-edited it, alter-
ing the language here and there, mostly with a view to
greater clearness and consistency, and interpolating inter-
mediate steps, alternative proofs, separate 'cases7, porisms
(corollaries) and lemmas (the most important addition being
the second part of VI. 33 relating to sectors). Even the gre&t
Apollonius was moved by Euclid's work to discuss the first
principles of geometry; his treatise on the subject was in
fact a criticism of Euclid, and none too successful at that;
some alternative definitions given by him have point, but his
alternative solutions of some of the easy problems in Book I
do not constitute any improvement, and his attempt to prove
the axioms (if one may judge by the case quoted by Proclus,
that of Axiom 1) was thoroughly misconceived.
Apart from systematic commentaries on the whole work or
substantial parts of it, there were already in ancient times
discussions and controversies on special subjects dealt with by
Euclid, and particularly his theory of parallels. The fifth
Postulate was a great stumbling-block. 
We know from
Aristotle that up to his time the theory of parallels had not
been put on a scientific basis1: there was apparently some
petitio principii lurking in it. It seems therefore clear that
Euclid was the first to apply the bold remedy of laying down
the indispensable principle of the theory in the form of an
indemonstrable Postulate. But geometers were not satisfied
with this solution. Posidonius and Geminus tried to get
over the difficulty by substituting an equidistance theory of
parallels. Ptolemy actually tried to prove Euclid's postulate,
as also did Proclus, and (according to Simplicius) one Diodorus,
as well as 'Aganis'; the attempt of Ptolemy is given by
Proclus along with his own, while that of ' Aganis' is repro-
duced from Simplicius by the Arabian commentator an-
Nairlzi.
1 Anal Prior, ii. 16. 65 a 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMMENTARIES, CRITICISMS & REFERENCES 359
Other very early criticisms there were, directed against the
very first steps in Euclid's work. Thus Zeno of Sidon, an
Epicurean, attacked the proposition I. 1 on the ground that it
is not conclusive unless it be first assumed that neither two
straight lines nor two circumferences can have a common
segment; and this was so far regarded as a serious criticism
that Posidonius wrote a whole book to controvert Zeno.1
Again, there is the criticism of the Epicureans that I. 20,
proving that any two sides in a triangle are together greater
than the third, is evident even to an ass and requires no
proof. I mention these isolated criticisms to show that the
Elements, although they superseded all other Elements and
never in ancient times had any rival, were not even at the
first accepted without question.
The first Latin author to mention Euclid is Cicero; but
it is not likely that the Elements had then been translated
into Latin. 
Theoretical geometry did not appeal to the
Romans, who only cared for so much of it as was useful for
measurements and calculations. Philosophers studied Euclid,
but probably in the original Greek; Martianus Capella speaks
of the effect of the mention of the proposition ' how to con-
struct an equilateral triangle on a given straight line' among
a company of philosophers, who, recognizing the first pro-
position of the Elements, straightway break out into encomiums
on Euclid.2 Beyond a fragment in a Verona palimpsest of
a free rendering or rearrangement of some propositions from
Books XII and XIII dating apparently from the fourth century,
we have no trace of any Latin version before Boetius (born
about A. D. 480), to whom Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus and
Theodoric attribute a translation of Euclid. The so-called
geometry of Boetius which has come down to us is by no
means a translation of Euclid; but even the redaction of this
in two Books which was edited by Friedlein is not genuine,
having apparently been put together in the eleventh century
from various sources; it contains the definitions of Book I,
the Postulates (five in number), the Axioms (three only), then
some definitions from Eucl. II, III, IV, followed by the
enunciations only (without proofs) of Eucl. I, ten propositions
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 200. 2. 
2 Mart. Capella, vi. 724.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

360 
EUCLID
of Book II, and a few of Books III and IV, and lastly a
passage indicating that the editor will now give something of
his own, which turns out to be a literal translation of the
proofs of Eucl. I. 1-3. This proves that the Pseudo-Boetius
had a Latin translation of Euclid from which he extracted
these proofs; moreover, the text of the definitions from
Book I shows traces of perfectly correct readings which are
not found even in the Greek manuscripts of the tenth century,
but which appear in Proclus and other ancient sources.
Fragments of such a Latin translation are also found in
the Gromatici veteres.1
The text of the Elements,
All our Greek texts of the Elements up to a century ago
depended upon manuscripts containing Theon's recension of the
work; these manuscripts purport, in their titles, to be either
'from the edition of Theon' (e/c rfjs Qeavos eKSoo-em) or
* from the lectures of Theon' (dnb avvovcncdv TOV Oecovos).
Sir Henry Savile in his Praelectiones had drawn attention
to the passage in Theon's Commentary on Ptolemy2 quoting
the second part of VI. 33 about sectors as having been proved
by himself in his edition of the Elements; but it was not
till Peyrard discovered in the Vatican the great MS.
gr. 190, containing neither the words from the titles of the
other manuscripts quoted above nor the addition to VI. 33,
that scholars could get back from Theon's text to what thus
represents, on the face of it, a more ancient edition than
Theon's. It is also clear that the copyist of P (as the manu-
script is called after Peyrard), or rather of its archetype,
had before him the two recensions and systematically gave
the preference to the earlier one ; for at XIII. 6 in P the first
hand has a marginal note,' This theorem is not given in most
copies of the new edition, but is found in those of the old'.
The editio princeps (Basel, 1533) edited by Simon Grynaeus
was based on two manuscripts (Venetus Marcianus 301 and
Paris, gr. 2343) of the sixteenth century, which are among
the worst. 
The Basel edition was again the foundation
of the text of Gregory (Oxford, 1703), who only consulted the
1 Ed. Lachmann, pp. 377 sqq. 
2 I, p. 201, ed. Halma.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TEXT OF THE ELEMENTS 
361
manuscripts bequeathed by Savile to the University in
places where the Basel text differed from the Latin version
of Commandinus which he followed in the main. It was
a pity that even Peyrard in his edition (1814-18) only
corrected the Basel text by means of P, instead of rejecting
it altogether and starting afresh; but he adopted many of the
readings of P and gave a conspectus of them in an appendix.
E. F. August's edition (1826-9) followed P more closely, and
he consulted the Viennese MS. gr. 103 also; but it was
left for Heiberg to bring out a new and definitive Greek text
(1883-8) based on P and the best of the Theonine manuscripts,
and taking account of external sources such as Heron and
Proclus. Except in a few passages, Proclus's manuscript does
not seem to have been of the best, but authors earlier than
Theon, e.g. Heron, generally agree with our best manuscripts.
Heiberg concludes that the Elements were most spoiled by
interpolations about the third century, since Sextus Empiricus
had a correct text, while Iamblicus had an interpolated one.
The differences between the inferior Theonine manuscripts
and the best sources are perhaps best illustrated by the arrange-
ment of postulates and axioms in Book I. Our ordinary
editions based on Simson have three postulates and twelve
axioms. Of these twelve axioms the eleventh (stating that
all right angles are equal) is, in the genuine text, the fourth
Postulate, and the twelfth Axiom (the Parallel-Postulate) is
the fifth Postulate; the Postulates were thus originally five
in number. 
Of the ten remaining Axioms or Common
Notions Heron only recognized the first three, and Proclus
only these and two others (that things which coincide are
equal, and that the whole is greater than the part); it is fairly
certain, therefore, that the rest are interpolated, including the
assumption that two straight lines cannot enclose a space
(Euclid himself regarded this last fact as involved in Postu-
late 1, which implies that a straight line joining one point
to another is unique).
Latin and Arabic translations.
The first Latin translations which we possess in a complete
form were made not from the Greek but from the Arabic.
It was as early as the eighth century that the Elements found
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

362 
EUCLID
their way to Arabia. The Caliph al-Mansur (754-75), as the
result of a mission to the Byzantine Emperor, obtained a copy
of Euclid among other Greek books, and the Caliph al-Ma'mun
(813-33) similarly obtained manuscripts of Euclid, among
others, from the Byzantines. Al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf b. Matar made
two versions of the Elements, the first in the reign of Harun
ar-Rashld (786-809), the second for al-Ma'mun; six Books of
the second of these versions survive in a Leyden manuscript
(Cod. Leidensis 399. 1) which is being edited along with
an-Nairizi's commentary by Besthorn and Heiberg1; this
edition was abridged, with corrections and explanations, but
without change of substance, from the earlier version, which
appears to be lost. The work was next translated by Abu
Ya'qub Ishaq b. Hunainb. Ishaq al-'Ibadi (died 910), evidently
direct from the Greek; this translation seems itself to have
perished, but we have it as revised by Thabit b. Qurra (died
901) in two manuscripts (No. 279 of the year 1238 and No. 280
written in 1260-1) in the Bodleian Library; Books I-XIII in
these manuscripts are in the Ishaq-Thabit version, while the
non-Euclidean Books XIV, XV are in the translation of Qusta
b. Luqa al-Ba'labakkl (died about 912). Ishaq's version seems
to be a model of good translation; the technical terms are
simply and consistently rendered, the definitions and enun-
ciations differ only in isolated cases from the Greek, and the
translator's object seems to have been only to get rid of
difficulties and unevennesses in the Greek text while at the
same time giving a faithful reproduction of it. The third
Arabic version still accessible to us is that of Nasiraddin
at-Tusi (born in 1201 at Tus in Khurasan); this, however,
is not a translation of Euclid but a rewritten version based
upon the older Arabic translations. On the whole, it appears
probable that the Arabic tradition (in spite of its omission
of lemmas and porisms, and, except in a very few cases, of
the interpolated alternative proofs) is not to be preferred
to that of the Greek manuscripts, but must be regarded as
inferior in authority.
The known Latin translations begin with that of Athelhard,
an Englishman, of Bath; the date of it is about 1120. That
1 Parts I, i. 1893, I, ii. 1897, II, i. 1900, II, ii. 1905, III, i. 1910 (Copen-
hagen).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LATIN AND ARABIC TRANSLATIONS 
363
it was made from the Arabic is clear from the occurrence
of Arabic words in it; but Athelhard must also have had
before him a translation of (at least) the enunciations of
Euclid based ultimately upon the Greek text, a translation
going back to the old Latin version which was the common
source of the passage in the Gromatici and 'Boetius'. But
it would appear that even before Athelhard's time some sort
of translation, or at least fragments of one, were available
even in England if one may judge by the Old English verses:
' The clerk Euclide on this wyse hit fonde
Thys craft of gemetry yn Egypte londe
Yn Egypte he tawghte hyt ful wyde,
In dyvers londe on every syde.
Mony erys afterwarde y understonde
Yer that the craft com ynto thys londe.
Thys craft com into England, as y yow say,
Yn tyme of good Kyng Adelstone's day',
which would put the introduction of Euclid into England
as far back as A. D. 924-40.
Next, Gherard of Cremona (1114—87) is said to have
translated the '15 Books of Euclid* from the Arabic as he
undoubtedly translated an-Nairizi's commentary on Books
I—X; this translation of the Elements was till recently
supposed to have been lost, but in 1904 A. A. Bjornbo dis-
covered in manuscripts at Paris, Boulogne-sur-Mer and Bruges
the whole, and at Rome Books X-XV, of a translation which
he gives good ground for identifying with Gherard's. This
translation has certain Greek words such as rombus, romboides,
where Athelhard keeps the Arabic terms; it was thus clearly
independent of Athelhard's, though Gherard appears to have
had before him, in addition, an old translation of Euclid from
the Greek which Athelhard also used. Gherard's translation
is much clearer than Athelhard's; it is neither abbreviated
nor * edited' in the same way as Athelhard's, but it is a word
for word translation of an Arabic manuscript containing a
revised and critical edition of Thabit's version.
A third translation from the Arabic was that of Johannes
Campanus, which came some 150 years after that of Athelhard.
That Campanus's translation was not independent of Athel-
hard's is proved by the fact that, in all manuscripts and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

364 
EUCLID
editions, the definitions, postulates and axioms, and the 364
enunciations are word for word identical in Athelhard and
Campanus. The exact relation between the two seems even
yet not to have been sufficiently elucidated. Campanus may
have used Athelhard's translation and only developed the
proofs by means of another redaction of the Arabian Euclid.
Campanus's translation is the clearer and more complete,
following the Greek text more closely but still at some
distance; the arrangement of the two is different; in Athel-
hard the proofs regularly precede the enunciations, while
Campanus follows the usual order. How far the differences
in the proofs and the additions in each are due to the
translators themselves or go back to Arabic originals is a
moot question; but it seems most probable that Campanus
stood to Athelhard somewhat in the relation of a commen-
tator, altering and improving his translation by means of
other Arabic originals.
The first printed editions.
Campanus's translation had the luck to be the first to be
put into print. It was published at Venice by Erhard Ratdolt
in 1482. 
This beautiful and very rare book was not only
the first printed edition of Euclid, but also the first printed
mathematical book of any importance. It has margins of
2j inches and in them are placed the figures of the proposi-
tions. Ratdolt says in his dedication that, at that time,
although books by ancient and modern authors were being
printed every day in Venice, little or nothing mathematical
had appeared; this fact he puts down to the difficulty involved
by the figures, which no one had up to that time succeeded in
printing; he adds that after much labour he had discovered
a method by which figures could be produced as easily as
letters. Experts do not seem even yet to be agreed as to the
actual way in which the figures were made, whether they
were woodcuts or whether they were made by putting together
lines and circular arcs as letters are put together to make
words. How eagerly the opportunity of spreading geometrical
knowledge was seized upon is proved by the number of
editions which followed in the next few years. Even the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE FIRST PRINTED EDITIONS 
365
year 1482 saw two forms of the book, though they only differ
in the first sheet. Another edition came out at Ulm in 1486,
and another at Vicenza in 1491.
In 1501 G. Valla gave in his encyclopaedic work Be ex-
petendis et fugiendis rebus a number of propositions with
proofs and scholia translated from a Greek manuscript which
was once in his possession; but Bartolomeo Zamberti (Zam-
bertus) was the first to bring out a translation from the
Greek text of the whole of the Elements, which appeared
at Venice in 1505. The most important Latin translation
is, however, that of Commandinus (1509-75), who not only
followed the Greek text more closely than his predecessors,
but added to his translation some ancient scholia as well
as good notes of his own; this translation, which appeared
in 1572, was the foundation of most translations up to the
time of Peyrard, including that of Simson, and therefore of
all those editions, numerous in England, which gave Euclid
1 chiefly after the text of Dr. Simson \
The study of Euclid in the Middle Ages.
A word or two about the general position of geometry in
education during the Middle Ages will not be out of place in
a book for English readers, in view of the unique place which
Euclid has till recently held as a text-book in this country.
From the seventh to the tenth century the study of geometry
languished: ' We find in the whole literature of that time
hardly the slightest sign that any one had gone farther
in this department of the Quadrivium than the definitions
of a triangle, a square, a circle, or of a pyramid or cone, as
Martianus Capella and Isidorus (Hispalensis, died as Bishop
of Seville in 636) left them/ 1 (Isidorus had disposed of the
four subjects of Arithmetic, Geometry, Music and Astronomy
in four pages of his encyclopaedic work Origines or Ety-
rrwlogiae). In the tenth century appeared a 'reparator
studiorum' in the person of the great Gerbert, who was born
at Aurillac, in Auvergne, in the first half of the tenth century,
and after a very varied life ultimately (in 999) became Pope
Sylvester II; he died in 1003. 
About 967 he went on
1 Hankel, op. cit, pp. 311-12.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

366 
EUCLID
a journey to Spain, where he studied mathematics. In 970 he
went to Rome with Bishop Hatto of Vich (in the province of
Barcelona), and was there introduced by Pope John XIII
to the German king Otto I. To Otto, who wished to find
him a post as a teacher, he could say that' he knew enough of
mathematics for this, but wished to improve his knowledge
of logic*. With Otto's consent he went to Reims, where he
became Scholasticus or teacher at the Cathedral School,
remaining there for about ten years, 972 to 982. As the result
of a mathematico-philosophic argument in public at Ravenna
in 980, he was appointed* by Otto II to the famous monastery
at Bobbio in Lombardy, which, fortunately for him, was rich
in valuable manuscripts of all sorts. Here he found the
famous * Codex Arcerianus' containing fragments of the
works of the Gromatici, Frontinus, Hyginus, Balbus, Nipsus,
Epaphroditus and Vitruvius Rufus. 
Although these frag-
ments are not in themselves of great merit, there are things
in them which show that the authors drew upon Heron of
Alexandria, and Gerbert made the most of them. They
formed the basis of his own ' Geometry', which may have
been written between the years 981 and 983. In writing this
book Gerbert evidently had before him Boetius's Arithmetic,
and in the course of it he mentions Pythagoras, Plato's
Timaeus, with Chalcidius's commentary thereon, and Eratos-
thenes. The geometry in the book is mostly practical; the
theoretical part is confined to necessary preliminary matter,
definitions, &c, and a few proofs; the fact that the sum of the
angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles is proved in
Euclid's manner. A great part is taken up with the solution
of triangles, and with heights and distances. The Archimedean
value of 7T (-2
T^) is used in stating the area of a circle; the
surface of a sphere is given as f^ D\ 
The plan of the book
is quite different from that of Euclid, showing that Gerbert
could neither have had Euclid's Elements before him, nor,
probably, Boetius's Geometry, if that work in its genuine
form was a version of Euclid. When in a letter written
probably from Bobbio in 983 to Adalbero, Archbishop of
Reims, he speaks of his expectation of finding ' eight volumes
of Boetius on astronomy, also the most famous of figures
(presumably propositions) in geometry and other things not
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

STUDY OF EUCLID IN THE MIDDLE AGES 367
less admirable', it is not clear that he actually found these
things, and it is still less certain that the geometrical matter
referred to was Boetius's Geometry.
From Gerbert's time, again, no further progress was made
until translations from the Arabic began with Athelhard and
the rest. Gherard of Cremona (died 1187), who translated
the Elements and an-Nairizi's commentary thereon, is credited
with a whole series of translations from the Arabic of Greek
authors; they included the Data of Euclid, the Sphaerica of
Theodosiu&,the Sphasrica of Menelaus, the Syntaxisoi Ptolemy ;
besides which he translated Arabian geometrical works such
as the Liber trium fratruni, and also the algebra of Muhammad
b. Musa. One of the first results of the interest thus aroused
in Greek and Arabian mathematics was seen in the very
remarkable works of Leonardo of Pisa (Fibonacci). Leonardo
first published in 1202, and then brought out later (1228) an
improved edition of, his Liber abaci in which he gave the
whole of arithmetic and algebra as known to the Arabs, but
in a free and independent style of his own; in like manner in
his Practica, geometriae of 1220 he collected (1) all that the
Elements of Euclid and Archimedes's books on the Measure-
ment of a Circle and On the Sphere and Cylinder had taught
him about the measurement of plane figures bounded by
straight lines, stilid figures bounded by planes, the circle and
the sphere respectively, (2) divisions of figures in different
proportions, wherein he based himself on Euclid's book 0 n the
divisions of figures, but carried the subject further, (3) some
trigonometry, which he got from Ptolemy and Arabic sources
(he uses the terms sinus rectus and sinus versus); in the
treatment of these varied subjects he showed the same mastery
and, in places, distinct originality. We should have expected
a great general advance in the next centuries after such a
beginning, but, as Hankel says, when we look at the work of
Luca Paciuolo nearly three centuries later, we find that the
talent which Leonardo had left to the Latin world had lain
hidden in a napkin and earned no interest. As regards the
place of geometry in education during this period we have
the evidence of Roger Bacon (1214-94), though he, it
is true, seems to have taken an exaggerated view of the
incompetence of the mathematicians and teachers of his
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

368 
EUCLID
time; the philosophers of his day, he says, despised geo-
metry, languages, &c, declaring that they were useless;
people in general, not finding utility in any science such as
geometry, at once recoiled, unless they were boys forced to
it by the rod, from the idea of studying it, so that they
would hardly learn as much as three or four propositions;
the fifth proposition of Euclid was called Elefuga or fuga
miserorum.1
As regards Euclid at the Universities, it may be noted that
the study of geometry seems to have been neglected at the
University of Paris. At the reformation of the University in
1336 it was only provided that no one should take a Licentiate
who had not attended lectures on some mathematical books;
the same requirement reappears in 1452 and 1600. From the
preface to a commentary on Euclid which appeared in 1536
we learn that a candidate for the degree of M.A. had to take
a solemn oath that he had attended lectures on the first six
Books; but it is doubtful whether for the examinations more
than Book I was necessary, seeing that the proposition I. 47
was known as Magister matheseos. At the University of
Prague (founded in 1348) mathematics were more regarded.
Candidates for the Baccalaureate had to attend lectures on
the Tractatus de Sphaera materially a treatise on the funda-
mental ideas of spherical astronomy, mathematical geography
and the ordinary astronomical phenomena, but without the
help of mathematical propositions, written by Johannes de
Sacrobosco (i.e. of Holy wood, in Yorkshire) in 1250, a book
which was read at all Universities for four centuries and
many times commented upon; for the Master's degree lectures
on the first six Books of Euclid were compulsory. Euclid
was lectured upon at the Universities of Vienna (founded 1365),
Heidelberg (1386), Cologne (1388); at Heidelberg an oath was
required from the candidate for the Licentiate corresponding
to M.A. that he had attended lectures on some whole books and
not merely parts of several books (not necessarily, it appears,
of Euclid); at Vienna, the first five Books of Euclid were
required; at Cologne, no mathematics were required for the
Baccalaureate, but the candidate for M.A. must have attended
1 Roger Bacon, Opus Tertium, cc. iv, vi.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

STUDY OF EUCLID IN THE MIDDLE AGES 369
lectures on the Sphaera mundi, planetary theory, three Books
of Euclid, optics and arithmetic. At Leipzig (founded 1409),
as at Vienna and Prague, there were lectures on Euclid for
some time at all events, though Hankel says that he found no
mention of Euclid in a list of lectures given in the consecutive
years 1437-8, and Regibmontanus, when he went to Leipzig,
found no fellow-students in geometry. At Oxford, in the
middle of the fifteenth century, the first two Books of Euclid
were read, and doubtless the Cambridge course was similar.
The f|rst English editions.
After the issue of the first printed editions of Euclid,
beginning with the translation of Campano, published by
Ratdolt, and of the editio princeps of the Greek text (1533),
the study of Euclid received a great impetus, as is shown
by the number of separate editions and commentaries which
appeared in the sixteenth century. The first complete English
translation by Sir Henry Billingsley (1570) was a monumental
work of 928 pages of folio size, with a preface by John Dee,
and notes extracted from all the most important commentaries
from Proclus down to Dee himself, a magnificent tribute to
the immortal Euclid. About the same time Sir Henry Savile
began to give unpaid lectures on the Greek geometers; those
on Euclid do not indeed extend beyond I. 8, but they are
valuable because they deal with the difficulties connected with
the preliminary matter, the definitions, &c, and the tacit
assumptions contained in the first propositions. But it was
in the period from about 1660 to 1730, during which Wallis
and Halley were Professors at Oxford, and Barrow and
Newton at Cambridge, that the study of Greek mathematics
was at its height in England. As regards Eudid in particular
Barrow's influence was doubtless very great. 
His Latin
version (Euclidis Elementorum Libri XV breviter demon-
strati) came out in 1655, and there were several more editions
of*the same published up to 1732; his first English edition
appeared in 1660, and was followed by others in 1705, 1722,
1732,1751. This brings us to Simson's edition, first published
both in Latin and English in 1756. It is presumably from
this time onwards that Euclid acquired the unique status as
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

370 
EUCLID
a text-book which it maintained till recently. I cannot help
thinking that it was Barrow's influence which contributed
most powerfully to this. We are told that Newton, when
he first bought a Euclid in 1662 or 1663, thought it' a trifling
book', as the propositions seemed to him obvious; after-
wards, however, on Barrow's advice, he studied the Elements
carefully and derived, as he himself stated, much benefit
therefrom.
Technical terms connected with the classical form
of a proposition.
As the classical form of a proposition in geometry is that
which we find in Euclid, though it did not originate with
him, it is desirable, before we proceed to an analysis of the
Elements, to give some account of the technical terms used by
the Greeks in connexion with such propositions and their
proofs. We will take first the terms employed to describe the
formal divisions of a proposition.
(a) Terms for the formal divisions of a proposition.
In its completest form a proposition contained six parts,
(1) the Trporatny, or enunciation in general terms, (2) the
eAc0eo-*9, or setting-out, which states the particular data, e.g.
a given straight line AB, two given triangles ABG, DEF, and
the like, generally shown in a figure and constituting that
upon which the proposition is to operate, (3) the Stopta/ios,
definition or specification, which means the restatement of
what it is required to do or to prove in terms of the particular
data, the object being to fix our ideas, (4) the KaraaKevr], the
construction or machinery used, which includes any additions
to the original figure by way of construction that are necessary
to enable the proof to proceed, (5) the diroSeigL?, or the proof
itself, and (6) the o-v/iwipaa/jLa, or conclusion, which reverts to
the enunciation, and states what has been proved or done;
the conclusion can, of course, be stated in as general terms
as the enunciation, since it does not depend on the particular
figure drawn; that figure is only an illustration, a type of the
class of figure, and it is legitimate therefore, in stating
the conclusion, to pass from the particular to the general.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

FORMAL DIVISIONS OF A. PROPOSITION 
371
In particular cases some of these formal divisions may be
absent, but three are always found, the enunciation, proof
and conclusion. Thus in many propositions no construction
is needed, the given figure itself sufficing for the proof;
again, in IV. 10 (to construct an isosceles triangle with each
of the base angles double of the vertical angle) we may, in
a sense, say with Proclusl that there is neither setting-out nor
definition, for there is nothing given in the enunciation, and
we set out, not a given straight line, but any straight line AB,
while the proposition does not state (what might be said by
way of definition) that the required triangle is to have AB for
one of its equal sides.
((3) The Siopicr/ios or statement of conditions of possibility.
Sometimes to the statement of a problem there has to be
added a Stopta-fios in the more important and familiar sense of
a criterion of the conditions of possibility or, in its most
complete form, a criterion as to ' whether what is sought
is impossible or possible and how far it is practicable and in
how many ways'.2 Both kinds of Siopicr/ios begin with the
words 8ei 8rj, which should be translated, in the case of the
definition, ' thus it is required (to prove or do so and so)' and,
in the case of the criterion of possibility, ' thus it is necessary
that . . .' (not ' but it is necessary . . .'). Cf. I. 22, {Out of
three straight lines which are equal to three given straight
lines to construct a triangle: thus it is necessary that two
of the straight lines taken together in any manner should be
greater than the remaining straight line'.
(y) Analysis, synthesis, reduction, reductio ad absurdum.
The Elements is a synthetic treatise in that it goes directly
forward the whole way, always proceeding from the known
to the unknown, from the simple and particular to the more
complex and general; hence analysis, which reduces the
unknown or the more complex to the known, has no place
in the exposition, though, it would play an important part in
the discovery of the proofs. A full account of the Greek
analysis and synthesis will come more conveniently elsewhere.
1 Proclus on Eucl-. I, p. 203. 23 sq. 
2 Ib., p. 202. 3.
Bb2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

372 
EUCLID
In the meantime we may observe that, where a proposition
is worked out by analysis followed by synthesis, the analysis
comes between the definition and the construction of the
proposition; and it should not be forgotten that reductio ad
absurdum (called in Greek rj eh TO dhvvarov d
'reduction to the impossible', or f) 8ta rod dSvvdrov 
g
or dnoSeigi?, 'proof per impossibile'), a method of proof
common in Euclid as elsewhere, is a variety of analysis.
For analysis begins with reduction {dirayo&yri) of the original
proposition, which we hypothetically assume to be true, to
something simpler which we can recognize as being either
true or false; the case where it leads to a conclusion known
to be false is the reductio ad absurdum.
(8) Case, objection, porism, lemma.
Other terms connected with propositions are the following.
A proposition may have several cases according to the different
arrangements of points, lines, &c, in the figure that may
result from variations in the positions of the elements given;
the word for case is TTTGXTLS. The practice of the great
geometers was, as a rule, to give only one case, leaving the
others for commentators or pupils to supply for themselves.
But they were fully alive to the existence of such other
cases; sometimes, if we may believe Proclus, they would even
give a proposition solely with a view to its use for the purpose
of proving a case of a later proposition which is actually
omitted. Thus, according to Proclus,1 the second part of I. 5
(about the angles beyond the base) was intended to enable
the reader to meet an objection (evcrraaris) that might be
raised to I. 7 as given by Euclid on the ground that it was
incomplete, since it took no account of what was given by
Proclus himself, and is now generally given in our text-books,
as the second case.
What we call a corollary was for the Greeks a porism
(7r6pi<rfjt,a), i. e. something provided or ready-made, by which
was meant some result incidentally revealed in the course
of the demonstration of the main proposition under discussion,
a sort of incidental gain' arising out of the demonstration,
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 248. 8-11; 263. 4-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TECHNICAL TERMS 
373
as Proclus says.1 The name porism was also applied to a
special kind of substantive proposition, as in Euclid's separate
work in three Books entitled Porisms (see below, pp. 431-8).
The word lemma (Xfj/jL/ia) simply means something assumed.
Archimedes uses it of what is now known as the Axiom of
Archimedes, the principle assumed by Eudoxus and others in
the method of exhaustion; but it is more commonly used
of a subsidiary proposition requiring proof, which, however,
it is convenient to assume in the place where it is wanted
in order that the argument may not be interrupted or unduly
lengthened. Such a lemma might be proved in advance, but
the proof was often postponed till the end, the assumption
being marked as something to be afterwards proved by some
such words as coy igrjs BtiyOrjaerai, ' as will be proved in due
course \
Analysis of the Elements.
Book I of the Elements necessarily begins with the essential
preliminary matter classified under the headings Definitions
(Spot), Postulates (alrrfixara) and Common Notions (KOLVCU
evvoiai). In calling, the axioms Common Notions Euclid
followed the lead of Aristotle, who uses as alternatives for
' axioms' the terms ' common (things)', f common opinions \
Many of the Definitions are open to criticism on one ground
or another. Two of them at least seem to be original, namely,
the definitions of a straight line (4) and of a plane surface (7);
unsatisfactory as these are, they seem to be capable of a
simple explanation. 
The definition of a straight line is
apparently an attempt to express, without any appeal to
sight, the sense of Plato's definition ' that of which the middle
covers the ends' (sc. to an eye placed at one end and looking
along it); and the definition of a plane surface is an adaptation
of the same definition. 
But most of the definitions were
probably adopted from earlier text-books; some appear to be
inserted merely out of respect for tradition, e.g. the defini-
tions of oblong, rhombus, rhomboid, wnieh are never used
in the Elements. 
The definitions of various figures assume
the existence of the thing defined, e. g. the square, and the
1 Ib., p. 212. 16.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

374 
EUCLID
different kinds of triangle under their twofold classification
(a) with reference to their sides (equilateral, isosceles and
scalene), and (6) with reference to their angles (right-angled,
obtuse-angled and acute-angled); such definitions are pro-
visional pending the proof of existence by means of actual con-
struction. A parallelogram is not defined; its existence is
first proved in I. 33, and in the next proposition it is called a
' parallelogrammic area', meaning an area contained by parallel
lines, in preparation for the use of the simple word ' parallelo-
gram' from I. 35 onwards. 
The definition of a diameter
of a circle (17) includes a theorem; for Euclid adds that' such
a straight line also bisects the circle', which is one of the
theorems attributed to Thales; but this addition was really
necessary in view of the next definition (18), for, without
this explanation, Euclid would not have been justified in
describing a semi-circle as a portion of a circle cut off by
a diameter.
More important by far are the five Postulates, for it is in
them that Euclid lays down the real principles of Euclidean
geometry; and nothing shows more clearly his determination
to reduce his original assumptions to the very minimum.
The first three Postulates are commonly regarded as the
postulates of construction, since they assert the possibility
(1) of drawing the straight line joining two points, (2) of
producing a straight line in either direction, and (3) of describ-
ing a circle with a given centre and ' distance \ 
But they
imply much more than this. In Postulates 1 and 3 Euclid
postulates the existence of straight lines and circles, and
implicitly answers the objections of those who might say that,
as a matter of fact, the straight lines and circles which we
can draw are not mathematical straight lines and circles;
Euclid may be supposed to assert that we can nevertheless
assume our straight lines and circles to be such for the purpose
of our proofs, since they are only illustrations enabling us to
imagine the real things which they imperfectly represent.
Rut, again, Postulates 1 and 2 further imply that the straight
line drawn in the first case and the produced portion of the
straight line in the second case are unique; in other words,
Postulate 1 implies that two straight lines cannot enclose a
space, and so renders unnecessary the ' axiom' to that effect
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK I 
375
interpolated in Proposition 4, while Postulate 2 similarly im-
plies the theorem that two straight lines cannot have a
common segment, which Simson gave as a corollary to I. 11.
At first sight the Postulates 4 (that all right angles are
equal) and 5 (the Parallel-Postulate) might seem to be of
an altogether different character, since they are rather of the
nature of theorems unproved. But Postulate 5 is easily seen
to be connected with constructions, because so many con-
structions depend on the existence and use of points in which
straight lines intersect; it is therefore absolutely necessary to
lay down some criterion by which we can judge whether two
straight lines in a figure will or will not meet if produced.
Postulate 5 serves this purpose as well as that of providing
a basis for the theory of parallel lines. Strictly speaking,
Euclid ought to have gone further and given criteria for
judging whether other pairs of lines, e. g. a straight line and
a circle, or two circles, in a particular figure will or will not
intersect one another. But this would have necessitated a
considerable series of propositions, which it would have been
difficult to frame at so early a stage, and Euclid preferred
to assume such intersections provisionally in certain cases,
e.g. in I. 1.
Postulate 4 is often classed as a theorem. But it had in any
case to be placed before Postulate 5 for the simple reason that
Postulate 5 would be no criterion at all unless right angles
were determinate magnitudes; Postulate 4 then declares them
to be such. But this is not all. If Postulate 4 were to be
proved as a theorem, it could only be proved by applying one
pair of ' adjacent' right angles to another pair. This method
would not be valid unless on the assumption of the invaria-
bility of figures, which would therefore have to be asserted as
an antecedent postulate. 
Euclid preferred to assert as a
postulate, directly, the fact that all right angles are equal;
hence his postulate may be taken as equivalent to the prin-
ciple of the invariability of figures, or, what is the same thing,
the homogeneity of space.
For reasons which I have given above (pp. 339, 358), I think
that the great Postulate 5 is due to Euclid himself; and it
seems probable that Postulate 4 is also his, if not Postulates
1-3 as well.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

376 
EUCLID
Of the Common Notions there is good reason to believe
that only five (at the most) are genuine, the first three and
two others, namely 4 Things which coincide when applied to
one another are equal to one another' (4), and ' The whole
is greater than the part' (5). The objection to (4) is that
it is incontestably geometrical, and therefore, on Aristotle's
principles, should not be classed as an ' axiom'; it is a more
or less sufficient definition of geometrical equality, but not
a real axiom. Euclid evidently disliked the method of super-
position for proving equality, no doubt because it assumes the
possibility of motion without deformation* But he could not
dispense with it altogether. Thus in I. 4 he practically had
to choose between using the method and assuming the whole
proposition as a postulate. But he does not there quote
Common Notion 4; he says' the base BC will coincide with
the base EF and will be equal to it \ 
Similarly in I. 6 he
does not quote Common Notion 5, but says 'the triangle
DBC will be equal to the triangle ACB, the less to the greater,
which is absurd'. It seems probable, therefore, that even
these two Common Notions} though apparently recognized
by Proclus, were generalizations from particular inferences
found in Euclid and were inserted after his time.
The propositions of Book I fall into three distinct groups.
The first group consists of Propositions 1-26, dealing mainly
with triangles (without the use of parallels) but also with
perpendiculars (11, 12), two intersecting straight lines (15),
and one straight line standing on another but not cutting it,
and making 'adjacent' or supplementary angles (13, 14),
Proposition 1 gives the construction of an equilateral triangle
on a given straight line as base; this is placed here not so
much on its own account as because it is at once required for
constructions (in 2, 9, 10, 11). The construction in 2 is a
direct continuation of the minimum constructions assumed
in Postulates 1-3, and enables us (as the Postulates do not) to
transfer a given length of straight line from one place to
another; it leads in 3 to the operation so often required of
cutting off from one given straight line a length equal to
another. 9 and 10 are the problems of bisecting a given angle
and a given straight line respectively, and 11 shows how
to erect a perpendicular to a given straight line from a given
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK 1 
377
point on it. Construction as a means of proving existence is
in evidence in the Book, not only in 1 (the equilateral triangle)
but in 11, 12 (perpendiculars erected and let fall), and in
22 (construction of a triangle in the general case where the
lengths of the sides are given); 23 constructs, by means of 22,
an angle equal to a given rectilineal angle. The propositions
about triangles include the congruence-theorems (4, 8, 26)—
omitting the 'ambiguous case' which is only taken into
account in the analogous proposition (7) of Book VI—and the
theorems (allied to 4) about two triangles in which two sides
of the one are respectively equal to two sides of the other, but
of the included angles (24) or of the bases (25) one is greater
than the other, and it is proved that the triangle in which the
included angle is greater has the greater base and vice versa.
Proposition 7, used to prove Proposition 8, is also important as
being the Book I equivalent of III. 10 (that two circles cannot
intersect in more points than two). Then we have theorems
about single triangles in 5, 6 (isosceles triangles have the
angles opposite to the equal sides equal—Thales's theorem—
and the converse), the important propositions 16 (the exterior
angle of a triangle is greater than either of the interior and
opposite angles) and its derivative 17 (any two angles of
a triangle are together less than two right angles), 18, 19
(greater angle subtended by greater side and vice versa),
20 (any two sides together greater than the third). This last
furnishes the necessary Siopicrjios, or criterion of possibility, of
the problem in 22 of constructing a triangle out of three
straight lines of given length, which problem had therefore
to come after and not before 20. 21 (proving that the two
sides of a triangle other than the base are together greater,
but include a lesser angle, than the two sides of any other
triangle on the same base but with vertex within the original
triangle) is useful for the proof of the proposition (not stated
in Euclid) that of all straight lines drawn from an external
point to a given straight line the perpendicular is the
shortest, and the nearer to the perpendicular is less than the
more remote.
The second group (27-32) includes the theory of parallels
(27-31, ending with the construction through a given point
of a parallel to a given straight line); and then, in 32, Euclid
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

378 
EUCLID
proves that the sum of the three angles of a triangle is equal
to two right angles by means of a parallel to one side drawn
from the opposite vertex (cf. the slightly different Pytha-
gorean proof, p. 143).
The third group of propositions (33-48) deals generally
with parallelograms, triangles and squares with reference to
their areas. 33, 34 amount to the proof of the existence and
the property of a parallelogram, and then we are introduced
to a new conception, that of equivalent figures, or figures
equal in area though not equal in the sense of congruent:
parallelograms on the same base or on equal bases and between
the same parallels are equal in area (35, 36); the same is true
of triangles (37, 38), and a parallelogram on the same (or an
equal) base with a triangle and between the same parallels is
double of the triangle (41). 39 and the interpolated 40 are
partial converses of 37 and 38. The theorem 41 enables us
' to construct in a given rectilineal angle a parallelogram
equal to a given triangle' (42). Propositions 44, 45 are of
the greatest importance, being the first cases of the Pytha-
gorean method of ' application of areas',f to apply to a given
straight line, in a given rectilineal angle, a parallelogram
equal to a given triangle (or rectilineal figure) \ 
The con-
struction in 44 is remarkably ingenious, being based on that
of 42 combined with the proposition (43) proving that the
' complements of the parallelograms about the diameter' in any
parallelogram are equal. We are thus enabled to transform
a parallelogram of any shape into another with the same
angle and of equal area but with one side of any given length,
say a unit length; this is the geometrical equivalent of the
algebraic operation of dividing the product of two quantities
by a third. Proposition 46 constructs a square on any given
straight line as side, and is followed by the great Pythagorean
theorem of the square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled
triangle (47) and its converse (48). The remarkably clever
proof of 47 by means of the well-known 'windmill' figure
and the application to it of I. 41 combined with I. 4 seems to
be due to Euclid himself; it is really equivalent to a proof by
the methods of Book VI (Propositions 8, 17), and Euclid's
achievement was that of avoiding the use of proportions and
making the proof dependent upon Book I only.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS I-II 
379
I make no apology for having dealt at some length with
Book I and, in particular, with the preliminary matter, in
view of the unique position and authority of the Elements
as an exposition of the fundamental principles of Greek
geometry, and the necessity for the historian of mathematics
of a clear understanding of their nature and full import.
It will now be possible to deal more summarily with the
other Books.
Book II is a continuation of the third section of Book I,
relating to the transformation of areas, but is specialized in
that it deals, not with parallelograms in general, but with
rectangles and squares, and makes great use of the figure
called the gnomon. 
The rectangle is introduced (Def. 1) as
a ' rectangular parallelogram', which is said to be' contained
by the two straight lines containing the right angle \ 
The
gnomon is defined (Def. 2) with reference to any parallelo-
gram, but the only gnomon actually used is naturally that
which belongs to a square. The whole Book constitutes an
essential part of the geometrical algebra which really, in
Greek geometry, took the place of our algebra. The first ten
propositions give the equivalent of the following algebraical
identities.
1. a(b + c + d +...) =
2. (a + b)a + (a + b)b = (a + i)2,
3. (a + b)a — ab + a2,
4.
5.
or
6. (2a + b)b + a2= (a + b)*,
or
7. (
or
8. 4
or
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

380 
EUCLID
9. a
or
10. (
or
As we have seen (pp. 151-3), Propositions 5 and 6 enable us
to solve the quadratic equations
(1) ax-x2 = b2 or
v ; 
xy =
and 
(2) ax + x2 = b2 or 
2 / ^ 
=
x ' 
xy =
The procedure is geometrical throughout; the areas in all
the Propositions 1-8 are actually shown in the figures.
Propositions 9 and 10 were really intended to solve a problem
in numbers, that of finding any number of successive pairs
of integral numbers (' side-' and ' diameter-' numbers) satisfy-
ing the equations
2#2-2/2= ±1
(see p. 93, above).
Of the remaining propositions, II. 11 and II. 14 give the
geometrical equivalent of solving the quadratic equations
x2 -f ax = a2
and 
x2 = ab,
while the intervening propositions 12 and 13 prove, for any
triangle with sides a, b, c, the equivalent of the formula
It is worth noting that, while I. 47 and its converse con-
clude Book I as if that Book was designed to lead up to the
great proposition of Pythagoras, the last propositions but one
of Book II give the generalization of the same proposition
with any triangle substituted for a right-angled triangle.
The subject of Book III is the geometry of the circle,
including the relations between circles cutting or touching
each other. 
It begins with some definitions, which are
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS II-III 
381
generally of the same sort as those of Book I. Definition 1,
stating that equal circles are those which have their diameters
or their radii equal, might alternatively be regarded as a
postulate or a theorem; if stated as a theorem, it could only
be proved by superposition and the congruence-axiom. 
It is
curious that the Greeks had no single word for radius, which
was with them ' the (straight line) from the centre', fj €K TOV
Kevrpou. A tangent to a circle is defined (Def. 2) as a straight
line which meets the circle but, if produced, does not cut it;
this is provisional pending the proof in III* 16 that such lines
exist. The definitions (4, 5) of straight lines (in a circle),
i. e. chords, equally distant or more or less distant from the
centre (the test being the length of the perpendicular from
the centre on the chord) might have referred, more generally,
to the distance of any straight line from any point. The
definition (7) of the * angle o/a segment' (the 'mixed' angle
made by the circumference with the base at either end) is
a survival from earlier text-books (cf. Props. 16, 31). The
definitions of the ' angle in a segment' (8) and of ' similar
segments' (11) assume (provisionally pending IIL 21) that the
angle in a segment is one and the same at whatever point of
the circumference it is formed. 
A sector (ro/zeyy, explained by
a scholiast as o-KVTOTOfwcb? ro/ievs, a shoemaker's knife) is
defined (10), but there is nothing 'about' similar sectors' and
no statement that similar segments belong to similar sectors.
Of the propositions of Book III we may distinguish certain
groups. 
Central properties account for four propositions,
namely 1 (to find the centre of a circle), 3 (any straight line
through the centre which bisects any chord not passing
through the centre cuts it at right angles, and vice versa),
4 (two chords not passing through the centre cannot bisect
one another) and 9 (the centre is the only point from which
more than two equal straight lines can be drawn to the
circumference). 
Besides 3, which shows that any diameter
bisects the whole series of chords at right angles to it, three
other propositions throw light on the form of the circum-
ference of a circle, 2 (showing that it is everywhere concave
towards the centre), 7 and 8 (dealing with the varying lengths
of straight lines drawn from any point, internal or external,
to the concave or convex circumference, as the case may be,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

382 
EUCLID
and proving that they are of maximum or minimum length
when they pass through the centre, and that they diminish or
increase as they diverge more and more from the maximum
or minimum straight lines on either side, while the lengths of
any two which are equally inclined to them, one on each side,
are equal).
Two circles which cut or touch one another are dealt with
in 5, 6 (the two circles cannot have the same centre), 10, 13
(they cannot cut in more points tnan two, or touch at more
points than one), 11 and the interpolated 12 (when they touch,
the line of centres passes through the point of contact).
14, 15 deal with chords (which are equal if equally distant
from the centre and vice versa, while chords more distant
from the centre are less, and chords less distant greater, and
vice versa).
16-19 are concerned with tangent properties including the
drawing of a tangent (17); it is in 16 that we have the
survival of the ' angle of a, semicircle', which is proved greater
than any acute rectilineal angle, while the ' remaining' angle
(the 'angle', afterwards called KepaToeiSrjs, or 'hornlike',
between the curve and the tangent at the point of contact)
is less than any rectilineal angle. These ' mixed' angles,
occurring in lfr and 31, appear no more in serious Greek
geometry, though controversy about their nature went on
in the works of commentators down to Clavius, Peletarius
(Pettier), Vieta, Galilei and Wallis.
We now come to propositions about segments. 20 proves
that the angle at the centre is double of the angle at the
circumference, and 21 that the angles in the same segment are
all equal, which leads to the property of the quadrilateral
in a circle (22). After propositions (23, 24) on 'similar
segments', it is proved that in equal circles equal arcs subtend
and are subtended by equal angles at the centre or circum-
ference, and equal arcs subtend and are subtended by equal
chords (26-9). 30 is the problem of bisecting a given arc,
and 31 proves that the angle in a segment is right, acute or
obtuse according as the segment is a semicircle, greater than
a semicircle or less than a semicircle. 32 proves that the
angle made by a tangent with a chord through the point
of contact is equal to the angle in the alternate segment;
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS III-IV 
383
33, 34 are problems of constructing or cutting off a segment
containing a given angle, and 25 constructs the complete circle
when a segment of it is given.
The Book ends with three important propositions. Given
a circle and any point 0, internal (35) or external (36), then,
if any straight line through 0 meets the circle in P, Q, the
rectangle PO . OQ is constant and, in the case where 0 is
an external point, is equal to the square on the tangent from
0 to the circle. Proposition 37 is the converse of 36.
Book IV, consisting entirely of problems, again deals with
circles, but in relation to rectilineal figures inscribed or circum-
scribed to them. After definitions of these terms, Euclid
shows, in the preliminary Proposition 1, how to fit into a circle
a chord of given length, being less than the diameter. The
remaining problems are problems of inscribing or circum-
scribing rectilineal figures. The case of the triangle comes
first, and we learn how to inscribe in or circumscribe about
a circle a triangle equiangular with a given triangle (2, 3) and
to inscribe a circle in or circumscribe a circle about a given
triangle (4, 5). 6-9 are the same problems for a square, 11-
14 for a regular pentagon, and 15 (with porism) for a regular
hexagon. The porism to 15 also states that the side of the
inscribed regular hexagon is manifestly equal to the radius
of the circle. 16 shows how to inscribe in a circle a regular
polygon with fifteen angles, a problem suggested by astronomy,
since the obliquity of the ecliptic was taken, to be about 24°,
or one-fifteenth of 360°. IV. 10 is the important proposition,
required for the construction of a regular pentagon, cto
construct an isosceles triangle such that each of the base
angles is double of the vertical angle', which is effected by
dividing one of the equal sides in extreme and mean ratio
(II. 11) and fitting into the circle with this side as radius
a chord equal to the greater segment; the proof of the con-
struction depends on III. 32 and 37.
We are not surprised to learn from a scholiast that the
whole Book is ' the discovery of the Pythagoreans '} 
The
same scholium says that 'it is proved in this Book that
the perimeter of a circle is not triple of its diameter, as many
1 Euclid, ed. Heib., vol. v, pp. 272-3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

384 
EUCLID
suppose, but greater than that (the reference is clearly to
IV. 15 Por.), and likewise that neither is the circle three*
fourths of the triangle circumscribed about it*. Were these
fallacies perhaps exposed in the lost Pseudaria of Euclid ?
Book V is devoted to the new theory of proportion,
applicable to incommensurable as well as commensurable
magnitudes, and to magnitudes of every kind (straight lines,
areas, volumes, numbers, times, &c), which was due to
Eudoxus. Greek mathematics can boast no finer discovery
than this theory, which first put on a sound footing so much
of geometry as depended on the use of proportions, How far
Eudoxus himself worked out his theory in detail is unknown;
the scholiast who attributes the discovery of it to him says
that ' it is recognized by all' that Book V is, as regards its
arrangement and sequence in the Elements, due to Euclid
himself.1 The ordering of the propositions and the develop-
ment of the proofs are indeed masterly and worthy of Euclid;
as Barrow said, * There is nothing in the whole body of the
elements of a more subtile invention, nothing more solidly
established, and more accurately handled, than the doctrine of
proportionals'. It is a pity that, notwithstanding the pre-
eminent place which Euclid has occupied in English mathe-
matical teaching, Book V itself is little known in detail; if it
were, there would, I think, be less tendency to seek for
substitutes; indeed, after reading some of the substitutes,
it is with relief that one turns to the original. For this
reason, I shall make my account of Book V somewhat full,
with the object of indicating not only the whole content but
also the course of the proofs.
Of the Definitions the following are those which need
separate mention. The definition (3) of ratio as 'a sort of
relation (noia a-yeais) in respect of size (TrrjXtKOTrjs) between
two magnitudes of the same kind' is as vague and of as
little practical use as that of a straight line; it was probably
inserted for completeness' sake, and in order merely to aid the
conception of a ratio. Definition 4 (' Magnitudes are said to
have a ratio to one another which are capable, when multi-
plied, of exceeding one another') is important not only because
1 Euclid, ed. Heib., vol. v, p. 282.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK V 
385
it shows that the magnitudes must be of the same kind,
but because, while it includes incommensurable as well as
commensurable magnitudes, it excludes the relation of a finite
magnitude to a magnitude of the same kind which is either
infinitely great or infinitely small; it is also practically equiva-
lent to the principle which underlies the method of exhaustion
now known as the Axiom of Archimedes. Most important
of all is the fundamental definition (5) of magnitudes which
are in the same ratio: ' Magnitudes are said to be in the same
ratio, the first to the second and the third to the fourth, when,
if any equimultiples whatever be taken of the first and third,
and any equimultiples whatever of the second and fourth, the
former equimultiples alike exceed, are alike equal to, or alike
fall short of, the latter equimultiples taken in corresponding
order.5 Perhaps the greatest tribute to this marvellous defini-
tion is its adoption by Weierstrass as a definition of equal
numbers. For a most attractive explanation of its exact
significance and its absolute sufficiency the reader should turn
to De Morgan's articles on Ratio and Proportion in the Penny
Cyclopaedia.1 The definition (7) of greater ratio is an adden-
dum to Definition 5 : ' When, of the equimultiples, the multiple
of the first exceeds the multiple of the second, but the
multiple of the third does not exceed the multiple of the
fourth, then the first is said to have a greater ratio to
the second than the third has to the fourth'; this (possibly
for brevity's sake) states only one criterion, the other possible
criterion being that, while the multiple of the first is equal
to that of the second, the multiple of the third is less than
that of the fourth. A proportion may consist of three or
four terms (Defs. 8, 9, 10); 'corresponding' or 'homologous'
terms are antecedents in relation to antecedents and conse-
quents in relation to consequents (11). Euclid proceeds to
define the various transformations of ratios. 
Alternation
(ha\\d£, 
alternando) means taking the alternate terms in
the proportion a: b = c:d, i.e. transforming it into a:c = b:d
(12). Inversion (avanaXiv, inversely) means turning the ratio
a:b into b:a (13). 
Composition 
of a ratio, crvvOzcris \6yo\j
(componendo is in Greek avvOevri, 'to one who has compounded
1 Vol. xix (1841). I have largely reproduced the articles in The
Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements, vol. ii, pp. 116-24.
152S 
C 
C
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

386 
EUCLID
or added', i.e. if one compounds or adds) is the turning of
a: b into (a + b):b (14). 
Separation, 
Siaipecris (SteXoj/ri =
separando) turns a:b into (a—b):b (15). Conversion, ava-
a-rpo(f>rj (di/aaTpiyfravTi = convertendo) turns a:b into a:a—b
(16<). Lastly, or aequali (sc. distantia), 8i i'<rov, and e# aequali
in disturbed proportion (kv rerapay/levy avaXoyla) are defined
(17, 18). 
If a:b = A:B, 
b:c = B : C... k:l = K : L, then
the inference ex aequali is that a: I — A :L (proved in V. 22).
If again a:b = B:G and b:c = A:B, the inference ex aequali
in disturbed proportion is a: c = A : G (proved in V. 23).
In reproducing the content of the Book I shall express
magnitudes in general (which Euclid represents by straight
lines) by the letters a, b, c ... and I shall use the letters
m, n, p... to express integral numbers: thus ma, mb are
equimultiples of a, b.
The first six propositions are simple theorems in concrete
arithmetic, and they are practically all proved by separating
into their units the multiples used.
(I. ma + mb + mc+ ... = m (a + 6 + c + ...)•
(5. ma — mh — m{a — b).
5 is proved by means of 1. As a matter of fact, Euclid
assumes the construction of a straight line equal to 1 /mth of
ma—mb. 
This is an anticipation of VI. 9, but can be avoided;
for we can draw a straight line equal to m (a — b); then,
by 1, m(a — b)+mb = ma, or mar-mb = m(a — b).
!
ma-\-na-\-pa-\-... =
6. ma — na = (m — n) a.
Euclid actually expresses 2 and 6 by saying that ma±na is
the same multiple of a that mb + nb is of b. By separation
of m, n into units he in fact shows (in 2) that
ma + na = (m-{-n) a, and mb + nb = (m + n) 6.
6 is proved by means of 2, as 5 by means of 1.
3. If m.na, m.nb are equimultiples of na, nb, which are
themselves equimultiples of a, b, then m. na, m. nb are also
equimultiples of a, b.
By separating m, ?i into their units Euclid practically proves
that m.na s= ww,a and m.nb = 
6
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK V 
387
4. If a:b = c:d, then ma:nb = me: nd.
Take any equimultiples p.ma, p.me of ma, vie, and any
equimultiples q.nb, q.nd of nb, nd. 
Then, by 3, these equi-
multiples are also equimultiples of a, c and b, d respectively,
so that by Def. 5, since a: b = c: d,
p.ma > = < q.nb according as p.me > = < q.nd,
whence, again by Def. 5, since p, q are any integers,
ma:nb= me: nd.
7, 9. If a — b, then 
a:c = 6:c)
_ 
_ h; and conversely,
and 
c: a = c: b 1
a:c > 6:c) 
_
. 
\ : and conversely.
c : & > c : a j ' 
J
8, 10. If a > b, then arc > b:t
and
7 is proved by means of Def. 5. Take ma, mb equi-
multiples of a, b, and nc a multiple of c. Then, since a = 6,
ma > = < nc according as mb > = < nc,
and 
nc > = < ma according as nc > = < mb,
whence the results follow.
8 is divided into two cases according to which of the two
magnitudes a — b, 6 is the less. Take m such that
m(a—b)>c or mb > c
in the two cases respectively. 
Next let nc be the first
multiple of c which is greater than mb or m(a — b) respec-
tively, so that
mb' 
.
nc > 
j > (n— l)c.
or m (a — 6)
Then, (i) since in{a — b) > c, we have, by addition, ma > nc.
(ii) since mb > c, we have similarly ma > nc.
In either case oab < nc, since in case (ii) m(a — b) > mb.
Thus in either case, by the definition (7) of greater ratio,
a:c > b:c,
and 
c : b > c: a.
The converses 9, 10 are proved from 7, 8 by reductio ad
absurdum.
c c %
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

388 
EUCLID
11. If 
a:b = c:d,
and 
c:d = e:/,
then 
a:b = e:f.
Proved by taking any equimultiples of a, e, e and any other
equimultiples of b, d>f, and using Def. 5.
12. If 
a:b = c:d = e : / = ...
then 
a:b = (a + c + e+ ...):(b + 
d+f+...).
Proved by means of V. 1 and Def. 5, after taking equi-
multiples of a, c, e ... and other equimultiples of b, d, f . . . .
13. If 
a:b = c:d,
and 
c:d > e:fy
then 
a:b > e:f.
Equimultiples me, me of c, e are taken and equimultiples
nd, nf of d, / such that, while me > nd, me is not greater
than nf (Def. 7). Then the same equimultiples ma, me of
a, e and the same equimultiples nb, nd of b, d are taken, and
Defs. 5 and 7 are used in succession.
14. If a:b = c:d, then, according as a > = < e, b > = < d.
The first case only is proved; the others are dismissed with
1 Similarly \
If 
a > c, a:b > c:b. 
(8)
B u t a:b = c:d, w h e n c e (13) c:d > c:b, a n d therefore (10)
b>d.
15. a:b = ma:nib.
Dividing the multiples into their units, we have m equal
ratios a: b; the result follows by 12.
Propositions 16-19 prove certain cases of the transformation
of proportions in the sense of Defs. 12-16. The case of
inverting the ratios is omitted, probably as being obvious.
For, if a: b = c: d, the application of Def. 5 proves simul-
taneously that 6:a = die.
16. If 
a:b 
=c:d,
then, altevnando, 
a:e = b:d.
Since 
a:b = ma:m&, and c:d = 
ne:nd,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. BOOK V 
389
we have 
ma: mb = no: ndy 
(11)
whence (14), according as ma > — < nc, mb > = < nd\
therefore (Def. 5) 
a:c = b:d.
17. If 
a:b = c:d,
then, separando, 
(a — b): b = (c — d):d.
Take TXia, m&, OTIC, md equimultiples of all four magnitudes,
and nb, nd other equimultiples of 6, d. 
It follows (2) that
(m + n) b, (m + n)d are also equimultiples of b, d.
Therefore, since 
a:b = c:d}
ma > = <(m + n)b according as mc> = < (m + n) d. 
(Def. 5)
Subtracting mb from both sides of the former relation and
md from both sides of the latter, we have (5)
m (a — b) > — < nb according as m (c — d) > — < nd.
Therefore (Def. 5) 
a — b:b = c — d:d.
(I have here abbreviated Euclid a little, without altering the
substance.)
18. If 
a:b = c:d,
then, componendo, 
(a + b):b — (c + d):d.
Proved by reductio ad absurdum. 
Euclid assumes that
a + b:b = (c + d): (d±x), 
if that is possible. 
(This implies
that to any three given magnitudes, two of which at least
are of the same kind, there exists a fourth proportional, an
assumption which is not strictly legitimate until the fact has
been proved by construction.)
Therefore, separando 
(17), a:b 
= (c + x) 
:(d±x),
whence (11), (c + x): (d + x) = c : d, which relations are im-
possible, by 14.
19. If 
a:b = c:d,
then 
(a — c):(b — d) = a:b.
Alternately (16),
a:c = b:d, whence (a — c) :c = (6—d) :d (17).
A l t e r n a t e l y again, (a — c): (b — d) = c:d (16);
whence (11) 
(a — c):(b — d) = 
a:b.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

390 
EUCLID
The transformation convertendo is only given in an inter-
polated Forism to 19. But it is easily obtained by using 17
(separando) combined with alternando (16). Euclid himself
proves it in X. 14 by using successively separando (17), inver-
sion and ex aequali (22).
The composition of ratios ex aequali and ex aequali in
disturbed proportion is dealt with in 22, 23, each of which
depends on a preliminary proposition.
20. If 
a:b = d:e,
and 
b : c = e:/,
then, ex aequali, according as a > = < c, d > = </.
For, according as a > = < c, a : b > = < c: b (7, 8),
and therefore, by means of the above relations and 13, il,
d:e > = <f:e,
and therefore again (9, 10)
d > = < /.
21. If 
a:b = e:f,
and 
b: c = d:e,
then, ere aequali in disturbed proportion,
according as 
a > = < c, d > = < f.
For, according as a > = < c, a: b > = < c: 6 (7, 8),
or 
e:f> 
= < e:d (13, 11),
and therefore 
d > = < / (9, 10).
22. If 
a:6 =<i:e,
and 
b : c = e:/,
then, ex aequali, 
a:c = cZ:/.
Take equimultiples ma, md; nb, ne; pc, p/, and it follows
that 
ma: nb — md: ne^ | 
,.x
and 
nbipe = Tie: jp/ )
Therefore (20), according as ma > = < pc, md > = < jp/i
whence (Def. 5) 
a:c — d:/.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK V 
391
23. If 
a:b = e:f,
and 
b: c =d:e,
then, ex aequali in disturbed proportion, a: c — d :f.
Equimultiples ma, m&, md and TIC, ne} nf are taken, and
it is proved, by means of 11, 15, 16, that
ma: mb = ne: nf,
and 
mb: nc = Tad: ne,
whence (21) ma > = < nc according as md > — < nf,
and(Def. 5) 
a:c = d:f.
24. If 
a : c = d:/,
and also 
b:c — e:f,
then 
(a + b):c = (d + e):f
Invert the second proportion to c:b=f:ey 
and compound
the first proportion with this (22);
therefore 
a:b = d:e.
Componendo, (a + b) :b = (d + e) :e, which compounded (22)
with the second proportion gives (a + b): c = (d + e):/.
25. If a: b = c: d, and of the four terms a is the greatest
(so that d is also the least), a + d > b + c.
Since 
a :b — c : d,
a — c :b — d = a : 6 ; 
(19)
and, since a > b, 
(a — c) > (b — d), 
(16, 14)
Add c + d to each;
therefore 
a + d > b + c.
Such slight defects as are found in the text of this great
Book .as it has reached us, like other slight imperfections of
form in the Elements, point to the probability that the work
never received its final touches from Euclid's hand; but they
can all be corrected without much difficulty, as Simson showed
in his excellent edition.
Book VI contains the application to plane geometry of the
general theory of proportion established in Book V. It begins
with definitions of ' similar rectilineal figures' and of what is
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

392 
EUCLID
meant by cutting a straight line ' in extreme and mean ratio'.
The first and last propositions are analogous; 1 proves that
triangles and parallelograms of the same height are to one
another as their bases, and 33 that in equal circles angles
at the centre or circumference are as the arcs on which they
stand; both use the method of equimultiples and apply
V, Def. 5 as the test of proportion. 
Equally fundamental
are 2 (that two sides of a triangle cut by any parallel to
the third side are divided proportionally, and the converse),
and 3 (that the internal bisector of an angle of a triangle cuts
the opposite side into parts which have the same ratio as the
sides containing the angle, and the converse); 2 depends
directly on 1 and 3 on 2. Then come the alternative con-
ditions for the similarity of two triangles: equality of all the
angles respectively (4), proportionality of pairs o'f sides in
order (5), equality of one angle in each with proportionality
of sides containing the equal angles (6), and the 'ambiguous
case' (7), in which one angle is equal to one angle and the
sides about other angles are proportional. After the important
proposition (8) that the perpendicular from the right angle
in a right-angled triangle to the opposite side divides the
triangle into two triangles similar to the original triangle and
to one another, we pass to the proportional division of
straight lines (9, 10) and the problems of finding a third
proportional to two straight lines (11), a fourth proportional
to three (12), and a mean proportional to two straight lines
(13, the Book VI version of II. 14). In 14, 15 Euclid proves
the reqiprocal proportionality of the sides about the equal
angles in parallelograms or triangles of equal area which have
one angle equal to one angle and the converse; by placing the
equal angles vertically opposite to one another so that the sides
about them lie along two straight lines, and completing the
figure, Euclid is able to apply VI. 1. From 14 are directly
deduced 16,17 (that, if four or three straight lines be propor-
tionals, the rectangle contained by the extremes is equal to
the rectangle contained by the two means or the square on the
one mean, and the converse). 18-22 deal with similar recti-
lineal figures; 19 (with Porism) and 20 are specially important,
proving that similar triangles, and similar polygons generally,
are to one another in the duplicate ratio of corresponding
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK VI 
393
sides, and that, if three straight lines are proportional, then,
as the first is to the third, so is the figure described on the first
to the similar figure similarly described on the second. The
fundamental case of the two similar triangles is prettily proved
thus. The triangles being ABC, DEF, in which B, E are equal
angles and BG, EF corresponding sides, find a third propor-
tional to BG, EF and measure it off along BG as BG; join AG.
Then the triangles ABG, D2£Fhave their sides about the equal
angles B, E reciprocally proportional and are therefore equal
(VI. 15); the rest follows from VI. 1 and the definition of
duplicate ratio (V, Def. 9).
Proposition 23 (equiangular parallelograms have to one
another the ratio compounded of the ratios of their sides) is
important in itself, and also because it introduces us to the
practical use of the method of compounding, i.e. multiplying,
ratios which is of such extraordinarily wide application in
Greek geometry. Euclid has never defined ' compound ratio?
or the ' compounding' of ratios; but the meaning of the terms
L
M -
and the way to compound ratios are made clear in this pro-
position. The equiangular parallelograms are placed so that
two equal angles as BCD, GGE are vertically opposite at G.
Complete the parallelogram DGGH. Take any straight line K,
and (12) find another, L, such that
BC:CG = K:L,
and again another straight line M, such that
DC:CE = L:M.
Now the ratio compounded of K : L and L : M is K: M; there-
fore K : M is the ' ratio compounded of the ratios of the sides '.
And 
(ABGD): (DGGH) = BG: CG, 
(1)
= 
K:L;
(DGGH): (CEFG) = DG:GE 
(1)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

394
EUCLID
Therefore, ex aequall (V. 22),
(ABCD): {CEFG) = K:M.
The important Proposition 25 (to construct a rectilineal figure
similar to one, and equal to another, given rectilineal figure) is
one of the famous problems alternatively associated with the
story of Pythagoras's sacrifice1; it- is doubtless Pythagorean.
The given figure (P, say) to which the required figure is to be
similar is transformed (I. 44) into a parallelogram on the same
base BG. Then the other figure (Q, say) to which the required
figure is to be equal is (I. 45) transformed into a parallelo-
gram on the base GF (in a straight line with BG) and of equal
height with the other parallelogram. Then (P): (Q) = BC:CF
(1). It is then only necessary to take a straight line GH
a mean proportional between BG and GF, and to describe an
GH as base a rectilineal figure similar to P which has BG as
base (VI. 18). The proof of the correctness of the construction
follows from VI. 19 Por.
In 27, 28, 29 we reach the final problems in the Pythagorean
application of areas, which are the geometrical equivalent of
the algebraical solution of the most general form of quadratic
equation where that equation has a real and positive root.
Detailed notice of these propositions is necessary because of
their exceptional historic importance, which arises from the
fact that the method of these propositions was constantly used
by the Greeks in the solution of problems. They constitute,
for example, the foundation of Book X of the Elements and of
1 Plutarch, Non posse snaviter vivi secundum Epicurum^ c. 11.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK VI 
395
the whole treatment of conic sections by Apollonius. The
problems themselves are enunciated in 28, 29: 'To a given
straight line to apply a parallelogram equal to a given recti-
lineal figure and deficient (or exceeding) by a parallelogrammic
figure similar to a given parallelogram'; and 27 supplies the
Siopitrfios, or determination of the condition of possibility,
which is necessary in the case of deficiency (28): ' The given
rectilineal figtire must (in that case) not be greater than the
parallelogram described on the half of the straight line and
similar to the defect/ 
We will take the problem of 28 for
examination.
We are already familiar with the notion of applying a
parallelogram to a straight line AB so that it falls short or
exceeds by a certain other parallelogram. Suppose that D is
the given parallelogram to which the defect in this case has to
be similar. Bisect AB in E, and on the half EB describe the
parallelogram GEBF similar and similarly situated to D.
Draw the diagonal GB and complete the parallelogram
HABF. 
Now, if we draw through any point T on HA a
straight line TR parallel to AB meeting the diagonal GB in
Q, and then draw PQS parallel to TA, the parallelogram TASQ
is a parallelogram applied to AB but falling short by a
parallelogram similar and similarly situated to D, since the
deficient parallelogram is QSBR which is similar to EF (24).
(In the same way, if T had been on HA produced and TR had
met GB produced in R, we should have had a parallelogram
applied to AB but exceeding by a parallelogram similar and
similarly situated to D.)
Now consider the parallelogram AQ falling short by SR
similar and similarly situated to D. Since (AO) == (ER), and
(OS) = (QF), it follows that the parallelogram AQ is equal to
the gnomon UWV, and the problem is therefore that of
constructing the gnomon UWV such that its area is equal to
that of the given rectilineal figure C. The gnomon obviously
cannot be greater than the parallelogram EF, and hence the
given rectilineal figure C must not be greater than that
parallelogram. 
This is the Siopurfios proved in 27.
Since the gnomon is equal to G, it follows that the parallelo-
gram GOQP which with it makes up the parallelogram EF is
equal to the difference between (EF) and C. Therefore, in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

396 
EUCLID
order to construct the required gnomon, we have only to draw
in the angle FGE the parallelogram GOQP equal to (EF)-C
and similar and similarly situated to D. This is what Euclid
in fact does; he constructs the parallelogram LKNM equal to
(EF) — C and similar and similarly situated to D (by means of
25), and then draws GOQP equal to it. The problem is thus
solved, TASQ being the required parallelogram.
To show the correspondence to the solution of a quadratic
equation, let AB = a, Q8 == x. and let b: c be the ratio of the
sides of D; therefore SB = -x. 
Then, if m is a certain con-
c
stant (in fact the sine of an angle of one of the parallelograms),
(AQ) = m (ax — -#2), so that the equation solved is
c
ml ax— -x" l = o
The algebraical solution is x = r * ~ ±
Euclid gives only one solution (that corresponding to the
negative sign), but he was of course aware that there are two,
and how he could exhibit the second in the figure.
For a real solution we must have G not greater than
c a2
m h ' T' w^^c^ *s ^ e a r e a °^ ^F. 
^his corresponds to Pro-
position 27.
We observe that what Euclid in fact does is to find the
parallelogram GOQP which is of given shape (namely such
that its area m.GO.OQ = m. GO2 -) and is equal to (EF) - C;
c
that is, he finds GO such that GO2 = % (~.-_-). 
In other
words, he finds the straight line equal to 
/ ] T ( T • T 
)('
and x is thus known, since x = GE — GO = -r 
GO.
Euclid's procedure, therefore, corresponds closely to the alge-
braic solution.
The solution of 29 is exactly similar, r^utatis mutandis.
A solution is always possible, so that no ScopuT/jios is required.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS VI-VII 
397
VI. 31 gives the extension of the Pythagorean proposition
I. 47 showing that for squares in the latter proposition we
may substitute similar plane figures of any shape whatever.
30 uses 29 to divide a straight line in extreme and mean
ratio (the same problem as II. 11).
Except in the respect that it is based on the new theory of
proportion, Book VI does not appear to contain any matter
that was not known before Euclid's time. Nor is the generali-
zation of I. 47 in VI. 31, for which Prbclus professes such
admiration, original on Euclid's part, for, as we have already
seen (p. 191), Hippocrates of Chios assumes its truth for semi-
circles described on the three sides of a right-angled triangle.
We pass to the arithmetical Books, VII, VIII, IX. Book VII
begins with a set of definitions applicable in all the three
Books. They include definitions of a unit, a number, and the
following varieties of numbers, even, odd, even-times-even, even-
times-odd, odd-times-odd, prime, prime to one another, com-
posite, composite to one another, plane, solid, square, cube,
similar plane and solid numbers, and a perfect number,
definitions of terms applicable in the numerical theory of pro-
portion, namely a part (= a submultiple or aliquot part),
parts (= a proper fraction), multiply, and finally the defini-
tion of (four) proportional numbers, which states that' num-
bers are proportional when the first is the same multiple, the
same part, or the same parts, of the second that the third is of
the fourth', i.e. numbers a, b, c, d are proportional if, when
a = — b, c = — d, where m, n are any integers (although the
definition does not in terms cover the case where m > n).
The propositions of Book VII fall into four main groups.
1-3 give the method of finding the greatest common mea-
sure of two or three unequal numbers in essentially the same
form in which it appears in our text-books, Proposition 1
giving the test for two numbers being prime to one another,
namely that no remainder measures the preceding quotient
till 1 is reached. 
The second group, 4-19, sets out the
numerical theory of proportion. 4-10 are preliminary, deal-
ing with numbers which are ' a part' or ' parts' of other num-
bers, and numbers which are the same ' part' or ' parts' of
other numbers, just as the preliminary propositions of Book V
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

398 
EUCLID
deal with multiples and equimultiples. 11-14 are transforma-
tions of proportions corresponding to similar transformations
(separando, alternately, &e.) in Book V. The following are
the results, expressed with the aid of letters which here repre-
sent integral numbers exclusively.
If 
a:b = c:d (a > c. b > d), then
(a-c):(b-d) 
= a:b. 
(11)
If a: a' — b: V — c: c'..., then each of the ratios is equal to
(a + &+c + ...): (a' + b' + c' +...). 
(12)
If 
a:b = c:d, then a:c = b:d. 
(13)
If a:b = die and b:c = e:/, then, ex aequali,
a:c = d:f. 
(14)
If 1: m = a: ma (expressed by saying that the third
number measures the fourth the same number of times that
the unit measures the second), then alternately
1 :a = m:ma. 
(15)
The last result is used to prove that ab -=.ba\ in other
words, that the order of multiplication is indifferent (1-6), and
this is followed by the propositions that b:c = ab:ac (17)
and that a:b — acbc 
(18), which are again used to prove
the important proposition (19) that, if a:b = c:d, then
ad = be, a theorem which corresponds to VI. 16 for straight
lines.
Zeuthen observes that, while it was necessary to use the
numerical definition of proportion to carry the numerical
theory up to this point, Proposition 19 establishes the necessary
point of contact between the two theories, since it is now
shown that the definition of proportion in Y, Def. 5, has,
when applied to numbers, the same import as that in VII,
Def. 20, and we can henceforth without hesitation borrow any
of the propositions established in Book V.1
Propositions 20, 21 about 'the least numbers of those which
have the same ratio with them' prove that, if m, n are such
numbers and a, b any other numbers in the same ratio, m
1 Zeuthen, * Sur la constitution des livres arithmeiiques des Elements
d'Euclide ' (Oversigt over det Teal. Danske VidensJcdbernes SelskabsForhand*
linger, 1910, pp. 412, 413).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS VII-VIII 
399
measures a the same number of times that n measures b, and
that numbers prime to one another are the least of those which
have the same ratio with them. These propositions lead up to
Propositions 22-32 about numbers prime to one another, prime
numbers, and composite numbers. This group includes funda-
mental theorems such as the following. 
If two numbers be
prime to any number, their product will be prime to the same
(24). If two numbers be prime to one another, so will their
squares, their cubes, and so on generally (27). If two numbers
be prime to one another, their sum will be prime to each
of them; and, if the sum be prime to either, the original
numbers will be prime to one another (28). Any prime number
is prime to any number which it does not measure (29). If two
numbers are multiplied, and any prime number measures the
product, it will measure one of the original numbers (30).
Any composite number is measured by some prime number
(31). Any number either is prime or is measured by some
prime number (32).
Propositions 33 to the end (39) are directed to the problem
of finding the least common multiple of two or three numbers;
33 is preliminary, using the G. C. M. for the purpose of solving
the problem, ' Given as many numbers as we please, to find the
least of those which have the same ratio with them.'
It seems clear that in Book VII Euclid was following
earlier models, while no doubt making improvements in the
exposition. This is, as we have seen (pp. 215-16), partly con-
firmed by the fact that in the proof by Archytas of the
proposition that fno number can be a mean between two
consecutive numbers' propositions are presupposed correspond-
ing to VII. 20, 22, 33.
Book VIII deals largely with series of numbers 'in con-
tinued proportion', i. e. in geometrical progression (Propositions
1-3, 6-7, 13). If the series in G. P. be
an
an-2b2,... 
a2bn-2, 
abn~\
Propositions 1-3 deal with the case where the terms are the
smallest that are in the ratio a:b, in which case an, bn are
prime to one another. 
6-7 prove that, if an does not measure
an~lb, no term measures any other, but if an measures bn,
it measures an~l 6. Connected with these are Propositions 14-17
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

400 
EUCLID
proving that, according as a2 does or does not measure 62,
a does or does not measure b and vice versa; and similarly,
according as a3 does or does not measure 63, a does or does not
measure b and vice versa. 13 proves that, if a, b% c ... are in
G. P., so are a2, b2, c2... and a3, ft3, c3 ... respectively.
Proposition 4 is the problem, Given as many ratios as we
please, a:b, c:d... to find a series p, q, r, ... in the least
possible terms such that p:q = a: 6, q: r = c: d,.... 
This is
done by finding the L. C. M., first of 6, c, and then of other
pairs of numbers as required. 
The proposition gives the
means of compounding two or more ratios between numbers
in the same way that ratios between pairs of straight lines
are compounded in VI. 23; the corresponding- proposition to
VI. 23 then follows (5), namely, that plane numbers have
to one another the ratio compounded of the ratios of their
sides.
Propositions 8-10 deal with the interpolation of geometric
means between numbers. If a:b = e:f, and there are n
geometric means between a and 6, there are n geometric
means between e and/ also (8). If an, a71'1 b ... a ft*1"1, bn is a
G.P. of n+l terms, so that there are (n — 1) means between
a71, bn
y there are the same number of geometric means between
1 and an and between 1 and bn respectively (9); and con-
versely, if 1, a, a2... dn and 1, b, b2 ... bn are terms in G. P.,
there are the same number (n — 1) of means between an, bn (10).
In particular, there is one mean proportional number between
square numbers (11) and between similar plane numbers (18),
and conversely, if there is one mean between two numbers, the
numbers are similar plane numbers (20); there are two means
between cube numbers (12) and between similar solid numbers
(19), and conversely, if there are two means between two num-
bers, the numbers are similar solid numbers (21). So far as
squares aild cubes are concerned, these propositions are stated by
Plato in theTimaeus, and Nicomachus, doubtless for this reason,
calls them {Platonic \ 
Connected with them are the proposi-
tions that similar plane numbers have the same ratio as a square
has to a square (26), and similar solid numbers have the same
ratio as a cube has to a cube (27). A few other subsidiary
propositions need no particular mention.
Book IX begins with seven simple propositions such as that
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK IX 
401
the product of two similar plane numbers is a square (1) and,
if the product of two numbers is a square number, the num-
bers are similar plane numbers (2); if a cube multiplies itself
or another cube, the product is a cube (3, 4); if a3 B is a
cube, B is a cube (5); if A2 is a cube, A is a cube (6). Then
follow six propositions (8-13) about a series of terms in geo-
metrical progression beginning with 1. If 1, a, b, c ... k are
n terms in geometrical progression, then (9), if a is a square
(or a cube), all the other terms b, c, ... k are squares (or
cubes); if a is not a square, then the only squares in the series
are the term after a, i. e. 6, and all alternate terms after b ; if
a is not a cube, the only cubes in the series are the fourth
term (c), the seventh, tenth, &c, terms, being terms separated
by two throughout; the seventh, thirteenth, &c, terms (leaving
out five in each case) will be both square and cube (8, 10).
These propositions are followed by the interesting theorem
that, if 1, ax> &2 ... an ... are terms in geometrical progression,
and if ar, an are any two terms where r < n, ar measures aw
and an = ar.an_r (11 and Por.); this is, of course, equivalent
to the formula am+n = am. an. Next it is proved that, if the
last term k in a series 1, a, b, c ... k in geometrical progression
is measured by any primes, a is measured by the same (12);
and, if a is prime, k will not be measured by any numbers
except those which have a place in the series (13). Proposi-
tion 14 is the equivalent of the important theorem that a
number can only be resolved into prime factors in one way.
Propositions follow to the effect that, if a, b be prime to one
another, there can be no integral third proportional to them
(16) and, if a, b, c ... k be in G. P. and a,k are prime to one
another, then there is no integral fourth proportional to a, 6, k
(17). The conditions for the possibility of an integral third
proportional to two numbers and of an integral fourth propor-
tional to three are then investigated (18, 19). Proposition 20
is the important proposition that the number of prime numbers
is infinite, and the proof is the same as that usually given in
our algebraical text-books. After a number of easy proposi-
tions about odd, even, 'even-times-odd', 'even-times-even'
numbers respectively (Propositions 21-34), we have two im-
portant propositions which conclude the Book. Proposition 35
gives the summation of a G. P. of n terms, and a very elegant
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

402 
EUCLID
solution it is. Suppose that av a2, a3, ... an+1 are n+ 1 terms
in G. P.; Euclid proceeds thus :
We have 
^ = ^ - = . . . = ^ ,
an 
an_x 
ax
n 
j 
an+i — an 
an — an-i 
a2 — at
and, separando, -Jk±1 
- = — 
—* = ...
an 
an_x 
ax
Adding antecedents and consequents, we have (VII. 12)
an+i-ai 
_ ^2~ax}
an + an_x+ ... +ax 
ax
which gives 
an + an_x + ... + ax or Sn.
The last proposition (36) gives the criterion for perfect
numbers, namely that, if the sum of any number of terms of
the series 1, 2, 22... 2n is prime, the product of the said sum
and of the last term, viz. (1 + 2 + 22 + ... + 2n) 2W, is a perfect
number, i. e. is equal to the sum of all its factors.
It should be added, as regards all the arithmetical Books>
that all numbers are represented in the diagrams as simple
straight lines, whether they are linear, plane, solid, or any
other kinds of numbers; thus a product of two or more factors
is represented as a new straight line, not as a rectangle or a
solid.
Book X is perhaps the most remarkable, as it is the most
perfect in form, of all the Books of the Elements. It deals
with irrationals, that is to say, irrational straight lines in rela-
tion to any particular straight line assumed as rational, and
it investigates every possible variety of straight lines which
can be represented by V{Va+ Vb), where a, b are two com-
mensurable lines. The theory was, of course, not invented by
Euclid himself. On the contrary, we know that not only the
fundamental proposition X. 9 (in which it is proved that
squares which have not to one another the ratio of a square
number to a square number have their sides incommen-
surable in length, and conversely), but also a large part of
the further development of the subject, was due to Theae-
tetus. Our authorities for this are a scholium to X. 9 and a
passage from Pappus's commentary on Book X preserved
in the Arabic (see pp. 154-5, 209-10, above). The passage
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS IX-X 
403
of Pappus goes on to speak of the share of Euclid in the
investigation:
' As for Euclid, he set himself to give rigorous rules, which he
established, relative to commensurability and incommensura-
bility in general; he made precise the definitions and the
distinctions between rational and irrational magnitudes, he set
out a great number of orders of irrational magnitudes, and
finally he made clear their whole extent/
As usual, Euclid begins with definitions. l Commensurable'
magnitudes can be measured by one and the same measure;
'incommensurable' magnitudes cannot have any common
measure (l). Straight lines are * commensurable in square'
when the squares on them can be measured by the same area,
but' incommensurable in square' when the squares on them
have no common measure (2). Given an assigned straight
line, which we agree to call ' rational', any straight line which
is commensurable with it either in length or in square only is
also called rational; but any straight line which is incommen-
surable with it (i.e. not commensurable with it either in length
or in square) is ' irrational' (3). The square on the assigned
straight line is ' rational', and any area commensurable with
it is 'rational', but any area incommensurable with it is
1 irrational', as also is the side of the square equal to that
area (4). As regards straight lines, then, Euclid here takes
a wider view of 'rational' than we have met before. If a
straight line p is assumed as rational, not only is— p also
' rational' where m, n are integers and m/n in its lowest terms
is not square, but any straight line is rational which is either
commensurable in length or commensurable in square only
with p\ that is, 
/— * p is rational according to Euclid. In
the case of squares, p2 is of course rational, and so is — p2 ; but
— • p2 is not rational, and of course the side of the latter
4
square 4 / — p is irrational, as are all straight lines commen-
surable neither in length nor in square with p, e.g. Va± <s/b
or (</k±V\).p.
Dd2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

404 
EUCLID
The Book begins with the famous proposition, on which the
' method of exhaustion' as used in Book XII depends, to the
effect that, if from any magnitude there be subtracted more
than its half (or its half simply), from the remainder more than
its half (or its half), and so on continually, there will at length
remain a magnitude less than any assigned magnitude of the
same kind. 
Proposition 2 uses the process for finding the
G. C. M. of two magnitudes as a test of their commensurability
or incommensurability: they are incommensurable if the process
never comes to an end, i.e. if no remainder ever measures the
preceding divisor; and Propositions 3, 4 apply to commen-
surable magnitudes the method of finding the G. C. M. of two
or three numbers as employed in VII. 2, 3. Propositions 5
to 8 show that two magnitudes are commensurable or incom-
mensurable according as they have or have not to one another
the ratio of one number to another, and lead up to the funda-
mental proposition (9) of Theaetetus already quoted, nametly
that the sides of squares are commensurable or incommen-
surable in length according as the squares have or have not to
one another the ratio of a square number to a square number,
and conversely. Propositions 11-16 are easy inferences as to
the commensurability or incommensurability of magnitudes
from the known relations of others connected with them;
e.g. Proposition 14 proves that, if a:b = c:d, then, according
as s/(a2 — b2) is commensurable or incommensurable with a.
V(c2—d2) is commensurable or incommensurable with c.
Following on this, Propositions 17, 18 prove that the roots of
the quadratic equation ax — x2 = &2/4 are commensurable or
incommensurable with a according as V(a2 — b2) is commen-
surable or incommensurable with a. Propositions 19-21 deal
with rational and irrational rectangles, the former being
contained by straight lines commensurable in length, whereas
rectangles contained by straight lines commensurable in square
only are irrational. The side of a square equal to a rectangle
of the latter kind 13 called medial; this is the first in Euclid's
classification of irrationals. As the sides of the rectangle may
be expressed as />, p</k, where p is a rational straight line,
the medial is h^p. Propositions 23-8 relate to medial straight
lines and rectangles; two medial straight lines may be either
commensurable in length or commensurable in square only:
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK X 
405
thus kfcp and Xlfip are commensurable in length, while 1$p
and Vx. k%p are commensurable in square only: the rectangles
formed by such pairs are in general medial, as Xk^p2 and
*/X. k^p2; but if */x = kWk in the second case, the rectangle
(k'kp2) is rational^Propositions 24,25). Proposition 26 proves
that the difference between two medial areas cannot be
rational; as any two medial areas can be expressed in the
form Vk. p2, VX . p2, this is equivalent to proving, as we do in
algebra, that (Vk— VX) cannot be equal to k'. 
Finally,
Propositions 27, 28 find medial straight lines commensurable
in square only (1) which contain a rational rectangle, viz. k^p,
k%p, and (2) which contain a medial rectangle, viz. k^p, Xip/k^. It
should be observed that, as p may take either of the forms a
or */A, a medial straight line may take the alternative forms
V(a \/B) or V(AB), and the pairs of medial straight lines just
mentioned may take respectively the forms
aod(2, 
A«VB}, J(£L) 
, V(AB),
I shall henceforth omit reference to these obvious alternative
forms. Next follow two lemmas the object of which is to find
(1) two square numbers the sum of which is a square, Euclid's
solution being
„ 
o /mnp2—mnq2\2 
/mnpr£ + mnq2\2
mnp2.mnq2 + l 
£ 
M = (—L— 
M >
V 
2 
/ 
\ 
2 
/
where mwp2, mnq2 are either both odd or both even, and
(2) two square numbers the sum of which is not square,
Euclid's solution being
mp2. mq\
Propositions 29-35 are problems the object of which is to find
(a) two rational straight lines commensurable in square only,
(6) two medial straight lines commensurable in square only,
(c) two straight lines incommensurable in square, such that
the difference or sum of their squares and the rectangle
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

406 
EUCLID
contained by them respectively have certain characteristics.
The solutions are
(a) x, y rational and commensurable in square only.
Prop. 29: p, p>/(l—&2) [V(x2 —y2) commensurable with x].
„ 
30: p, p/ V{l+k2) 
[-/(a;2 — y2) incommensurable with x],
(b) x, y medial and commensurable in square only.
Prop. 31: p (1 — k2)^, p(l — k2)* [xy rational, y/(x2 — y2) comment
surable with x];
p/(l+k2)*, p/(l+k2)% [xy rational, V(x2-y2) 
incom-
mensurable with x].
„ 
32: pX*, p\*V(l— h2) \xy medial, V(x2 — y2) commensur-
able with x\;
pA^, p\*/V(y + k2) [xy medial, V(x2—y2) incommen-
surable with x~\.
(c) x, y incommensurable in square.
Prop.33:-f 
/(l + 
A V 
P
[(x2+y2) rational, xy medial].
3 5. £*
[x2-\-y2 medial, ocy rational].
*.* 
ISi 1 
k 
I 
f>Xl 
/ i i 
h 
}
V(l+k2)]
[x2 + y2 and xy both medial and
incommensurable with one another].
With Proposition 36 begins Euclid's exposition of the several
compound irrationals, twelve in number. Those which only
differ in the sign separating the two component parts can be
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK X 
407
taken together. The twelve compound irrationals, with their
names, are as follows:
(Ax) (Binomial, p+ Vk.p (Prop. 36)
(A2) (Apotome, p~» Vk.p (Prop. 73)
IB.) (First bimedial 
) 7, 
. /r%
,n\ \<n- , 
B 
v , kip + k*p (Props. 37, 74)
(B2) (First apotome of a medial) 
H~ 
* v 
* 
;
(&) .(Second bimedial 
) 7, 
X*p /TI 
o o .„.
1 \ 
[k*p+ —f (Props. 38, 75)
(G2) (Second apotome of a medial] 
* k*
(A) (Major) jp
jp_ 
/ / 
fe 
^ 
p 
// _
(Props. 39, 76)
/Side of a rational plus
a medial area
That which l produces'
with a rational area
a medial whole
+
(Props. 40, 77)
(Side of the sum of two^ p\%
medial areas
w
That which c produces '\- 
p\k
with a medial area 
~ V ^ / ""
. a medial whole
(Props. 41, 78).
As regards the above twelve compound irrationals, it is
to be noted that
Al9 A2 are the positive roots of the equation
x*-2(l+k)p2.x2 + (l-k)2p* = 0;
B19 B2 are the positive roots of the equation
Cx, C2 are the positive roots of the equation
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

408 
EUCLID
Z)j, Z)2 are the positive roots of the equation
4
2
2
2
+
4 
0
?j, E2 are the positive roots of the equation
Fly F2 are the positive roots of the equation
7,2
*
4
Propositions 42-7 prove that each of the above straight lines,
made up of the sum of two terms, is divisible into its terms
in only one way. In particular, Proposition 42 proves the
equivalent of the well-known theorem in algebra that,
if 
a + Vb = x + Vy, then a = x, 6 = y\
and if 
Va + Vb = Vx + Vy,
then 
a = x, b •= y (or a = y, b = x).
Propositions 79-84 prove corresponding facts in regard to
the corresponding irrationals with the negative sign between
the terms: in particular Proposition 79 shows that,
if 
a— Vb — x— Vy, then a = x, b = y;
and if 
Va— Vb = Vx— Vy, then a = x, b = y.
The next sections of the Book deal with binomials and
apotomes classified according to the relation of their terms to
another given rational straight line. 
There are six kinds,
which are first defined and then constructed, as follows:
(a,) ( First binomial ) , 
.,
/ v 1 Tiv x 
j. 
\ kp + kpV(l-\2)', 
(Props. 48, 85)
(a2) { First apotome J H~ ^ v 
n v 
F 
'
(3.) (Second binomial) 
kp
c 
^ 
4. 
f Jl\ 
X«> +*P' (Props. 49, 86)
(Second apotome) v ( l - A ' ) - ^' ^ ^ 
7
Third apotome J 
(Props. 50, 87)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK X 
409
(<$!> (Fourth binomial) 1 
kp 
._ 
.. Q(A
W 
{Fourth apotome) * ' * 7(iTx) ; ^ 
" ' 8 8 )
(ej f Fifth binomial)
(el) 1 Fifth apotome } ^ 
+ X > ± ^ ^ 
52' 89)
fc) ( Sixth binomial | 
g 3 j
(£>) (Sixth apotome ) 
r — 
r 
v 
r
Here again it is to be observed that these binomials and
apotomes are the greater and lesser roots respectively of
certain quadratic equations,
oc17 oc2 being the roots of x2 — 2kp %x + \2k2p2 = 0,
y v y2 
„ 
„ 
x2 — 2m^k.px 
+ \2m2kp* — 0,
= 0,
The next sets of propositions (54-65 and 91-102) prove the
connexion between the first set of irrationals (A19 A2... Flf F2)
and the second set (a1? a2 ... £19 ^2) respectively. It is shown
e.g., in Proposition 54, that the side of a square equal to the
rectangle contained by p and the first binomial ax is a binomial
of the type A19 and the same thing is proved in Proposition 91
for the first apotome. In fact
V{p(kp±kpVT^\2)} =pV{ik(l+\)} 
±PV{^k(l-X)}.
Similarly /(/oft), V(pp2) are irrationals of the type Bl9 B2
respectively, and so on.
Conversely, the square on Ax or A2, if applied as a rectangle
to a rational straight line (a, say), has for its breadth a binomial
or apotome of the types <xl9 a2 respectively (60, 97).
o
In fact 
(p± Vk.pf/a- = ^ {(1 +&) ±2jk},
and JSj2, B2
2 are similarly related to irrationals of the type
j8j, j82, and so on.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

410 
EUCLID
Propositions 66-70 and Propositions 103-7 prove that
straight lines commensurable in length with Al9 A2... Fv F2
respectively are irrationals of the same type and order.
Propositions 71, 72, 108-10 show that the irrationals
Aly A2 ... Fl3 F2 arise severally as the sides of squares equal
to the sum or difference of a rational and a medial area, or the
sum or difference of two medial areas incommensurable with
one another. Thus kp2 + V\. p2 is the sum or difference of a
rational and a medial area, Vk.p2± 
V\.p2 
is the sum or
difference of two medial areas incommensurable with one
another provided that */k and V\ are incommensurable, and
the propositions prove that
V(kp2 + v'A./)2) and </(Vk.p*± V\.p2)
take one or other of the forms A19 A2 ... F19 F2 according to
the different possible relations between Jc, X and the sign
separating the two terms, but no other forms.
Finally, it is proved at the end of Proposition 72, in Proposi-
tion 111 and the explanation following it that the thirteen
irrational straight lines, the medial and the twelve other
irrationals Alt A2... Fl9 F2, are all different from one another.
E.g. (Proposition 111) a binomial straight line cannot also be
an apotome; in other words, Vx + Vy cannot be equal to
Vx'—Vy', 
and x + Vy cannot be equal to x'—*/y'. 
We
prove the latter proposition by squaring, and Euclid's proce-
dure corresponds exactly to this. Propositions 112-14 prove
that, if a rectangle equal to the square on a rational straight
line be applied to a binomial, the other side containing it is an
apotome of the same order, with terms commensurable with
those of the binomial and in the same ratio, and vice versa;
also that a binomial and apotome of the same order and with
terms commensurable respectively contain a rational rectangle.
Here we have the equivalent of rationalizing the denominators
of the fractions -y-j 
- ^ or 
-p~ by multiplying the
numerator and denominator by VAT VB or #+ VB respec-
tively. Euclid in fact proves that
°"V(P+ Vh.p) — Xp— Vk.Xp (lc < 1),
and his method enables us to see that \ = cr2/(p2 — kp2).
Proposition 115 proves that from a medial straight line an
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOK X 
411
infinite number of other irrational straight lines arise each
of which is different from the preceding. k%p being medial,
we take another rational straight line a and find the mean
proportional \/(k%p<r)} this is a new irrational. Take the
mean between this and </, and so on.
I have described the contents of Book X at length because
it is probably not well known to mathematicians, while it is
geometrically very remarkable and very finished. As regards
its object Zeuthen has a remark which, I think, must come
very near the truth. ' Since such roots of equations of the
second degree as are incommensurable with the given magni-
tudes cannot be expressed by means of the latter and of num-
bers, it is conceivable that the Greeks, in exact investigations,
introduced no approximate values, but worked on with the
magnitudes they had found, which were represented by
straight lines obtained by the construction corresponding to
the solution of the equation. That is exactly the same thing
which happens when we do not evaluate roots but content
ourselves with expressing them by radical signs and other
algebraical symbols. But, inasmuch as one straight line looks
like another, the Greeks did not get the same clear view of
what they denoted (i. e. by simple inspection) as our system
of symbols assures to us. For this reason then it was neces-
sary to undertake a classification of the irrational magnitudes
which had been arrived at by successive solutions of equations
of the second degree.' 
That is, Book X formed a repository
of results to which could be referred problems depending on
the solution of certain types of equations, quadratic and
biquadratic but reducible to quadratics, namely the equations
.x2±2/xx.p±v.p2 = 0,
and 
x*±2fix2.p2±i>.p* 
= 0,
where p is a rational straight line and p, v are coefficients.
According to the values of /x, v in relation to one another and
their character (/*, but not v9 may contain a surd such as
>/m or \/(m/n)) the two positive roots of the first equations are
the binomial and apotome respectively of some one of the
orders ' first', ' second',...' sixth', while the two positive
roots of the latter equation are of some one of the other forms
of irrationals (A19 A2)} (B1> B2) ... (F1} F2).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

412 
EUCLID
Euclid himself, in Book XIII, makes considerable use of the
second part of Book X dealing with apotomes; he regards a
straight line as sufficiently defined in character if he can say
that it is, e.g., an apotome (XIII. 17), & first apotome (XIII. 6),
a minor straight line (XIII. 11). So does Pappus.1
Our description of Books XI-XIII can be shorter. They
deal with geometry in three dimensions. The definitions,
belonging to all three Books, come at the beginning of Book XI.
They include those of a straight line, or a plane, at right angles
to a plane, the inclination of a plane to a plane (dihedral angle),
parallel planes, equal and similar solid figures, solid angle,
pyramid, prism, sphere, cone, cylinder and parts of them, cube,
octahedron, icosahedron and dodecahedron. Only the defini-
tion of the sphere needs special mention. Whereas it had
previously been defined as the figure which has all points of
its surface equidistant from its centre, Euclid, with an eye to
his use of it in Book XIII to ' comprehend' the regular solids
in a sphere, defines it as the figure comprehended by the revo-
lution of a semicircle about its diameter.
The propositions of Book XI are in their order fairly
parallel to those of Books I and VI on plane geometry. First
we have propositions that a straight line is wholly in a plane
if a portion of it is in the plane (1), and that two intersecting
straight lines, and a triangle, are in one plane (2). Two
intersecting planes cut in a straight line (3). Straight lines
perpendicular to planes are next dealt with (4-6, 8, 11-14),
then parallel straight lines not all in the same plane (9,10, 15),
parallel planes (14, 16), planes at right angles to one another
(18, 19), solid angles contained by three angles (20, 22, 23, 26)
or by more angles (21). The rest of the Book deals mainly
with parallelepipedal solids. It is only necessary to mention
the more important propositions. Parallelepipedal solids on the
same base or equal bases and between the same parallel planes
(i.e. having the same height) are equal (29-31). Parallele-
pipedal solids of the same height are to one another as their
bases (32). Similar parallelepipedal solids are in the tripli-
cate ratio of corresponding sides (33). In equal parallele-
pipedal solids the bases are reciprocally proportional to their
heights and conversely (34). If four straight lines be propor-
1 Cf. Pappus, iv, pp. 178, 182.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS XI-XII 
413
tional, so are parallelepipedal solids similar and similarly
described upon them, and conversely (37). A few other
propositions are only inserted because they are required as
lemmas in later books, e.g. that, if a cube is bisected by two
planes each of which is parallel to a pair of opposite faces, the
common section of the two planes and the diameter of-the
cube bisect one another (38).
The main feature of Book XII is the application of the
method of exhaustion, which is used to prove successively that
circles are to one another as the squares on their diameters
(Propositions 1, 2), that pyramids of the same height and with
triangular bases are to one another as the bases (3-5), that
any cone is, in content, one third part of the cylinder which
has the same base with it and equal height (10), that cones
and cylinders of the same height are to one another as their
bases (11), that similar cones and cylinders are to one another
in the triplicate ratio of the diameters of their bases (12), and
finally that spheres are to one another in the triplicate ratio
of their respective diameters (16-18). Propositions 1, 3-4 and
16-17 are of course preliminary to the main propositions 2, 5
and 18 respectively. Proposition 5 is extended to pyramids
with polygonal bases in Proposition 6. Proposition 7 proves
that any prism with triangular bases is divided into three
pyramids with triangular bases and equal in content, whence
any pyramid with triangular base (and therefore also any
pyramid with polygonal base) is equal to one third part of
the prism having the same base and equal height. The rest
of the Book consists of propositions about pyramids, cones,
and cylinders similar to those in Book XI about parallele-
pipeds and in Book VI about parallelograms: similar pyra-
mids with triangular bases, and therefore also similar pyramids
with polygonal bases, are in the triplicate ratio of correspond-
ing sides (8); in equal pyramids, cones and cylinders the bases
are reciprocally proportional to the heights, and conversely
(9,15).
The method of exhaustion, as applied in Euclid, rests upon
X. 1 as lemma, and no doubt it will be desirable to insert here
an example of its use. An interesting case is that relating to
the pyramid. Pyramids with triangular bases and of the same
height, says Euclid, are to one another as their bases (Prop. 5).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

414 
EUCLID
It is first proved (Proposition 3) that, given any pyramid, as
ABGBy on the base BCD, if we bisect the six edges at the
points E, F, G, H, K, L, and draw the straight lines shown in
the figure, we divide the pyramid ABGD into two equal
prisms and two equal pyramids AFGE, FBHK similar to the
original pyramid (the equality of the prisms is proved in
XI. 39), and that the sum of the two prisms is greater than
half the original pyramid. Proposition 4 proves that, if each
of two given pyramids of the same height be so divided, and
if the small pyramids in each are similarly divided, then the
smaller pyramids left over from that division are similarly
divided, and so on to any extent, the sums of all the pairs of
prisms in the two given pyramids respectively will be to one
another as the respective bases. Let the two pyramids and
their volumes be denoted by P, P' respectively, and their bases
by B, B' respectively. Then, if B: B' is not equal to P : P', it
must be equal to P : W, where W is some volume either less or
greater than P'.
I. Suppose W < P'.
By X. 1 we can divide Pr and the successive pyramids in
it into prisms and pyramids until the sum of the small
pyramids left over in it is less that P' — W, so that
P' > (prisms in P') > W.
Suppose this done, and P divided similarly.
Then (XII. 4)
(sum of prisms in P): (sum of prisms in P') = B: B'
= P : TF, by hypothesis.
But P > (sum of prisms in P):
therefore 
W > (sum of prisms in P').
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS. 
BOOKS XII-XIII 
415
But W is also less than the sum of the prisms in P': which
is impossible.
Therefore W is not less than P'.
II. Suppose 
W>P'.
We have, inversely,
B':B=W:P
= Pf: V, where V is some solid less than P.
But this can be proved impossible, exactly as in Part I.
Therefore W is neither greater nor less than P', so that
B:B'=P:P'.
We shall see, when we come to Archimedes, that he extended
this method of exhaustion. Instead of merely taking the one
approximation, from underneath as it were, by constructing
successive figures within the figure to be measured and so
exhausting it, he combines with this an approximation from
outside. He takes sets both of inscribed and circumscribed
figures, approaching from both sides the figure to be measured,
and, as it were, compresses them into one, so that they coincide
as nearly as we please with one another and with the curvi-
linear figure itself. The two parts of the proof are accordingly
separate in Archimedes, and the second is not merely a reduction
to the first.
The object of Book XIII is to construct, and to c comprehend
in a sphere', each of the five regular solids, the pyramid
(Prop. 13), the octahedron (Prop. 14), the cube (Prop. 15),
the icosahedron (Prop. 16) and the dodecahedron (Prop. 17);
' comprehending in a sphere' means the construction of the
circumscribing sphere, which involves the determination of
the relation of a ' side' (i. e. edge) of the solid to the radius
of the sphere; in the case of the first three solids the relation
is actually determined, while in the case of the icosahedron
the side of the figure is shown to be the irrational straight
line called 'minor', and in the case of the dodecahedron an
fapotome\ The propositions at the beginning of the Book
are preliminary. Propositions 1-6 are theorems about straight
lines cut in extreme and mean ratio, Propositions 7, 8 relate
to pentagons, and Proposition 8 proves that, if, in a regular
pentagon, two diagonals (straight lines joining angular points
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

416 
EUCLID
next but one to each other) are drawn intersecting at a point,
each of them is divided at the point in extreme and mean
ratio, the greater segment being equal to the side of the pen-
tagon. Propositions 9 and 10 relate to the sides of a pentagon,
a decagon and a hexagon all inscribed in the same circle,
and are preliminary to proving (in Prop. 11) that the side of
the inscribed pentagon is, in relation to the diameter of the
circle, regarded as rational, the irrational straight line called
' minor \ 
If p, d, h be the sides of the regular pentagon,
decagon, and hexagon inscribed in the same circle, Proposition 9
proves that h + d is cut in extreme and mean ratio, h being the
greater segment; this is equivalent to saying that (r + d) d=r2,
where r is the radius of the circle, or, in other words, that
d = ^r(</5 — 1). Proposition 10 proves that p2 = h2 + d2 or
r2-\-d2, whence we obtain p = |r\/(10 — 2 \/5). 
Expressed as
a ' minor' irrational straight line, which Proposition 11 shows
it to be, p = \r -/(5 + 2 \ / 5 ) - \ r V ( 5 - 2 ^5).
The constructions for the several solids, which have to be
inscribed in a given sphere, may be briefly indicated, thus:
1. The regular pyramid or tetrahedron.
Given D, the diameter of the sphere which is to circum-
scribe the tetrahedron, Euclid draws a circle with radius r
such that r2 = ^D .%D, or r = ^V2 . D, inscribes an equi-
lateral triangle in the circle, *and then erects from the centre
of it a straight line perpendicular to its plane and of length
§D. The lines joining the extremity of the perpendicular to
the angular points of the equilateral triangle determine the
tetrahedron. Each of the upstanding edges (x, say) is such
that x2 = r2 + |D 2 = 3r2, and it has been proved (in XIII. 12)
that the square on the side of the triangle inscribed in the
circle is also 3r2. Therefore the edge a of the tetrahedron
2. The octahedron.
If D be the diameter of the circumscribing sphere, a square
is inscribed in a circle of diameter D, and from its centre
straight lines are drawn in both directions perpendicular to
its plane and of length equal to the radius of the circle or half
the diagonal of the square. Each of the edges which stand up
from the square = V2 .|D, which is equal to the side of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS, 
BOOK XIII 
417
square. Each of the edges a of the octahedron is therefore
equal to V2 . \B.
3. The cube.
D being the diameter of the circumscribing sphere, draw
a square with side a such that a2 = D. ^D, and describe a cube
on this square as base. The edge a = § V3 . D.
4. The icosahedron.
Given D, the diameter of the sphere, construct a circle with
radius r such that r2 = D. ^D. 
Inscribe in it a regular
decagon. Draw from its angular points straight lines perpen-
dicular to the plane of the circle and equal in length to its
radius r; this determines the angular points of a regular
decagon inscribed in an equal parallel circle. 
By joining
alternate angular points of one of the decagons, describe a
regular pentagon in the circle circumscribing it, and then do
the same in the other circle but so that the angular points are
not opposite those of the other pentagon. Join the angular
points of one pentagon to the nearest angular points of the
other; this gives ten triangles. Then, if p be the side of each
pentagon, d the side of each decagon, the upstanding sides
of the triangles (= x, say) are given by x2 = d2 + r2 = p2
(Prop. 10); therefore the ten triangles are equilateral. We
have lastly to find the common vertices of the five equilateral
triangles standing on the pentagons and completing the icosa-
hedron. If G, C be the centres of the parallel circles, CC is
produced in both directions to X, Z respectively so that
GX = G'Z = d (the side of the decagon). 
Then again the
upstanding edges connecting to X, Z the angular points of the
two pentagons respectively {~x, say) are given by
Hence each of the edges
It is finally shown that the sphere described on XZ as
diameter circumscribes the icosahedron, and
(</5-l) = r. </5 = D.
E e
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

418
EUCLID
5. The dodecahedron.
We start with the cube inscribed in the given sphere with
diameter B. 
We then dr#»w pentagons which have the edges
of the cube as diagonals in the manner shown in the figure.
If H, JV", M, 0 be the middle points of the sides of the face
BF, and H, Gy L, K the middle points of the sides of the
face BD, join NO, OK which are then parallel to BC, and
draw ME, HL bisecting them at right angles at P, Q.
Divide PN, PO, QH in extreme and mean ratio at R, 8, T}
and let PR, PS, QT be the greater segments. Draw RU, PX,
8 V at right angles to the plane BF, and TW at right angles to
the plane BD, such that each of these perpendiculars = PR
or PS. 
Join UV, VC, CW, WB} BIT. These determine one
of the pentagonal faces, and the others are drawn similarly.
It is then proved that each of the pentagons, as UVCWB,
is (1) equilateral, (2) in the same plane, (3) equiangular.
As regards the sides we see, e. g., that
BIT2 =
(by means of XIII. 4) = UV\
and so on.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEME-NTS. 
BOOK XIII 
419
Lastly, it is proved that the same sphere of diameter D
which circumscribes the cube also circumscribes the dodeca-
hedron. For example, if Z is the centre of the sphere,
ZU* = ZX* + XU* = N82 + PS2 = 3PJV2, (XIII. 4)
while 
ZB? = 3ZP* = 3 PN\
If a be the edge of the dodecahedron, c the edge of the cube,
a = 2RP = 2 • 
~ 1 c
4
2\/3 
</5-l
Book XIII ends with Proposition 18, which arranges the
edges of the five regular solids inscribed in one and the same
sphere in order of magnitude, while an addendum proves that
no other regular solid figures except the five exist.
The so-called Books XIV, XV.
This is no doubt the place to speak of the continuations
of Book XIII which used to be known as Books XIV, XV of
the Elements, though they are not by Euclid. The former
is the work of Hypsicles, who probably lived in the second
half of the second century B. c, and who is otherwise known
as the reputed author of an astronomical tract !Ava<f>opiKos
(Be ascensionibus) still extant (the earliest extant Greek book
in which the division of the circle into 360 degrees appears),
besides other works, which have not survived, on the harmony
of the spheres and on polygonal numbers. The preface to
' Book XIV' is interesting historically. It appears from
it that Apollonius wrote a tract on the comparison of the
dodecahedron and icosahedron inscribed in one and the same
sphere, i. e. on the ratio between them, and that there were two
editions of this work, the first of which was in some way
incorrect, while the second gave a correct proof of the pro-
position that, as the surface of the dodecahedron is to
the surface of the icosahedron, so is the solid content of the
Ee 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

420 
EUCLID
dodecahedron to that of the icosahedron, ' because the per-
pendicular from the centre of the sphere to the pentagon of
the dodecahedron and to the triangle of the icosahedron is the
same \ 
Hypsicles says also that Aristaeus, in a work entitled
Comparison of the jive figures, proved that cthe same circle
circumscribes both the pentagon of the dodecahedron and the
triangle of the icosahedron inscribed in the same sphere';
whether this Aristaeus is the same as the Aristaeus of the
Solid Loci, the elder contemporary of Euclid, we do^ not
know. The proposition of Aristaeus is proved by Hypsicles
as Proposition 2 of his book. The following is a summary
of the results obtained by Hypsicles. In a lemma at the end
he proves that, if two straight lines be cut in extreme and
mean ratio, the segments of both are in one and the same
ratio; the ratio is in fact 2:(\/5— 1). If then any straight
line AB be divided at C in extreme and mean ratio, AC being
the greater segment, Hypsicles proves that, if we have a cube,
a dodecahedron and an icosahedron all inscribed in the same
sphere, then:
(Prop. 7) (side of cube): (side of icosahedron)
(Prop. 6) (surface of dodecahedron): (surface of icosahedron)
= (side of cube): (side of icosahedron);
(Prop. 8) (content of dodecahedron): (content of icosahedron)
= (surface of dodecahedron): (surface of icosahedron);
and consequently
(content of dodecahedron): (content of icosahedron)
: V(AB2 + BC2).
The second of the two supplementary Books (' Book XV') is
also concerned with the regular solids, but is much inferior to
the first. The exposition leaves much to be desired, being
in * some places obscure, in others actually inaccurate. The
Book is in three parts unequal in length. The first1 shows
how to inscribe certain of the regular solids in certain others,
1 Heiberg's Euclid, vol. v, pp. 40-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE SO-CALLED BOOKS XIV, XV 
421
(a) a tetrahedron in a cube, (6) an octahedron in a tetrahedron,
(c) an octahedron in a cube, (d) a cube in an octahedron,
(e) a dodecahedron in an icosahedron. The second portion1
explains how to calculate the number of edges and the number
of solid angles in the five solids respectively. The third
portion2 shows how to determine the dihedral angles between
the faces meeting in any edge of any one of the solids. The
method is to construct an isosceles triangle with vertical angle
equal to the said angle; from the middle point of any edge
two perpendiculars are drawn to it, one in each of the two
faces intersecting in that edge; these perpendiculars (forming
the dihedral angle) are used to determine the two equal sides
of an isosceles triangle, and the base of the triangle is easily
found from the known properties of the particular solid. The
rules for drawing the respective isosceles triangles are first
given all together in general terms; and the special interest
of the passage consists in the fact that the rules are attributed
to 'Isidorus our great teacher'. 
This Isidorus is doubtless
Isidorus of Miletus, the architect of the church of Saint Sophia
at Constantinople (about A.D. 532). Hence the third portion
of the Book at all events was written by a pupil of Isidorus
in the sixth century.
The Data.
Coming now to the other works of Euclid, we will begin
with those which have actually survived. Most closely con-
nected with the Elements as dealing with plane geometry, the
subject-matter of Books I-VI, is the Data, which is accessible
in the Heiberg-Menge edition of the Greek text, and also
in the translation annexed by Simson to his edition of the
Elements (although this translation is based on an inferior
text). The book was regarded as important enough to be
included in the Treasury of Analysis (767709 avaXvojievos) as
known to Pappus, and Pappus gives a description of it; the
description shows that there were differences between Pappus's
text and ours, for, though Propositions 1-62 correspond to the
description, as also do Propositions 87-94 relating to circles
at the end of the book, the intervening propositions do not
Heiberg's Euclid, vol. v, pp. 48-50. 
2 Ib., pp. 50-66.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

422 
EUCLID
exactly agree, the differences, however, affecting the distribu-
tion and numbering of the propositions rather than their
substance. The book begins with definitions of the senses
in which things are said to be given. Things such as areas,
straight lines, angles and ratios are said to be ' given in
magnitude when we can make others equal to them' (Defs.
1-2). 
Rectilineal figures are 'given in species' when their
angles are severally given as well as the ratios of the sides to
one another (Def. 3). Points, lines and angles are 'given
in position'(when 
they always occupy the same place ': a not
very illuminating definition (4). A circle is given in position
and in magnitude when the centre is given in position and
the radius in magnitude (6); and so on. The object of the
proposition called a Datum is to prove that, if in a given figure
certain parts or relations are given, other parts or relations are
also given, in one or other of these senses.
It is clear that a systematic collection of Data such as
Euclid's would very much facilitate and shorten the procedure
in analysis; this no doubt accounts for its inclusion in the
Treasury of Analysis. 
It is to be observed that this form of
proposition does not actually determine the thing or relation
which is shown to be given, but merely proves that it can be
determined when once the facts stated in the hypothesis
are known; if the proposition stated that a certain thing is
so and so, e.g. that a certain straight line in the figure is of
a certain length, it would be a theorem; if it directed us to
find the thing instead of proving that it is c given', it would
be a problem; hence many propositions of the form of the
Data could alternatively be stated in the form of theorems or
problems.
We should naturally expect much of the subject-matter of
the Elements to appear again in the Data under the different
aspect proper to that book; and this proves to be the case.
We have already mentioned the connexion of Eucl. II. 5, 6
with the solution of the mixed quadratic equations ax±x2 = b2.
The solution of these equations is equivalent to the solution of
the simultaneous equations
y + x = a
and Euclid shows how to solve these equations in Propositions
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DATA 
423
84, 85 of the Data, which state that 'If two straight lines
contain a given area in a given angle, and if the difference
(sum) of them be given, then shall each of them be given.'
The proofs depend directly upon those of Propositions 58, 59,
' If a given area be applied to a given straight line, falling
short (exceeding) by a figure given in species, the breadths
of the deficiency (excess) are given.5 
All the 'areas' are
parallelograms.
We will give the proof of Proposition 59 (the case of
' excess'). Let the given area AB
be applied to AC, exceeding by the
figure GB given in species. I say
that each of the sides HG, GE is
given.
Bisect DE in F, and construct
on EF the figure FG similar and
similarly situated to GB (VI. 18).
Therefore FG, GB are about the same diagonal (VI. 26).
Complete the figure.
Then FG, being similar to CB, is given in species, and,
since FE is given, FG is given in magnitude (Prop. 52).
But AB is given; therefore AB -f FG, that is to say, KL, is
given in magnitude. But it is also given in species, being
similar to GB\ therefore the sides of KL are given (Prop. 55).
Therefore KH is given, and, since KG = EF is also given,
the difference CH is given. And CH has a given ratio to HB;
therefore HB is also given (Prop. 2).
Eucl. III. 35, 36 about the 'power' of a point with reference
to a circle have their equivalent in Data 91, 92 to the effect
that, given a circle and a point in the same plane, the rectangle
contained by the intercepts between this point and the points
in which respectively the circumference is cut by any straight
line passing through the point and meeting the circle is
also given.
A few more enunciations may be quoted. Proposition 8
(compound ratio): Magnitudes which have given ratios to the
same magnitude have a given ratio to one another also.
Propositions 45, 46 (similar triangles): If a triangle have one
angle given, and the ratio of the sum of the sides containing
that angle, or another angle, to the third side (in each case) be
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

424 
EUCLID
given, the triangle is given in species. Proposition 52: If a
(rectilineal) figure given in species be described on a straight
line given in magnitude, the figure is given in magnitude.
Proposition 66: If a triangle have one angle given, the rect-
angle contained by the sides including the angle has to the
(area of the) triangle a given ratio. Proposition 80: If a
triangle have one angle given, and if the rectangle contained
by the sides including the given angle have to the square on
the third side a given ratio, the triangle is given in species.
Proposition 93 is interesting: If in a circle given in magni-
tude a straight line be drawn cutting off a segment containing
a given angle, and if this angle be bisected (by a straight line
cutting the base of the segment and the circumference beyond
it), the sum of the sides including the given angle will have a
given ratio to the chord bisecting the angle, and the rectangle
contained by the sum of the said sides and the portion of the
bisector cut off (outside the segment) towards the circum-
ference will also be given.
Euclid's proof is as follows. In the circle ABC let the
chord BC cut off a segment containing a given angle BAG,
and let the angle be bisected by AE meeting BC in D.
Join BE. Then, since the circle is given in magnitude, and
BC cuts off a segment containing a given
angle, BC is given (Prop. 87).
Similarly BE is given; therefore the
ratio BC: BE is given. (It is easy to
see that the ratio fiC:BE is equal to
2 cos %A.)
Now, since the angle BAC is bisected,
BA:AC=BD:DC.
It follows that (BA + AC): (BD + DC) = AC: DC.
But the triangles ABE, ADC are similar;
therefore 
AE: BE = AC: DC
= (BA + AC): BC} from above.
Therefore (BA+AC):AE=BC:BE, 
which is a given
ratio.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DATA 
425
Again, since the triangles ADC, BDE are similar,
BE:ED = AC:CD = (BA + AC):BC.
Therefore 
(BA + AC) .ED = BC. BE, which is given.
On divisions (of figures).
The only other work of Euclid in pure geometry which has
survived (but not in Greek) is the book On divisions (of
figures), nept SiaLpeo-eoov pifiXiov. It is mentioned by Proclus,
who gives some hints as to its content1; he speaks of the
business of the author being divisions of figures, circles or
rectilineal figures, and remarks that the parts may be like
in definition or notion, or unlike; thus to divide a triangle
into triangles is to divide it into like figures, whereas to
divide it into a triangle and a quadrilateral is to divide it into
unlike figures. These hints enable us to check to some extent
the genuineness of the books dealing with divisions of figures
which have come down through the Arabic. It was John Dee
who first brought to light a treatise De divisionibus by one
Muhammad Bagdadinus (died 1141) and handed over a copy
of it (in Latin) to Commandinus in 1563 ; it was published by
the latter in Dee's name and his own in 1570. Dee appears
not to have translated the book from the Arabic himself, but
to have made a copy for Commandinus from a manuscript of
a Latin translation which he himself possessed at one time but
which was apparently stolen and probably destroyed some
twenty years after the copy was made. The copy does not
seem to have been made from the Cotton MS. which passed to
the British Museum after it had been almost destroyed by
a fire in 1731.2 The Latin translation may have been that
made by Gherard of Cremona (1114-87), since in the list of
his numerous translations a ' liber divisionum' occurs. But
the Arabic original cannot have been a direct translation from
Euclid, and probably was not even a direct adaptation of it,
since it contains mistakes and unmathematical expressions;
moreover, as it does not contain the propositions about the
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 144. 22-6.
2 The question is fully discussed by R. C. Archibald, Euclid1 s Book on
Divisions of Figures with a restoration based on Woepche's text and on the
Practica Geometriae of Leonardo Pisano (Cambridge 1915).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

426 
EUCLID
division of a circle alluded to by Proclus, it can scarcely have
contained more than a fragment of Euclid's original work.
But Woepcke found in a manuscript at Paris a treatise in
Arabic on the division of figures, which he translated and
published in 1851. It is expressly attributed to Euclid in the
manuscript and corresponds to the indications of the content
given by Proclus. Here we find divisions of different recti-
linear figures into figures of the same kind, e.g. of triangles
into triangles or trapezia into trapezia, and also divisions into
' unlike ' figures, e. g. that of a triangle by a straight line parallel
to the base. The missing propositions about the division of
a circle are also here : ' to divide into two equal parts a given
figure bounded by an arc of a circle and two straight lines
including a given angle' (28), and ' to draw in a given circle
two parallel straight lines cutting off a certain fraction from
the circle' (29). Unfortunately the proofs are given of only
four propositions out of 36, namely Propositions 19, 20, 28, 29,
the Arabic translator having found the rest too easy and
omitted them. But the genuineness of the treatise edited by
Woepcke is attested by the facts that the four proofs which
remain are elegant and depend on propositions in the
Elements, and that there is a lemma with a true Greek ring,
' to apply to a straight line a rectangle equal to the rectangle
contained by AB, AC and deficient by a square' (18). Moreover,
the treatise is no fragment, but ends with the words,' end ofN
the treatise ', and is (but for the missing proofs) a well-ordered
and compact whole. 
Hence we may safely conclude that
Woepcke's tract represents not only Euclid's work but the
whole of it. 
The portion of the Practica geometriae of
Leonardo of Pisa which deals with the division of figures
seems to be a restoration and extension of Euclid's work;
Leonardo must presumably have come across a version of it
from the Arabic.
The type of problem which Euclid's treatise was designed
to solve may be stated in general terms as that of dividing a
given figure by one or more straight lines into parts having
prescribed ratios to one another or to other given areas. The
figures divided are the triangle, the parallelogram, the trape-
zium, the quadrilateral, a figure bounded by an arc of a circle
and two straight lines, and the circle. The figures are divided
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON DIVISIONS OF FIGURES 
427
into two equal parts., or two parts in a given ratio; or again,
a given fraction of the figure is to be cut off, or the figure is
to be divided into several parts in given ratios. The dividing
straight lines may be transversals drawn through a point
situated at a vertex of the figure, or a point on any side, on one
of two parallel sides, in the interior of the figure, outside the
figure, and so on; or again, they may be merely parallel lines,
or lines parallel to a base. The treatise also includes auxiliary
propositions, (1) 'to apply to a given straight line a rectangle
equal to a given area and deficient by a square', the proposi-
tion already mentioned, which is equivalent to the algebraical
solution of the equation ax — x2 = 62 and depends on Eucl. II. 5
(cf. p. 152 above); (2) propositions in proportion involving
unequal instead of equal ratios:
If a. d > or < b. c, then a: b > or < c : d respectively.
If a: b > c:d, then (a + b):b > (c + d) :d.
If a : b < c : d, then (a — b): b < (c — d) : d.
By way of illustration I will set out shortly three proposi-
tions from the Woepcke text.
(1) Propositions 19, 20 (slightly generalized): To cut off
a certain fraction (m/n) from a given triangle by a straight
line drawn through a given point within the triangle (Euclid
gives two cases corresponding to m/n — J and m/n = |).
The construction will be best understood if we work out
the analysis of the problem (not given by Euclid).
Suppose that ABC is the given triangle, D the given
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

428 
EUCLID
internal point; and suppose the problem solved, i. e. GH
drawn through D in such a way that A GBH = — A ABC.
Therefore GB .BH = —. AB .BC. 
(This is assumed by
Euclid.)
Now suppose that the unknown quantity is GB = x, say.
Draw DE parallel to BC; then DE, EB are given.
Now BH:DE = GB-.GE = 
x:(x-BE),
T>TJ 
x.DE
or 
BH =
x—.
therefore 
GB.BH = x2. 
J J ^ L
x-BE
And, by hypothesis, GB .BH = — . AB .BC;
theretore 
or = — ————(x — BE),
.., 
m ^S.fi(7 
x 
1 
x_
or, it A; = 
=r=—5 we have to solve the equation
or 
Jcx-x2 = J
This is exactly what Euclid does; he first finds F on BA
such that BF.DE=—. 
AB.BC 
(the length of BF is deter-
mined by applying to DE a rectangle equal to —. AB.BC,
Eucl. I. 45), that is, he finds BF equal to L 
Then he gives
the geometrical solution of the equation ]cx — x2 = k. BE in the
form ' apply to the straight line BF a rectangle equal to
BF .BE and deficient by a square1; that is to say, he deter-
mines G so that BG.GF= 
BF.BE. 
We have then only
to join GD and produce it to H\ and GH cuts off the required
triangle.
(The problem is subject to a 8iopia/i6$ which Euclid does
not give, but which is easily supplied.)
(2) Proposition 28: To divide into two equal parts a given
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON DIVISIONS OF FIGURES
429
figure bounded by an arc of a circle and by two straight lines
which form a given angle.
Let ABEC be the given figure, D the middle point of BG,
and DE perpendicular to BG. Join AD.
Then the broken line ADE clearly divides the figure into
two equal parts. Join AE, and draw
DF parallel to it meeting BA in F.
Join FE.
The triangles AFE, ADE are then
equal, being in the same parallels.
Add to each the area AEG.
Therefore the area AFEG is equal to the area AD EG, and
therefore to half the area of the given figure.
(3) Proposition 29 : To draw in a given circle two parallel
chords cutting off a certain fraction (m/n) of the circle.
(The fraction m/n 
must be
such that 
we can, by plane
methods, draw a chord cutting off
m /n 
of the circumference of
the circle; Euclid takes the case
where m/n = §.)
Suppose that the arc ADB is
m/n 
of the circumference of the
circle. Join A, B to the centre 0.
Draw 0C parallel to AB and join
A G, BG. From D, the middle point
of the arc AB, draw the chord DE parallel to BG. Then shall
BG, DE cut off m/n of the area of the circle.
Since AB, 0G are parallel,
A A0B = A AGB.
Add to each the segment ADB;
therefore
(sector ADBO) = figure bounded by AC, GB and arc ADB
= (segmt. ABG) - (se'gmt. BFC).
Since BG, DE are parallel, (arc DB) = (arc GE);
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

430 
EUCLID
therefore
(arc ABC) = (arc DOE), and (segmt. ABC) = (segmt. DCE)\
therefore (sector ADBO), or — (circle ABC)
= (segmt. DC®)-(segmt. BFC),
ryyi
That is BC, BE cut off an area equal to — (circle ABC).
Lost geometrical works.
(a) The Pseudaria.
The other purely geometrical works of Euclid are lost so far
as is known at present. One of these again belongs to the
domain of elementary geometry. This is the Psewdaria, or
' Book of Fallacies', as it is called by Proclus, which is clearly
the same work as the ' Pseudographemata' of Euclid men-
tioned by a commentator on Aristotle in terms which agree
with Proclus's description.1 Proclus says of Euclid that,
' Inasmuch as many things, while appearing to rest on truth
and to follow from scientific principles, really tend to lead one
astray from the principles and deceive the more superficial
minds, he has handed down methods for the discriminative
understanding of these things as well, by the use of which
methods we shall be able to give beginners in this study
practice in the discovery of paralogisms, and to avoid being
ourselves misled. The treatise by which he puts this machinery
in our hands he entitled (the book) of Pseudaria, enumerating
in order their various kinds, exercising our intelligence in each
case by theorems of all sorts, setting the true side by side
with the false, and combining the refutation of error with
practical illustration. This book then is by way of cathartic
and exercise, while the Elements contain the irrefragable and
complete guide to the actual scientific investigation of the
subjects of geometry/ 2
The connexion of the book with the Elements and the refer-
ence to its usefulness for beginners show that it did not go
beyond the limits of elementary geometry.
1 Michael Ephesius, Comm. on Arist. Soph. El., fol. 25V, p. 76. 23 Wallies.
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 70. 1-18. Cf. a scholium to Plato's Theaetetus
191 B, which says that the fallacies did not arise through any importation
of sense-perception into the domain of non-sensibles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LOST GEOMETRICAL WORKS 
431
We now come to the lost works belonging to higher
geometry. The most important was evidently
(/?) The Porisms.
Our only source of information about the nature and con-
tents of the Porisms is Pappus. In his general preface about
the books composing the Treasury of Analysis Pappus writes
as follows* (I put in square brackets the words bracketed by
Hultsch).
' After the Tangencies (of Apollonius) come, in three Books,
the Porisms of Euclid, a collection [in the view of many] most
ingeniously devised for the analysis of the more weighty
problems, [and] although nature presents an unlimited num-
ber of such porisms, [they have added nothing to what was
originally written by Euclid, except that some before my time
have shown their want of taste by adding to a few (of the
propositions) second proofs, each (proposition) admitting of
a definite number of demonstrations, as we have shown, and
Euclid having given one for each, namely that which is the
most lucid. These porisms embody a theory subtle, natural,
necessary, and of considerable generality, which is fascinating
to those who can see and produce results].
' Now all the varieties of porisms belong, neither to theorems
nor problems, but to a species occupying a sort of intermediate
position [so that their enunciations can be formed like those of
either theorems or problems], the result being that, of the great
number of geometers, some regarded them as of the class of
theorems, and others of problems, looking only to the form of
the proposition. But that the ancients knew better the differ-
ence between these three things is clear from the definitions.
For they said that a theorem is that which is proposed with a
view to the demonstration of the very thing proposed, a pro-
blem that which is thrown out with a view to the construction
of the very thing proposed, and a porism that which is pro-
posed with a view to the producing of the very thing proposed.
[But this definition of the porism was changed by the more
recent writers who could not produce everything, but used
these elements and proved only the fact that that which is
sought really exists, but did not produce it, and were accord-
ingly confuted by the definition and the whole doctrine. They
based their definition on an incidental characteristic, thus :
A porism is that which falls short of a locus-theorem in
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 648-60.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

432 
EUCLID
respect of its hypothesis. Of this kind of porisms loci are
a species, and they abound in the Treasury of Analysis; but
this species has been collected, named, and handed down
separately from the porisms, because it is more widely diffused
than the other species] ... 
But it has further become charac-
teristic of porisms that, owing to their complication, the enun-
ciations are put in a contracted form, much being by usage
left to be understood; so that many geometers understand
them only in a partial way and are ignorant of the more
essential features of their content.
'[Now to comprehend a number of propositions in one
enunciation is by no means easy in these porisms, because
Euclid himself has not in fact given many of each species, but
chosen, for examples, one or a few out of a great multitude.
But at the beginning of the first book he has given some pro-
positions, to the number of ten, of one species, namely that
more fruitful species consisting of loci.] Consequently, finding
that these admitted of being comprehended in our enunciation,
we have set it out thus:
If, in a system of four straight lines which cut one
another two and two, three points on one straight line
be given, while the rest except one lie on different straight
lines given in position, the remaining point also will lie
on a straight line given in position.
'This has only been enunciated of four straight lines, of
which not more than two pass through the same point, but it
is not known (to most people) that it is true of any assigned
number of straight lines if enunciated thus:
If any number of straight lines cut one another, not
more than two (passing) through the same point, and all
the points (of intersection situated) on one of them be
given, and if each of those which are on another (of
them) lie on a straight line given in position—
or still more generally thus:
if any number of straight lines cut one another, not more
than two (passing) through the same point, and all the
points (of intersection situated) on one of them be given,
while of the other points of intersection in multitude
equal to a triangular number a number corresponding
to the side of this triangular number lie respectively on
straight lines given in position, provided that of these
latter points no three are at the angular points of a
triangle (sc. having for sides three of the given straight
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PORISMB 
433
lines)—each of the remaining points will lie on a straight
line given in position.1
'It is probable that the writer of the Elements was not
unaware of this, but that he only set out the principle; and
he seems, in the case of all the porisms, to have laid down the
principles and the seed only [of many important things],
the kinds of which should be distinguished according to the
differences, not of their hypotheses, but of the results and
the things sought. [All the hypotheses are different from one
another because they are entirely special, but each of the
results and things sought, being one and the same, follow from
many different hypotheses.]
We must then in the first book distinguish the following
kinds of things sought :
1 At the beginning of the book is this proposition:
I. If from two given points straight lines be drawn
meeting on a straight line given in position, and one cut
off from a straight line given in position (a segment
measured) to a given point on it, the other will also cut
off from another {straight line a segment) having to the
first a given ratio.
e Following on this (we have to prove)
II. that such and such a point lies on a straight line
given in position;
IIT. that the ratio of such and such a pair of straight
lines is given';
&c. &c. (up to XXIX).
'The three books of the porisms contain 38 lemmas; of the
theorems themselves there are 171/
Pappus further gives lemmas to the Porisms?
With Pappus's account of Porisms must be compared the
passages of Proclus on the same subject. Proclus distinguishes
1 Loria (Le scienze esatte nelVantica Grecia, pp. 256-7) gives the mean-
ing of this as follows, pointing out that Simson first discovered it: 'If
a complete w-lateral be deformed so that its sides respectively turn about
n points on a straight line, and (n — 1) of its \n{n — 1) vertices move on
as many straight lines, the other \{n-\) 
(n — 2) of its vertices likewise
move on as many straight lines: but it is necessary that it should be
impossible to form with the (w — 1) vertices any triangle'having for sides
the sides of the polygon.'
2 Pappus, vii, pp. 866-918; Euclid, ed. Heiberg-Menge, vol. viii,
pp. 243-74.
152S 
F f
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

434 
EUCLID
the two senses of the word Tropicr/xa. 
The first is that of
a corollary, where something appears as an incidental result
of a proposition, obtained without trouble or special seeking,
a sort of bonus which the investigation has presented us
with.1 The other sense is that of Euclid's Porisms. 
In
this sense
' porism is the name given to things which are sought, but
need some finding and are neither pure bringing into existence
nor simple theoretic argument. For (to prove) that the angles
at the base of isosceles triangles are equal is matter of theoretic
argument, and it is with reference to things existing that such
knowledge is (obtained). But to bisect an angle, to construct
a triangle, to cut off, or to place—all these things demand the
making of something; and to find the centre of a given circle,
or to find the greatest common measure of two given commen-
surable magnitudes, or the like, is in some sort intermediate
between theorems and problems. For in these cases there is
no bringing into existence of the things sought, but finding
of them; nor is the procedure purely theoretic. For it is
necessary to bring what is sought into view and exhibit it
to the eye. Such are the porisms which Euclid wrote and
arranged in three books of Porisms.'2
Proclus's definition thus agrees well enough with the first,
the ' older *, definition of Pappus. A porism occupies a place
between a theorem and a problem; it deals with something
already existing, as a theorem does, but h&s to find it (e.g. the
centre of a circle), and, as a certain operation is therefore
necessary, it partakes to that extent of the nature of a problem,
which requires us to construct or produce something not
previously existing. Thus, besides III. 1 and X. 3, 4 of the
Elements mentioned by Proclus, the following propositions are
real porisms: III. 25, VI. 11-13, VII. 33, 34, 36, 39, VIII. 2, 4,
X. 10, XIII. 18. Similarly, in Archimedes's On the Sphere and
Cylinder, I. 2-6 might be called porisms.
The enunciation given by Pappus as comprehending ten of
Euclid's propositions may not reproduce the for m of Euclid's
enunciations; but, comparing the result to be proved, that
certain points lie on straight lines given in position, with the
class indicated by II above, where the question is of such and
such a point lying on a straight line given in position, and
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 212. 14; 301. 22. 
2 Ib., p. 301. 25 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE P0RT8M8 
435
with other classes, e. g. (V) that such and such a line is given
in position, (VI) that such and such a line verges to a given point,
(XXVII) that there exists a given point such that straight
lines drawn from it to such and such (circles) will contain
a triangle given in species, we may conclude that a usual form
of a porism was ' to prove that it is possible to find a point
with such and such a property ' o r ' a straight line-on which
lie all the points satisfying given conditions', and so on.
The above exhausts all the positive information which we
have about the nature of a porism and the contents of Euclid's
Porisms. _ It is obscure and leaves great scope for speculation
and controversy; naturally, therefore, the problem of restoring
the Porisms has had a great fascination for distinguished
mathematicians ever since the revival of learning. But it has
proved beyond them all. Some contributions to a solution have,
it is true, been made, mainly by Simson and Ohasles. The first
claim to have restored the Porisms seems to be that of Albert
Girard (about 1590-1633), who spoke (1626) of an early pub-
lication of his results, which, however, never saw the light.
The great Fermat (1601-65) gave his idea of a 'porism',
illustrating it by five examples which are very interesting in
themselves l; but he did not succeed in connecting them with
the description of Euclid's Porisms by Pappus, and, though he
expressed a hope of being able to produce a complete restoration
of the latter, his hope was not realized. It was left for Robert
Simson (1687-1768) to make the first decisive step towards the
solution of the problem.2 He succeeded in explaining the mean-
ing of the actual porisms enunciated in such general terms by
Pappus. In his tract on Porisms he proves the first porism
given by Pappus in its ten different cases, which, according to
Pappus, Euclid distinguished (these propositions are of the
class connected with loci); after this he gives a number of
other propositions from Pappus, some auxiliary proposi-
tions, and some 29 ' porisms', some of which are meant to
illustrate the classes I, VI, XV, XXVII-XXIX 
distin-
guished by Pappus. Simson was able to evolve a definition
of a porism which is perhaps more easily understood in
Chasles's translation: ' Le porisme est une proposition dans
1 (Euvres de Fermat, ed. Tannery and Henry, I, p. 76-84.
2 Roberti Simson Opera quaedam reliqna, 1776, pp. 315-594.
Ff 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

436 
EUCLID
laquelle on demande de d&nontrer qu'une chose ou plusieurs
choses sont donnees, qui, ainsi que Tune quelconque d'une
infinite d'autres choses non donn^es, mais dont chacune est
avec des choses donnees dans une meme relation, ont une
propriety commune, d&rite dans la proposition.' 
We need
not follow Simson's English or Scottish successors, Lawson
(1777), Playfair (1794), W. Wallace (1798), Lord Brougham
(1798), in their further speculations, nor the controversies
between the Frenchmen, A. J. H. Vincent and P. Breton (de
Champ), nor the latter's claim to priority as against Chasles;
the work of Chasles himself (Les trois livres des Porismes
d'Euclide rStablis . . . Paris, 1860) alone needs to be men-
tioned. Chasles adopted the definition of a porism given by
Simson, but showed how it could be expressed in a different
form. 'Porisms are incomplete theorems which express
certain relations existing between things variable in accord-
ance with a common law, relations which are indicated in
the enunciation of the porism, but which need to be completed
by determining the magnitude or position oaf certain things
which are the consequences of the hypotheses and which
would be determined in the enunciation of a theorem properly
so called or a complete theorem.' Chasles succeeded in eluci-
dating the connexion between a porism and a locus as de-
scribed by Pappus, though he gave an inexact translation of
the actual words of Pappus: ' Ce qui constitue le porisme est
ce qui manque a Vhypothese d'un theoreme local (en d'autres
termes, le porisme est inf&ieur, par l'hypothese, au theoreme
local; c'est a dire que quand quelques parties d'une proposi-
tion locale n'ont pas dans l'^nonee la determination qui leur
est propre, cette proposition cesse d'etre regards comme un
theoreme et devient un porisme)'; here the words italicized
are not quite what Pappus said, viz. that 'a porism is that
which falls short of a locus-theorem in respect of its hypo-
thesis \ but the explanation in brackets is correct enough if
we substitute ' in respect of' for ' parJ (' by'). The work of
Chasles is historically important because it was in the course
of his researches on this subject that he was led to the. idea of
anharmonic ratios; and he was probably right in thinking
that the Porisms were propositions belonging to the modern
theory of transversals and to projective geometry. But, as a
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PORISMS 
437
restoration of Euclid's work, Chasles's Porisms cannot be re-
garded as satisfactory. 
One consideration alone is, to my
mind, conclusive on this point. Chasles made ' porisms' out
of Pappus's various lemmas to Euclid's porisms and com-
paratively easy deductions from those lemmas. 
Now we
have experience of Pappus's lemmas to books which still
survive, e.g. the Conies of Apollonius; and, to judge by these
instances, his lemmas stood in a most ancillary relation to
the propositions to which they relate, and do not in the
least compare with them in difficulty and importance. 
Hence
it is all but impossible to believe that the lemmas to the
porisms were themselves porisms such as were Euclid's own
porisms; on the contrary, the analogy of Pappus's other sets
of lemmas makes it all but necessary to regard the lemmas in
question as merely supplying proofs of simple propositions
assumed'by Euclid without proof in the course of the demon-
stration of the actual porisms. This being so, it appears that
the problem of the complete restoration of Euclid's three
Books still awaits a solution, or rather that it will never be
solved unless in the event of discovery of fresh documents.
At ihe same time the lemmas of Pappus to the Porisms
are by no means insignificant propositions in themselves,
and, if the usual relation of lemmas to substantive proposi-
tions holds, it follows that the Poriswis was a distinctly
advanced work, perhaps the most important that Euclid ever
wrote; its loss is therefore much to be deplored. Zeuthen
has an interesting remark a propos of the proposition which
Pappus quotes as the first proposition of Book I, ' If from two
given points straight lines be drawn meeting on a straight
line given in position, and one of them cut off from a straight
line given in position (a segment measured) towards a given
point on it, the other will also cut off from another (straight
line a segment) bearing to the first a given ratio.' This pro-
position is also true if there be substituted for the first given
straight line a conic regarded as the ' locus with respect to
four lines', and the proposition so extended can be used for
completing Apollonius's exposition of that locus. Zeuthen
suggests, on this ground, that the Porisms were in part by-
products of the theory of conies and in part auxiliary means
for the study of conies, and that Euclid called them by the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

438 
EUCLID
same name as that applied to corollaries because they were
corollaries with respect to conies.1 This, however, is a pure
conjecture.
(y) The Conies.
Pappus says of this lost work: ' The four books of Euclid's
Conies were completed by Apollonius, who added four more
and gave us eight books of Conies.'2 It is probable that
Euclid's work was already lost by Pappus's time, for he goes
on to speak of ' Aristaeus who wrote the still extant five books
of Solid Loci avv^rj rots KOOVLKOLS, connected with, or supple-
mentary to, the conies'.3 This latter work seems to have
been a treatise on conies regarded as loci; for ' solid loci' was
a term appropriated to conies, as distinct from 'plane loci',
which were straight lines and circles. In another passage
Pappus (or an interpolator) speaks of the ' conies' of Aristaeus
the ' elder ',4 evidently referring to the same book. Euclid no
doubt wrote on the general theory of conies, as Apollonius did,
but only covered the ground of Apollonius's first three books,
since Apollonius says that no one before him had touched the
subject of Book IV (which, however, is not important). As in
the case of the Elements, Euclid would naturally collect and
rearrange, in a systematic exposition, all that had been dis-
covered up to date in the theory of conies. That Euclid's
treatise covered most of the essentials up to the last part of
Apollonius's Book III seems clear from the fact that Apol-
lonius only claims originality for some propositions connected
with the 'three- and four-line locus', observing that Euclid
had not completely worked out the synthesis of the said locus,
which, indeed, was not possible without the propositions
referred to. Pappus (or an interpolator)5 excuses Euclid on
the ground that he made no claim to go beyond the discoveries
of Aristaeus, but only wrote so much about the locus as was
possible with the aid of Aristaeus's conies. We may conclude
that Aristaeus's book preceded Euclid's, and that it was, at
least in point of originality, more important. When Archi-
medes refers to propositions in conies as having been proved
1 Zeuthen, Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Alterturn, 1886, pp. 168,
173-4.
2 Pappus, vii, p. 672. 18. 
8 Cf. Pappus, vii, p. 636. 23.
4 Ib. vii, p. 672. 12. 
Ib. vii, pp. 676. 25-678. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS AND 8URFACE-L0G1 
439
in the 'elements of conies', he clearly refers to these two
treatises, and the other propositions to which he refers as well
known and not needing proof were doubtless taken from the
same sources. Euclid still used the old names for the conic
sections (sections of a right-angled, acute-angled, and obtuse-
angled cone respectively), but he was aware that an ellipse
could be obtained by cutting (through) a cone in any manner
by a plane not parallel to the base, and also by cutting a
cylinder; this is clear from a sentence in his Phaenomena to
the effect that, ' If a cone or a cylinder be cut by a plane not
parallel to the base, this section is a section of an acute-angled
cone, which is like a shield
(8) The Surface-Loci 
(TOTTOL irpos km<f)avzia).
like the Data and the Porisms, this treatise in two Books
is mentioned by Pappus as belonging to the Treasury of
Analysis. 
What is meant by surface-loci, literally ' loci on a
surface' is not entirely clear, but we are able to form a-con-
jecture on the subject by means of remarks in Proclus and
Pappus. The former says (l) that a locus is ' a position of a
line or of a surface which has (throughout it) one and the
same property',1 and (2) that 'of locus-theorems some are
constructed on lines and others on surfaces'2; the effect of
these statements together seems to be that' loci on lines' are
loci which are lines, and 'loci on surfaces' loci which are
surfaces. On the other hand, the possibility does not seem to
be excluded that loci on surfaces may be loci traced on sur-
faces ; for Pappus says in one place that the equivalent of the
quadratrix can be got geometrically ' by means of loci on
surfaces as follows'3 and then proceeds to use a spiral de-
scribed on a cylinder (the cylindrical helix), and it is consis-
tent with this that in another passage 4 (bracketed, however, by
Hultsch) ' linear' loci are said to be exhibited (Sdicvvvrai) or
realized from loci on surfaces, for the quadratrix is a ' linear'
locus, i.e. a locus of an order higher than a plane locus
(a straight line or circle) and a c solid' locus (a conic). How-
ever this may be, Euclid's Surface-Loci probably included
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 394. 17. 
2 Ib.y p. 394. 19.
3 Pappus, iv, p. 258. 20-25. 
4 Ib. vii. 662. 9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

440 
EUCLID
such loci as were cones, cylinders and spheres. The two
lemmas given by Pappus lend some colour to this view. The
first of these1 and the figure attached to it are unsatisfactory
as they stand, but Tannery indicated a possible restoration.2
If this is right, it suggests that one of the loci contained all
the points on the elliptical parallel sections of a cylinder, and
was therefore an oblique circular cylinder. 
Other assump-
tions with regard to the conditions to which the lines in the
figure may be subject would suggest that other loci dealt with
were cones regarded as containing all points on particular
parallel elliptical sections of the cones. In the second lemma
Pappus states and gives a complete proof of the focus-and-
directrix property of a conic, viz. that the locus of a point
the distance of which from a given point is in a given ratio
to its distance from a fixed straight line is a conic section,
which is an ellipse, a parabola or a hyperbola according as the
given ratio is less than, equal to, or greater than unity* 
Two
conjectures are possible as to the application of this theorem in
Euclid's Surface-Loci 
(a) It may have been used to prove that
the locus of a point the distance of which from a given straight
line is in a given ratio to its distance from a given plane
is a certain cone. Or (6) it may have been used to prove
that the locus of a point the distance of which from a given
point is in a given ratio to its distance from a given plane is
the surface formed by the revolution of a conic about its major
or conjugate axis.4
We come now to Euclid's works under the head of
Applied mathematics.
(a) The Phaenoniena.
The book on sphaeric intended for use in astronomy and
entitled Phaenomena has already been noticed (pp. 349, 351-2).
It is extant in Greek and was included in Gregory's edition of
Euclid. The text of Gregory, however, represents the later
of two recensions which differ considerably (especially in
Propositions 9 to 16). The best manuscript of this later
recension (b) is the famous Vat. gr. 204 of the tenth century,
1 Pappus, vii, p. 1004. 17; Euclid, ed. Heiberg-Menge, vol. viii, p. 274.
2 Tannery in Bulletin des sciences mathematiques, 2e serie, VI, p. 149.
3 Pappus, vii, pp. 1004. 23-1014; Euclid, vol. viii, pp. 275-81.
4 For further details, see The Works of Archimedes, pp. lxii-lxv.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PHAENOMENA 
AND OPTICS 
441
while the best manuscript of the older and better version (a)
is the Viennese MS.Vind. gr. XXXI. 13 of the twelfth century.
A new text edited by Menge and taking account of both
recensions is now available in the last volume of the Heiberg-
Menge edition of Euclid.1
03) Optics and Catoptrlca.
The Optics, a treatise included by Pappus in the collection of
works known as the Little Astronomy, survives in two forms.
One is the recension of Theon translated by Zambertus in
1505; the Greek text was first edited by Johannes Pena
(de la Pene) in 1557, and this form of the treatise was alone
included in the editions up to Gregory's. But Heiberg dis-
covered the earlier form in two manuscripts, one at Vienna
(Vind. gr. XXXI. 13) and one at Florence (Laurent. XXVIII. 3),
and both recensions are contained in vol. vii of the Heiberg-
Menge text of Euclid (Teubner, 1895). There is no reason to
doubt that the earlier recension is Euclid's own work; the
style is much more like that of the Elements, and the proofs of
the propositions are more complete and clear. The later recen-
sion is further differentiated by a preface of some length, which
is said by a scholiast to be taken from the commentary or
elucidation by Theon. It would appear that the text of this
recension is Theon's, and that the preface was a reproduction
by a pupil*of what was explained by Theon in lectures. It
cannot have been written much, if anything, later than Theon's
time, for it is quoted by Nemesius about A.D. 400. Only the
earlier and genuine version need concern us here. It is
a kind of elementary treatise on perspective, and it may have
been intended to forearm students of astronomy against
paradoxical theories such as those of the Epicureans, who
maintained that the heavenly bodies are of the size that they
look. It begins in the orthodox fashion with Definitions, the
first of which embodies the same idea of the process of vision
as we find in Plato, namely that it is due to rays proceeding
from our eyes and impinging upon the object, instead of
the other way about: 'the straight lines (rays) which issue
from the eye traverse the distances (or dimensions) of great
1 Euclid is Phaenomena et scripta Musica edidit Henricus Menge.
Fmgmenta collegit et disposuit J. L. Heiberg, Teubntr, 1916.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

442 
EUCLID
magnitudes'; Def. 2 : ' The figure contained by the visual rays
is a cone which has its vertex in the eye, and its base at the
extremities of the objects seen'; Def. 3: ' And those things
are seen on which the visual rays impinge, while those are
not seen on which they do notJ; Def. 4: ' Things seen under
a greater angle appear greater, and those under a lesser angle
less, while things seen under equal angles appear equal';
Def. 7: 'Things seen under more angles appear more distinctly/
Euclid assumed that the visual rays are not ' continuous',
i.e. not absolutely close together, but are separated by a
certain distance, and hence he concluded, in Proposition 1,
that we can never really see the whole of any object, though
we seem to do so. Apart, however, from such inferences as
these from false hypotheses, there is much in the treatise that
is sound. Euclid has the essential truth that the rays are
straight; and it makes no difference geometrically whether
they proceed from the eye or the object. Then, after pro-
positions explaining the differences in the apparent size of an
object according to its position relatively to the eye, he proves
that the apparent sizes of two equal and parallel objects are
not proportional to their distances from the eye (Prop. 8); in
this proposition he proves the equivalent of the fact that, if a,
^3 are two angles and a < /8 < \ IT, then
tana 
a
the equivalent of which, as well as of the corresponding
formula with sines, is assumed without proof by Aristarchus
a little later. From Proposition 6 can easily be deduced the
fundamental proposition in perspective that parallel lines
(regarded as equidistant throughout) appear to meet. There
are four simple propositions in heights and distances, e.g. to
find the height of an object (1) when the sun is shining
(Prop. 18), (2) when it is not (Prop. 19): similar triangles are,
of course, used and the horizontal mirror appears in the second
case in the orthodox manner, with the assumption that the
angles of incidence and reflection of a ray are equal, 'as
is explained in the Catoptrica (or theory of mirrors) \ 
Pro-
positions 23-7 prove that, if an eye sees a sphere, it sees
less than half of the sphere, and the contour of what is seen
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

0PTIG8 
443
appears to be a circle; if the eye approaches nearer to
the sphere the portion seen becomes less, though it appears
greater; if we see the sphere with two eyes, we see a hemi-
sphere, or more than a hemisphere, or less than a hemisphere
according as the distance between the eyes is equal to, greater
than, or less than the diameter of the sphere; these pro-
positions are comparable with Aristarchus's Proposition 2
stating that, if a sphere be illuminated by a larger sphere,
the illuminated portion of the former will be greater
than a hemisphere. Similar propositions with regard to the
cylinder and cone follow (Props. 28-33). Next Euclid con-
siders the conditions for the apparent equality of different
diameters of a circle as seen from an eye occupying various
positions outside the plane of the circle (Props. 34-7); he
shows that all diameters will appear equal, or the circle will
really look like a circle, if the line joining the eye to the
centre is perpendicular to the plane of the circle, or, not being
perpendicular to that plane, is equal to the length of the
radius, but this will not otherwise be the case (35), so that (36)
a chariot wheel will sometimes appear circular, sometimes
awry, according to the position of the eye. 
Propositions
37 and 38 prove, the one that there is a locus such that, if the
eye remains at one point of. it, while a straight line moves so
that its extremities always lie on it, the line will always
appear of the same length in whatever position it is placed
(not being one in which either of the extremities coincides
with, or the extremities are on opposite sides of, the point
at which the eye is placed), the locus being, of course, a circle
in which the straight line is placed as a chord, when it
necessarily subtends the same angle at the circumference or at
the centre, and therefore at the eye, if placed at a point of the
circumference or at the centre; the other proves the same thing
for the case where the line is fixed with its extremities on the
locus, while the eye moves upon it. The same idea underlies
several other propositions, e.g. Proposition 45, which proves
that a common point can be found from which unequal
magnitudes will appear equal. The unequal magnitudes are
straight lines BC, CD so placed that BCD is a straight line.
A segment greater than a semicircle is described on BC, and
a similar segment on CD. The segments will then intersect
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

444 
EUCLID
at F} and the angles subtended by BC and CD at F are
equal. The rest of the treatise is of the same character, and
it need not be further described.
The Catoptrica published by Heiberg in the same volume is
not by Euclid, but is a compilation made at a much later date,
possibly by Theon of Alexandria, from ancient works on the
subject and mainly no doubt from those of Archimedes and
Heron. Theon1 himself quotes a Catoptrica by Archimedes,
and Olympiodorus2 quotes Archimedes as having proved the
fact which appears as an axiom in the Catoptrica now in
question, namely that, if an object be placed just out of sight
at the bottom of a vessel, it will become visible over the edge
when water is poured in. It is not even certain that Euclid
wrote Catoptrica at all, since, if the treatise was Theon's,
Proclus may have assigned it to Euclid through inadvertence.
(y) Music.
Proclus attributes to Euclid a work on the Elements of
Music (ai Kara fiova-tKfjv a-roL^idoa-ei?)3', so does Marinus.4
As a matter of fact, two musical treatises attributed to Euclid
are still extant, the Sectio Canonis (Kararojifi KCLVOVOS) and the
Introductio harmonica (Ela-aycoyfj apyLoviKr\). 
The latter,
however, is certainly not by Euclid, but by Cleonides, a pupil
of Aristoxenus. The question remains, in what relation does
the Sectio Canonis stand to the 'Elements' mentioned by
Proclus and Marinus 1 
The Sectio gives the Pythagorean
theory of music, but is altogether too partial and slight to
deserve the title ' Elements of Music' 
Jan, the editor of the
Music I Graeci, thought that the Sectio was a sort of summary
account extracted from, the 'Elements' by Euclid himself,
which hardly seems likely; he maintained that it is the
genuine work of Euclid on the grounds (1) that the style and
diction and the form of the propositions agree well with what
we find in Euclid's Elements, and (2) that Porphyry in his
commentary on Ptolemy's Harmonica thrice quotes Euclid as
the author of a Sectio Canonis.5 The latest editor, Menge,
1 Theon, Comm. on Ptolemy1 s Syntaxis, i, p. 10.
2 Comment, on Arist. Meteorolog. ii, p. 94, Ideler, p. 211. 18 Busse.
8 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 69. 3.
4 Marinus, Comm. on the Data (Euclid, vol. vi, p. 254. 19).
5 See Wallis, Opera mathematical vol. iii, 1699, pp. 267, 269, 272.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON MUSIC 
445
points out that the extract given by Porphyry shows some
differences from our text and contains some things quite
unworthy of Euclid; hence he is inclined to think that the
work as we have it is not actually by Euclid, but was ex-
tracted by some other author of less ability from the genuine
' Elements of Music' by Euclid.
(8) Works on mechanics attributed to Euclid.
The Arabian list of Euclid's works further includes among
those held to be genuine ' the book of the Heavy and Light'.
This is apparently the tract De levi et ponderoso included by
Hervagius in the Basel Latin translation of 1537 and by
Gregory in his edition. That it comes from the Greek is
made clear by the lettering of the figures: and this is con-
firmed by the fact that another, very slightly different, version
exists at Dresden (Cod. Dresdensis Db. 86), which is evidently
a version of an Arabic translation from the Greek, since the
lettering of the figures follows the order characteristic of such
Arabic translations, a, b, g, d, e, z, h, t. The tract consists of
nine definitions or axioms and five propositions. Among the
definitions are these : Bodies are equal, different, or greater in
size according as they occupy equal, different, or greater spaces
(1-3). Bodies are equal in power or in virtue which move
over equal distances in the same medium of air or water in
equal times (4), while the poiver or virtue is greater if the
motion takes less time, and less if it takes more (6). Bodies
are of the same land if, being equal in size, they are also equal
in fpower when the medium is the same; they are different in
kind when, being equal in size, they are not equal in power or
virtue (7, 8). Of bodies different in kind, that has more poiver
which is more dense (solidius) (9). With these hypotheses, the
author attempts to prove (Props. 1, 3, 5) that, of bodies which
traverse unequal spaces in equal times, that which traverses
the greater space has the greater power and that, of bodies of
the same kind, the poiver is proportional to the size, and con-
versely, if the poiver is proportional to the size, the bodies are
of the same kind. We recognize in the potentia or virtus
the same thing as the Svvafiis and Iv^vs of Aristotle.1 The
1 Aristotle, Physics, Z. 5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

446 
EUCLID
property assigned by the author to bodies of the same kind is
quite different from what we attribute to bodies of the same
specific gravity; he purports to prove that bodies of the
same kind have power proportional to their size, and the effect
of this, combined with the definitions, is that they move at
speeds proportional to their volumes. Thus the tract 4s the
most precise statement that we possess of the principle of
Aristotle's dynamics, a principle which persisted until Bene-
detti (1530-90) and Galilei (1564-1642) proved its falsity.
There are yet other fragments on mechanics associated with
the name of Euclid. 
One is a tract translated by Woepcke
from the" Arabic in 1851 under the title 'Le livre d'Euclide
sur la balance', a work which, although spoiled by some.com-
mentator, seems to go back to a Greek original and to have
been an attempt to establish a theory of the lever, not from a
general principle of dynamics like that of Aristotle, but from
a few simple axioms such as the experience of daily life might
suggest. 
The original work may have been earlier than
Archimedes and may have been written by a contemporary of
Euclid. A third fragment, unearthed by Duhem from manu-
scripts in the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, contains four
propositions purporting to be 'liber Euclidis de ponderibus
secundum terminorum circumferentiam'. 
The first of the
propositions, connecting the law of the lever with the size of
the circles described by its ends, recalls the similar demon-
stration in the Aristotelian Mechanica; the others attempt to
give a theory of the balance, taking account of the weight of
the lever itself, and assuming that a portion of it (regarded as
cylindrical) may be supposed to be detached and replaced by
an equal weight suspended from its middle point. The three
fragments supplement each other in a curious way, and it is a
question whether they belonged to one treatise or were due to
different authors. In any case there seems to be no indepen-
dent evidence that Euclid was the author of any of the
fragments, or that he wrote on mechanics at all.1
1 For further details about these mechanical fragments see P. Duhem,
Les origines de la statique, 1905. esp. vol. i, pp. 61-97.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

