CHAPTER VII.
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
117. IT has been already pointed out that the conditions of
life in Athens were unfavourable to the growth of any "natural"
science. Her practical men were absorbed in politics, her
philosophers in metaphysical speculation. Neither of these
classes objected to deductive science, for deduction is the chief
instrument of rhetoric and is also the most interesting part
of logic: but the patient and unrewarded industry, which leads
to inductive science, was not to the Athenian taste. The
practical men thought it profane, the philosophers vulgar. The
schools of inductive science remained therefore far away from
the turmoil of Athens: the observatories of the astronomers
were at Cyzicus on the Hellespont or at Cnidus on the south
coast of Asia Minor: the school of medicine was maintained by
one illustrious family in the island of Cos. If it be objected
that Aristotle lived in Athens, the answer is that Aristotle was
the son of a physician, was not born or bred in Athens, never
became an Athenian citizen, disliked Athens and left it, and
was not able to command in Athens an audience for anything
but metaphysics. The Peripatetic school was as unscientific as
the Platonic. There was not yet a "university," to which all
the world might come and learn all the knowledge that was in
existence. Alexandria was the first city to deserve that name.
Athens might have won it, but when Athenian politics were no
more and the field was free for other pursuits, Alexandria had
forestalled her.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONI0S. 
193
118. The political supremacy of Athens was first broken by
the Peloponnesian War (B.C. 431—404). During the next 50
years she was slowly recovering, but in the meantime a more
powerful enemy was growing in the North and the Macedonian
phalanx was in training for the subjugation of Greece. It came
down at last (352 B.C.) under the command of Philip, the father
of Alexander the Great. In the struggle that followed, Athens
once more took the lead; but she was beaten at Chaeronea
(338 B.C.) and never held up her head again. 
Alexander
succeeded his father in 336 B.C. and, after securing his power
over Greece, started on his unparalleled career of conquest. In
thirteen years he scoured the earth from Macedonia to the
Indus, from the Caspian to the cataracts of the Nile, and left
behind him, wherever he went, a monument of his visit in the
shape of a new city, founded on some aptly chosen position, to
be at once a fortress and a centre of commerce1. In this way
Alexandria was founded in B.C. 332, when Alexander turned
from Palestine into Egypt. The site was chosen, the ground-plan
drawn and the mode of colonization directed, by Alexander himself,
but the building of the city, which was entrusted to Dinocrates,
the architect of the temple of Diana at Ephesus, was not com-
pleted till many years afterwards. The structure, when finished,
was worthy of the site and Alexandria seemed to Ammianus
Marcellinus still, in the 4th century after Christ, "vertex
omnium civitatum," the noblest of all cities. It was divided
into three districts, Greek, Jewish and Egyptian, for Alexander
was above all things cosmopolitan and deliberately attempted,
on many occasions, to break down the barriers of race and
1 Besides Alexandria in Egypt, he 
those regions, show how successfully
founded at least 17 other Alexandrias 
they were opened up to Greek com-
(not to mention other cities) in dif- 
merce and civilization. Alexander's
ferent parts of central Asia. Herat, 
example in this respect was followed by
Candahar and probably also Merv, 
his successors. Ten cities of Antiochia,
attest the excellence of his judgment. 
six of Seleucia, six of Apamea, and six
The abundance of Greek coins which 
of Laodicea were built in a short time
are still current in the bazaars of 
by the kings of Syria: and similarly
Afghanistan and the signs of the in- 
iu Egypt the Ptolemies studded the
fluence of Greek sculpture and archi- 
coasts with cities of Ptolemais, Arsinoe,
tecture which everywhere abound in Berenice.
G. G. M. 
13
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

194 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
creed1. It became at once the meeting-place of all the most
important trade-routes; Greek, Egyptian, Arabian and Indian
produce passed through it and brought with them a motley host
of new settlers. The travels of Alexander had excited through-
out the civilized races a new and burning curiosity to see and
know more of one another and of the world, and the place
where of all others this curiosity could best be satisfied, was
Alexandria.
To the sovereignty of this magnificent city Ptolemy, the son
of Lagus, succeeded on the partition of Alexander's empire
after his death in 322 B.C. Ptolemy was a man who had
caught much of Alexander's own enthusiasm, and it was he who
created the university of Alexandria. The university buildings
stood near the palace and were provided with lecture-rooms,
laboratories, museums, a zoological garden, promenades and other
accommodations, all clustered near the great Library. This
contained in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus (about B.C. 260)
400,000 rolls, representing about 90,000 distinct works, and
there was another library in the Egyptian quarter, containing
about 40,000 works. The collections were afterwards greatly
increased and were always under the care of some distinguished
scholar. So equipped for the pursuit of learning, Alexandria
had yet another advantage, in that she enjoyed under the
Ptolemies for nearly 200 years a profound peace both internal
and external. A short period of conflict followed and then
again the 'majestas Romanae pacis' settled upon her and she
was free to pursue her old callings, of commerce on the one
side, of learning on the other. It is no wonder that to this haven
every student resorted and that to Alexandria we owe whatever
is best in the science of antiquity. Criticism, mathematics,
astronomy, geography, medicine, natural history, jurisprudence
1 E.g. at Susa, in B.O. 325, he him- 
donians in the same phalanx. To the
self married Statira, daughter of Darius, 
cities which he founded he imported
and compelled 100 of his generals and 
colonists of all nations, and after his
10,000 of his soldiers to marry Persian 
death there was found, in his written
wives. At Babylon, in B.C. 323, he. orders to Craterus, a plan for the
corporated 20,000 Persians in his 
wholesale transportation of inhabitants
army and mixed them with Mace- 
from Asia to Europe and vice versa.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
195
were for nearly a thousand years taught in her schools. Other
schools arose elsewhere (notably at Pergamum) on the model of
these, but none were so complete or so long-lived. Almost all
the mathematicians who remain to be mentioned in this history
were professors or had been students in the University of
Alexandria.
119. A distinguished Athenian, Demetrius Phalereus, was
invited to take charge of the Alexandrian Library and it
is probable that Euclid was invited, with him, to open the
mathematical school. That Euclid lived and taught in Alexan-
dria is certain1, but in fact nothing more is known of him save
what Proclus has added to the Eudemian summary, viz. that he
lived in the time of Ptolemy I. and was junior to Plato, senior
to Archimedes and Eratosthenes. The first Ptolemy reigned
B.C. 306—283, and these dates must be taken to determine the
period of Euclid's greatest activity. Proclus2 says he was a
Platonist but adds immediately the obviously untrue state-
ment that the whole aim of the Elements was to show the
construction of the five regular solids, "the Platonic figures." It
is true that the xmth Book concludes with the construction of
these solids, but it is not true that the whole of the preceding
books are designed purely for this purpose. It may, neverthe-
less, be that Euclid was a Platonist, for most of the geometers
who could have taught him, were of that school. All the
other historical notices of Euclid are either trivial or un-
trustworthy or false. Pappus3 says that he was gentle and
amiable to all those who could in the least degree advance
mathematical science, but the context shows that Pappus here
refers not to Euclid's personal conduct but to his criticism
of his predecessors. A little story related by Stobaeus* is
perhaps authentic and is at least ben trovato. " A youth who
had begun to read geometry with Euclid, when he had learnt
the first proposition, inquired 'What do I get by learning these
1 Pappus, VII. 35, p. 678 (Hultsch's 
is not genuine. It is given a propos
ed.). 
of some disparaging remarks on Euclid
2 Ed. Friedlein, p. 68. 
by Apollonius of Perga. See the pre-
3 Ed. Hultsch, vu. 34, pp. 676—678. 
face to his Conies, quoted infra, p. 218.
Hultsch, however, thinks the passage 
4 Floril. iv. p. 259.
13—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

196 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
things?' So Euclid called his slave and said 'Give him three-
pence, since he must make gain out of what he learns.'" These
are almost the only personal details which Greek writers have
preserved, for in truth 'Euclid' soon became with them, as it is
with us, synonymous with 'Elementary Geometry1.' Syrian and
Arabian writers however know a great deal more. They tell us
that Euclid's father was Naucrates, his grandfather Zenarchus:
that he was a Greek who was born in Tyre and lived in
Damascus: that he was much later than Apollonius, whose
Elements he edited: that the name Euclides is derived from two
Greek words, ucli a ' key,' and dis ' geometry,' so that Euclides
means ' key to geometry2.' Much of this information is pure
invention", the rest is founded on the preface to the xivth Book
of the Elements, which was written not by Euclid but by
Hypsicles. In the middle ages some new statements appear, for
Euclid was then always confused with Euclides of Megara4,
a pupil of Socrates who founded a small philosophical school
which Plato greatly disliked. Dismissing these errors, we can
retain only the meagre biography that Euclid was a Greek who
lived and taught at Alexandria about 300 B.C.
120. The fame of Euclid, both in antiquity and in modern
times, has always rested mainly on his Elements (a-ro^eta).
From this work he acquired among Greeks the special title of
1 So Aelian, Hist. Anim. vi. 57, says 
3 The Arabs tried to claim Orien-
that spiders can draw a circle and 
tal origin or education for all the
"need not Euclid" (EikXeiSou Storrai great Greek mathematicians. So Nasir
oiSiv). So an Arabian, Ibn Abbad, 
Eddin, who was born at Tus in Kho-
quoted by Hadji Kalfa, maintained 
rassan, says that Euclid was born there
that Euclid was the name of a book. 
also.
2 Casiri, BiUioth. Arab. i. 339, 
4 E.g. Campano's translation is de-
Abulpharagius, Hist. Dynast, p. 41, 
scribed in the colophon Opus Elemen-
Hadji Kalfa, Lexic. Bibliogr. i. p. 380 
torum Euclidis Megarensis (Venice,
sqq. etc. The Arabian authorities on 
1482). Many more' examples of this
Euclid's life and writings are most care- 
error are collected by Heiberg, pp. 23,
fully collected, discussed and rejected 
24. Diog. Laertius (n. 106) says that
by Heiberg, Litterar. geschichtliche Euclides Megarensis was sometimes
Studien fiber Euklid. Leipzig, 1882, 
said to have been a Sicilian from Gela.
pp. 1—21. This work will hereafter 
Hence arose the very frequent state-
be referred to as 'Heiberg.' Compare 
ment, that Euclid the geometer was a
also Cantor, p. 224, Hankel, p. 383. 
Sicilian.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONITJS.
197
o (7TOJ^6K»T7;?, 'the author of the Elements1,' for he so completely
superseded his predecessors Hippocrates, Leon and Theudius, that
not a trace of their works survives, and so completely satisfied
posterity that, until recent times, no attempt seems ever to
have been made to supersede the Elements as Euclid left them.
His success, moreover, was evidently immediate, for Archimedes
and Apollonius and "all the rest," as Proclus says2, " treat the
Elements as perfectly well known and start from them."
It is needless, in England, to describe this book with
any detail3, or to criticise it. Every schoolboy possesses the
greater part of it and every one, who is likely to read these
pages, is able to recognise both its merits and some at least
of its defects4. The space which is saved by omitting matter
which is so well known, may be better utilised by remarks
which do not find a place in English editions of Euclid.
It should be said then, what the preceding chapter has
1 See for instance, the beginning of
Heron's Definitions, Hultsch's ed. p. 7,
s. 1, and the last section of Marinus'
Pref. to Euclid's Data, printed in
Gregory's ed. of Euclid, pp. 453—459.
More reff. in Heiberg, pp. 29, 30.
2 Ed. Friedlein, p. 71, 18.
3 It may be useful, perhaps, to add
a short statement of the contents of
the xmth Book, which is now seldom
seen. It is composed of 18 propositions.
The first five (attributed to Eudoxus)
relate to lines cut in extreme and mean
ratio. Suppose the whole line a, the
segments 6, c, of which 6 is the greater.
(
<A2 
fa\2
6 + 2; = 5 V 2 / 
a n d
conversely, (prop. 2) if this equation
is assumed, 6 is the greater segment.
Prop. 3, (c+^j =5(|J • ^op. 4,
o2 + c2=362. Prop. 5, If b be added to
a, the line (a + b) is divided in extreme
and mean ratio: b (a + b) = a'. Prop.
6, If a rational line be cut in extreme
and mean ratio, each segment is the
irrational line called iiroToif/j (supra,
p. 81). These props, are then applied
in an investigation chiefly of the re-
lations between the sides of a pentagon,
hexagon and decagon inscribed in the
same circle with one another and with
the diameter (props. 7—11). Prop. 12,
The square of the side of an equi-
lateral triangle inscribed in a circle is
three times the square of the radius.
Then follow five problems, to inscribe
in the same sphere (13) a pyramid, (14)
an octahedron, (15) a cube, (16) an
eicosahedron, (17) a dodecahedron and
to show the relations of their sides to
the diameter. In prop. 18 the sides of
these inscribed figures are compared
together. The reader will here see for
what purpose Book x. is inserted in
the Elements. Book xiv. was added
by Hypsicles, xv. probably by Damas-
cius of Damascus about A. r>. 510.
4 A very neat and comprehensive
criticism is given by Prof, de Morgan
in the article Eucleidei in Smith's
Diet, of Gk. and Rom, Biogr.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

198 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
abundantly proved, that Euclid is certainly not the author of
all the propositions which are contained in the Elements. In
the whole collection there is only one proof (i. 47) which is
directly ascribed to him. Many more, no doubt, are his or
partly his', but his merit, as Proclus (p. 69 of Friedlein's ed.)
expressly says, lies chiefly in the selection and arrangement of
the propositions. The word 'selection' (iicXoyr)) implies that
some matter is omitted and Proclus again (pp. 72—74) ex-
pressly says that much which was not in itself generally useful,
or followed very easily from inserted propositions, was discarded:
e. g. (p. 72, 13) the prop, that the perpendiculars drawn from
the angular points of a triangle to the opposite sides meet in a
point: (p. 74, 18) the construction of an isosceles or scalene
triangle, or propositions on unclassed irrational lines. Hence
not only Archimedes and ApoUonius, but Euclid himself, refer
to and use, as well-known truths, propositions which are not
included, in the Elements at all. Thus, to take only an in-
stance or two, in the Sectio Canonis, prop. 2, Euclid says
" I have learnt that if any series of numbers be in continued
proportion, and the first is a measure of the last, it is also
a measure of all the rest," which is not stated in the Elements.
In the de Divisionibus, prop. 232, he cites the fact that if
a : b > c : d, then a — b : b > c — d : d. In the Data, prop. 67,
(76 of Simson's ed.) Euclid uses a proposition that, if in an
isosceles triangle a straight line be drawn from the vertex
to the base, then the square of one of the equal sides is equal to
the square of the straight line so drawn + the rectangle under,
the segments of the base3. (Simson adds a lemma to prove this.)
Evidence of this kind, which shows that Euclid used his dis-
cretion in rejecting available matter, which was unquestionably
useful for some purposes, shows also that he had a definite
1 Proclus, at the end of the Eu- 
a :b < c : d, which Archimedes also
demian summary, says that Euclid 
uses. Sph. et Cyl. n. 9, ed. Torelli, p.
brought to irrefragable proof propo- 
186. 12.
sitions which had been less strictly 
3 For many other examples, see
proved by his predecessors (rd ,uaXa- 
Heiberg, pp. 15, 31, 32, 53, n. and reff.
Ktirepov deiKvifieva TOIS Zpirpoadev). 
there given.
2 So in prop. 22 if ad < he, then
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONITJS. 
199
design in the composition of the Elements. 
We may therefore,
perhaps, attribute to his deliberate choice all the characteristics
of the book. With Euclid the word o-Tot%eta * no longer means
"easiest" or "preliminary" propositions in geometry, but means
the whole of geometry, exclusive of certain subjects (the
geometry of conies and other higher curves), treated by one
method (that of synthesis) only. To him also perhaps may be
attributed that orderly method of proof by the regular stages of
general enunciation (jn-poTaais), particular statement (l/e0e<u?),
construction {KaraaKevrj), proof (air6het^i<i), conclusion (avfnri-
pacr/Aa) and the addition of the final Q. B. D. (ovrep eSei Beifjat.)
or Q. E. F. (oirep eSei Troirjcrai)2. At any rate, Autolycus, just
before Euclid, knows only 7rporaai<! and aTrdSetft?, Archimedes,
just after, often dispenses with Trporao-is or eK0eai<ia. The
design of the whole book, viz. to proceed from a few definitions
and axioms, by sure steps which are always of precisely the same
kind, to the furthest limits of the subject, is certainly Euclid's,
and the pattern of each particular proof is of a piece with
the pattern of the whole book4.
121. 
Secondly, some remarks will not be out of place
on the text of Euclid as we have it. 
Theon of Alexandria, the
1 Etymologieally, aroix^ov means any 
and that large portions of Euclid (e.g.
one of a series (crrofxos), one thing of a 
Book v.) are attributed to Eudoxus
numberof similarthingsplaoedinarow. 
and other predecessors.
Hence it comes to mean the elements 
4 A few of Euclid's Greek terms may
of which composite things are com- 
be here added from the definitions
pounded, e.g. the single sounds which 
(o/iw). fftifieTov = a point: evdela ypan/xr)
go to make a word or the parts of 
= straight line: £m<pdvei.a — superficies:
speech (Arist. Poet. 20, 1 & 2), or 
iMxe5os=plane: yornla = angle: eidv-
the four elements of which the uni- 
ypa/i/j.os=rectilineal: <5/>&5s=right: K&6-
verse was supposed to be made. With 
eros = perpendicular: a/J.p\i%=obtuse:
Euclid the etymological meaning seems 
<5£ws = acute: crxwa—figure: Tepuptpaa
to be uppermost. 
He calls his book 
= circumference. 
There is no word
r i <rroixe?a because it is a connected 
for radius, which is called q be TOS
whole and each proposition leads to 
nivrpov (ypapb/nfl. Terpiyavov = square:
another. 
h-epo/j.tiicrjs = oblong: 
iK^dWureai — to
2 Proclus, pp. 203, 210. 
be produced: iyypa<t>ea9ai=to be in-
s Bretschneider (p. 21), Cantor (pp. 
scribed: vepiypaipeudat = to be circum-
236, 237) and Heiberg (pp. 35, 36) 
scribed: S/Koia<rxij,t«u-a = similarfigures:
deny that Euclid invented this form 
ivnir(ivovS6Ta=reciprocals: 
aKpov KO.1
of proof, on the ground that Proclus 
niaov \byov TeT/«J<r0a( = to be cut in
does not expressly attribute it to him, 
extreme and mean ratio.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

200 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
father of Hypatia, says, in his commentary on the Almagest
(ed. Halma, I. p. 201), " that the sectors of equal circles are to
one another as the angles which they span (e<f>* cov /SeyS^/ca-
aip) has been proved by me (flfuv) in my edition of the Elements
at the end of Book vi." (vi. 33, pt. 2). From this it is evident
that Theon edited the Elements, and in fact all the MSS. which
first came to light are entitled ' after Theon's edition' or ' after
Theon's lectures' (a,7rd crvpova-iwv T&V ©eiwo?)1. For this reason,
on the one hand most commentators of the 16th century
supposed that Euclid had left only the enunciations but Theon
added the- proofs2, and, at a still later time, when this notion
was exploded, other commentators, especially Robert Simson8,
attributed to Theon all the defects which they could not fail to
perceive in the Elements as they knew them. But at the
beginning of this century, among various other MSS. which
Napoleon sent to Paris from the Vatican library and which were
restored after the peace in 1815, there was found one (Vat. 190)
of the 10th century, in which the second part of Euclid vi. 33
was written not with the text but in the margin. Many other
variations from the received text were also perceived in it
(e.g. the useless definition of compound ratio, vi. def. 5,
was omitted4), and from these facts F. Peyrard, who printed
it (Paris, 1814—1818), concluded that he had here a copy
of Euclid anterior to Theon's recension. Nevertheless the
variations between this MS. and the others, which give Theon's
1 E.g. for the first title Cod. Flor. 
3 See the conclusion of his notes.
Laur. XXVIII. 3 of the 10th or 11th 
"From the preceding notes, it is suf-
century, for the second Laur. xxvm. 1 ficiently evident how much the Ele-
of the 13th century. More in Heiberg, 
ments of Euclid, who was a most
p. 174. 
accurate geometer, have been vitiated
2 Heiberg, p. 175, gives a great many 
and mutilated by ignorant editors," etc.
instances: e.g. Xylander (Holtzmann) 
4 Simson had, on his own authority,
in his German translation (Basil, 1562) 
rejected it. See his note to vi. 23. It
warns the reader that the demonstra- 
does not occur, nor does vi. 33, pt. 2,
tions were added 'nit von jme dem 
in Campano's translation (Venice, 1482)
Euclid selbs' but by other learned men, 
from the Arabic, but though Campano's
Theon, Hypsicles, Campano etc. For 
Arabic original was not the Theonic
the contrary opinion see the quotations 
text, it is not a close enough version of
from Sir Henry Savile in the Preface 
Euclid to be useful for critical pur-
to Gregory's Euclid (1703). 
poses. Heiberg, p. 178.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
201
text, are not at all important and show that Theon, in the
main, confined himself to trifling verbal alterations.
It appears, however, from the citations contained in Proclus'
commentary on Eucl. i. that Proclus, though he did not use the
Theoniq text, did not use the Vatican either or, if he did, was
sometimes dissatisfied with it: and it appears also, from
quotations in other authors, that the text of Euclid had for
many centuries been subject to criticism1. This criticism, it is
true, was, for the most part, of a verbal kind, but some real dis-
cussion seems to have taken place over the definitions (opot),
postulates (alTij/AaTa), and axioms (KOIVCU hivoiav, 'common
notions'2) to Book i. Thus in our MSS. the definition now
printed as ill. def. 6 (segment of a circle) is appended to the def. I.
18, but Proclus did not have it in that place3. This is not an
important matter, and, in fact, Heron, who lived about 100 B. c,
quotes in his 'Definitions' all the definitions of Euclid, save the
arithmetical, in practically the same form, though not in
the same order, as that in which we now have them*. But the
postulates and axioms were the subject of more serious contro-
versy. Our editions have three postulates and twelve axioms,
of which the last three are 10. Two straight lines cannot
enclose a space: 11. All right angles are equal: 12. If a
straight line meet two straight lines, so as to make the two
interior angles on the same side of it together less than two
right angles, these straight lines will meet if produced on that
side. Of these three, the first (Ax. 10) appears in many
ancient MSS. as Ax. 12, but in the Vatican as Postulate 6°.
Proclus (p. 184, 8), however, who omits it altogether, says that
Geminus (dr. 60 B.C.) would reject it from the Axioms, as
a proposition requiring proof, and himself (p. 239) gives a
1 Alexander Aphrod. in Arist. Anal. 
(e.g. p. 193).
Prior. (Venice, 1530) 87. a, quotes as 
s See Proclus, p. 158. The definition
Euclid x. 4, the proposition which is 
is quoted in Heron (ed. Hultsch), Deff.
now Euclid x. 5: andEutociusin.4poZ- 
no. 33, but, curiously enough, Heron's
lonii Conic, p. 44, quotes as Eucl. in. 15 
no. 31 is Eucl. i. 18 and his no. 34 is
the prop, which is now Eucl. in. 16. 
Eucl. in. 8, so that no inference can
Both these cases may be mere slips. 
be founded on this arrangement.
3 Euclid does not use the name 
4 Heiberg, pp. 186—192.
' axioms,' atjubfiara, which Proclus has 
6 Heiberg, p. 182, nn.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

202 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
proof in his commentary on I. 41. The last two (Axx. 11, 12)
are given by Proclus as Postulates 4, 5, and so also in the
Vatican MS. and the older MSS. of the Theonic recension.
But as to Post. 4 (Ax. 11), Proclus says (p. 188, 2) that
Geminus wished to take it from the postulates and add it
to the axioms, and as to Post. 5 (Ax. 12), he says (p. 191, 21)
that it ought to be struck out of the postulates and proved as a
theorem, like its converse, and for this opinion he again cites
Geminus as an authority2. With regard to Axioms 1—9,
Proclus says (p. 196, 15) that Heron wanted to admit only the
first three, and in fact Martianus Capella in the 4th century
(Nupt. VI. 723) quotes only these three as 'communes animi
conceptiones.' Proclus himself quotes only five (viz. 1, 2, 3, 9,8,
in this order), says (p. 197, 6) that Pappus added Axx. 4, 5,
though not in their present form, and himself expressly rejects
Axx. 6 and 7 (p. 196, 25), which stand in the Vatican and are
therefore older than Theon. The evidence, therefore, on the
whole, shows that Euclid originally wrote five postulates, of
which the fourth and fifth were those which are now printed as
Axx. 11 and 12, and perhaps four axioms, of which the first
three were the present Axx. 1—3, and the fourth was the
present Ax. 10. The number of the postulates is clearly
attested by Geminus, Proclus and the oldest MSS.: but of the
axioms we can only say, with certainty, that Nos. 4 and 5 are
due to Pappus and 11 and 12 are transferred from the postulates.
But though some reasonable doubt remains as to the
axioms, there is none at all as to the proofs of the propositions.
These are very seldom mentioned by ancient writers with
an exact reference to the number of the proposition nor are
whole proofs ever quoted, but there is no trace of any contro-
versy as to any Euclidean proof: the extracts of Proclus show
that he had Book I. almost word for word as it stands now, and
the Vatican MS. agrees, in all but trifling details, with the
1 Nevertheless, p. 193, 22 he rejects 
V\T}S).
it from the axioms as unnecessary, on 
2 Ptolemy (in Proclus, pp. 362—368)
the ground that it merely describes ' a 
attempted to prove it as theorem. See
characteristic of the subject-matter of 
post.
geometry' (tdid e<m rijs yeoijj.erpiKijs
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLQNIUS. 
203
copies of Theon's recension. From this it is evident that the
defects of Euclid are of his own making and not, as Simson
would have it, the fault of bungling editors.
122. Lastly, it will perhaps be interesting to show what
have been the fortunes of Euclid's Elements and how they have
come into the possession of English schoolboys and been made
the staple of our mathematical education1. In Alexandria this
book occupied the same place as with us, and Theon's edition of
it was made, nearly 700 years after Euclid, for the benefit of
the students who attended the editor's lectures. It does not,
however, seem to have been at all known in Italy, for Boethius,
who (about A. D. 500) wrote a Latin geometry, contents himself
with giving merely the enunciations of Book I. and of some
propositions in Books in. and IV. of Euclid and adding at the
end, as a stimulus to the mind, the whole proofs of the first
three propositions of Book I. He then proceeds (in Book n.) to
the calculation of areas etc. of given dimensions, the practical
geometry for which alone the Romans had any desire. Euclid
was the Greek text-book and was confined to Greek schools, or
to those which were founded on the model of Alexandria, such
as the Syrian schools of Antioch and Emesa and Damascus, and
in particular, the school of Nestorian Christians at Edessa.
These latter, after the terrible sack and ruin of Alexandria
in 640, became the chief repositories in the East of all Greek
learning. To them belonged the chief physicians of that
time, who were invited to Bagdad to attend upon the
Abbasid Caliphs2. The Arabs did not fail to remark that
these Jewish and Christian doctors relied upon the writings
1 Most of the facts given in this 
Be Auctorum Graec. Versionibus Arab.
section are taken from various chapters 
Syr. et Pers. Leipzig, 1842. Cantor
of Hankel, pp. 231—237 (on Arabic 
has a more recent authority, Kremer,
translations): pp. 307-—317 (Gerbert 
Kulturgesch. des Orients unter den
and his predecessors): pp. 334—348 
Chalifen (Vienna, 1877). English lite-
translations from the Arabic, etc.): 
rature is ridiculously deficient in such
pp. 354—359 (Mathematics in foreign 
monographs.
Universities). I have added some tri- 
2 It is said that the Arabs, when
fling details from Cantor, whose Vor- 
they gave up the nomad life and settled
lesungen Vol. i. only go as far as the 
in Bagdad, became subject to various
year 1200. Hankel's account of the 
disorders, which their native physicians
Arabs is taken chiefly from Wenrich, 
were unable to cure.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

204 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
of Hippocrates, Aristotle and Galen, and the medical books
of these three Greeks were therefore translated into Arabic from
the Syriac in the time of Harun al Raschid (786—809). An
intense interest in Greek science of every kind was thus aroused,
and in a few years translations of all the principal mathematical
books of Alexandria were secured. The Caliph Al Mamun1
(813—833) was especially zealous in this cause. He obtained
from the Byzantine empire, through his ambassadors, copies of
the Greek MSS. and established in Bagdad a college of Syrian
Christians who were nominally his physicians but were chiefly
engaged in translating the Greek books into Arabic. A little
earlier than this, in the time of Al Mansur (754—775), the
Arabian commerce with India had brought to the knowledge of
Bagdad the Siddhanta or 'System' of Brahmagupta2. This also
was translated and thus the Arabs acquired the Indian numeri-
cal symbols. The interest of Al Mamun in foreign science
was more than rivalled by his successors. The most famous of
the translators was one Honein ibn Ishak, a Syrian physician,
who was acquainted with both Greek and Arabic. He was
appointed, by the Caliph Mutawakkil (847—861), president of
the college of translators some of whom were busy in rendering
Greek books into Syriac, the rest in rendering the Syriac
into Arabic. Honein and his son, Ishak ibn Honein, revised
the final Arabic translations, but as they were both ill-versed in
mathematics, Tabit ibn Korra (836—901), another Syrian,
edited their texts with the knowledge of a competent mathe-
matician. It was in this way that the works of Euclid, Archi-
medes, Apollonius, Theodosius, Ptolemy and other Greeks re-
ceived a new lease of life among a strange people3. Ptolemy
seems to have been the first of these to be translated. A
portion of the Elements of Euclid was translated in the time of
1 See Gibbon's Chapter LII. 
an advanced knowledge of his subject.
2 Cantor, pp. 597, 598. 
Hankel (p. 263) suggests that the Dio-
8 Diophantus was not translated till 
phantine analysis had become tradi-
the end of the 10th century (by Abul 
tional in the Syrian schools. Cantor
Wefa). Arabian algebra however be- 
(pp. 619, 620) leaves it an open ques-
gins mS20\iithtTcieAlgebrw'alMuka- 
tion whence Mohammed obtained his
bala of Mohammed ibn Musa Alchwar- 
Algebra,
izmi, who cites no authorities but has
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOIXONIUS. 
205
Harun al Raschid: Al Mamun ordered another and a complete
translation, Honein or his son Ishak prepared a third, Tabit ibn
Korra published the final redaction.
But Euclid did not come into Europe from Bagdad. Some
fifty years before the Abbasid Caliphs settled in that city, the
Arabs had penetrated into Spain and taken possession of the
ancient city of Cordova. Here, in 747, the Emir Abdarrahman
founded a separate kingdom and the Arabs of Spain were
thenceforth wholly dissociated from their kinsmen in the East.
Both nations had the same intellectual tastes: each was as
enthusiastic as the other for medicine, mathematics and astro-
nomy, but each pursued its studies in its own way and with
some considerable jealousy of the other. Nevertheless, by some
means which has not been explained1, the Arabs of Spain
acquired the same books which were used in Bagdad and had
also their Indian numerals, their Ptolemy, Euclid and Aristotle.
In the meantime, among the Christians of the West, learning
was at its lowest ebb. Their mathematical interest was con-
fined, almost entirely to arithmetic and, as to geometry, "we
find in the whole literature of that time hardly the slightest
sign that any one had gone further in this department of the
Quadrivium than the definitions of a triangle, square, circle or of
a pyramid or cone, as Martianus Capella and Isidor (Hispalensis,
bishop of Seville in 636) left them2." The study was revived
by the great Gerbert, a native of Auvergne, born in the first
half of the 10th century. He, after a visit to Barcelona, where
perhaps he acquired somehow an inkling of the Arabic sciences3,
became the teacher of the Cathedral school at Rheims and
acquired the greatest renown by his mathematical ability. He
was, after many other promotions, elected Pope in 1003, under
the name of Sylvester II. Gerbert, while abbot of Bobbio on
the Trebbia (about 980), came across the Codex Arcerius con-
1 Possibly Jewish pedlars of books 
and the common statement that he
had something to do with it. 
went to Cordova is for many reasons
1 Hankel, pp. 307, 311, 312. 
Com- 
incredible. 
Nevertheless, it was he
pare Hallam, Middle Ages, in. chap. 
who introduced the Arabic numerals
ix. pt. 2, p. 420 (12th ed.). 
(as apices) into the Western schools.
3 Gerbert certainly knew no Arabic, 
Hankel, pp. 327,328, supra, pp. 37—39.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

206 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
taining the works of the old Roman surveyors (gromatici)1* He
studied them with avidity and founded on them his own
Geometry. A little later, he found at Mantua a copy of the
Geometry of Boethius. In this way the study of practical
geometry was renewed and some small portions of Euclid
became the common property of the Christian schools. But it
was not for 100 years yet that men began to seek the Arabic
text-books. The Moorish Universities of Cordova and Seville
and Granada were dangerous resorts for Christians and, though
it was known that all manner of learning was to be had there,
no student ventured to steal it. An Englishman was the first,
or one of the first two, to undertake the enterprise. In 1120,
Adelha'rd of Bath obtained in Spain a copy of Euclid's Elements
and translated them into Latin. Translations from the Arabic
of other Greek works, especially those of Aristotle, soon followed2.
Abotxt 1186 Gherardo of Cremona made another translation
of the Elements and, again in 1260, Giovanni Campano repro-
duced Adelhard's translation under his own name3 and ob-
tained with it a wide celebrity. The fruit of these translations
soon followed. In 1220, Leonardo of Pisa, a mathematician of
great power and originality, published his Practica Geometriae,
which though it deals with the calculation of areas and numeri-
cal ratios of spaces, is founded on Euclid and Archimedes and
Ptolemy4, and contains some trigonometry and conies. A little
later Roger Bacon (1214—1294) was urging the claims of
experimental science as taught by Aristotle. But the greatest
result of the inflow of Arabian learning was the organisation of
study in Universities. At Paris5, indeed, the study of geometry
1 See Cantor, pp. 467, 734, 738—743. 
seem to have been given in Paris all
a The Jews, who'^were tolerated by 
through the 11th century and even
both Arabs and Christians, assisted 
earlier. But it was Abelard (1079—
largely in this movement. See Jour- 
1142) who made the University of
dain, Rech. sur Us Trad. Lat. d'Aris- 
Paris famous. Similarly, all the other
tote. 
Universities seem to have been at an
3 Prof, de Morgan first suspected 
early time centres of instruction. 
But
this. For a full bibliography of Euclid 
it is in the 13th and 14th centuries
see his art. Eucleides in Smith's Die. 
that they first receive charters of in-
of Gr. and Rom. Biogr. 
corporation. Paris received its charter
4 Hankel, pp. 344—346. 
in 1200. 
See Hallam supra cit. pp.
5 Unofficial lectures of some kind 
420—427.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
207
was neglected and Aristotle's logic was the favourite subject.
But at the reformation of the University in 1336 a rule was in-
troduced that no student should take a degree without attend-
ing lectures in mathematics and from the preface to a commen-
tary on the first six Books of Euclid, dated 1536, it appears that
a candidate for the degree of M.A. was then required to take
an oath that he had attended lectures on the said books. In
Leipzig (founded 1389), the daughter of Prague, a similar rule
was made, but it is doubted whether the rule was enforced,
since in the lists of lectures for the years 1437, 1438, none
on Euclid are mentioned1. But in Prague itself (founded 1350)
mathematics were more regarded. Candidates for the Baccalau-
reat were required to take up the treatise of the Globe by
Johannes de Sacroboseo (i.e. of Holy wood in Yorkshire) and, for
the Master's degree, the first six Books of Euclid and many
subjects of applied mathematics were required. At Oxford, in
the middle of the 15th century, the first two books of Euclid
were read2 and no doubt the Cambridge curriculum was similar.
It will be seen, however, that though the study of geometry was
maintained (indeed it was part of the ancient Quadrivium) it was
maintained only in a half-hearted manner and did not produce
a tithe of the results which might have been expected from the
brilliant commencement of Leonardo of Pisa. It was, in fact,
driven out of the field by Aristotelian logic and the stupid
subtleties on which that logic was employed by the schoolmen.
Another Renaissance was still wanted. 
This came after
Constantinople was taken by the Turks in 1453 and a crowd of
Greeks fled into Italy bringing with them precious manuscripts
of Greek literature. About this time also printing was invented
and books became comparatively cheap and common. Cam-
pano's (stolen) translation of Euclid was printed in 1482 by
1 Cologne, founded 1389, was equally 
Quadripartitum, an astrological work
behindhand and so were the Italian 
attributed to Ptolemy. Hankel, p. 357.
Universities of Bologna, Padua and 
s Churton's Life of Smyth, p. 151,
Pisa, where astrology was the favourite 
quoted by Hallam Lit. of Ewr. Pt. i.
subject. As late a3 1598, the professor 
ch. 2, g. 34, n. I have been unable to
of mathematics in Pisa was required to find any statement of the Cambridge
lecture, not on the Almagest, but on the 
course.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

208 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
Ernest Ratdolt at Venice, and many times afterwards. The
Greek text was printed in 1533 by Simon Grynseus at Basle.
Even still it cannot be pretended that Euclid or any other
mathematician occupied anything like the same amount of
attention as the writers of belles lettres. Nevertheless a con-
siderable number of commentaries were produced in the 16th
century and in 1570 an English translation from the Latin
was published (by Henry Billingsley). About the same time
Sir Henry Savile began to give unpaid lectures on the Greek
geometers at Oxford. In 1619, the Savilian professorships were
founded in that University, but it was not till 1663 that
a professorship of mathematics (the Lowndean) was given to
Cambridge1. The 70 years or so, from 1660 to 1730, when
Wallis and Halley were professors at Oxford, Barrow and
Newton at Cambridge, were the period during which the study
of Greek geometry was at its height in England. 
After
Newton's time the whole field of mathematics and natural philo-
sophy was so rapidly enlarged that the Greeks, all except Euclid,
fell into neglect. But as modern learning advanced, so also
it became necessary that boys leaving school for the Universities
should take with them some preliminary knowledge of mathe-
matics and should stay at school longer to acquire this3. For
this purpose Euclid's Elements was especially suited, but it may
be safely guessed that its place among our schoolbooks dates
only from the middle of the last century at the earliest. To
1 Sir Thomas Gresham founded a 
2 This statement an,d the next are
professorship of geometry in London 
made without much authority. I have
in 1596. Briggs, a Cambridge man, 
looked through all manner of biogra-
was the first professor but afterwards 
phies and "memorials" without finding
became the first Savilian professor of 
any useful information on the curricu-
geometry at Oxford. At the latter 
lumof a public school before 1750. The
place, he began lecturing on Eucl. i. 
evidence is abundant that, during the
prop. 9, at which Savile had himself 
last century, the average age of fresh-
left off. The mathematicians of this 
men was gradually increasing. It may
time were more interested in algebra 
be gathered (e.g. from Wordsworth's
than geometry. Lord Herbert of Cher- 
Scholae Academ. ch. vii. and app. iii.)
bury (1581—1648), in his Autobiogra- 
that, during the same time, Euclid was
phy, says that he sees little use in 
gradually passing from the Universities
geometry for gentlemen, though it may 
to the schools. There is obviously
perhaps help them to understand for- 
some connexion between the two facts.
tification. 
When boys stayed longer at school,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
209
this time belong also all the famous editions of Euclid in
England, from Gregory's Greek text (pub. 1703) to Simson's
translation and commentary (pub. 1756) upon which all sub-
sequent editions have been more or less founded. Attempts
have recently been made to depose Euclid from his place in
the English educational system, but they are not likely to be
successful. No modern text-book can acquire an equal prestige
and the advantage to teachers, in knowing that all their pupils
possess and have studied the same rudimentary treatise, is not
lightly to be foregone.
123. The extant works of Euclid comprise, beside the
Elements, books of Data (AeBofieva), Qaivofieva ('appearances of
the heavens'),'O7TTt«a, KaTO7TT/3i«a ('Reflections'), KaraTo/Ar)
Kdvovo? ('Division of the Scale'), a probably spurious Etowywy?)
'Apfioviicr) (' Introduction to Harmony'), and a work De Divisioni-
bus, known only in the Arabic and in a Latin translation from
another Arabic edition.
The Data, the authenticity of which is attested by Pappus1,
consists of 95 propositions (Pappus knew only 90), preceded
now by an explanatory introduction written by Marinus of
Neapolis, a pupil of Proclus, at the end of the 5th century.
The book, which is printed in Simson's Euclid with many
alterations, begins with some definitions declaring the meaning
of the word hehofievov in various cases8: e.g. 1. Spaces, lines
and angles, are said to be given in magnitude when equals
to them can be found: 4. Points, lines and spaces are said
to be given in position, which have always the same situation
[and which are either actually exhibited or can be found,
Simson]: 6. A circle is said to be given in position and in
magnitude when the centre is given in position, the radius
in magnitude. The propositions which follow deal with magni-
they would necessarily begin to learn 
2 Marinus says that Euclid ought to
higher subjects. But why did they stay 
have started with a general definition
longer at school? The answer sug- 
of "given" and, after discussing many
gested in the text is inadequate but is no 
suchhimself, concludes with the opinion
doubt correct. Classical studies at the 
that the best definition is "knowable
Universities are not, and never were, 
and obtainable" (yvwpifiov teal T6pifju>v).
much different from those of schools. 
Gregory, pp. 457, 458.
1 VII. ed. Hultach, pp. 638—640.
G. G. M. 
14
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

210 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
tudes, lines, rectilineal figures and circles, in this order. The
following specimens will sufficiently show their character. Prop.
VIII. (Simson, 9): Magnitudes which have a given ratio to the
same magnitude have also a given ratio to one another. Prop,
xxxil. (35): If a straight line be drawn between two parallel
straight lines given in position, and make given angles with them,
the straight line is given in magnitude. Prop, xxxix. (42):
If each of the sides of a triangle be given in magnitude,
the triangle is given in species. Prop. LII. (56): If a recti-
lineal figure, given in species, be described on a straight line
given in magnitude, the figure is given in magnitude. Prop.
I.XXXIX. (92): If a straight line, given in magnitude, be drawn
within a circle given, in magnitude, it shall cut off a segment
containing a given angle. The word ' given,' it will be seen, is
employed in two significations. It means first 'actually given'
and secondly, 'given by implication,' and the propositions are
all to this effect, that a certain partial description of a certain
magnitude, or of a certain geometrical figure, involves a more
complete description, just as the description of a triangle as
equilateral involves its description as equiangular. The book,
in fact, is a series of easy riders on the Elements. The proof
of the prop. LXXXix. stated above, will serve well enough as a
specimen. By def. 1 the angle is ' given,' if equals to it can be
found. Now let the straight line A C, given in magnitude, be drawn
within the circle ABC given in magnitude. It shall cut off a
segment containing a given angle. Draw
AE, passing through the centre, and join
EG. Then because each of the straight
lines AC, AE is given, their ratio is
given: and the angle ACE is a right
angle, therefore the triangle ACE is
given in species and consequently the
angle AEC is given (i.e. can always be
reproduced). But the Data had a special use in Greek
geometry. They are described by Pappus and Marinus1 as
forming part of the TOTTO<; dvaXvo/xevos. This was the name of
a special department of geometry, "matter prepared for those
1 Marinus in Gregory's Euclid, p. 458.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, AECHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
211
who, after going through the Elements, wish to acquire the
power of solving problems proposed to them and useful for this
purpose only1," a course of practice in analysis. The way in which
the Data were found serviceable in analysis will be seen at once
by reference to the specimen of analysis given above (p. 178)
from Pappus. Analysis begins with a construction which is
assumed to satisfy the proposed conditions. These conditions
being thus converted into given elements of the figure, involve
others which are given by implication in the Euclidean sense,
and these again involve more, until by steps, every one of which
is legitimate, we reach a construction from which a synthesis
is obtainable. The Data are hints upon the most usual steps
in analysis.
The Phaenomena is a book of 18 propositions with a preface.
The authenticity of this also is attested by Pappus2, who gives
some lemmas, or explanatory propositions to it. The preface is
a statement of the considerations which show that the universe
is a sphere, followed by some definitions of technical terms.
Among these bpl^wv, as a substantive, and /j,ea-7)fi^piv6<; KVK\O?,
meridian circle, occur for the first time. The book consists of
geometrical proofs^of propositions which are established by
observation, to the effect chiefly that stars situate in given
positions rise or set together or one after another in a certain
order. It is beyond question founded on the Moving Sphere of
1 Pappus, vn. ed. Hultsoh, p. 634. 
translation of TOTOS &i>a\v6fi.tiios as
In the same place it is said that the 
'locus resolutus,' 'lieu resolu' or 'auf-
T6TOS &va\v6iievos was written entirely 
geloster Ort' is therefore misleading
by Euclid, Apollonius and Aristaeus 
and has led, I believe, to some mis-
the elder. The word T6WOS here does 
conception. See the translation in
not mean locus, hut has its Aristotelian 
Chasles, Les Porismes etc. p. 16.
meaning o f store-house.' So, at the be- 
a vi. (Hultsch), pp. 594—632. The
ginning of Book vi. of Pappus T6TOS of- 
text which Pappus used was not quite
Tpovo/ioviMOios means ' the astronomical 
the same as that of Gregory's edition,
treasury,' consisting of books which 
which has a great many evident inter-
he afterwards discusses. Tiros &pa\vo- 
polations. 
These are discussed by
(iievos means "the treasury of analysis," 
Heiberg (pp. 47—52), who has found at
just as in Aristotle's rhetoric TOJTOI, or 
Vienna a better MS. On the Phae-
KUVOITOVOI are collections of "common- 
nomena see also Delambre, Astr. Anc.
places,"remarksandcriticismstowhich 
i. ch. 3, pp. 48—60.
the rhetorician may always resort. The
14—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

212 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
Autolycus, which is several times referred to, though not by
name1. But it is evident also that Euclid is here quoting some
work on Spherical Geometry, by an unknown author. In
the preface, for instance, he cites casually the fact that if on
a sphere two circles bisect one another, they are both great
circles, and in the proofs he very frequently assumes in his reader
a knowledge of other such theorems2. A comparison of these
with the later Sphaerica of Theodosius shows that both Euclid
and his successor had recourse to the same original work, which
perhaps was written by Eudoxus.
The Optics, as commonly printed8, consists of 61 propositions
preceded by a preface and a list of assumptions (decrei<;). The book
has often been suspected because these assumptions are absurdly
wrong and some of the proofs are, in the present text, slovenly
or defective4. There seems, however, no fair reason for denying
its authenticity, which is attested by Theon in many passages of
his commentary on the Almagest. Pappus, though he does
not name the book, cites some propositions from it just before
he passes to Euclid's Phaenomena*. The preface, which is
obviously not by Euclid, is part of a report of a discourse
on Optics. It begins, for instance, with the words "After
proving the theorems concerning sight, he proceeded to advance
some suggestions, arguing that light is carried in straight lines"
etc. A scholiast has added at the beginning of a Paris MS.6
1 E.g. Prop. 1 of Autolycus is cited 
3 In Gregory's edition with notes by
in Euclid's 5th, Prop. 2 in Euclid's 
Savile. Gregory suspects the book,
4th and 6th, Prop. 10 in Euclid's 2nd. 
Peyrard rejects it altogether. Heiberg
See Gregory's ed. pp. 564, 567—569. 
(pp. 93—129) prints an improved text
Heiberg, pp. 41, 42. 
in 62 props, from a Vienna MS., which
2 A full collection in Heiberg, pp. 
he thinks is genuine.
43—46. The instances are difficult to 
4 Such suspicion is protested against
cite because Euclid does not actually 
by Kepler (.E#p. ad I. Kepler cm.) quoted
statethetheorems,butsays,for instance, 
by Heiberg, p. 90, fromE. Wilde, Optik
in the course of a proof, "since in a 
der Griechen, p. 9 n. On the Optics,
sphere the circles ABC, DEF touch 
see also Delambre, loc. cit.
one another and the great cirole GHK 
5 Pappus vi. p. 568. The proposi-
passes through the poles of one circle 
tions cited are Nos. 35, 36, 37 of Gre-
and the point of contact of both, there- 
gory's ed. See Gregory's preface and
fore GHK passes through the poles of 
Heiberg, pp. 130, 131.
DEF and is perpendicular to it." 
6 Heiberg, p. 139.
(Prop. ii. p. 564.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ABCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
213
the words "the preface is taken from the commentary of Theon,"
and this may well be true, for the preface is quoted by Neme-
sius1 who lived as early as the year 400. It is merely a
number of notes on the Euclidean hypothesis that light pro-
ceeds from the eye and not from the object seen. The contrary
is shown to be absurd by such arguments as these, that, if light
proceeded from the object, then we should not, as we often
do, fail to observe a needle on the floor, and a circle seen edge-
ways would not appear to be a straight line. The assumptions
(fleVet?, positiones, 12 in number) are such as 1. Eays emitted
from the eye are carried in straight lines, distant by an interval
from one another: 2. The figure contained by such rays is
a cone, having its vertex in the eye, its base on the object
seen2: 5. Things seen under a greater angle seem greater:
8. Things seen by the higher rays seem higher, etc. The
propositions, which are proved from these assumptions with
the aid of the Elements and Data, are of the following kind.
I. No object is seen in toto at one time: vi. Parallel intervals
seen from a distance seem of unequal width : xvm—xxi. To
measure a given altitude, depth or longitude (proved by similar
triangles in the manner attributed above, p. 141, to Thales): XL.
The wheels of chariots appear now circular, now elliptical (irape-
cnracrfievoi,) etc. Prop. xxil. is ' If a circle be described in the
same plane as the eye, it will seem to be a straight line.'
The proof is as follows3. Suppose the eye
at A: the circle BZF in the same plane.
The rays AB, AZ, AF proceed from the
eye. Since (by prop. I.) no object is seen
in toto at once, the circumference BZ will
not be seen, but only its extreme points B
and Z, wherefore the circumference BZ will
appear to be a straight line. And similarly
1 Hepl 0u<rews &v9pthrov, ed. Matthaei
VII. p. 179.
2 So also Arist. Probl. xv. 5.
3 Another proof attributed to Pappus
in Gregory's ed. p. 617, but given as
Euclid's in Heiberg's text icy', p. 102,
depends on the assumption that the
line MB, being seen under a greater
angle than MA, appears longer etc.
Aristotle Problem, xv. 5 gives a similar
explanation.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

214 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
the circumference ZI\ Therefore the whole circumference BF
will appear a straight line.
The Gatoptrica is a book of 31 propositions on reflections in
plane, convex and concave mirrors. It begins with assumptions
of the same character as those in the Optics, to which are
added four admitted phaenomena1, the last of which is that a
ring placed in a vase so as to be invisible from a certain
position, may be made visible from the same position by filling
the vase with water. The propositions start with proving that
the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection and go
on to give reasons for such familiar facts as that in a convex
mirror objects seem smaller and, in a concave, are seen upside
down. But though Euclid certainly wrote a Catoptrica, which he
mentions in the Optics (Prop. XX. of Heiberg's text, p. 101, 1.
25), it is in the highest degree improbable that he wrote this
one. The book is not cited by any ancient author. Heron's
Catoptrica is cited for propositions which occur in Euclid and
the explanation of the phenomenon, above mentioned, is ex-
pressly attributed to Archimedes, who suggested that the water
acted as a mirror". Probably Euclid's original work was super-
seded entirely by Archimedes and the extant Gatoptrica is the
work of a later compiler3.
The Sectio Canonis is a work on musical intervals, which is
probably Euclid's, who, according to Proclus (p. 69) and other
commentators wrote an Elements of Music, but the Introductio
Harmonica is mainly a collection of musical terms, not agreeing
with the Sectio Canonis, and Is generally rejected4. It remains
only to mention the book Trepl Siaipeaecov, which is ascribed to
Euclid by Proclus (pp. 69, 144). We have this in a Latin
translation {Be Divisionibus) made by John Dee, about 1563,
from an incomplete Arabic copy attributed to Mohammed
Bagdadinus. Woepcke subsequently found another and pro-
1 The first three are false. So also 
2 Olympiodorus in Arist. Meteorol.
are a great many propositions. The 
n. p. 94 (ed. Ideler). Euclid gives no
most curious slip is that Prop. 5 proves 
explanation at all and does not allude
the contrary of Prop. 6. For a long 
further to the phenomenon.
list of errors and inconsistencies see 
3 Heiberg, pp. 148—152.
Gregory's Prefatio. 
* Heiberg, pp. 52—55.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONItTS. 
215
bably complete Arabic text1, containing some propositions
on the division of the circle, which, Proclus says, Euclid's book
contained but which are missing from Dee's translation. The
work is a collection of problems on the division of plane figures
into parts which have to one another a given ratio: e.g. Dee's
7th prop, is 'By a line drawn from an angle of a given tra-
pezium, to divide the trapezium in a given ratio': Woepcke's
28th is ' To divide into two equal parts a given figure bounded
by an arc of a circle and by two straight lines containing
a given angle.' This, like the Data, may be regarded as a
collection of riders on the Elements2.
124. Beside these extant works, Euclid wrote others which
are lost. One of these bore the title trepl ifrevSapimv, on
Fallacies, but nothing is known of it save from a notice of
Proclus3, who, in his usual wordy manner, explains that it con-
sisted of exercises (apparently geometrical) in the detection
of fallacies. The fact that Euclid wrote such a book renders it
more than ever probable that his Elements was composed solely
for educational purposes and that Euclid is responsible for the
whole style and arrangement of the latter work. Beside the
Fallacies, we hear also of a treatise by Euclid on ToVot wpos
eTn<f>avela or Loci on a Surface in two books. The meaning
of this title has occasioned some controversy. Prof, de Morgan
says frankly that he does not understand it and it is evident
1 Journ. Asiatique, 1851, p. 233 sqq. 
same medium (air or water), move the
See Ofterdinger, Beitrage zur Wieder- same distance." The 7th is "Bodies
herstellung etc. tiber die Theilung der 
are of the same kind which are equal
Figuren, Ulm, 1853. Heiberg, pp. 13— 
in magnitude. and in power." The
16, 36—38. Cantor, pp. 247, 248. 
book, if complete, would evidently fur-
2 There is appended to Gregory's 
nish some interesting ideas on specifio
Euclid a Latin fragment of one page 
gravity, but the language, especially
only entitled De levi et ponderoso, of 
the use of potentia [Swa/us), is not
the origin of which nothing is known. 
Euclid's or of Euclid's time, and is
It was printed in the Basle translation 
indeed hardly in the Greek style,
of 1537, but the publisher Hervagius 
Heiberg, pp. 9—11.
says only that somebody brought it to 
3 p. 70 (ed. Friedlein). Heiberg, p.
him during the progress of the work. 
38 n. suggests that there may be a
It consists of nine definitions and five ref. to this book in the Schol. to Theaet.
propositions. 
The 4th definition is 
191 B (vi. p. 248 of Hermann's ed.)
"Bodies are equal in power (potentia) 
and in Alex. Aphr. in Arist. Soph. El.
which, in the same time and in the 
fol. 25 b (Venet. 1520).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

216 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONITJS.
that Eutocius was in the same predicament, for he says, after
describing other loci well enough, that the roirov 7rpo<; eirifynveiq
derived their name ' from the peculiarity of them' {drrb TJ?9 irepl
auroi)? ISiorrJTO';) and so leaves them1. 
Prof. Chasles supposes
that the book contained propositions on "surfaces of the second
degree, of revolution, and sections therein made by a plane":
and he refers to the facts that Archimedes, at the end of Prop.
XII. of his Conoids and Spheroids, says that certain propositions
on sections of conoids <f>avepat ivri (i.e. "are clear," not "are
well known" as Chasles takes it) and that the four lemmas
which Pappus gives on this book of Euclid2 relate to conic
sections. Heiberg, however, by a very elaborate analysis of all
the passages in which TQTZOI of various kinds are described3,
comes to the conclusion that TOTTOI 7rpo? i-iri<f>avela means
simply "loci which are surfaces," and that Euclid's treatise dealt
chiefly with the curved surfaces of the cylinder and the cone.
That such surfaces were regarded as loci before Euclid's time is
evident from Archytas' solution of the duplication problem
cited above p. 1824.
Pappus6 attributes to Euclid also a treatise on Conic
Sections (iccoviicd) in four books, which formed the foundation of
the first four books of Apollonius' work on the same subject.
The former will more properly be considered when we come to
speak of the latter, but it may be mentioned here that the
names ellipse, parabola and hyperbola or the mode of producing
the conic sections which these names imply cannot have been
Euclid's, for not only are they expressly attributed to Apollonius,
but Euclid, in the preface to the Phaenomena", uses the old
1 Prof, de Morgan in Smith's Die. 
3 pp. 79—83.
Eutocius in Apollon. Conic. Halley's 
4 Heiberg refers also to Pappus, pp.
ed. pp. 10—12. 
258. 23, 260. 13, 262. 14.
8 Pappus, VII. prop. 235 sqq. (Hultsch, 
6 vn. p. 672 (Hultseh).
pp. 1004 sqq.). Chasles, Aperqu, Kote, 
6 Gregory's ed. p. 561. Here Euclid
II. pp. 273, 274. Montuola (i. p. 172) 
says that "any cone or cylinder, out
says that T6VOI irpbs imftwelq. were 
by a plane which is not parallel to" its
surfaces, and subsequently (p. 215) 
base, exhibits that section of an acute-
that they were lines of double curva- 
angled cone, which is like a shield "
ture described on curved surfaces, such 
($vpeos).
as a helix on a cylinder.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
217
expression 'section of an acute-angled cone' for the ellipse.
The work of Euclid, therefore, must have been recast by
Apollonius.
Lastly, a treatise on Porisms (Tropia/iara) in three books
is attributed to Euclid by Pappus1, and this has for more
than two centuries provoked a lively controversy2, partly
because the definitions of ' Porisms' given by Pappus are very
obscure and partly also because Pappus treats so largely of
Euclid's book and gives so many lemmas to it that it has
seemed possible, to many modern geometers, to restore the
entire work. Of these the most recent, as well as the most
successful, is the late Professor M. Chasles. The reconstruction
of the book depends entirely upon a long passage of Pappus and
a short one of Proclus, the effect of which is as follows. Proclus3
says that iropicrfia is used, in geometry, in two senses, viz. a
'corollary,' for which it is the ordinary word, and also as the
name of a proposition which is neither a theorem nor a problem,
but partakes of the nature of both. Its aim is not, like a
theorem, to describe a new characteristic nor, like a problem,
to effect a construction or alter a given construction, but to
find and bring to view (vir o^jnv dyayeiv) a thing which
necessarily coexists with given numbers or a given construction,
as, to find the centre of a given circle or to find the G. c. M. of
two given numbers4. With this definition agrees also the
ordinary use of the words Tropi^eadcu (which means ' to find'
but not' to construct,' e.g. in Heron to find the length of a line)
and iropifiov (which is synonymous with BeBo/nevov, and means
'discoverable')5. But the aim of the porism is not quite the
same as that of a proposition in the Data. The latter is to
the former as a theorem to a problem. A datum alleges, for
1 VII. p. 648 (Hultsoh). 
in. pp; 274 sqq.
2 A very full bibliography is given 
3 pp. 301—2 of Friedlein's ed.; cf.
by Heiberg, pp. 56, 57. It is necessary 
p. 212.
only to mention Fermat, 1655. 
Sim- 
4 The props, of the Elements in.
son (posthumously published) 1776. 
25, vi. 11, 12, 13, are'porisms'in this
Chasles, Les trois livres de Porismes, 
sense. These ought to conclude with
Paris, 1860. 
This also contains a 
oirep £$ei eipeiv, quod erat inveniendum.
bibliography pp. 8 and 9. 
See also 
6 See Heiberg, pp. 59, 60 and the
Chasles, Apergu, pp. 12^-14, and Note 
note from Marinus supra, p. 209 M.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

218 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
instance, that with a segment of a circle the angle in it is
given, a corresponding porism is to find the ratio of the angle
to a right angle. But though porisms occur in the Elements,
they were used chiefly in higher geometry and Pappus says that
Euclid's Porismata formed part of the collection Towo? avaXvo-
fi€vo<;, like the Data. He proceeds then1 to discuss the nature
of porisms, which he first defines, like Proclus, as intermediate
between a problem and theorem, subsequently as "a proposition
for the purpose of finding the thing proposed," afterwards again
(but this, he asserts, is only a partial definition) as "that which
is inferior by hypothesis to a local theorem" (rd Xelirov viroOeaei
rcnrtKQv 0ea>p^fj,aro<;)a of which ol TOTTOI, are the commonest
examples. He then describes with some fulness two types of
porisms contained in Euclid's book, but gives 28 more types
with horrible brevity, e. g. in the first book,' This line is given
in position,' in the third book,' The sum of these two straight
lines has a given ratio to a straight line drawn from this point
to a given point*.' No figures are appended. The whole work
contained, in three books, 171 propositions, to which Pappus sup-
plies 38 lemmas. Upon these statements of Pappus, which Halley
and Prof, de Morgan found unintelligible, Simson framed a defini-
tion of a porism as " a proposition in which it is to be proved
that one or several things is or are given which (like any one of
an infinite number of things not given but having the same rela-
tion to the things which are given) has or have a certain property,
described in the proposition4." Chasles, who approves of this
1 VII. p. 648. 18 sqq. 
their number, were collected in a sepa-
s The translation in the text is from 
rate work (KCXW/MC/X^COC TWV iropia/jA-
Chasles. It seems, on authority, to be 
TWV TJSpourTai).
right. Heiberg explains it as "a local 
3 See Nos. v. and xx. The whole
theorem with incomplete hypothesis." 
list is given in Hultsch, pp. 654 sqq.
Whatever it may mean, it clearly is only 
Heiberg, pp. 73—77. The Greek of xx,
intended to describe a special class of 
is Sri \6yos irvvan^oripov wpis TWO. 6.irb
porisms, used by writers later than 
rovSe ?ws SoBivros. Halley, Simson and
Euclid who, without attempting to find Heiberg interpret this dark saying as
the thing proposed, merely declared 
above: Chasles and Hultsch translate
that It was possible to do so (e.g. 
"the sum of these two rectangles has a
Archimedes, De Spir. propp. 5—9, 
given ratio to the segment lying between
cited by Heiberg, pp. 68, 69). Pappus 
this point and a given point."
then adds that o! roirot belonged to 
4 De Porismatibus, p. 347, quoted by
this class of porisms but, owing to 
Chasles, Le Livre de Porismes, p. 27.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
219
definition, then proceeds to show the similarity between porisms
and the propositions called TOTTOI, for a TWO? " is a proposition
in which it is declared that certain points subject to the same
known law are on a line of which the nature is enunciated
and of which it remains to find the magnitude and the position.
Example: two points being given, as also a ratio, the locus of a
point, the distances of which from the two given points are in
the given ratio, is the circumference of a circle given both in
magnitude and in position1." Hence, also, a connexion exists
between the two meanings of 'porisma,' for every porism may
be put as the corollary of a local theorem2 and the close
connexion between the porism and the datum is equally
obvious3. Further, Chasles suggests a new definition of porism,
which shall combine all the older definitions. Porisms, according
to him, are incomplete theorems, " expressing certain relations
between things variable according to a common law: relations
indicated in the enunciation of the porism but requiring to be
completed by the determination of the magnitude and the
position of certain things which are the consequence of the
hypothesis and which would be determined in the enunciation
of a theorem properly so-called." In order to exhibit the
similarity of porisms with the most usual propositions of modern
geometry, Chasles gives the following example (among others):
" If in the diameter of a circle there be taken two points which
divide it harmonically, the ratio of the distances between these
two points and any point on the circumference will be constant."
Substitute here " given " for '"constant" and this proposition is
a porism. Find the ratio and include it in the enunciation,
and you have a complete theorem.
Upon the preliminary discourse of Chasles, from which these
remarks are taken, Heiberg (pp. 56—79) has many criticisms,
supported by much learning, to offer, but his observations are
Playfair (in Trans, of B. S. of Edin- 
Chasles, pp. 31, 32, objects to this.
burgh, 1792), improving on Simson, 
1 Chasles, Porismes, pp. 33—36.
suggested a def. of a porism as " a pro- 
a Ibid. pp. 36—38.
position affirming the possibility of 
3 Ibid. pp. 42, 43. The porisms
finding such conditions as will render 
cited by Diophantus (supra, p. 121)
a certain problem indeterminate, or 
are closely similar to data.
capable of innumerable solutions."
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

220 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOIXONIUS.
relevant mainly to the form of the enunciation of a porism and
its relations, by virtue of its enunciation and hypothesis, to the
TO7ro? and the local theorem1. The passage of Pappus, on which
Chasles and Heiberg, and every other would-be restorer of
Euclid's work must necessarily rely, is so obscure and is suspected
of so many interpolations and mutilations4, that I could not, save
at inconvenient length, give the details of the controversy, which,
after all, is of no practical importance. I have therefore preferred
to accept Chasles's theories, which are founded on adequate learn-
ing and are followed by a restoration of Euclid's Porisms with
which, at present, no serious fault has been founds.
One of the types of porisms which Pappus describes at any
length, is as follows: "If from two given points, two straight
lines be drawn, which cut one another on a straight line given
in position, and one of which intercepts on a straight line, given
in position, a segment extending to a given point on it, the other
will intercept on another straight line a segment which has a
given ratio." This type was treated in one or more propositions
early in the First Book, and this statement, together with the 38
lemmas of Pappus, gave Chasles his clue. The Porisms of the
First Book, in his view, deal with propositions suggested by a
hypothesis in which we suppose two straight lines to turn about
two fixed points, to cut one another on a straight line given in
position, and to make on two other fixed straight lines (or on
one only) two segments which have to one another a certain
constant relation. In the Second Book, the segments are, as a
rule, formed on one line only. In the Third Book, the two fixed
points are on the circumference of a circle and the two revolving
straight lines cut one another on this circumference. "Almost, if
not quite, all the relations of segments in the first two Books are
1 E.g. according to Heiberg, a porism 
2 See Hultsch's edition. Heiberg
proper has nothing whatever to do 
accepts the whole of the text,
with a corollary. A T6TOS was, as 
3 Heiberg himself has very few criti-
Simson defined it, a proposition ' to 
cisms to make, even on the enuncia-
find a locus,' and therefore rSiroi were 
tions, which, he admits, are generally
a kind of porisms. The propositions, 
of the true porismatic form. The one
which Chasles calls 'local problems' 
obvious error in Chasles' book is that
and distinguishes from 'loci' and 'local 
his restored Porism xvn. (p. 119)is iden-
theorems,' are really identical with 
tical with the 8th Lemma of Pappus,
'loci' and are porisms, etc. 
which is only ancillary to a porism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
221
such as express that two variable points on two straight lines, or
on one only, form two homographic divisions." It should be added
that Chasles has had the good fortune to produce 201 porisms, or
30 more than Euclid himself composed1. The original porisms
were used, as their place in the TO'TTO? avaXv6fievo<i indicates,
in the analysis, or in the synthesis, of a problem which was
solved analytically. No doubt, a porism of the form ' it is
possible to find' would be used in analysis, like the Data; a
porism of the form ' to find' would be used in the synthesis.
125. 
The immediate successors of Euclid, as heads of the
Alexandrian mathematical school, seem to have been Conon of
Samos, who added " Berenice's hair " to the constellations2, and
Dositheus of Colonus. Perhaps also a certain Zeuxippus and
Nicoteles of Cyrene were at Alexandria during this period. But
nothing is known of these persons, save that Conon, Dositheus
and Zeuxippus corresponded with Archimedes, who had a high
opinion of their abilities (especially of Conon's3) and that
ApoUonius acknowledges some obligation to discoveries in conic
sections by Conon and Nicoteles4.
But Archimedes, the greatest mathematician of antiquity,
lived not at Alexandria but at Syracuse. He is said by Tzetzes6
1 A summary of the more interest- 
4 Conica, Pref. to Bk. iv. Halley's
ing portion of Chasles' book is given 
ed. pp. 217, 218. A very important
in Taylor's Ancient and Modern Conies, astronomer, Aristarohus of Samos,
pp. LII—LIV. Chasles himself says, 
belongs to this interval. His extant
p. 14, "Si oe livre de Porismes nous 
work on the Sizes and Distances of the
fM parvenu, il eut donne lieu depnis 
Sun and Moon is printed in the 3rd
longtemps a la conception et au de- 
Vol. of Wallis's works. His proofs of
veloppement des theories elementaires 
course are geometrical (e.g. Prop. 2 is
du rapport anharmonique, des divisions 
"If a greater sphere illuminate a less,
homographiques et de Vinvolution." 
more than half the latter is illumina-
2 Catullus LXVI. 7, 8, translating 
ted") but add nothing to geometry.
Callimachus. 
Delambre (1. p. 215) 
6 Chiliad, n. 35, 105. Proclus, p. 68,
suggests that Callimachus invented the 
cites Eratosthenes as witnessing that
name of the constellation himself and 
he was a contemporary of Archimedes,
attributed it to Conon. The Berenice 
The chief authority on the life of
in question was wife of Ptolemy IH. 
Archimedes is Plutarch, Vita MarceUi,
(Euergetes). Ptolemy, the astronomer, 
co. 14—19. A biography, which was
cites some observations of Conon. 
used by Eutocius, was written by one
3 See the prefaces to Sph. et Cyl. 
Heracleides who perhaps was the friend
and Arenarius, ed. Torelli, pp. 63, 64, 
whom Archimedes mentions pp. 217,
319. 
318 (Torelli).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

222 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONItXS.
(an authority as late as the 12th century) to have died at the
age of 75, and, as it is well attested that he was killed in the
sack of Syracuse B. c. 212, he was probably born about 287 B. c.
Diodorus1 says that he visited Egypt and it is certain that he
was a friend of Conon and Eratosthenes, who lived in Alexan-
dria. His writings also show a most thorough acquaintance
with all the work previously done in mathematics, and it may
therefore be inferred that he was a disciple of the Alexandrian
school. He returned, however, to Syracuse and lived there on
intimate terms with King Hieron and his son Gelon, to whom
possibly he was related by blood2. He made himself useful to
his patrons by his extraordinary ingenuity of mechanical
invention,—a gift by which he himself set little store8. 
He is
said, by various contrivances, to have inflicted much loss on the
Romans during the siege by Marcellus, but the city was
ultimately taken and Archimedes perished in the indiscriminate
slaughter. Marcellus wished to preserve his life but he was
slain by accident4. The story is that he was contemplating a
geometrical figure drawn on the ground when a Roman soldier
entered. Archimedes bade him stand off and not spoil the
diagram, but the soldier, insulted at this behaviour, fell upon
him and killed him6. Marcellus raised in his honour a tomb
bearing the figure of a sphere inscribed in a cylinder. 
Cicero
had the honour of restoring this during his quaestorship in
Sicily B. C 756.
1 Diod. v. 37. 
authorities for Archimedes' life are col-
2 Plutarch, Marcell. 14. 
leoted and generally quoted in Torelli's
3 Ibid. 17, vaaav o\ws T^XVV Xpeias 
Preface, pp. 11 and 12, and Heiberg's
i(pairTOiUvi]v 6.yevv7j nal pdvavvov Ttyq- 
Quaestiones Archimedeae, Copenhagen,
aa/ievos, "thinking that every kind of 
1879, pp. 1—9. This little monograph
art, which was connected with daily 
deals chiefly with the text, but con-
needs, was ignoble and vulgar." 
tains much very minute information
4 Cio. Verr. iv. 131, Livy xxv. 31, 
on the arithmetic of Archimedes.
Plut. Marc. 19, Pliny, Hist. Nat. vn. 
Heiberg has since edited the text
125. 
(Leipzig, 1880), but I have quoted
5 This tale is told in many slightly 
always from Torelli, whose edition I
different forms. 
Plutarch loe. cit. 
happen to have. 
The errors and mis-
Valerius Maximus VIII. 7, 7, Tzetzes n. 
prints which Heiberg points out in
35. 135, Zonaras ix. 5. 
Torelli, are not such as to seriously
6 Cic. Tusc. Disp. v. 64, 65. The 
affect his value for the present purpose.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ABCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
223
126. The extant works of Archimedes seem to comprise
almost all his more important contributions to mathematics.
Internal evidence, derived from references in some books to
proofs contained in others and from allusions in the prefatory-
letters which accompany many of the books, shows that the
works are to he arranged in the following approximately chrono-
logical order1: viz.
(1) Book I. of ' Equiponderance of Planes or Centres of
Plane Gravities' (Ylepl iirnreScov l&oppoTriwv fj K&vTpa fiapwv
eirnreBcov), in 15 props, preceded by 8 (or 9) postulates2.
(2) ' The Quadrature of the Parabola,' in 24 props, (sent to
Dositheus).
(3) 
Book II. of 'Equiponderance 
of Planes,' etc., in 10
props.
(4) ' On the Sphere and the Cylinder,' in two books, the
first of 50 props., preceded by 5 postulates, the second of 10
props, (both sent to Dositheus).
(5) ' The Measurement of the Circle' (KVKXOV /ierpifa-t?), in
3 props.
(6) ' On Spirals' (irepl ekUcov), in 28 props.
(7) 'On Conoids and Spheroids,' in 40 props, (sent to
Dositheus).
(8) 'The Sand-Counter' (yfra/j,fiiTij<i), an essay addressed to
Gelon.
(9) 'On Floating Bodies' (irepl oxovfievmv or irepl TWV
iiBari e<f)i<rTafiiva>v), in two books, the first of 9, the second of
10 props, (extant only in Latin)3.
We have also, in a Latin translation from the Arabic, a
collection of 15 Lemmas, which have certainly been tampered
1 See Torelli's Pref. p. xiii. Heiberg, 
from a Greek codex which has not since
Q. A. pp. 10—13. 
been discovered. The title vepl TS>V
2 Archimedes himself (Quadr. Parab. 
&xovii.£vo>v is cited by Strabo i. p. 54:
props. 6 and 10) refers to this book as 
ret 6xoii^va in Math. Vett. p. 151,
T& nrrxaviKi. Proclus (p. 181) calls it 
Pappus vni. p. 1024. A fragment re-
al d«<ro/5/5o7r(<u. Simplicius (ad Arist. 
cently discovered has the other title,
De Caelo, iv. p. 508 a.) calls it Kevrpo- 
and Tzetzes evidently alludes to this
j3api(cd. 
book by the name iviaraclSia (Chil. xn.
3 The Latin translation was made 
974). Torelli, Pref. xviii. Heiberg,
by. Tartaglia (Venice, 1543 and 1565) 
Quaest. Arch. pp. 13, 22.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

224 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
with (e.g. Archimedes is mentioned in the 4th and 14th) and
may not be authentic at all1. Those works, also, which are
extant in Greek, are evidently not now in precisely the same
form as when first written. Some of the titles for instance,
especially ' Quadrature of the Parabola,' are added by later
hands, and again, most of the books are written in inferior
Greek of the Attic dialect, whereas Archimedes wrote in Doric",
the dialect proper to Syracuse. Eutocius of Ascalon, a scholiast
of the 6th century, wrote commentaries still extant on the
books of the Sphere and Cylinder, Measurement of the Circle
and Equiponderants. These are valuable for the great number
of "historical notices which they contain and of which very
frequent use has been made in these pages.
Beside the extant works, Archimedes is known to have
written several others and yet more are attributed to him. He
wrote a treatise on the half-regular polyhedra, i.e. the solids,
thirteen in number, which are bounded by regular but dissimilar
polygons of two or three kinds3. He himself refers (in the
Arenarius) to his arithmetical treatise called 'Ap^at, 'First
Principles,' addressed to Zeuxippus. Pappus4 quotes his work
Tiepl guytSv, 'on Levers.' Theon quotes his Catoptrica6. Pappus8
quotes Carpus as an authority for the fact that Archimedes
wrote a mechanical treatise on the method of constructing a
globe or planetary {irepl a(f>aipoiroua<;). The Arabs ascribe to
him works on ' the heptagon in a circle,' on ' circles touching
1 The translation in Borelli's edition 
69 sqq.
(Florence, 1661) is said to have been 
3 Pappus v. 19. Heron (Deff. 101)
made by Abraham Ecchellensis from 
says wrongly that Archimedes added
the Arabic of Tabit ibn Eorra, with 
13 to the 5 Platonic regular solids,
notes by Almochtas Abulhasan. Torelli 
Kepler resumed the study of such poly-
reprints this (see his Pref. p. xix), but 
hedra in his Harmonice Mundi. Cantor,
there was another version by J. Gravius 
p. 264.
(Foster's Miscellan. London, 1659). 
4 vm. 24, p. 1068.
Heiberg (p. 24) and Cantor (pp. 256, 
6 Comm. in Ptol. i. 3, p. 10 (Basle
257) are inclined to think that the book 
ed.). Cf. Olympiodorus in Arist.Meteor.
contains some authentic propositions, 
n. p. 94 (ed. Ideler). Apuleius, Apol.
esp. the 4th and 14th, perhaps also 
16. Tzetzes, Chil. xn. 973. Heiberg,
the 8th and 11th. 
Quaest. Arch. p. 33.
a Torelli's Pref. p. xv, Heiberg, Q. 
6 vm. 3, p. 1026. Cf.Proclus, p. 41,
Archim. ch. v., De Dialecto Arch. pp. 
16.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
225
one another,' on 'parallel lines,' on 'triangles,' on 'the properties
of right-angled triangles,' on 'data1.' Suidas says that Theodo-
sius wrote a commentary on the 'Guide-book' or e'<£o8toi> of
Archimedes, perhaps a little treatise on geometrical methods.
Beside these, it is possible that Archimedes wrote yet other
books, for he on several occasions refers to propositions as
already proved, which are not so in any extant work, or reduces
a proposition to a problem which he does not solve (e.g. 8ph.
et Gyl. II. 5. p. 158), or uses a theorem which is not proved at
all".
127. It is usual to divide the works of Archimedes into
three groups, geometrical, arithmetical and mechanical, but
these distinctions are not strictly maintained by Archimedes
himself. Thus in Quadrature of the Parabola, propositions vi.
—XIV. are founded on propositions proved in the preceding first
book of Equiponderance (e.g. in props, vi. and vn. a triangle is
suspended from one arm of a lever kept in equilibrium by
another area suspended at the other end). So, also, the 3rd
proposition of Measurement of the Circle is an attempt to find
an arithmetical value for the ratio between the circumference
1 Wenrich De A-uct. Graec. Version- 
portion only, not the equation) adds
ibus, pp. 194, 196, Heiberg Q. A. pp. 
a diorismus, or determination of a
29, 30. Heiberg is inclined to reject 
condition under which this can be sol-
these Arabic notices, save that on 
ved (for a positive root). If c = 2(a-c),
'circles touching one another,'of which 
then a - c must be greater than 6. In
he thinks, some extracts may be pre- 
other words, x3-cu? + $a?b=0, is solu-
served in the 15 Lemmas. 
^ 
.f ft< a ^
^ 
i a e s
2 E.g. in De us quce in humido n. 2, 
3
he uses, without a word of reference, 
a solution but does not give it. See
a theorem that, in a segment of a 
Cantor, pp. 265, 270, 271. Archime-
parabolic conoid, the centre of gravity 
des is often said to have written a
divides the axis into two parts such 
Conies (Kunxi.), but it is now generally
that the part on the side of the vertex 
supposed that the Conies and the
is twice the other. The proposition 
Elements, to both of which he often
Sph. et Cyl. n. 5 is to divide a sphere 
refers, are the works of Euclid; Cantor
into two segments whose volumes are 
pp. 260, 261. Heiberg, Q. A. p. 31.
to one another in a given ratio. This is 
Heracleides, however, the biographer
soluble only (to use algebraical symbols) 
-of Archimedes, accused Apollonius of
if a line a can be so divided that 
stealing from an unpublished work by
a-x:b"(?:xii.e. 
if the cubic equation 
his predecessor. 
(See Eutocius in
x3 - ax2 + 6c2=0, can be solved. Archi- 
Halley's Apollonius, p. 8.)
medes (who of course gives the pro-
G. G. M. 
15
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

226 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
and its diameter, and the inquiry involves the extraction of \/3.
Nevertheless, the division first suggested is exact enough for
most purposes, and may be adopted in the following brief
summary of the contents of the various books. The geometrical
are taken first.
The Quadrature of the Parabola begins with a letter to
Dositheus announcing the chief contents of the book. 
It
contains two solutions of the problem, the one mechanical, the
other geometrical. Both involve the use of the method of
exhaustion. Props. I.—III. are simple propositions in Conies
without proofs: IV. v. are of the same kind, but are proved.
Then props. VII.—XVII. contain the mechanical proof that " any
segment which is contained by a straight line and the section
of a right-angled cone is $ (eViVpiT<w) of a triangle which has
the same base and the same altitude as the segment." Archi-
medes starts, as above mentioned, by suspending a triangle or
trapezium and another area on opposite sides of a lever in
equilibrium, the triangle or trapezium being suspended from
two points, the area from one. The triangle or trapezium is
then shewn to bear a certain ratio to the area1. Then if B@F
be a segment of a parabola, of which BF is the base and © the
point on the curve most distant from the base8, the segment
B©F is shewn by exhaustion to be one-third of the space of
which the triangle B@F is one-fourth. 
Props, xvin.—xxiv.
1 E.g. Prop. vi. ABr is a lever, of 
arms of the lever, or as AB to BE, and
which B is the middle point. Aright- 
AB=3BE. A summary of the follow-
angled triangle BAP is suspended from 
ing propositions is given by Cantor,
B, T, the right angle being at B, the 
pp. 278—279.
side Br being half the length of the 
2 In Prop. XVII. 0 is called the vertex,
lever. This is exactly balanced by an 
Kopv<t>-fi, of the carve. In Prop. xvm.
area Z, suspended from A. Then Z is 
the first of the geometrical proof, it is
one-third of the triangle. For in BP 
shewn that if the base BP be bisected
take E, so that EP = 2EB. Then the 
and B6 be drawn parallel to the axis
centre of gravity of the triangle (as pre- 
(called the 'diameter'), meeting the
viously proved in the 1st Book of Equi- 
curve in 6, then 9 is the point from
ponderance) lies in the vertical line 
whioh the greatest perpendicular can
drawn from E, and the triangle may be 
be drawn from the curve to BP, and is
suspended from E without disturbing 
the Kopv<j>i) of the segment. The tan-
the equilibrium. Suspend it from E 
gent at 6 is parallel to BP.
and the triangle is to Z inversely as the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, AKCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
227
contain the geometrical proof. The triangle B©T is half the
parallelogram of the same altitude on BP, and is therefore more
than half the segment. Inscribe triangles in the segments cut
off by the lines B@, @P. Each of these is more than half the
segment in which it is inscribed and is also one-eighth of the
triangle BOP: the two together are one-fourth of it. 
Take a
T* 
i* 
uc 
or
series of magnitudes, x, -r, j ^ , ^r 
~, of which x is equal
to the triangle B©P. The sum of these is less than the
segment. Their sum, again, plus ^d of the least magnitude,
is -s-. Hence if the segment be exhausted by triangles in the
o
manner above indicated, it is found by reductio ad absurdum,
that the segment is f rds of the first triangle B©P.
The treatise on the Sphere and the Cylinder is in two books.
Book I. begins with another letter to Dositheus, announcing its
principal contents1. Then follow some definitions (curiously called
dgioofiaTa) and assumptions (Ka/ij3av6fieva). Of the assumptions,
the 1st is " a straight line is the shortest of all lines which have
the same extremities." The book begins with 7 propositions,
bearing on the theory of exhaustion, e.g. VI. is " a circle being
given and also two unequal magnitudes, it is possible to describe
about and within the circle two polygons, such that the cir-
cumscribed polygon shall have to the inscribed a less ratio than
the greater given magnitude to the less." Props, vill.—xvn.
are on the surfaces of pyramids (described within and about
cones), of cylinders and of cones (e. g. Prop. xvi. " The sur-
face of an isosceles cone is to its base as the side of the cone
to the radius of the base"). Props, XVIII.—xxi. are on the
1 In this book Torelli numbers fifty are merely " Take A equal to Br, by
propositions. Other editors, who do 
the Second of the First Book of
not count the first, number forty- 
Euclid's" {TUP EVK\(ZL8OV). It is in the
nine. In Prop. in. Torelli omits a 
preface to this book that Archimedes
reference to Euclid by name which is 
states that the cubatures of the pyra-
given in all the MSS. 
Proclus (p. 68) 
mid and cone (Euclid xn. 7, 10) were
says that Archimedes mentionedEuclid, 
discovered byEudoxus. The cubatures
and this is the only place in which 
of the sphere and the cylinder are
such mention occurs. Heiberg (p. 157) 
referred to that of the cone,
thinks the words are genuine. They
15—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

228 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
volumes of cones and of portions of cones. These propositions,
are then used (xxn.—xxxiv.) in an exposition of the relations
of the surfaces and volumes of those solids, described within and
about a sphere, which are produced by the revolution of polygons
described in or about a great circle. Prop. xxxv. is selected
for mention in the prefatory letter. It is that " the surface of a
sphere is four times that of one of its great circles." Prop, xxxvi.
is " any sphere is four times a cone whose base is a great circle,
and whose altitude is a radius, of the sphere." This leads to
xxxvil. The volume and the surface of a sphere are frds of
the volume and surface, respectively, of a cylinder whose base is
a great circle, and whose altitude is the diameter, of the sphere
(the bases of the cylinder being included in its surface). This
discovery was the chief pride of its author. The figure of this
proposition is that which Marcellus, following an expressed wish
of Archimedes1, inscribed on his tomb. Props, xxxvni.—XLVII.
deal with segments of a sphere and the inscribed and circum-
scribed solids produced, as before, by the revolution of polygons
described within and about a great circle. Props, XLVIII.—XLIX.
prove that the surface of a segment of a sphere, whether less or
greater than a hemisphere, is equal to a circle whose radius
is the straight line drawn from the vertex of the segment
to the periphery of its basal circle. Prop. L. is on the volume
of a sector of a sphere, which is shewn to be equal to a cone
whose base is a circle equal to the surface of the segment, and
whose altitude is the radius of the sphere.
Book II. of the Sphere and Cylinder begins with another
prefatory letter to Dositheus, in which the chief glories of
Book I. are again recounted, and which says that the Second
Book contains some problems and theorems suggested by the
First. Prop. II. is a problem " To find a sphere equal to a given
cone or given cylinder." The analysis of this problem leads to
the discovery of two mean proportionals between two straight
lines. The synthesis, which is the analysis taken backwards,
of course, requires that two mean proportionals should be found.
Archimedes does not here shew how this is to be done, but it is
1 Plutarch Marcellas, 17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
229
<} propos of this passage that Eutocius introduces that historical
account of the duplication problem which has been already so
often cited \ 
Prop. in. is that " a segment of a sphere is equal
to a cone whose base is that of the segment and whose altitude
is to that of the segment as the radius of the sphere + the
altitude of the remaining segment is to the altitude of the
remaining segment." Some problems are founded on this, solved,
as usual, first by analysis, then by synthesis. Prop. IX. is that
" if a sphere be cut by a plane which does not pass through the
centre, the greater segment is to the less in a ratio which is less
than the duplicate but more than the sesquialter of the ratio
which the surface of the greater bears to the surface of the
less2". Lastly, Prop. X. is " of spherical segments with equal
surfaces a hemisphere is the greatest8."
The book De Spiralibus begins with another letter to
Dositheus, which, after deploring the death of Oonon, who
was studying the propositions*, recounts the contents of the
2nd book of the Sphere and Cylinder, then points out the chief
results of the treatise on Spirals and concludes with a note
that Archimedes has used the ordinary lemma (Euclid X. or xn. i.)
on which the method of exhaustion is founded. The definition
of the spiral and the chief results of the book may be stated
practically in the words of Archimedes himself. " If in a plane
a straight line, fixed at one extremity, revolve evenly till it
return to the position from which it started, and if along
the revolving line a point moves evenly from the fixed
extremity, this point will describe a spiral. I say that the
1 The solutions which Eutocius re- found everything, but never produce a
cords (Torelli, pp. 135—149) are those 
proof, and sometimes claim to have
of Plato, Heron, Philon of Byzantium, 
discovered the impossible."
Apollonius, Diodes, Pappus, Sporus, 
s The treatise "Measurement of the
Menaechmus, Archytas, Eratosthenes, 
Circle" is given in full in the next
Nicomedes, in this order. 
section. The quadratures of the spiral
8 It appears from the preface to De 
and ellipse depend upon a previous
Spiralibus (p. 218) that Archimedes 
quadrature of the circle,
had wrongly stated this and the next 
* Pappus says that Conon invented
proposition, in an earlier copy which 
the spiral. Arohimedes, however, only
he sent to Dositheus, for the express 
says that he had sent the-enunciations
purpose of deceiving the boastful ama* 
of his propositions to Conon, who had
teurs of geometry, "who say they have 
been trying to prove them.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

230 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
space which is included between the spiral and the straight
line after one complete revolution is one-third of a circle
described from the fixed extremity as centre, with radius
that part of the straight line over which the moving point
advances during one revolution (Prop. xxiv.). Again, if a
straight line touch the spiral at the last extremity of the
latter1, and from the fixed point there be drawn a perpendicular
to the revolving line (after a complete revolution) produced to
meet the tangent, this perpendicular straight line is equal
to the circumference of a circle described from the fixed
point as centre with the revolving line at the end of a com-
plete revolution as radius (Prop, xvill.). Again, if the revolv-
ing line and the moving point thereon make several com-
plete revolutions, the space which is included by the second
revolution of the spiral is half that included by the third, a
third of that included by the fourth, a fourth of that in
the fifth and so on. But the space included by the first
revolution is one-sixth of that which is included by the second
(Prop, XXVII.). Again, if in the spiral of one revolution two
points be taken and straight lines be drawn from them to
the fixed point and two circles be drawn from the fixed point
as centre with these straight lines as radii, and the lesser of
these straight lines be produced (to meet the larger circle), the
half-crescents included between the circles, the spiral, and the
straight lines are to one another in a given ratio. (Prop, xxvili.2).
The book begins with some lemmas on constructions (Props. I.—
IX.) and with two propositions, which are in effect the geometri-
cal summation of the series 1.4.9 — n.2, (Prop, x.) and of the
series a, 2a, 3a...na (Prop. XI.). Then follow the definitions
and some propositions on tangents to the spiral and lines passing
1 If A6 be the revolving line, A 
H. The space S is to the space II as
he fixed point, the last extremity (T6 
0A+£HA is to 9A +JHA.
(axo-Tov Tripai) of the spiral is 9.
2 The enunciation is extremely diffi-
cult to follow -without a figure. 6 is
the fixed point, A, Y are points on the
spiral. From centre 9, describe circles
with radii 0A, er, and produce 0A to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
231
through the fixed point and cutting the curve (Props. XII.—XVII.).
The course of the remainder of the book is pretty well indicated
by the summary above given from the preface. But a word
should be added on the way in which Archimedes arrives at the
area of the spiral. The revolving line may be stopped any-
where. The space included between the curve and the line
is divided into sectors having equal angles at the fixed point.
Each of these is shewn to be less than one, and greater than the
other, of two similar sectors of circles. It follows, therefore,
that two plane figures (composed of similar sectors of circles)
can be described, one within, the other about, the spiral, such
that the difference between the two figures can be made as
small as we please, and exhaustion is thus effected1.
The treatise on Conoids and Spheroids is also sent, as was
promised in the letter which accompanied the De Spiralibus, to
Dositheus. A conoid is the solid produced by the revolution of a
parabola or a hyperbola about its axis. Spheroids are produced
by the revolution of an ellipse, and are long (Trapafidicea) or
flat (eiwrXaria) according as the ellipse revolves about its
major or its minor axis. The first 3 propositions are certain
very complex arithmetical theorems". Props. IV.—vu. deal
with conies, e.g. V. and VI. are on quadrature of the ellipse
by exhaustion; vu. shews that ellipses are to one another as the
products of their axes. Props, vm.—X. shew that an infinite
number of right cones and cylinders can be constructed so as
to contain a given ellipse. Prop. XI. merely recapitulates some
well-known theorems on the ratios of cones and segments of
cones and cylinders to one another. Props, xn.—xv. shew that
the plane sections of conoids and spheroids are conies; xvi.—xix.
are on planes touching these solids, XX. is on the division of
1 Compare the accompanying 
figure 
2 They are of no intrinsic value. The
to Prop. xxi. which deals with a spiral first is in effect that if
of one revolution only. 
s=a + 2a + 3a 
+ na,
then 
2s>?i2a>2 (s-na).
The other two cannot be stated shortly,
even with symbols. On these and the
other arithmetical propositions of Ar-
chimedes, see Heiberg, Q.A. Chap. IV.
pp. £4 sqq. esp. pp. 50, 51, 56, 51.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

232 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONItTS.
a spheroid into two equal parts, xxi.—xxn. are preparatory
to the cubature of the solids: if a conoid or a spheroid
be cut by two parallel planes, the segment so obtained
contains one cylinder and is contained in another, and the
difference between these two cylinders may be made as small
as we please by bringing the two planes of section closer aud
closer together. Then follow the propositions selected for
mention in the preface : Props, xxm.—xxiv. prove that every
parabolic "right-angled" conoid is to a cone on the same base
and of the same altitude as 3 : 2 ; XXV.—xxvi. shew that seg-
ments of a parabolic conoid (cut by planes in any direction) are to
one another as the squares of their axes. Props, xxvil.—XXVIII.
deal with the volume of hyperbolic (" obtuse-angled ") conoids;
and XXIX.—xxxiv. with the volume of sections of spheroids cut
by planes, whether passing through the centre or not.
Lastly, of the Lemmas which may be authentic, Nos. IV. and
xiv. are to find the area of two curvilinear figures, which
Archimedes calls respectively apftrjXos and a-aXivov. The ap-
firjXos, which literally is the name of
a shoemaker's knife, is bounded by
three semicircles whose centres are in
a straight line. Its area is the circle
described about the perpendicular DB,
The a-aXivov, which perhaps means a 'sieve', (cf. trdXafj, KOO-KIVOV)
is bounded by four semicircles, whose centres are in a straight
line, two having the same centre A. 
Its area is equal to a
circle described about B C as diameter \
No. XI. is that if in a circle two chords
cut one another at right angles, the
squares of the four segments of these
chords are together equal to the square
of the diameter. No. VIII. is as follows.
In a circle of which the centre is A draw any chord AB and
produce it to F, so that BF is equal to the radius. Join FA,
1 Heiberg Q. A. p. 25, suggests that 
iv. 14 (pp. 208—232, ed. Hultsoh) treats
these Lemmas iv. and xiv. are extracts 
of the ap^Xos. See also Cantor pp.
from the work of Archimedes on "cir- 
256, 257.
cles touching one another." 
Pappus
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
233
cutting the circle in Z, and produce FA to meet the circle again
in E. Then the arc AE will be three times the arc BZ. The
figure which leads to the proof is appended.
128. The reader will see, from this brief summary, how
wide a range of subjects Archimedes studied and with what
astonishing ingenuity he treated them. Nevertheless, quadrature
and cubature of curvilinear areas and solids bounded by curved
surfaces were his chief hobbies, and the process which he most
affects is exhaustion. This he handles with consummate mastery,
and with it he obtains results for which we now look to the
infinitesimal calculus. It is desirable, however, that an authentic
specimen of Archimedes' geometrical work should be given in full.
For this purpose, the little work on "'Measurement of the Circle"
is especially well adapted, both because it is short in itself, and
does not appeal to any recondite propositions the proof of which
is too long to be admitted, and because it gives all the main
characteristics of Archimedes' style. It will be seen, at once,
that Archimedes writes not with any educational purpose, like
Euclid, but for the elite of the mathematicians of his time. He
does not confine himself to a stereotyped form of exposition, and
does not shrink from introducing, into a geometrical argument,
propositions of dpi0/jLr)Tt,ici) and operations of XOJMTTIKTJ.
The Measurement of the Circle is in three propositions only.
Prop. I. is "Every circle is equal to a right-angled triangle, such
that the sides containing the right angle one is equal to the
radius, the other to the circumference of the circle." The
proof, literally translated, save for the introduction of symbols,
is as follows.
"Let the circle ABCD be related to the triangle E ac-
cording to the hypothesis. I say it is equal to the triangle E,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

234
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
For, if possible, let the circle be greater and let the square AC
be described in it, and let the circumferences be bisected, and
let the segments be finally less than the excess of the circle
over the triangle. Then the rectilineal figure is > the triangle.
Take the centre N and the perpendicular NX. 
Then NX
is < the side of the triangle. And the periphery of the recti-
lineal figure is < the other side, for it is < the circumference
of the circle. The rectilineal figure is therefore < the triangle,
which is absurd.
But let the circle, if possible, be less than the triangle E.
And let the square be circumscribed and let the circumferences
be bisected, and let tangents be drawn through the points of
bisection. Then the angle OAR is a right angle: therefore
OR is >MR, for MR=RA. And the triangle ROP is >\OZAM.
Let the segments similar to PZA be left less than the excess of
the triangle E over the circle. Then the circumscribed recti-
lineal figure is < E, which is absurd, for it is > E, since NA is
equal to one side of the triangle and the perimeter is greater
than the other. The circle therefore is equal to the triangle E.
Prop. II. is "A circle has to the square on its diameter the
ratio 11:14 very nearly."
The proof is as follows: "Take a circle, with diameter AB,
and let the square CHD be circumscribed about it. And let
DE be double of the side CD, and EZ one seventh part of CD.
Since then the triangle ACE has to ACD the ratio 21:7, and
ACD has to A EZ the ratio 7:1, therefore the triangle A CZ is to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
235
the triangle ACD as 22 :1. But the square CH is four times
the triangle ACD: therefore the triangle ACZ is to the square
CH as 22 : 28 or 11:14. And the triangle AGZis equal to the
circle, since AG is equal to the radius and GZ to the circum-
ference (which will be shewn to be very nearly 3f of the
diameter). The circle therefore has to the square CH the
ratio 11:14 very nearly1.
Prop. in. is "The circumference of a circle exceeds 3 times
its diameter by a part which is less than f but more than f£ of
the diameter." The proof is:
"Let there be a circle with diameter AC and centre E
and tangent CLZ, and let the angle ZEG be a third of a right
angle. Then EZ: ZC:: 306 :153 and
EG:GZ> 265 :153 s. Draw EH, bi-
secting ZEG. Then ZE: EG:: ZH: HG,
and 
permutando and componendo,
ZE+EC : ZC :: EC : GH. Where-
fore CE : CH> 571 :153. Therefore
EH2 : HG*> 349450 : 23409 
and
EH : HG < 591£: 153s. Again, bisect
H
B
\
1 The word tyyurra "very nearly"
seems to have been added throughout by
Wallis. The proposition should possi-
bly be placed third, but it must be
remembered that ir = 3f was a very
common approximation in Archimedes'
time. Heron in his Geometria (ed.
Hultsch, pp. 115, 136) refers it first to
Euclid, then to Archimedes. The E-
gyptian value was 3-1604.. Ptolemy
(ed. Halma vi. 7) uses 3TyT = 3-141666.
It is
2 The omitted steps are EZ=2ZG
EC 
.-
••Ic=x/3>
not known how Archimedes obtained this
approximation. See supra, pp. 53—55.
But in fact (ff$)2=|Sf£f = 3 - ^ W
3 N. B. 
349450 = (5712 + 1532)
= (326041 + 23409). 
This is greater
than (59H)2=349,428||. 
(591|)a is
nearer.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

236
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
the angle HEG by the line EP. On the same principle,
EG : CP> 1162^ : 153 \ 
Therefore PE:PC> 
1172£ : 153s.
Bisect the angle PEG by the line EK. Then
EG: CK> 2334-i : 153. Therefore EK:GK> 2339J : 153.
Bisect the angle ZSC by the line LE. Then
j£O:ZC>4673£ : 153.
The angle LEG is ^sth of a right angle. At E, make the
angle GEM = LEG &nd produce zC to if. The angle Z.Eif is
^?th of a right angle. Therefore the line LM is the side of a
polygon of 96 sides (f/^) circumscribed about the circle.
Since it has been proved that EG: CL > 4673£ : 153 and
AC=2EG 
and LM=2CL, therefore AC: LM> 4673J : 153.
Therefore AG : peripheiy of UM> 4&73% : 14688. Of these
numbers, the latter is three times the first + 667^, which is
< —f~. 
Wherefore the periphery of Um is three times the
diameter + a part less than |. Much more then is the cir-
cumference of the circle < 3f of the diameter.
Secondly, Take a circle with diameter A C, and make the
angle BA C £rd of a right angle. Then AB:BG< 1351 : 780,
but AG-.GB:: 1560:780.
Bisect BA G by HA. Then since / BAH= /. HCB and also
= iHAC, :. <• HCB=* HAG. And the right angle AHG is
common. Therefore the third angle HZC = the third/ ACH.
Wherefore the triangles AHG, GHZ are equiangular and
1 EH :EO :: HP : PC 
ana EH : CH> 591J : 153. Therefore
.-. (EH+EC) : EG :: (HP+PC) : PC 
EG: PC >(571 + 591£) : 153.
a.ndi{EH+EC):(HP+PC)::EC:PC. 
3 PE" = PC" + CEa > 1373943J T»T
But it was shewn above that 
> (1172J)J. (1172f)3 is nearer.
CE : GH> 571 : 153
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ABCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
237
AH: HC:: CH: HZ:: AC: GZ. But AC: CZ:: CA+AB: BG.
Therefore CA + AB : BG :: AH : HC. 
Therefore
AH :HG< 2911: 780 : but AG:CH< 3013^ : 780.
Bisect the angle CAH by AP. 
Then on the same principle
AP: PC < 5924^ : 780 or < 1823 : 240, which numbers are ^ of
the preceding, respectively. Wherefore AC:CP< 1838^-: 240.
Bisect the angle PAG by KA. 
Then
KA :ifC<3661T
9
T:240,or(dividingby^)<1007:66. Therefore
Lastly, bisect the angle KA G by LA. Then
AL : LC< 2016| : 66: but AC : CL < 2017J : 66.
Conversely CL : AC > 66 : 2017J, and the -periphery of the
inscribed polygon: diameter > 6336 :2017J. Of these numbers,
the first is > 3ff of the second. Much more then is the cir-
cumference of the circle > 3|^ of the diameter.
129. The arithmetical treatise of Archimedes (Arenarius,
TJrafifiiTTis;) and also the cattle-problem have been summarised
above (pp. 57—61 and 99). It remains only to notice his works
on mechanics. For these he had fewer predecessors. Of the
simple machines two at least, the lever and wedge, were known
from a remote antiquity. Archytas is said to have invented the
screw (*o^;\('a?) and the pulley (rpo-^iXala)1. Some kind of a
compound pulley seems to be described in Aristotle's Mechanica
Problematic (c. 18). The same work shews that, in the century
before Archimedes, the mathematical theory of the lever was
under consideration, and that it was known that the power and
the weight if applied perpendicularly to a straight lever, so as to
produce equilibrium, are to one another inversely as the arms of
1 He invented also a child's rattle, 
children " from breaking things about
which Aristotle" recommends (Pol. vra. 
the house."
5, 2) as a useful instrument to prevent
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

238 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
the lever1. Some notion of the parallelogram of forces2 and of
the principle of virtual velocity also appears. Many intelli-
gent questions in mechanics, moreover, are here asked, and
Aristotle illustrates such explanations as he can give by geo-
metrical figures3. The author of the fragment Be levi et
ponderoso (attributed to Euclid), if he lived before Archimedes,
had some idea of specific gravity. 
Also somebody before
Archimedes had invented the term "centre of gravity" (icevTpov
fidpovs) which Archimedes uses but does not define4. But
there was not as yet any mathematical proof of any proposition
in mechanics. This step is taken by Archimedes, who deals
however only with statics. Book I. of the Equiponderance of
Planes begins abruptly with some postulates6, of which the
second is "that equal weights suspended from unequal arms
(longitudes, fidxea) are not in equilibrium (/*?) laoppotrelv) but
incline (sic) towards the weight which is suspended from the longer
arm." A little further on, he assumes "that if equal and
similar planes fit exactly upon one another, their centres of
gravity also fit exactly upon one another" (i<j>apfi6^eiv ev
1 Aristotle says that cheating trades- 
tions, then the resulting motion is along
men would shift the centre of their 
the diagonal AD of the parallelogram
balances towards the scale in which 
ABDG. He shews this by supposing A to
the weight lay (Mech. Probl. i. Jin.). 
move along AB, while the whole line AB
This practice, no doubt, led to the 
moves towards CD. There is a good note
discovery of the law. Aristotle dis- 
inVanCappelle'sEd. (1812) pp. 150 sqq.
tinguishes the balance (flow) from 
8 Cantor, p. 219 and supra, pp. 105n.
the lever (nox^os)' an(^ the <™&prov 189.
(rope) by which the former is suspended 
* Eutocius defines it at the beginning
from the UTTO/M'XXIOC (fulcrum) on which 
of his commentary (Torelli, p. 2). The
the latter is supported. 
He gives, 
xivrpov p<nrrjs or fidpovs of a plane figure
however, the same explanation of both, 
is " the point from which it must be
8 See Mech. Probl. i. and xxm., and 
suspended, in order to remain parallel
Heller, Gesckichte der Physik, pp. 63— 
with the horizon.". "The centre of
66. Heller admits that "it would be 
gravity of two or more plane figures is
foolish to attribute to Aristotle a clear 
the point from which the balance (6
knowledge" of the principle in question. 
iyyos) must be suspended, in order to
All that Aristotle says is as follows. If 
remain parallel with the horizon."
a point A have two "motions" (0opo£) 
Possibly Archimedes had given this
at the same time, the one along the 
definition in his lost treatise ircpl £vy&v.
straight line AB and the other along 
5 According to Eutocius, Geminus,
the straight line A C, and AB, AC re- 
who was a great purist in nomenclature,
present in length the ratio of the mo- 
proposed to call these "axioms."
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APQIXONIUS. 
239
dWaXa). 
"Of unequal but similar figures, the centres of
gravity are similarly placed." "In similar figures points are
similarly placed if the straight lines, making equal angles at
such points, make also equal angles on the homologous sides."
Lastly, "In any figure, of which the periphery is concave
towards the same parts1, the centre of gravity must fall within
the figure." Props. I.—ill. are of exactly the same kind as the
initial postulates. Props IV.—V. shew how to find the centre
of gravity of two or three equal magnitudes whose centres of
gravity are in the same straight line. Props. VI. and vn. are
"commensurable and incommensurable magnitudes hang in
equilibrium from arms which are inversely as the magnitudes."
Prop. viil. is to find the centre of gravity of the remaining
part of a magnitude, from which a portion not having the
same centre of gravity as the whole, has been removed. Props.
ix.—xv. shew how to find first the line in which the centre
of gravity lies, and then the centre of gravity itself of a
parallelogram, a triangle and a trapezium. Between Books I.
and II. the Quadrature of the Parabola is interposed. Book
II. begins (Prop. I.) by applying to parabolic segments the
Props, vi.—vn. of the first book. Props n.—vn. deal with the
centres of gravity of rectilineal figures inscribed in a parabolic
segment, e.g. Prop. v. is "If a rectilineal figure be inscribed in a
parabolic segment, the centre of gravity of the whole segment is
nearer to the vertex than that of the inscribed figure." Prop,
viil. is "The centre of gravity of a parabolic segment divides
the diameter so that the part towards the vertex is f of the part
towards the base." Prop. ix. is a very complicated proposition8
1 This expression is cot here ex- 
If four straight lines (a, b, c, d, of
plained, De Sph. et Cyl. Ax. 2 is "A 
which a is the greatest) be in continued
line is concave (xolXi;) towards the 
proportion, and d : a-d :; e : f (a-c)
same parts in which, if any two points 
, 
2a + 46 + 6c 4- 3d _ 
/
be taken, the straight lines joining 
5a +106 + 10c + 5d ~ a-c '
such points either all fall on the same 
«+/-£«. This is worked out in a
side (M TA airb. wlirTovat) of the line 
series of proportions obtained permu-
or some on the same side and some on 
tando, componendo, dividendo. The
the line itself (KOT avrijs) but none on 
proof in modern symbols is given in
the other side" (tvl rk irepa). 
Heiberg, Q.A. pp. 49, 50.
2 The enunciation is to this effect:
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

240 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
in arithmetic which is required for Prop. X. to find the centre
of gravity of a truncated parabolic segment.
It is evident that, in the composition of this work, Archi-
medes' interest was not with mechanics but with mathematics.
He does not care about weights or balances but about proofs.
Some more practical propositions, perhaps, were contained in
the lost book irepl ^vymv, from which Pappus1 seems to quote
the problem "To move a given weight with a given power."
The two books on Hydrostatics, Be Us quae in humido
vehuntur, are similar in character to the Equiponderance, but in
this department of mechanics Archimedes seems to have had no
predecessors whatever. His attention seems to have been first
called to the subject of specific gravity by the following circum-
stance. King Hiero, being anxious to discover whether a crown,
which was ostensibly made of gold, might not perhaps be
alloyed with silver, asked Archimedes to test it. The story
relates that the philosopher was in the bath when the proper
method of inquiry occurred to him, and that he immediately ran
home naked, shouting Wvpy/ca, e'vpriica, " I have found it." Our
authorities, however, which agree thus far, now begin to diverge.
One2 says that Archimedes, having observed, on stepping into
the bath, that bodies immersed in water displaced a quantity of
water proportionate to their bulk and not to their weight,
measured the quantity displaced by gold and silver masses of
equal weight and thus obtained a ratio of bulk between the two
metals. A later writer3 on the other hand, states that Archi-
medes, by weighing two equal weights of gold and silver immersed
in water, discovered not the quantity but the weight of the water
displaced, and thus arrived at the specific gravity of the metals.
Both methods may be authentic, but the latter leads more natu-
rally to the treatise on Floating Bodies. Book i.* begins with
1 vm. 19. p. 1060. 
are printed in Torelli, p. 364.
2 Vitruvius, ix. 3. 
* The definition of a fluid is given in
3 The author of a poem Be pon- 
Positio i. "Let it be assumed that
deribus et mensuris, formerly attributed 
the nature of a fluid is such that, all
to Priscian but now supposed to be 
its parts lying evenly and continuous
of about A.D. 500 (Hultsch, Scriptt. 
with one another, the part subject to
Metrologici p. 88 sqq.). The passage 
less pressure is expelled by the part
of Yitruvius and the lines of the poem 
subject to greater pressure. But each
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
241
two propositions to the effect that the surface of every still fluid
is spherical, the centre of the sphere being the centre of the earth.
Prop. in. is that bodies of equal weight with an equal bulk of
any fluid do not, if immersed in the fluid, rise above or sink below
its surface. Props. IV.—VI. are on bodies lighter than a fluid.
Prop. v. in particular contains the hydrostatic principle that
" a body lighter than a fluid, when immersed therein, sinks so
deep that the quantity of fluid displaced weighs as much as the
whole body." Prop. vil. is on bodies heavier than a fluid and
immersed therein. Props, vm.—ix. are on segments of a sphere
lighter than a fluid and immersed therein. These will float
so that their axes are always vertical. Book n. begins with
a proposition (i.), which gives a scientific definition of the
specific gravity of bodies lighter than the fluid in which the
unit of gravity is chosen. It is that " if a body, lighter than a
fluid, floats therein, its weight is to that of an equal bulk of the
fluid as the immersed part is to the whole." The remaining
propositions II.—x. are on segments of parabolic conoids im-
mersed in a fluid and the positions which they will assume
under various conditions1.
Although, in these works, it is evident that mathematical
interest far exceeds the mechanical, and though Archimedes, as
above mentioned, was of the opinion of Plato and Pythagoras
that the employment of the intellect in the useful arts was
degrading, yet it is certain that many of the most useful
mechanical contrivances of antiquity were due to his ingenuity.
Of these the most famous is the water-screw («o%Xt'a?), which
part is pressed perpendicularly by the 
there made of them. i. is "If in any
fluid above it, if the fluid be falling 
line a point moves evenly and there be
(deseendens in aliquo) or under any 
taken in the line two parts, these shall
pressure." 
Positio n. occurs after 
have to one another the ratio of the
Prop. VII. and is "Let it be assumed 
times in which the point traverses them
that a body which is borne upwards by 
respectively." n. is "If two points
a fluid, is so borne in the direction of 
move evenly each in its own line and
the perpendicular line which passes 
in each line there be taken two parts,
through its centre of gravity." 
of which the two first are traversed by
1 Two propositions of the De Spiral. 
the points in the same time and also
(i. and II.) are of mechanical import- 
the two second, the parts will be pro-
ance, though no mechanical use is 
portional."
G. G. M. 
16
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

242 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
is still used. 
This apparently was invented by Archimedes
when in Egypt for the purpose of irrigating fields, but it was
used also for pumping water out of mines or from the hold of a
ship1. Further the problem " how to move a given weight with
a given power," above mentioned, was practically solved by
Archimedes2 by the construction of a machine which is variously
described. It is said by Athenseus (and Plutarch has a similar
tale), that Hiero was in a difficulty about the launching of a
certain very large ^hip. Archimedes effected this very easily
by means of an apparatus of cogwheels, worked by an endless
screw (eXtfj)". Plutarch, however, states that he used, for the
purpose, a compound pulley (iroXvairaarro';). It is possible
that Athenaeus has by some confusion attributed to Archimedes
the fiapov\ieo<; which was invented by Heron4, but many autho-
rities concur in attributing to him a compound pulley of three
(TynWacrTo?) or more (7roXi;o-7racrT09) wheels5. Perhaps this
machine was called by Archimedes himself a yapiaTlmv, for
Tzetzes who, in one place (Chil. Ii. 130), records the proud boast
of the philosopher " Give me a place to stand on (Sos TTOV crrtS)
and I will move the whole earth with a ^apiarlcov," elsewhere
(ill. 61) repeats the same saying as referring to a T/atWao-ro?
(or TrokvcriracrTosy. It is well attested, again, that Archimedes
protracted the siege of Syracuse for a long time by his ingenuity
in constructing catapults which were equally serviceable for
long or short ranges, and others which could be applied to a
small loophole in a wall7, but the tale that he set fire to the
1 See the article'Archimedean Screw' 
the teacher of Heron.
with an illustration in Encycl. Brit. 
6 Beside Plutarch, Galen in Hippocr.
The ancient authorities are Diodorus, 
De Artie, iv. 27 (xvm. p. 747, ed. Kuhn),
I. 34, v. 37, Vitruvius x. 6 (11), Philo 
Oribasius, Coll. Med. XLIX. 22 (iv. p.
in. p. 330 (ed. Pfeiffer), Strabo xvn. p. 
407,ed. Bussemaker). The latter writer
807, Athenseus v. 208 f. 
loc. cit. and Vitruvius x. 2, describe
2 Plutarch, Marcellus 14, Athenasus 
the TplewacrTos. Proclus (p. 63) only
v. 207 a, b. 
gives the fact that Archimedes moved
3 Eustathius ad Iliad in. p. 114, 
a large ship.
ed. Stallbaum. 
« AH the authorities are collected in
4 Pappus m. prop. 5. (Hultsch, p. 
Heiberg Q.A., pp. 36—38.
63) and vm. props. 31 sqq. So also 
7 Polybius VIII. 7, Livy xxiv. 34,
Tertullian (De Anima, 14) ascribes to 
Plutarch, Marcellus 15. More reff, in
Archimedes the hydraulic organ which 
Heiberg, op. cit. pp. 38, 39.
everybody else attributes to Ctesibius,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
243
Roman ships, by means of burning-glasses or concave mirrors1,
though repeated by many late writers, is not found in any
authority older than Lucian {Hipp. 2).
It is evident, again, both from the Atenarius itself and from
many references in later authors, that Archimedes was much
engaged in astronomical observations2. Hipparchus (loc. cit.)
says " from these observations it is clear that the differences of
the years are very small, but, as to the solstices, I almost think
(OVK dir€wltyo) that both myself and Archimedes have erred,
by a quarter of a day, both in the observation and in the
calculation." It would seem from this, and Ammianus expressly
states, that Archimedes was interested in the great question of
the length of the year. Macrobius says that he discovered the
distances of the planets. However this may be, it is certain
that Archimedes not only wrote a treatise (mentioned above)
on the constitution of a celestial globe (wept cr<f>aipoTroua<s) but
himself actually made one and also a planetary, exhibiting the
movements of the sun, moon and five planets. Both these were
brought to Rome by Marcellus and were inspected by Cicero
himself3.
It is not difficult to understand how, in ancient times,
Archimedes came to be considered as the prince of mathe-
maticians, and that " an Archimedean problem " became a name
for a difficulty insoluble to the ordinary intellect and an " Archi-
1 The same story is told of Proclus 
i. 63, Nat. D. n. 88, Ovid, Fasti, vi.
by Zonaras (Montuola i. p. 33-t). 
277, etc. Most of the passages con-
Montucla, who has some rather a- 
taining references to the mechanical
musing pages (i. 232—235) on this 
contrivances of Archimedes are printed
subject, shews the improbability of the 
in Torelli's Appendix, pp. 363—370.
tale about Archimedes. It appears 
Some further references are added by
that le phre Kircher and also Buffon 
Heiberg, Q.A. cap. 3, pp. 35—44. The
made some successful experiments with 
loculus Archimedius, mentioned by late
a great number of mirrors. Buffon, 
Roman writers (Marius Victorin. Art.
with 400 small mirrors, melted lead at 
gr. 3, Atilius Fortun. De Metr. vi. p.
a distance of 140 feet. 
271), was a square of ivory cut into 14
2 Hipparchus in Ptol. Almagest. I. 
pieces of various shapes. It was a
p. 153. Ammianus Marcell. xxvi. 1, 8, 
common game to put these together
Maerobius, Somn.Scip. n. 3. Livy, loc. 
again into the original square. There
cit. calls Archimedes 'unicus spectator is no reason to suppose that Archimedes
caeli siderumque.' 
invented this toy.
3 Cicero, De Rep. i. 21—22, Tusc.
16—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

244 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
medean proof" was the type of incontrovertible certainty1.
The older men of the modern school, from Tartaglia to Leibnitz,
while geometry and mechanics were still largely dependent for
support on the discoveries and demonstrations of the Greeks,
were as enthusiastic as the ancients about Archimedes. Even
later writers, such as Gauss and De Morgan and Chasles2, who
were familiar with the highest modern methods, do not hesitate
to rank him with Newton in the very forefront of the champions
of science. But knowledge has lately advanced too fast for the
fame of Archimedes to keep up with it, and, though his name is
no doubt immortal, few readers now know upon, what services
his immortality depends. Possibly these few paragraphs will
justify it at least to mathematicians who understand what diffi-
culties the work of Archimedes involved.
130. The chief contemporary of Archimedes was the famous
Eratosthenes. As he was eleven years younger than the mathe-
matician of Syracuse, he was probably born B.C. 276 or 275.
He was a son of Eglaus, a native of Cyrene, but lived almost all
his life in Alexandria. He was a pupil of Callimachus, the
poet, and after a visit to Athens, was invited to succeed his
master as custodian of the Alexandrian library. He is said to
have almost lost his sight by ophthalmia and on that account
to have committed suicide, by voluntary starvation, about
B.C. 194.
The multifarious activity of Eratosthenes may be guessed
from the fact that, among other contributions to literature and
science, he wrote works on Good and Evil, Comedy, Geography,
Chronology, the Measurement of the Earth and the Constella-
tions3. He was also a considerable poet. The students of the
1 Cio. ad Att. in. 4, XII. 28, Pro 
for their object the measurement of the
Cluentio 32, Ac. Priora 36. 
dimensions of lines and curved surfaces
2 Chasles, Apergu, p. 15, says of the 
and which require the consideration of
discoveries of Archimedes that they 
the infinite."
are "for ever memorable for their 
8 See the article Eratosthenes in
novelty and the difficulty which they 
Smith's Die. of Gr. and Rom. Biogr.
presented atthattime, and because they 
for the authorities who mention these
are the germ of a great part of those 
and other works, none of which are
which have since been made, chiefly in 
extant,
all branches of geometry which have
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
245
University used to call him Pentathlus, the champion in five
sports1. It was Eratosthenes who first made a fairly accurate
measurement of the obliquity of the ecliptic and an approxi-
mate measurement of a geographical degree2. It was certainly
in his time also that the calendar3, which we now call Julian,
with an intercalary day every four years, was introduced. His
arithmetical device for finding prime numbers has been described
above (p. 87), but of the geometrical work of Eratosthenes only
one fragment now remains, the letter which he addressed to
Ptolemy Euergetes on the duplication-problem and which is
preserved in the commentary of Eutocius on Archimedes, Sph.
et Cyl. II. 5. This is mainly occupied with the description of a
mechanical contrivance for effecting duplication, which Eratos-
thenes hence called a mesolabium or "mean-finder," and of
which he was so proud that he dedicated a specimen of it in a
temple to be a possession for ever to posterity. It consists of
three oblong frames, with their diagonals, sliding in three
grooves so that the second frame can slide under the first, the
third under the second.
A
\
\
\
\
B 
X> 
J
B a-
* Hi
If AB, OH be the two lines between which it is required
to find two mean proportionals, then slide the second frame
under the first and the third under the second so that A Q shall
pass through the points G, E, at which the diameters of the
1 They also called him Beta, as a
little later they called a certain as-
tronomer Apollonius Epsilon. I should
think these were simply the numbers
of certain lecture-rooms, hut Ptolemy
Hephaestio (in Photius, Cod. cxc.) says
that Apollonius was called Epsilon be-
cause he studied the moon, of which
the letter e was a symbol. 
This
Apollonius maybe Apollonius of Perga,
who certainly studied the stations and
retrogradations of the planets (Ptol.
Almag. xn. 1).
2 On the astronomical and geode-
tical work of Eratosthenes see Delam-
bre i. ch. vn. pp. 86—97.
3 See the edict of Canopus, de-
scribed by Lepsius in his Zeitschrift
1877. Heft I. Cantor, p. 283.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

246 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
second and third frames, respectively, cease to be visible. Then
CD, EF are the required two mean proportionals1.
131. Contemporary with Eratosthenes and Archimedes,
though younger than either, was ApoUonius of Perga (in Pam-
phylia). He was born in the reign of Ptolemy III. (Euergetes
247—222 B.C.), and flourished under Ptolemy IV. (Philopator
222—205 B.C.). He came when quite young to Alexandria and
studied under the successors of Euclid, though no special
preceptor is named. He stayed for some time at Pergamum,
where there was an university and library similar to the
Alexandrian, and where he made the acquaintance of that
Eudemus to whom the first three books of his magnum opus,
the Conic Sections, are dedicated. The brilliance of this work
gained for him the title of ' the great geometer,' but no more
than these meagre facts'2 is known of his history.
Of the eight books which the treatise on Conic Sections
originally contained, we possess only seven, and these again have
come to us in two parts from two distinct sources. Sir Henry
Savile had a Greek MS. of the first four books, but though the
whole work seems to have remained for many centuries a
text-book of the Greek schools8, the last four books seem to
have been ultimately abandoned as hopeless and the Greek
text of them has wholly disappeared. The 8th was lost as
early as the time of Tabit ibn Korra who (in the 9 th century)
translated the first seven books into Arabic. This translation
remained the standard Arabic text of ApoUonius4. The Persians,
1 Pappus VII. Proem, pp. 636, 662 
Arabic translations of ApoUonius. Han-
(Hultsch) mentions a work of Era- 
kel (p. 234), quoting Casiri, says that a
tosthenes irepi ixeaoT^Tav or TO'TTOI irpbs 
version was made, in the time of Al
/teffoTTjras, which perhaps dealt with 
Mamun,of the first four Books: that this
the duplication-problem or with conies. 
was edited by Muhammed, one of the
Montucla i. p. 280. 
Beni Moses (i.e. the three sons of Musa
2 These are obtained from the pre- 
ibn Schakir), and that Tabit added a
fatory letter to Book i. of the Conies, 
translation of the 5th, 6th, and 7th
and from Eutocius'Commentary there- 
Books. But the writer of the Golian
on, Halley's ed. pp. 8 and 9. 
MS. (see Halley, p. 255) says that he
3 Geminus, Serenus, Pappus, Hy- 
has followed the version of Tabit, as
patia and Eutocius all wrote commen- 
emended by the Beni Moses. The Per-
taries on ApoUonius. 
sians Abulphath and Abdulmelik, next
4 There is some difficulty about the 
mentioned, are not otherwise known.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
247
Abulphath and Abdulmelik made an epitome of it, and the
famous Nasir-Eddin edited the whole with a commentary about
A. D. 1240. But, in Europe, only the first four books were
known as late as the middle of the 17th century, when one
Golius, a professor at Leyden, introduced an Arabic MS. written
in 1248, containing the first four books in Nasir-Eddin's edition,
bnt the last three from the translation of Tabit with emendations
by the Beni Moses1. This MS. was bought by Dr Marsh, arch-
bishop of Armagh, who lent it to Halley, the astronomer, who
was then Savilian professor of geometry at Oxford. In 1710
Halley published the Greek text of four books and a Latin
translation of the remaining three, together with the lemmas of
Pappus to each book, the commentary of Eutocius and a
conjectural restoration (by Halley himself) of the lost 8th book.
The contents of the eight books of Conies are stated in
a very brief summary by Apollonius himself in the prefatory
letter to Book I. The more interesting and material parts of
this are as follows: "Apollonius to Eudemus, greeting. When I
was in Pergamum with you, I noticed that you were eager
to become acquainted with my Conies: so I send you now the
first book with corrections and will forward the rest when I have
leisure. I suppose you have not forgotten that I told you that
I undertook these investigations at the request of Naucrates the
geometer, when he came to Alexandria and stayed with me: and
that, having arranged them in eight books, I let him have
them at once, not correcting them very carefully (for he was on
the point of sailing) but setting down everything that occurred
to me, with the intention of returning to them later. Wherefore
I now take the opportunity of publishing the needful emen-
dations. But since it has happened that other people have
obtained the first and second books of my collections before
1 In 1656, almost simultaneously 
much that was in Apollonius but had
with the arrival of Golius' MS., an- 
improved on the real text in many re-
other was found in the Medioean library 
speots. The restoration of lost works
at Florence. Galileo's pupil, Viviani, 
of Apollonius founded on the lemmas
had then nearly completed his restora- 
of Pappus and other authorities, was
tion of the four last books, all of which 
a favourite exercise of mathematicians
were supposed to he lost. It was found, 
from the 16th century onwards. See
on comparison, that he had omitted 
infra, pp. 261—263,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

248 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS,
correction, do not wonder if you meet with copies which are
different from this. Of the eight books, the first four are
devoted to an elementary introduction. The 1st contains the
mode of producing the three sections and the conjugate hyper-
bolas (avTi/cel/jievcu, 'opposite') and their principal character-
istics, more fully and generally worked out than in the writings
of other authors. The 2nd Book treats of diameters and axes
and asymptotes and other things of general and necessary use in
diorismi. What I mean by diameters and axes you will learn
from this book. The 3rd Book contains many curious theorems,
most of which are pretty and new (KOXCL /cal %kvd), useful,
for the synthesis of solid loci and for diorismi. In the in-
vention of these, I observed that Euclid had not treated syn-
thetically the locus ivl Tpek KOX T^crcrapa? ypa/i/ids ('the locus
which is related to three or four lines')1 but only a certain
small portion of it, and that not happily, nor indeed was a
complete treatise possible at all without my discoveries. The
4th Book shews in how many points the sections of a cone can
coincide with one another or with the circumference of a circle2
and some extra propositions (aXXa e« irepicrcrov), none of which
had been published by my predecessors. The rest (the last
1 The TO7ros ivl rpeis KOX Titxoapas 
The conic as a locus ad quattuor lineas
ypafi/ias would have been treated ana- 
is used by Newton in the Principia.
lytically in Euclid's lost Conies. Pap- 
Chasles Aper$u p. 38 points out the
pus vn. 36, p. 678 (Hultsch), defines 
importance of this aspect of conies,
this locus as follows: "If three straight 
2 This sentence is only a paraphrase,
lines be given in position and from 
The Greek has wotrax&s (" in how many
a point straight lines be drawn to 
ways") and Kari, iroca, a-ri^ela ("in
meet the given three at given angles, 
how many points") in two distinct
and the ratio of the rectangle under 
sentences, as if these were two different
two of the lines so drawn to the square 
things. But the introduction to the
of the third be given, the point will lie 
4th book has only nark iroah <rqii.ua.>
on a solid locus given in position, i.e. 
and it is probable that these words
on one of the three conies. If four 
were added as a gloss on iroaax&s by
straight lines be given in position and 
some commentator. The.same intro-
four straight lines be drawn as before, 
duction to the 4th Book says also that
and the ratio of the rectangles under 
the subject here assigned to it had
two pairs be given, similarly the point 
been treated already, but very badly, by
will lie on a conic." If five or six 
Conon, whose work was severely criti-
straight lines were drawn, whose pro- 
cised by Nicoteles of Cyrene, and that
ducts were in a given ratio, the locus 
some props, of the 4th Book had been
of the point could not be described, 
cursorily treated by this Nicoteles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
249
four books) is more advanced (TrepiovcnaariKmTepa). One is, for
the most part, on maxima and minima: the next about equal
and similar conies: the next about 'determinative' (dioristic)
theorems; the last on some problems so 'determined' (Stwpio--
fikva)." The first three books were sent to Eudemus at intervals,
the remainder (after Eudemus' death) to one Attalus. All
(except the 3rd) are accompanied by little prefatory notes,
which repeat in effect the remarks of the first letter. The
preface to Book n. is interesting, as shewing the mode in
which Greek books were "published" at this time. It runs
"I have sent my son Apollonius to bring you the second
book of my Conies. Read it carefully and communicate
it to such others as are worthy of it. If Philonides the
geometer, whom I introduced to you at Ephesus, comes into
the neighbourhood of Pergamum, give it to him also."
It will be seen that Apollonius does not pretend that his
first three books were entirely new, but only that they were im-
provements on his predecessors. The statement of Pappus,
therefore, that Apollonius' first four books are founded on the
Conies of Euclid is probably substantially true, and there may be
some foundation for the accusation of Heracleides that Apollonius
had stolen from the unpublished MSS. of Archimedes. But
how far the study of conies had been carried before Apollonius
cannot now be ascertained. Menaechmus, we know, first wrote
on the subject and advanced far enough to apprehend the
existence of asymptotes to the hyperbola. He was followed by
Aristaeus the elder, whose work was used by Euclid at least in
his treatment of the locus ad tres et quattuor lineas1, which
seem to have been partly discussed in his Conies*. But the
Conies of Menaechmus, Aristaeus and Euclid were almost
immediately driven out of the field by the superior book
of Apollonius, and the only clue to their contents is to be found
in those passages of Archimedes (especially in the Quadrat.
Paraboles and Be Conoidibus) in which propositions in conies
1 Pappus VII. 34 (Hultschp. 676). 
occurred. But it could hardly have been
2 Eutocius (Halley p. 12) did not 
in the T6ITOI irpbs tirupavdq., because
know where the passage of Euclid to 
the locus in question was a conic. See
which Apollonius refers in his preface, 
note on preceding page.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

250 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
are referred to as well known or assumed. A careful exami-
nation of these shews, in the first place positively, that almost
all the propositions which Archimedes uses are to be found
in the first three books of ApoUonius1, and, in the second place
negatively, that no predecessor of ApoUonius was acquainted
with the names parabola, ellipse and hyperbola, and with the
new treatment of conies which these names imply. It is
evident, therefore, that almost the whole of Apollonius' work
was original.
132. The completed work adheres closely to the lines
indicated in the prefatory letter, but it is obviously difficult to
give an intelligible or readable analysis of a huge treatise
in which the propositions do not, as they generally do with
Archimedes, lead gradually up to one crowning achievement.
The theorems, of course, are in great measure identical with
those of the modern text-books, but a summary of them, if
stated in modern language, would lose historical suggestiveness,
and, if stated in the language of Apollonius, would generally be
tedious or incomprehensible. This paragraph, therefore, and
the next are to be regarded only as containing some hints upon
the matter and manner of Apollonius.
Book I. begins with a series of definitions. If a line be
drawn from a fixed point to the circumference of a circle, which
is not in the plane of the point, and the line revolve round the
circumference of the circle, it describes a cone, of which the
circle is the base, the fixed point the vertex. The axis is the
line joining the vertex and the centre of the base. If the axis
is at right angles to the base, the cone is right: if otherwise,
scalene. "Of every curve in one plane, that straight line is
a diameter which, being drawn from the curve, bisects all the
straight lines drawn in the curve parallel to a certain straight
line." The extremity of the diameter on the curve is the
vertex of the curve: each of the parallels is drawn ordinatim
1 See Heiberg in Zeitsehr. fur Math. 
21, 26, 33, 35, 36, 46, 49: n. 3, 12, 13,
u. Phys. Hist. Lit. Abth. xxv. pp. 41 
27, 49": in. 17: vi. def. 7, props. 2
sqq. and a summary of this in Litter- 
and 11, of Apollonius were known to
argesch. uber Euclid, pp. 86—88. He 
his predecessors,
concludes that the props, i. 11, 17, 20,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
251
(Terar//iive>s KarrJKTai "is an ordinate") to the diameter. 
Of
two curves in one plane, that straight line is a transverse
(irXcvyia) diameter which, cutting both curves, is a diameter of
each; and that straight line is an erect (ppdia) diameter,
which, lying between the curves, bisects all the lines inter-
cepted between them which are parallel to a certain straight
line. Conjugate (crv^vyeif) diameters are straight lines of
which each is a diameter and each bisects the straight lines
parallel to the other. The axis of the curve (or of two
curves) is the diameter which bisects the parallels at right
angles, and conjugate axes are the conjugate diameters, each of
which bisects the parallels to the other at right angles. The
definitions of the centre of the ellipse and the conjugate hyper-
bolas and one or two more are added after Prop. xvi. Book vi.
begins with the definitions of similar and dissimilar conies and
segments of conies. But many of the most important definitions
(e.g. of parabola, ellipse and hyperbola, latus rectum and trans-
versum, conjugate hyperbolas and asymptotes) are contained in
the propositions in which the things defined first appear. The
seven extant books contain on an average about 50 propositions
apiece.
The first and most striking of the novelties which are due
to Apollonius himself is his mode of producing the three conic
sections and the names and descriptions which he gives of
them. It will be remembered that his predecessors had always
cut the cone by a plane at right angles to one of its sides, and
had therefore produced the parabola as the section of a " right-
angled cone," the ellipse in an " acute-angled cone," the hyper-
bola in an " obtuse-angled cone." Apollonius produces all
these sections in one and the same cone, whether right or
scalene, cut by a plane which is parallel or not parallel to one of
its sides. The old names, therefore, ceased to be appropriate,
and new ones were required. It will be remembered, again,
that a rectangle, applied to a straight line, was said irapa-
fidWea-Ocu, if its base exactly coincided with the line, virep-
fiaXkeiv, if it exceeded the line, iXKelireiv, if it fell short of it.
Fiom these technical terms, Apollonius derived his new names.
Let 0 be any point on a conic of which AB is the axis, and from
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

252 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
C draw CD perpendicular to AB, cutting off (the abscissa) AD.
From A draw AE at right angles to AB and equal in length to
what we now call the latus rectum of the conic. Draw a rectangle
equal to the square on CD and having AD for one of its sides.
If this rectangle, applied to AE, has its other side exactly coin-
ciding (TrapafiaXXofievov) with AE, the conic is a parabola. If
the side applied to AE is too short (iWefcei), the conic is an
ellipse: if it is too long (inrepfidWei), the conic is a hyper-
bola. (In the language of modern analytical conies, if p be the
parameter, the Parabola is so-called because y* = px: the Hyper-
bola because y*>px: the Ellipse because y*<px.) It is in this
way that Apollonius gets rid of the cone and exhibits the conic
as a plane locus. But he does not define the conic with any
reference whatever to a focus and directrix. The focus of an
ellipse and hyperbola he discovers only incidentally (in. props.
45—52): he does not discover the focus of a parabola at all and
has no notion of a directrix for any conic1.
These remarks being premised, the critique of M. Chasles,
which repeats some of them in , another form, may be here
substantially reproduced2. Almost the whole of the learned
treatise of Apollonius, he says, "depends upon a single property
of the conic sections, which is derived directly from the nature
of the cone in which these curves are formed....Conceive an
oblique cone on a circular base. A plane, passing through the
axis, perpendicularly to the base, produces a triangular section,
which is called the triangle through the axis. Apollonius sup-
poses, in the formation of his conic sections, the cutting plane
1 Pappus vn. 238 (p. 1013) first 
Apollonius, with some indications of
suggested the focus of a parabola and 
the profounder part of his researches.
the directrix. The theory of foci was 
A much fuller summary is given by
first worked out by Kepler; Newton 
Mr Taylor, Ancient and Modern Conies,
first made any use of the directrix, 
pp. XLII.—L. 
Montucla (i. p. 247) is
which was adopted from him by Bos- 
extremely brief. Cantor (pp. 290—296)
covich. 
Taylor, Ancient and Mod. 
is tolerably full, but gives no precise
Conies, LIV., LXV., LXXI, 
references. The fact is that Apollonius
2 Apercu, pp. 18—20. I select this 
is tedious, as Prof, de Morgan found
passage because it rather happily com- 
him (Art. "Apoll." 
in Penny Cy-
bines some information on the nomen- 
clop.).
clature and elementary propositions of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, AECHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
253
to be perpendicular to the triangle through the axis. The
points in which this plane meets the sides of the triangle are
the vertices of the curve, and the straight line joining these
points is a diameter of it. Apollonius calls this diameter lotus
transversum (irKaryia)1.
" At one of the two vertices of the curve erect a perpendi-
cular to the plane of the triangle through the axis, of a certain
length, to be determined as herein-after mentioned: and from
the extremity of this perpendicular draw a straight line to the
other vertex of the curve. Now, from any point in the diameter
of the curve draw at right angles an ordinate: the square of
this ordinate, lying between the diameter and the curve, will be
equal to the rectangle contained by the part of the ordinate
comprised between the diameter and the straight line and the
part of the diameter comprised between the first vertex and the
foot of the ordinate. Such is the generic (originaire) and
characteristic property which Apollonius recognises in his conic
sections and which he uses for the purpose of inferring from it,
by very adroit transformations and deductions, almost all the
rest. It plays, as will be seen, in his hands, almost the same
part as the equation of the second degree with two variables in
the system of Analytical Geometry of Descartes.
" It will be observed that the diameter of the curve and the
perpendicular raised at one of its extremities, suffice to construct
the curve. These are the two elements which the ancients
used to establish their theory of conies. The perpendicular in
question was called by them latus erectum (opOla): the moderns
first changed this name to that of latus rectum, which was long
employed, and afterwards replaced it by parameter, which has
remained. Apollonius and the geometers who wrote after him
gave different geometrical expressions, found in the cone, for the
length of this latus rectum for each section, but none has
appeared to us so simple and elegant as that of Jacques
Bernoulli. It is as follows: Take a plane parallel to the base of
the cone and situate at the same distance from its vertex as the
plane of the proposed conic: this plane will cut the cone in a
1 A parabola, having only one vertex, has no latus transversum,.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

254 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
circle, the diameter of which will be the lotus rectum of the
conic1. From this it is easy to infer the mode of placing a
given conic in a given cone.
"The most interesting properties of the conies are to be
found in the treatise of Apollonius. We may cite those of the
asymptotes, which form the chief part of Book n.: the constant
ratio of the products of the segments made by a conic on two
transversals parallel to two fixed axes and drawn through any
point (props. 16—23 of Book III.): the principal properties of
the foci of the ellipse and hyperbola (in. 45—52)2: the two
pretty theorems on conjugate diameters (vn. 12 and 22:
30 and 31).
"We ought also to cite the following theorem, which has
obtained so great importance in recent geometry as the basis of
the theory of reciprocal polars, and which LaHire had, earlier,
made the foundation of his theory of conies. ' If, through the
point of concourse of two tangents to a conic section, a trans-
versal be drawn which meets the curve in two points, and the
chord which joins the points of contact of the two tangents in a
third point, as the whole transversal to the part of it outside
the curve, so are the segments of the chord to one another'
(in. 37)8.
" The first 23 propositions of Book iv. relate to the harmonic
division of straight lines drawn in the plane of a conic. These
are, for the most part, different cases of the theorem just enun-
ciated. In the following propositions Apollonius considers
the system of two conies and shews that these curves can cut
one another only in four points. He examines what happens
when they touch one another in one or in two points and treats
1 Novum theorema pro doctr. Sect. 
et le point de concours des deux tan-
Conic, in the Leipzig Ada Eruditorum, 
gentes seront conjuguis harmoniques^ax
anno 1689, p. 586. 
rapport aux deux premiers." So Mr
2 The foci are called "points of 
Taylor, p. XLV. "Any chord through
application." 
the intersection of two tangents to a
3 Save for the use of the word 
conic is cut harmonically by their
"transversal" I give the enunciation 
point of concourse and their chord of
practically as it stands in Apollonius. 
contact" (in. 37—40). Apollonius does
Chasles converts it into modern phra- 
not use the word "harmonic," but
seology, concluding "ce troisiemepoint 
gives his proportions in full.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
255
various other cases of the respective positions which they can
present1.
"Book V. is the most precious monument of the genius of
Apollonius. Here, for the first time, appear questions of maxi-
ma and minima*. The book contains all that the analytical
methods of to-day teach us on this subject, and we may recog-
nise in it the germ of the beautiful theory of evolutes (dfoe-
loppe'es)3. In fact, Apollonius proves that there is, on each side
of the axis of a conic, a succession of points from which only one
normal can be drawn to the opposite part of the curve: he gives
the construction of these points and observes that their con-
tinuity separates two spaces which present this remarkable
difference, viz.: from any point of the one two normals can be
drawn to the curve and none can be drawn from any point of
the other. Here then we have centres of osculation (curvature)
and the evolute of a conic perfectly determined*. Apollonius
makes use of an auxiliary hyperbola, of which he determines
the elements, for the purpose of constructing the feet of the
normals let fall, from a given point, on the proposed conic. All
these investigations are conducted with admirable sagacity."
It should be added that Book VI. treats mainly of similar
conies: Book vil. of conjugate diameters, Book VIII., as restored
by Halley, consists of 33 problems (or porisms, as he might have
called them) to find conjugate diameters which satisfy certain
given conditions.
133. It will be obvious that, for the mere purpose of
illustrating the style of Apollonius, one proposition will do
almost as well as another. The proofs, which I shall give in
this section, are those of two propositions of exceptional histori-
cal interest.
Prop. II. of Book I. exhibits the characteristic of the parabola
above described. The enunciation (slightly abbreviated) is as
1 Every proposition in Bk. iv. is 
n. 5, given above, p. 225, n.
proved by reductio ad absurdum. 
3 Suggested first by Huyghena in
2 This iB not quite true. Euclid vi. 
1673. 
Taylor, Conies, pp. 221, 222.
27 (supra p. 84, n.), is the first known 
4 The remarks of Chasles on Bk. v.
proposition in which a maximum is 
are practically identical with Mon-
found. Compare also the determination 
tucla's.
given by Archimedes De Sph. et Cyl.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

256 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES, AND APOLLONIUS.
follows: " If a cone be cut by a plane through the axis and by
another plane cutting its base along a straight line which is
perpendicular to the triangle through the axis, and the diameter1
of the section be parallel to one of the sides of the triangle
through the axis: the square of the straight line which is drawn
to the diameter from the section of the cone parallel to the
common section of the cutting plane and the base of the cone
will be equal to the area contained by the abscissa (JJ airokaix^a-
vofiivrf) of the diameter and a certain other line which has, to
the straight line lying between the angle of the cone and the
vertex of the segment, the same ratio which the square on the
base of the axial triangle has to the rectangle under its sides.
Let a section of this sort be called a Parabola."
The proof (somewhat abridged) is as follows:
ABF is the axial triangle. Let the cone be cut also
by a plane which cuts its base along AE, at right angles
to BF. AZE is the conic, ZH its diameter, parallel to AF,
one side of the axial triangle. From Z draw Z© at right
angles to ZH, making Z© : ZA :: BF2 : AB . AF. Erom any
point K on the carve draw KA parallel to AE, meeting the
diameter in A. Then KA3 = ©Z. ZA.
Through A draw MN, parallel to BF. Now KA is parallel
to AE, therefore the plane through KA, MN is parallel to the
plane through BF, AE, i.e. to the base of the cone. Therefore
1 This diameter, which is in fact the 
diameter IK yevvtiaeus, "arising from
axis, is called in the corollary to i. 46 
the generation of the curve."
the principal (dpx<Ki)) diameter or the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
257
the plane through KA, MN is a circle, of which MN is a
diameter. And KA is perpendicular to MN {as AE to BF).
Therefore KA2 = MA . AN1.
And since BF2 : BA. AF :: ©Z : ZA, but B P : BA . AF
is the ratio compounded of BF : TA and BF : FA, there-
fore ©Z : ZA is. the same compounded ratio. But
BF : FA :: MN : NA :: MA : AZj
and BF : BA :: MN : MA :: MA : MZ :: the remainder NA: the
remainder ZA. Therefore @Z : ZA (being compounded of the
ratios MA : AZ and NA : ZA) is MA . NA : AZ. ZA.
But ©Z : ZA :: ©Z. ZA : ZA . ZA. Therefore
MA. NA = ©Z. ZA. But MA . NA = KA2, as already proved.
Therefore KA2 = ©Z . ZA. Q. E. D.
The proof concludes with a direction that ©Z may be called
either the line related to the squares of the ordinates {irap' fjv
hvvavrai) or latus rectum (6p8ia),
The enunciation of I. 12 establishes a similar law for the
hyperbola. " If a cone be cut by a plane through the axis and
by another plane cutting its base along a straight line perpen-
dicular to the base of the axial triangle, and the diameter of the
section produced meet one side of the axial triangle produced on
the other side of the vertex8, the square of any ordinate (described
as before) will be equal to an area {applied to a certain straight
line, to which the portion of the diameter of the conic produced,
which subtends the exterior angle of the triangle, has the same
ratio as the square of the straight line which is drawn, parallel
to the diameter, from the vertex of the cone to the base of the
triangle has to the rectangle contained by the segments of that
base made by it} having for its side the abscissa and excessive
(inrep/3aX\ov) by a figure similar and similar in position to that
which is contained by the straight line subtending the external
angle of the triangle and the straight line to which the area,
equal to the square of the ordinates, is to be applied (77 evdela
Trap fjv hvvavTai al KarayS/jLevai). Let a section of this kind,
be called a Hyperbola." This rigmarole (abridged from the
1 The nomenclature is remarkable. 
&x6.
T6 &pa irb TSV MAN t<rov iixrl T$ &T6 
S TWO cones, having a common
TOO KA. Nqtice the use of iiri and 
vertex, may here be supposed.
G. G. M. 
17
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

258 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
original) will be easier to follow by reference to the figure1,
in which ABF is the axial triangle: AZE the section: ZH the
diameter produced to meet FA in @. MN is the ordinate.
Then MN' is equal to an area applied to ZA, which line is
perpendicular to ZH, and is such that ©Z : ZA :: AK2 • BK. KT,
the line AK being drawn parallel to the diameter ZH. The
area in question, ZH, has the abscissa ZN for one side, and
is such that it "overlaps" (inrepfidWei) the line ZA by the
figure AS which is similar and similar in position to the
rectangle ©Z. ZA. The line ZA is drawn at right angles to
ZH. From N, NOS is drawn parallel to ZA, and the point 3 is
that in which ©A produced meets NOS. The only addition
made to the figure for the purpose of the proof is that, through
N, PS is drawn parallel to BF. The proof is of the same kind
as that for the parabola, but concludes with the additional
statement that ©Z is to be called irXayia, latus transversum.
The next proposition (i. 13) contains a similar theorem with
regard to the ellipse. The latus rectum is determined precisely
as before. The square of the ordinate is equal to an area
applied to the latus rectum, but deficient by a figure similar and
similar in position to the rectangle under the latus transversum
and the latus rectum. The proposition contains also directions
for producing an elliptical section,
1 In the figure AO and IIS ought to be parallel to ZX.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
259
Book III. prop. 45, first exhibits the foci of the ellipse and
hyperbola. The enunciation is as follows: " If in a hyperbola
or ellipse or circle or conjugate hyperbolas, from the extremities
of the axis there be drawn straight lines at right angles, and a
rectangle equal to a fourth part of the figure1 be applied to the
axis at either end, in the hyperbola or conjugate hyperbolas
excessive by a square but in the ellipse deficient, and there be
drawn a tangent to the curve meeting the straight lines drawn
at right angles as aforesaid, the straight lines drawn from the
points of concourse to the points determined by the application
aforesaid (ra 4K rrjf "irapafiokfj1; yeveOevra a-rj/aeia) make right
angles at those points."
The proof is as follows:
Let AB be the axis of any of the proposed sections, and
draw AF, BA at right angles to this. TEA is a tangent. And
let a rectangle equal to a fourth part of the figure be applied
at either end of AB, as above mentioned, viz. the rectangles
1 The figure (T6 eVSot) is the rectangle
oontained by the latut transversum and
the latw rectum. A rectangle, equal to
one-fourth of this, is to be applied to
the axis, so that in a hyperbola it
overlapt by a square, and in an ellipse
is deficient by a square. See Taylor,
Anc. and Mod. Conies, pp. XLIV. 81 n.
Ill Sohol. E.
17—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

260 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONITJS.
AZ . ZB, AH . HB : and join FZ, FH, AZ, AH. The angles
FZA and FHA are right angles.
It has been shewn (ill. 42) that the rectangle AF. BA is
equal to the fourth part of " the figure " on AB. Therefore the
rectangle AZ . ZB = the rectangle AF . BA. Therefore
FA : AZ :: ZB : BA.
And the angles at A and B are right angles. Therefore the
angle AFZ = the angle BZA and angle AZF = angle ZAB.
And the angles AFZ, AZF are together equal to a right angle,
therefore the angles AZF, BZA are equal to a right angle:
therefore the remainder AZF is a right angle. Similarly, FHA
may be proved to be a right angle.
The following propositions, XLVI.—Lll., deal with some other
theorems suggested by the same construction.
The two proofs, here given, which are both comparatively
easy, will perhaps suffice to indicate to the reader the lack of
technical terms and symbols, and consequently the cumbrous
modes of proof, which characterise the higher Greek geometry.
It seems superfluous to add more specimens, which probably no
one would read.
134. The century which produced Euclid, Archimedes and
Apollonius was, beyond question, the time at which Greek
mathematical genius attained its highest development. For
many centuries afterwards geometry remained a favourite study,
but no substantive work fit to be compared with the Sphere and
Cylinder or the Conies was ever produced. One great invention,
trigonometry, remains to be completed, but trigonometry with
the Greeks remained always the instrument of astronomy and
was not used1 in any other branch of mathematics, pure or
applied. The geometers who succeed to Apollonius are pro-
fessors who signalised themselves by this or that pretty little
discovery or by some commentary on the classical treatises.
"The works of Archimedes and Apollonius," says M. Chasles2,
" marked the most brilliant epoch of ancient geometry. They
may be regarded, moreover, as the origin and foundation of two
questions which have occupied geometers at all periods. The
greater part of their works are connected with these and are
1 Except, perhaps, by Heron. See below, pp. 283, 284. 
2 Apergu, pp. 22, 23.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
261
divided by them into two classes, so that they seem to share
between them the domain of geometry.
" The first of these two great questions is the quadrature of
curvilinear figures, which gave birth to the calculus of the
infinite, conceived and brought to perfection successively by
Kepler, Cavalieri, Fermat, Leibnitz and Newton.
" The second is the theory of conic sections, for which were
invented first the geometrical analysis of the ancients, afterwards
the methods of perspective and of transversals. This was the
prelude to the theory of geometrical curves of all degrees, and
to that considerable portion of geometry which considers, in the
general properties of extension, only the forms and situations of
figures, and uses only the intersection of lines or surfaces and the
ratios of rectilineal distances.
" These two great divisions of geometry, which have each its
peculiar character, may be designated by the names of Oeometry
of Measurements and Oeometry of Forms and Situations, or
Geometry of Archimedes and Geometry of Apollonius1."
135. It remains only to add a few words on a great number
of other geometrical works which are attributed to Apollonius.
Pappus* ascribes to him the following works (1) On Contacts
(ire.pl iirafy&v), (2) On Plane Loci (eTrlireboc TOTTOI), (3) On
Inclinations (rrrepl vevcrecov), (4) On Section of an Area {trepl
Xaplov dTTOTOfir}?), (5) On the Determinate Section (vepl Stapur-
fiip7)<; Tofirjs), and gives a few lemmas, from which attempts
have been made to reconstruct the lost originals3. 
Vieta
restored the 1st in his Apollonius Oallus: Fermat in 1637 and
Simson in 1746 attempted the 2nd: Ghetaldi the 3rd : Halley
(in his edition of Be Sectione Rationis) restored the 4th:
Snellius, Ghetaldi, and Simson, again, worked at the 5th. All
i "These two divisions," he adds, 
and proportion?" The quotations are
"are those of all the mathematical 
from Descartes, Regies pour la direction
sciences which have for their aim, to 
de VEsprit, 14" and 4" Regie, Aristotle,
use Descartes' expression, the investi- 
Metaph. xi. 3.
gation of order and measure." Aristotle 
a vn. Nos. 298—311, pp. 990—1004
had already uttered the same thought 
(Hultsch).
in these terms: "With what are mathe- 
3 See Montucla, i. pp. 251, 252 and
maticians concerned save with order 
notes F and G, pp. 285—288.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

262 
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
of these were certainly exercises in geometrical analysis, and an
account of their supposed contents is given by Montucla, but
does not seem worth citing. The passage, however, in which
the same writer mentions Vieta's restoration of the work On
Contacts is interesting as illustrating the manners and customs
of mathematicians at a time when they were more dependent
on Greek learning than they are now. Vieta (1540—1603)
having a contention with one Adrianus Romanus, a clever
geometer of the Low Countries, took occasion "to propose to
him the principal problem, and the only difficult one in the book
(Oi Contacts). It is this: Three circles being given, to find a
fourth, which shall touch the three. Romanus solved this badly
by adopting the expedient which presents itself at first sight
and determining the centre of the desired circle by the inter-
section of two hyperbolas. The objection is that the problem
is plane, and can consequently be solved by the aid of ordinary
geometry. Vieta solved it in this way and very elegantly: his
solution is the same as that in the Arithmetica Universalis1 of
Newton. Another is given in the 1st Book of the Principia2,
where this question is necessary for some determinations of
physical astronomy. 
Here Newton, with remarkable skill,
reduces the two solid loci of Romanus to the intersection of two
straight lines. This problem, one of those to which algebraical
analysis does not lend itself with facility, occupied Descartes
also: and of two solutions which he found, he admits that one
gave an expression so complicated that he would not undertake
to construct it in a month. The other, though less crabbed,
was sufficiently so to prevent Descartes from touching it. We
may mention finally, on the subject of this problem, an anecdote
which in a way illustrates it. The princess Elizabeth of Bo-
hemia8, who, as is well-known, honoured our philosopher (Des-
cartes) with her correspondence, deigned to occupy herself with
it and sent him a solution, but as this is derived from algebraic
calculation, it is open to the same objection as that of Descartes."
But a work of Apollonius called Be Sectione Rationis was
translated from the Arabic and published by Halley in 1706.
This deals with the cases of one problem, which is as follows.
1 Prob. XLVII. 
a Lemma xvi. 
3 Daughter of our James L
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUCLID, ABCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS. 
263
Two straight lines of infinite length, MN, PQ, are in one plane,
parallel to one another or intersecting in a point. On each any
one point is taken {A and B respectively), and a point 0 is given
outside them. It is required to draw from 0 a straight line
meeting MN, PQ in the points 0 and D, so that the sequents
A 0, BD shall be in a given ratio. In the first book, 14 cases are
treated, where the lines are parallel and where they intersect,
but the points A, B upon them are the point of their intersection.
The second book contains 63 cases. All are solved analytically
with the aid of conies1.
A work of Apollonius on Unclassed Incommensurables (ako-
r/oi draKToi) is mentioned in an Arabic commentary on Euclid's
10th Book, which is translated from a Greek commentary,
written perhaps by Vettius Valens, a Byzantine astronomer of
the 2nd century. It is, however, impossible to discern from
the commentary what these "unclassed incommensurables"
were2. Hypsicles (see below) knew another work of Apollonius,
and Proclus (p. 105) mentions a treatise on the screw.
136. Lastly, Eutocius, in his often-cited commentary to the
Bphere and Cylinder, attributes to Apollonius, Heron and Philon
of Byzantium, methods of duplication which are practically
identical, and which Apollonius, as the oldest of these three
mathematicians, must be taken to have invented8. This solution
is in effect as follows. If AB, AC be the two straight lines
between which it is required to find two mean proportionals,
place them at right angles to one another, the right angle being
at the common extremity A, and complete the parallelogram
ABDC.
Join BC and bisect it in E. From the centre E describe a
circle FCf, cutting AB, A C produced in F and G, so that the
1 On all these minor works of Apol- 
Paris, 1856, and Chasles in Comptes
lonius.the femmasupon themin Pappus' 
Rendus, xxxvu. 553—568(Oet. 17,1853).
vuth Book and the important antioi- 
3 Philon may be the oldest, for Vi-
pations of modern geometry which 
truviusassignshimtoAlexander'sreign,
these contain, see Chasles, Aperpi, pp. 
but other authorities give him a much
28—47. 
laterdate, aboutB.C. 150. Heron's solu-
2 Cantor, pp. 299—301, quoting an 
tion is given first by Eutocius (Torelli,
emayoi'WoepoT&e'BuiMgmoirespre'sente'i pp. 136—138). Philon constructs the
a I'Acad. del Sciences, xrv. 658—720, figure a little more conveniently.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

264
EUCLID, ARCHIMEDES AND APOLLONIUS.
points F, D, G are on the same straight line. " This may be
effected if a ruler (jcavoviov) cutting AF,AG 
be turned about
D until EF, EG are equal." From E draw EH perpendicular
to AG and bisecting it in H.
Then (by Euc. n. 6) AG . 00+ EG2 = HQ\ 
Add EH2 to
each equal. Then AG . GG+EG2 = EG2. In the same manner
it may be shewn that AF . FB + EB* = EF2 = EG2. 
And
EG1 = EB>. Therefore AG.GG = 
AF.FBand
AG : AF :: FB : GG.
But, by similar triangles, AG : AF :: GG : CD r. BD : BF.
Therefore BD : BF :: BF : CG :: GG : CD.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

