Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent
Advances and the Road Ahead
Sharadhi Alape Suryanarayana1,2, David Sarne1, and Sarit Kraus1
1 Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Israel
2 Centre for Ubiquitous Computing, University of Oulu, Finland
sharadhi.as@gmail.com, david.sarne@biu.ac.il, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il
Abstract. Designing and implementing explainable systems is seen as
the next step towards increasing user trust in, acceptance of and reliance
on Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems. While explaining choices made by
black-box algorithms such as machine learning and deep learning has oc-
cupied most of the limelight, systems that attempt to explain decisions
(even simple ones) in the context of social choice are steadily catching
up. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive survey of explainability
in mechanism design, a domain characterized by economically motivated
agents and often having no single choice that maximizes all individual
utility functions. We discuss the main properties and goals of explainabil-
ity in mechanism design, distinguishing them from those of Explainable
AI in general. This discussion is followed by a thorough review of the
challenges one may face when working on Explainable Mechanism De-
sign and propose a few solution concepts to those.
Keywords: Explainability · Mechanism Design · Justification.
1
Introduction
Intelligent systems and automated decision-making are replacing and enhancing
human decision-making nowadays to the extent that people are increasingly re-
liant on them [42]. Despite the increased presence of such systems, people are
not often aware that they are interacting with an AI-based system. Recognizing
the need for transparency in this evolving policy and technology ecosystem, the
ACM U.S. Public Policy Council (USACM) and ACM Europe Council Policy
Committee (EUACM) codified a set of principles such as awareness, explain-
ability, accountability, validation and testing to address this [20]. Among which,
Explainability, which could be understood as a description in some form of the
functioning of the system, has gained immense traction in the recent past.
Due to their opacity, domains with black-box algorithms like machine learn-
ing and deep learning have been extensively researched in the context of ex-
plainability. However, the need for explainability goes far beyond black-box al-
gorithms. For example in various multi-agent systems (MAS), where agents are
self-interested, commonly arises a need to aggregate private preferences such as
availability, budget constraints and geographical location of several agents into

2
Suryanarayana et al.
a collective decision in a socially desirable way. Mechanism design, an important
tool in economics and computer science, is one such research topic which is con-
cerned with the development of a mechanism that takes into consideration the
preferences of selfish and intelligent agents exhibiting strategic behavior while
adhering to norms such as envy-freeness, budget-balancing and pareto-optimality
[57]. The applications of mechanism design can be found in various real-world
and, in many cases, high-impact applications such as elections, rent division,
resource allocation, and stable matching [28,57].
Regardless of their extensive usage in the real-world, there is a renewed in-
terest in designing and analyzing mechanisms to align with human values. This
includes re-designing existing mechanisms to accommodate human preferences
[18], viewing existing practices for inclusive housing allocation from a game-
theoretic perspective [8], empirical studies on human behavior [66], using the
insights from empirical analyses to re-frame a mechanism [52], and devising al-
gorithms to justify the decision of a mechanism [9]. Explaining the results to
human participants is a natural and complementary extension to the pursuit of
designing mechanisms that are more “understandable” to humans.
Nevertheless, the road to Explainable Mechanism Design systems is replete
with its own share of hurdles. One key element in providing an explanation in
such domains is the goal of the explanation and the measures of its success—
whereas with a single user the system’s goal is known, hence the explanation
aims to improve her recognition of the optimality of the choice made, in settings
of mechanism design, a user does not always know the system’s goals since they
may depend on other agents’ preferences. This focus on preference aggregation
of multiple agents, often associated with conflicting goals, may lead to a bla-
tant compromise of the preferences of some of them. The explanations should
therefore aim to increase user satisfaction by taking into account the system’s
decision, the user’s and the other agents’ preferences, the environment settings,
and properties such as fairness, envy and privacy [29]. In addition to the above
intricacies, the presence of domains such as voting, scheduling and resource al-
location in popular culture, without the necessity to be theoretically aware, has
led to people forming their own irrational opinions which the explanations have
to uproot [16,38,67].
We also note that even cases where social choice is merely a particular step
in a multi-stage decision making process carried out by an agent making deci-
sions on behalf of humans, call for Explainable Mechanism Design. This can hold
even when the use of mechanism design is not explicit. Examples of such settings
include algorithmic hiring and virtual democracy (an approach to automated de-
cision making) which is used in autonomous vehicles and kidney exchanges to
automate moral decisions, and recommendation systems to allocate food dona-
tions to recepient organizations [18,36,49,62].
In this survey, we provide a comprehensive summary of the various threads
of explainability in mechanism design. We note that while the broad theme
of explainability translates to the same meaning with respect to both machine
learning and mechanism design, there are a few differences between the premises

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
3
of the two fields in terms of what leads up to generating explanations. In partic-
ular, we first provide a comparison between Explainable Mechanism Design and
Explainable AI (XAI) with respect to the taxonomy, the purpose of explanations
and who the explainees are. We then outline the methods of generating explana-
tions in mechanism design. Finally, we elaborate on the challenges of conducting
laboratory experiments on explainability in mechanism design and shed light on
solution concepts combining insights from XAI and behavioral studies.
2
Mechanism Design
Various definitions for mechanism design have been suggested over the years
[47,53]. Essentially, a mechanism can be seen as a “communication system” where
the participants send messages to each other and/or to a “message center” and
every collection of messages is assigned an outcome based on a pre-specified rule
[25]. These messages are characterized by private information such as utility
from an allocation (in rent division), preference over a set of candidates (in
social choice theory), or willingness to pay for a good (in auctions). Thus, the
mechanism is analogous to a machine that collects, processes and aggregates the
private information of several agents in order to reach a desirable social outcome.
In most cases the agents are self-interested and rational, and care only about
maximizing their private utility with no guarantee that they will tell the truth.
Therefore, a desired property of a mechanism is that the agents have no strategic
incentive to deviate from truth-telling [33]. A mechanism satisfying this property
is considered incentive-compatible, as every participating agent achieves the best
outcome by reporting her true preferences [33].
Since incentive-compatibility is a desired feature, most mechanisms are de-
signed to be incentive-compatible. Hence, even though truth-telling might fetch
the least utility, say not winning the Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) auction [33],
it is the best response for an agent in most mechanisms. However, as we observe
in section 7, due to repeated interactions, humans may be prone to their own
biases. Explanations could be a tool to mitigate user biases as well.
The two main branches of designing mechanisms are the axiomatic branch
and the Bayesian branch [14]. In the axiomatic branch, the solution is supposed
to satisfy a set of desired properties called axioms. Axioms are normative ele-
ments designed to conceptualize notions of reason such as fairness, justice and
eﬀiciency. Examples of such axioms include envy-freeness and pareto-optimality.
In the Bayesian branch the solution achieves an optimal value for a given objec-
tive function such as expected revenue or projected loss.
3
Motivations for Explainable Mechanism Design
Consider the example of a rent division problem with 3 housemates, 3 rooms with
a total rent of $3. Housemate 𝑖values room 𝑖at $3 and the other two rooms
at $0. One possible solution to this problem is to assign room 1 to housemate
1 at $3 and rooms 2 and 3 to housemates 2 and 3 for free. Even though from

4
Suryanarayana et al.
an inter-personal perspective, this solution seems blatantly unfair to housemate
1, it is an envy-free solution, hence theoretically acceptable. Housemate 1 is
indifferent between the three rooms, given their cost, while housemates 2 and 3
are overjoyed [19]. While this is an overblown depiction of the problem with a
rent division setting which has seen an immense improvement in the solutions
proposed over the years [19], it is suﬀicient to illustrate the complexity with
respect to devising explanations in mechanism design settings.
As explained in the former section, solutions in mechanism design are ob-
tained by aggregating the preferences of several agents. The nature of the prob-
lem necessitates a “social approach” where the solution is expected to aggregate
said preferences in some acceptable manner. This can be achieved by mandating
the solution to adhere to certain desirable criteria that are egalitarian in nature,
maximizing a criterion of social welfare or using any other method that appre-
ciates the social nature of the problem. The need to balance the preferences of
several agents, which could be conflicting in nature might result in the solution
not being in favor of a few of them. Multi-user Privacy Conflict due to vary-
ing privacy preferences of owners of shared content [43], multi-attribute settings
such as team formation where the solution might not adhere to the preferences
of all of the agents with respect to every attribute [21] and settings such as the
classical “glove game” where the solution is non-intuitive yet theoretically sound
[48] are other real-life examples of mechanism design that necessitate a nuanced
approach to obtain the solution as well as to devise explanations.
In addition to the social nature of the problem, solutions in mechanism design
face two hurdles. First, the issue of what is socially acceptable can vary according
to perception, context and domain which can result in multiple solutions for the
same problem. For example, in social choice theory, there are multiple voting
rules due to the absence of a unique voting rule that satisfies Arrow’s mandatory
principles of fairness [5]. The second problem which is a consequence of the
first, is that it is easy for the user to challenge the solution. This requires the
explanations to not only elaborate on how good the solution is but also how
problematic another solution is.
This is in sharp contrast with other domains such as machine learning, plan-
ning and recommender systems where a solution, good or bad, results from a
definite and often complicated algorithm which needs to be broken down for
user understanding [15,42,69]. While solutions in other settings can also rely on
metrics such as accuracy, the absence of a unique algorithm in mechanism de-
sign settings makes this problem hard as well. Hence, instead of arguing on the
theoretical accuracy of the decision or how it results from a particular algorithm
which is a common trait in the aforementioned domains, the focus of explana-
tions in mechanism design should be on arguing how the decision is “good” in
its social context and how the preferences of the agents have led to the solution.

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
5
4
Explainable Mechanism Design versus XAI
While both Explainable Mechanism Design and XAI aim to explain certain deci-
sions made by the system, in retrospect, there are several factors differentiating
the two. Owing to the differences in the domains and the solution concepts,
there is an obvious difference in the nature of explanations offered in Explain-
able Mechanism Design and XAI. One way to reason about the differences in
the nature of the explanation to be offered, is by considering the differences
in the taxonomy to be used, the explainee and the goals of the explanations.
Hence, we focus our comparison in these aspects. Since XAI has become a well
established research area, whereas Explainable Mechanism Design is a newly
emerging field, we use the first to lead the discussion, mapping and contrasting
equivalent notions of Explainability in Mechanism Design accordingly.
4.1
Taxonomy
The common types of Explanations that are found in Explainability Studies
are Explanations, Justifications and Interpretations. With respect to mechanism
design, the most relevant and consequently most researched capability is Jus-
tifiability. Justifications deal with explaining the system’s decision in terms of
acceptable societal norms [32]. These norms (i.e. axioms that formalize desirable
social concepts such as fairness, justice and eﬀiciency) are the foundation of many
mechanisms. Hence they are natural and, in many cases, effective contenders for
explanations [9,48,57].
While there is no consensus on what constitutes an Explanation in mechanism
design, we adopt the idea proposed by Langley [32], who states that an intelligent
system exhibits explainable agency if it can provide, on request, the reasons for
its activities. Still, the extent of research dedicated to this capability is somehow
limited (see Table 1 later on). As for Interpretability, this notion is completely
absent from Explainable Mechanism Design.
For example, in the domain of fair division, explaining the decision by high-
lighting how the decision is envy-free is a Justification [35]. However, comparing
the maximin solution (the solution that maximizes the minimum utility for every
player thus resulting in the least disparity) to an arbitrary envy-free solution to
demonstrate the superiority of the former solution amounts to an Explanation
[19].
However, in XAI, the relationship of Explanations and Justifications to the
algorithm are reversed. Here, Explanations act as an accurate proxy of the model
while still being understandable to the human users [4] and Justifications defend
the decision of the algorithm by explaining why it is a good one without nec-
essarily focusing on how the decision was made [59]. While nearly absent from
Explainable Mechanism Design, Interpretability which aims to enhance user un-
derstanding and comprehension of the model’s decision-making process and pre-
dictions [42] through Interpretations [59] is rigourously researched in XAI. It is
also interesting to note that Justifiability is the most researched capability in
Explainable Mechanism Design since there is a need to show how the decision

6
Suryanarayana et al.
abides by desirable social norms while the need to explain the functioning of
black-box nature of the algorithms has led to Explainability and Interpretability
enjoying the most attention from the XAI research community.
4.2
Explanation Purpose
Explanations may be provided for various purposes and goals, with partial equiv-
alences between Explainable Mechanism Design and XAI.
Appreciating System Decision-Making. In Explainable Mechanism Design, an
appreciation of the system’s decision translates to understanding how the pref-
erences of the different agents are combined to obtain a collective decision [9].
This is akin to understanding how different features contribute to the output in
a machine learning model [31], which is the focus of XAI. Still, as explained in
Section 3, the task of increasing user appreciation of the system’s decision mak-
ing is more challenging in mechanism-design settings, as decisions need to be
explained in their wider social context and are often plagued with impossibility
theorems [5,60].
Improving User Trust and Reliability. With the decision depending on the pref-
erences of several agents, dissatisfaction is an inevitable evil in mechanism design
which might affect the user’s trust and reliability. The explanations presented
thus need to argue about the legitimacy of the decision and how, even if the de-
cision is unfair to a particular agent, the mechanism as a whole has adhered to
mandatory principles of fairness and the dissatisfied agent needs to make peace
with it [29]. In fact, as demonstrated in the work of Suryanarayana et al. [65], it
is often the explanations provided to those participants for whom the winning
candidate is the least preferred that are the most impactful. In XAI, unfavor-
able situations are also present (e.g., rejection of a loan application), however
the prospect of improving the odds of the decision being in her favor through
Counterfactual Explanations exists [44]. This, unfortunately, cannot be achieved
in Explainable Mechanism Design.
Ensuring Accuracy of Decision-making. In mechanism design, explanations can
serve as a tool for the verification of results in order to ensure that the deci-
sion was made under a set of rules consistently applied in each setting [7]. This
somehow resembles the use of XAI as a tool for bias mitigation and fairness as-
sessment [42] in cases where datasets are potentially biased and decision-making
might be discriminatory.
4.3
The Explainee
The nature and mode of the explanation to be offered depend on who the ex-
plainee is and the purpose of providing explanations to her [59]. One of the main
recipients of explanations in Explainable Mechanism Design are the end users or

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
7
participants as they are the ones affected by the decision made.3 Unlike end users
in XAI who are typically passive (as the system is making the decision for them,
based on their data) users receiving explanations in mechanism design play an
active role in the collective decision process taking place, by reporting their pref-
erences. Examples of such explainees include a researcher whose grant proposal
was rejected [7], one among many roommates who is assigned a particular room
and rent based on her actively reported (and hopefully true) preferences [19] or,
a user in a hybrid domain like algorithmic hiring where a social choice function
is applied in some part of the overall algorithm [62].
Two classes of explainees in Explainable Mechanism Design enjoy some simi-
larity with those of XAI. The first one is the Decision Maker who does not need
to be an expert in mechanism design but has to have relevant knowledge of the
domain in order to make informed decisions. This could include the employees
of a refugee resettlement agency who need to be able to override the decision
proposed by the algorithm [2] or the members of a committee who cannot de-
cide on a specific voting rule and base the election on a set of desired properties
(axioms) [9]. The Decision Makers are similar to Data Experts in XAI who use
explanations to visualize, inspect, tune and select models [42]. The second class
is that of an External Entity, similar to its namesake in XAI [59], who is someone
not directly interacting with the system, say an auditor who needs to ensure that
the decisions made adhere to a set of rules and that there is no violation [7]. In
both classes of explainees, the requirements of the explanations to be produced
in XAI and Explainable Mechanism Design overlap.
5
Explanation Concepts
As with XAI [42], Explainable AI Planning [15] and Explainable Recommenda-
tion [69], we provide a brief overview of the theoretical aspects (natural con-
tenders) and behavioral aspects (necessary for human comprehension) of the
explanations available in literature. Table 1 depicts a breakdown of the sur-
veyed papers with respect to the different concepts and the evaluation methods
discussed in the next section.
5.1
Norms versus Attributes
As mentioned earlier, mechanism design has two defining characteristics - the
private information (such as preference and cost) of the agents participating in
it and the requirement for the solution to recognize its social nature. Both of
these can be used to devise explanations. Norms that formalize the desirable
social traits are the foundation of solutions in mechanism design and can hence
be used to extol its virtues. Attributes, on the other hand, quantify the stake a
given agent has in the mechanism. Explanations that relate the solution to an
3 In many cases the need to provide users with proper explanations is dictated by the
regulator, e.g., in the case of GDPR guidelines [29].

8
Suryanarayana et al.
Table 1. Surveyed literature organized by Explanation Concepts – Normative Char-
acterization (NO), Attributive (AT), Contrastive (CO), Argumentative (AR), Visual-
ization (VI) and Evaluation Methods – Theoretical Properties (TP), Computational
Complexity (CC), Empirical Analysis (EA) and User Studies (US).
Explanation Concepts and Evaluation Methods
Work
Setting
NO
AT
CO
AR
VI
TP
CC
EA
US
Ahani et al. [2]
Refugee Resettle-
ment
✓
✓
✓
Belahcene et al. [7]
Approval Sorting ✓
✓
✓
✓
Boixel and Endriss [9]
Voting
✓
✓
✓
Boixel et al. [10]
Voting
✓
✓
Boixel and de Haan [12] Voting
✓
✓
Cailloux and Endriss [13] Voting
✓
✓
✓
Gal et al. [19]
Rent Division
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Georgara et al. [21]
Team Formation
✓
✓
✓
Kirsten and Cailloux [26] Voting
✓
✓
✓
✓
Knapp [27]
Matching Theory ✓
✓
✓
Lee et al. [35]
Rent Division
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Mosca and Such [43]
Multi-User
Pri-
vacy Conflict
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Nardi et al. [46]
Voting
✓
✓
✓
Nizri et al. [48]
Payoff Allocation ✓
✓
Peters et al. [54]
Voting
✓
✓
✓
✓
Peters et al. [55]
Voting
✓
✓
✓
Pozanco et al. [56]
Scheduling
✓
✓
✓
Suryanarayana et al. [65] Voting
✓
✓
✓
Zahedi et al. [68]
Task Allocation
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
agent’s individual stakes can be effective in helping her appreciate the impact
of the solution from a selfish perspective and thus convince her. For example,
convincing a housemate in a rent division setting that the decision is envy-free
amounts to a normatively characterized explanation [35] while the comparison of
the maximin (the solution that maximizes the minimum utility for every player
thus resulting in the least disparity) solution to an arbitrary envy-free solution to
demonstrate the lower disparity achieved by the former solution is an attributive
explanation [19]. In the following paragraphs, we elaborate on diverse settings
where both norms and attributes have been used to devise explanations.
Normative Characterization. Formally in mechanism design, axioms are used to
capture the social norms that the solution is expected to adhere to. Procaccia [57]
advocates for the use of axioms to not only be used for designing a mechanism
but also to justify its solutions with an example of the not-for-profit website
Spliddit [23]. Justifying an outcome using a set of agreed upon axioms, without
having to depend on a particular rule has found a special appeal in the domain
of social choice theory, where no unique outcome can be obtained while following
fair voting procedures [5].

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
9
In social choice theory, given a voting profile, Cailloux and Endriss [13] de-
veloped a logic-based language to construct arguments for and against specific
outcomes. Using the elements of the proposed language, an algorithm to justify
the Borda outcome given a voting profile was developed. Building on said ap-
proach, Boixel and Endriss [9] developed a formal notion of justification based
on the definition of Langley [32] and an algorithm based on constraint pro-
gramming to compute the justifications using any set of axioms. To counter the
computational complexity of the aforementioned algorithm [12], Nardi et al. [46]
used a combination of instance graphs and state-of-the-art SAT solvers to design
an algorithm that can provide viable justifications. To enhance the readability
of the justifications using the axiomatic approach, Boixel et al. [10] developed
a tableau-based calculus. Using a combination of SAT solving and Answer Set
Programming to implement the calculus, the authors provide an insight into how
the justifications look.
The evolution from Boixel and Endriss [9] to Boixel et al. [10] helps visual-
ize the transformation from a non-automated procedure to an automated pro-
cedure, from unstructured justifications to structured justifications and, from
manual post processing to obtain the justifications to tableau-based rendering
of the justifications for enhanced readability. A demonstration summarizing the
application of the aforementioned techniques proposed [9,10,45,46] to find justi-
fications given a normative basis can be found in Boixel et al. [11]. Furthermore,
the approach used by Boixel and Endriss [9] has been extended to matching the-
ory [27] where an algorithm is designed to justify outcomes that are of interest
to a given agent (local outcomes) instead of the whole outcome.
The axiomatic characterization is also used to derive justifications for the
results of approval voting [55] and non-compensatory approval sorting [7]. In the
broader sense, non-compensatory approval sorting and voting are concerned with
aggregating collective information into a single decision. The reviewed literature
on justifying the results of a voting mechanism reveal all of the preference ballots.
However, Belahcene et al. [7] show that the classification based on the binary
judgements of the participants is compliant with the decision making process by
revealing minimal information that is backed by theoretical properties.
One of the key elements used in some of the papers is Automated Reasoning
(AR) using SAT or SMT solvers [7,10,45]. This combination of AR with social
choice theory can be used to identify if a voting rule satisfies a particular axiom
(thus arguing against it) [26] as well as verifying the correctness of the system
output [12].
User studies to test axiom-based explanations were also successful in increas-
ing satisfaction. Suryanarayana et al. [65] tested explanations based on features
constructed from axioms in the domain of ranked-choice voting while Nizri et al.
[48] used the axiomatic characterization of Shapley value [64] to come up with
explanations in the domain of fair division. The research carried out by Nizri et
al. [48] is significant in two ways. First, the solution that is being justified, i.e.
Shapley value, satisfies all of the desired properties of fair division [24]. Second,
the axiomatic characterization is not only used to justify the solution but also

10
Suryanarayana et al.
to come up with the algorithm to generate explanations. The authors decom-
pose the coalitional game into sub-games and generate explanations for each of
these games based on the additivity axiom which states that the sum of Shapley
allocations in each sub-game is equal to the Shapley allocation in the original
game. The explanations were successful in convincing the participants that the
allocation was fair.
An exception in terms of the norms used can be found in the work of Mosca
and Such [43] in the domain of Multiuser Privacy who propose an explainable
agent called ELVIRA that collaborates with other ELVIRA agents to identify
the optimal sharing policy for shared content. Here, instead of axioms, the au-
thors use a socio-cultural theory of human values by Schwartz [63] known as the
theory of basic values. The explanations however, are based on both values and
individual attributes, i.e. the privacy preferences of the participants.
Attributive Explanation. If norms capture societal acceptance, attributes quan-
tify personal interests. Hence, explanations that relate to the individual at-
tributes of the participants have also been fruitful in increasing participant sat-
isfaction
Zahedi et al. [68] compare the cost of a proposed allocation to the cost of
the counterfactual allocation proposed by the participant. Ahani et al. [2] de-
pict the change in employment score if the refugee allocation proposed by the
algorithm needs to be changed. A tangential direction termed priceability where
voters spend money on buying candidates which forms an intuitive explanation
for the committee selected in approval-based committee elections was proposed
by Peters et al. [54]. Explaining outcomes based on individual attributes enables
the comparison of solutions that are equally good in terms of theoretical require-
ments. For example, Gal et al. [19] explain their optimal rent division solution
by comparing it to another envy-free rent division.
Several explanation generation methods are procedure-agnostic i.e., do not
focus on the procedure that leads to the outcome. Here, a framework is devel-
oped to encode the different facets of the problems such as explanations, queries
and constraints. Notable examples include encoding the Justification Genera-
tion Problem for collective decisions into a Constraint Network [9], developing
a generic procedure for providing justifications for Team Formation Algorithm
(TFA) while keeping the TFA intact [21] and using Mixed-Integer Linear Pro-
gramming (MILP) to explain why the preferences of a participants were not sat-
isfied [56] while designing a preference-driven schedule. While using such frame-
works simplifies the process of finding an explanation, adequate care needs to be
taken to convert the explanations provided by the system into a readable form.
One solution to this problem is using explanation templates [21,56].
5.2
Catering to the Human Mind
Understanding how human-beings explain and respond to explanations can re-
veal important insights into how explanations of a system can be presented.
Two such behavioral modes of explanations that are considered effective and

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
11
that have found applications in mechanism design are Contrastive explanations
and Argumentative explanations [41]. Given the fact that mechanism design set-
tings are social in nature, it is imperative that the behavioral nature of the
explanations are attended to. Most of the papers that use a behavioral element
in their explanations incorporate an element of social-interaction [41], which is
necessary for a layman to comprehend the functioning of a complicated AI-based
system.
As mentioned earlier, mechanism design settings suffer from the issues of
familiarity, non-uniqueness of the solution and the solution not being in favor
of the participants. This provides the perfect ground for the participants to
challenge the solution. Identifying this, there is a great deal of interest in devising
contrastive explanations that provide reasons for why a particular event did not
occur as opposed to why a particular event did [41]. From Table 1, we can see
that in nearly all of the cases where the explanations are based on the individual
attributes of the agents, they are contrastive. In these scenarios, contrastive
explanations can help the participant compare the difference in her utility across
different solutions and thus appreciate the decision better.
In Suryanarayana et al [65], a contrastive explanation comparing the win-
ning candidate to the participant’s most preferred candidate were found to in-
crease user satisfaction and acceptance the most when the winning candidate
was the least preferred option of the participant. Similarly, in Mosca and Such
[43], contrastive explanations were found to be more appealing than general de-
scriptive explanations when the recommended solution was different from the
participant’s preference. Contrastive explanations are also especially useful in
multi-attribute/multi-preference settings where the outcome may not align with
all of the preferences of any participant. Other notable studies that uses the
contrastive approach are of Georgara et al. [21] that provide explanations for
both collaboration queries (questioning team formation) and assignment queries
(challenging the assignment of teams and individuals to tasks) at individual,
local and global levels, and the work of Pozanco et al. [56] which provides con-
trastive explanations regarding the unsatisfied preferences of the participants
while ensuring that the explanation is relevant to the participant.
As far as argumentation is concerned, the presence of umpteen conflicting
axioms is an encouraging premise to build an argumentation framework. This is
demonstrated by Cailloux and Endriss [13] who developed a formal framework for
presenting arguments favoring a particular outcome. Zahedi et al. [68] present the
case for the a suggested task allocation by demonstrating how a negotiation based
on the counterfactual task allocation proposed by the participant can lead to a
higher cost. Mosca and Such [43] base their explanation on the argumentation
scheme used to obtain the optimal solution. Both in Zahedi et al. [68] and Mosca
and Such [43] argumentation is used for devising the optimal solution which was
then organically extended to generating explanations in favor of the outcome.
Visualization is a tool that is often viewed as a less technical means of convey-
ing complex theoretical concepts [6]. Human-in-the-loop systems are a natural
extension to mechanism design that caters to capturing reality better. Here, the

12
Suryanarayana et al.
algorithms have the capacity to process large volumes of data while expert in-
sights are required to handle the inherent uncertainty of the real world. Hence,
in addition to enabling easier comparisons [19], visual tools can also be used to
support human decision-making.
Notable illustrations of visualization can be found in the case of the resettle-
ment agency HIAS that is involved in resettlement of refugees into communities
in the USA. The matching software AnnieTM MOORE enables the employees
to override the proposed allocation by revealing the updated statistics so that
no change will have a grievous impact [2].
Explaining the outcome through effective visualizations can aid in enhancing
the appreciation of fairness, a theoretical notion that is the bread and butter
of mechanism design, as was observed by Gal et al. [19]. While Ahani et al. [2]
capture practical elements such as indivisible families of refugees, batching and,
an unknown number of refugee arrivals in the context of refugee resettlement,
Gal et al. [19] provide the fairest division of rent subject to envy-freeness. In
both of these cases, the practical relevance and eﬀicacy of the proposed algo-
rithm is demonstrated with the help of explanations. Hence, user studies with
explanations can be seen as a complementary extension to establishing the su-
periority of novel algorithms while comparing them to existing state-of-the-art
algorithms. It is also interesting to note that users of the website Spliddit, the
platform from which data was used by Gal et al. [19], are provided with a de-
tailed explanation on why the proposed rent division is fair, thus signifying the
utility of explanations in everyday usage. Lee et al. [35] used visualizations to
both provide an elaborate breakdown of the process as well as let the participant
experiment with different values in the website Spliddit, to observe the changes.
When the participants were shown only their outcome, they perceived the results
as unfair while when they were shown the preferences and outcomes for all of
the participants in the group, the participants perceived the result as fair.
From Table 1 it can be observed that Normative Characterization and Con-
trastive Explanations are extensively used in comparison to their other theoret-
ical and behavioral counterparts, respectively.
6
Evaluation Methods
There are several dimensions for evaluating methods of Explainable Mechanism
Design from theoretical as well as practical perspectives. We provide a descrip-
tion on each of them in the following paragraphs.
Theoretical Properties. Building explanations on the foundation of concepts like
Axiomatic Characterization, Logic-based Programming and Automated Reason-
ing necessitates these methods to be supported by rigid theoretical norms. Exam-
ples include proof of an explanation given the problem instance [13,68], unique-
ness of the outcome and justification given a voting profile and normative basis
[9], the correctness of a tableau-based calculus for generating explanations [10]
and an upper bound on the number of steps required to generate justifications
to ensure readability [55].

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
13
Computational Complexity. Practical feasibility of any explanation-generation
method is tantamount to its real-life application. Very few authors have ad-
dressed this aspect in their work. Exceptional examples include, Peters et al.
[54] that demonstrate the polynomial-time verifiability of their proposed heuris-
tic algorithm. Boixel and de Haan [12] prove the intractability of finding and
generating justifications given a normative basis.
Empirical Analysis. Empirical insights act as an intermediate between theoret-
ical guarantees and experimental results. Running the explainability studies on
real or synthetic datasets can help compare the running times of several ex-
planation generation methods and pick the fastest one [45], help understand the
step-by-step breakdown of the explanation generation method [55], disclose inter-
esting insights about different statistical cultures (e.g., probability distribution
of election profiles) that might help in the development of personalized explana-
tions [45], and identify and evaluate metrics for the evaluation of explanation-
generation methods before deploying them in real-time studies [21].
User Studies. User studies are an effective means for examining the consequences
of explanations on aspects such as reliability, satisfaction, trust and conviction.
While it is always desirable to conduct the experiment with the actual partic-
ipants of a mechanism as in the case of Spliddit [19], experiments conducted
with synthetic data using platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)
or laboratory settings are a great starting point [48,65].
In addition to the obvious purpose of helping determine the impact of expla-
nations, user studies can also be used to provide insights on curating effective
explanations. For example, Suryanarayana et al. [65] hinted at a user bias in
favor of plurality voting rule while Mosca and Such [43] used the experimental
insights to devise a hybrid explanation framework and improve the wording of
the explanations.
From Table 1 we can observe that there is a good mix of all of the evalua-
tion methods in the literature. However, performing Empirical Evaluation and
User Studies to evaluate explanation-generation methods in mechanism design
is challenging and we address this issue in detail in the next section.
7
Challenges and Possible Solutions
Despite the rapid increase in interest in explainable systems for mechanism de-
sign, the progress made in this field is still far behind compared to XAI. One of
the main challenges is that of testing. As far as testing for the eﬀicacy of expla-
nations is considered, the ideal premise would be testing with real users, as in
Spliddit [19] (where explainees are the actual renters in a rent division setting) or
in the work of Pozanco et al. [56] (where a real restrictive return to oﬀice scenario
due to the COVID-19 pandemic was tackled). However, the development of such
evaluations is expensive and users of such real-life settings are often inaccessible
to the research community. We therefore outline a few challenges in designing

14
Suryanarayana et al.
nearly realistic experiments that can be conducted in laboratories or platforms
like AMT.
User Behavior. Human participants in a mechanism are poles apart from the
perfect agents modeled in theory and exhibit short-sighted and downright irra-
tional behavior. Instances of such behavior include reward divisions that adhere
to weaker axioms than those that characterize Shapley value [16], playing domi-
nated strategies in cooperative settings such as fair division and bargaining [30],
and performing manipulations that can be captured by simple heuristics [40].
Any social explanation [41] thus catering to the expected selfish interests, while
the participants betray the same, may defeat the purpose of explanations. For
example, in an experiment conducted on human behavior in voting, Tal et al.
[66] report that the participants exhibit herding by disregarding their most pre-
ferred candidate and voting for the candidate with the most first place votes
in a predictive poll, even though it is the least optimal choice for them. In this
case, framing a contrastive explanation comparing the participant’s most pre-
ferred candidate and the winning candidate (which might be the candidate the
participant voted for) would be counter-productive.
A natural solution to the problem of mismatched behavior is building pre-
dictive models using behavioral, game-theoretic and machine learning tools. Ex-
amples include models for predicting human decisions in plurality voting [17],
approval voting [61] and auctions [50]. The benefits of such models are twofold.
First, it might help the explanations to be more selective [41] by shedding light
on what is important to the explainee. For example, in the game-theoretic model
of human behavior in Doodle Polls [52], the concept of Social Bonus is proposed
in order to reason why voters vote for unpopular slots. Consequently, contrastive
explanations comparing the winning candidates to the unpopular ones can be
discarded as the latter are insignificant to the voter.
The second and rather consequential utility from such models is that they
might help identify the sub-optimal manipulations of the participants which can
be contrasted with the optimal choice. In that context, an interesting hypothesis
to investigate is if and what kind of explanations can bring irrational humans
closer to the rational agents modeled in literature. This will open new avenues for
Interpretability in mechanism design which has not received as much attention
as in the XAI literature [59].
User Biases. The prevelance of mechanisms in society has led to humans forming
their own prejudices such as favoritism for plurality voting rule [38,55], altru-
ism towards non-performing participants [16] and a disdain towards algorithmic
decisions as being far from reality [34,39,67].
Long before building explainable systems was considered, researchers in-
vested efforts into manually explaining technical jargon to non-expert partic-
ipants. Notable examples include acquainting participants of a centipede game
with backward induction [39] and measuring the frequency of violation of fair-
ness criteria in voting [38]. Coupling these ideas with biases such as automation
bias, where a user believes that a computing system is more knowledgeable and

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
15
“intelligent” than it is, is a direction worth exploring [22]. In addition, com-
paring different modes of presenting explanations such as textual and visual,
both of which are extensively used in Explainable Recommender Systems [69],
can strengthen the eﬀicacy of explanations. It is also noteworthy that human
intelligence can be leveraged to not only rate explanations but also to provide
explanations, thus providing valuable insights into human factors that might be
useful for generating convincing explanations [56,65] .
Lack of Data. A useful tool in bridging the gap between idealized agent behavior
and flawed human behavior is empirical analysis and subsequent modeling of hu-
man participants in the different mechanism design settings. Also, as mentioned
earlier, empirical analysis can act as an intermediate stage between theoretical
guarantees and user studies while revealing interesting insights.
However, there are not many datasets in the domains of Computational Social
Choice and Preference Reasoning publicly available [37]. Also, while collecting,
preserving and presenting data on private preferences, adequate care needs to
be taken to ensure that user privacy is preserved [29].
Naturally, the obvious solution to the lack of data is to develop tools for eﬀi-
cient data collection. One such very useful collection of datasets in the domain of
Computational Social Choice is Preflib4 which was used by Nardi [45] to exam-
ine the practical utility of the proposed algorithm. However the process of data
collection is easier said than done. Replicating real-life settings in order to get
people to report their preferences, even manipulated ones, is a mammoth task.
Anonymizing data is an effective way to protect the privacy of the participants.
An alternate technique to preserve privacy was used by Gal et al. [19] where the
original valuations for the rooms were perturbed by an acceptable margin and
presented to the explainees.
Simulating Synthetic Environments. In order to evaluate the eﬀicacy of expla-
nations, it is vital to have the participant interested in the explanations. In
mechanism design, these interests are captured by notions such as preferences,
utility and costs which are easy to conceptualize but diﬀicult to replicate and/or
induce in lab experiments. XAI, even though tasked with explaining complex al-
gorithms, enjoys relatability with experiments such as image classification [51],
review classification [31] and selection of a competent agent [3]. This enables the
design of interactive experiments where explanations can be sneaked in without
being explicit, hence eliciting an organic response from the participant.
Inspired by the experimental design in XAI, gamification of the problems is a
good starting point. Tailoring games such as the centipede game for bargaining
[39] and share-the-loot game for resource allocation [16] to accommodate expla-
nations and with the reward tied to the performance of the participant is an
idea worth testing. The presence of a monetary reward inadvertently engrosses
the participant, thus eliciting a realistic response. Some other tested methods of
invoking user interest in synthetic lab experiments were done using the concept
4 https://www.preflib.org/

16
Suryanarayana et al.
of bonus from the winning candidate in ranked choice voting [65] and asking the
participant to imagine themselves in the setting and extracting their preferences
through meticulously designed questionnaires [43].
Another way to stimulate the interest of participants in explanations might be
to leverage the diversity of axioms to build argumentation systems augmented
with human input on how convincing the arguments are [58]. The conversion
from passive listeners of explanations to active debaters of arguments might
trigger a passionate yet honest response from the participants.
In addition to the above ideas, tools used in Social Psychology such as Exper-
imental Vignette Methodology (EVM) [1] and online testing methods like A/B
testing used in Explainable Recommendation [69] offer valid premises for devel-
oping tests for Explainable Mechanism Design.
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we survey explainability in mechanism design, provide an overall
picture of the various concepts around it and shed light on the challenges faced
by researchers in the domain.
While we do propose several workarounds to overcome the aforementioned
challenges, we emphasize that implementing each of these is a non-trivial task
per se and calls for collaborations between researchers in mechanism design,
human-agent interaction, software engineering, and psychology. We hope that
both experienced as well as budding researchers find this survey helpful in de-
signing and improving explainability in mechanism design. We also envision a
future where designing mechanisms aligned with human values and Explainable
Mechanism Design complement each other.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Data Science Institute at Bar-Ilan Uni-
versity, the EU Project TAILOR under grant 952215 and the Israeli Ministry of
Science & Technology under grant 89583. The research was carried out with the
technological support and funding from the HRI Consortium – the Israel Inno-
vation Authority. Sharadhi Alape Suryanarayana is grateful for the President’s
Scholarship and Erasmus+ Global Mobility Programme that has supported this
research.
References
1. Aguinis, H., Bradley, K.J.: Best practice recommendations for designing and im-
plementing experimental vignette methodology studies. Organizational research
methods 17(4), 351–371 (2014)
2. Ahani, N., Gölz, P., Procaccia, A.D., Teytelboym, A., Trapp, A.C.: Dynamic place-
ment in refugee resettlement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14388 (2021)

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
17
3. Amir, O., Doshi-Velez, F., Sarne, D.: Summarizing agent strategies. JAAMAS
33(5), 628–644 (2019)
4. Arrieta, A.B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado,
A., García, S., Gil-López, S., Molina, D., Benjamins, R., et al.: Explainable artifi-
cial intelligence (xai): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward
responsible ai. Information fusion 58, 82–115 (2020)
5. Arrow, K.J.: Social choice and individual values. Yale university press (1951)
6. Barwise, J., Etchemendy, J.: Visual information and valid reasoning. In: Logical
reasoning with diagrams (1991)
7. Belahcene, K., Chevaleyre, Y., Maudet, N., Labreuche, C., Mousseau, V., Ouer-
dane, W.: Accountable approval sorting. In: IJCAI-ECAI. pp. 70––76 (2018)
8. Benabbou, N., Chakraborty, M., Ho, X.V., Sliwinski, J., Zick, Y.: Diversity con-
straints in public housing allocation. In: AAMAS. pp. 973––981 (2018)
9. Boixel, A., Endriss, U.: Automated justification of collective decisions via con-
straint solving. In: AAMAS. pp. 168–176 (2020)
10. Boixel, A., Endriss, U., de Haan, R.: A calculus for computing structured justifi-
cations for election outcomes. In: AAAI (2022)
11. Boixel, A., Endriss, U., Nardi, O.: Displaying justifications for collective decisions.
In: IJCAI (July 2022), demo Paper
12. Boixel, A., de Haan, R.: On the complexity of finding justifications for collective
decisions. In: AAAI. pp. 5194–5201 (2021)
13. Cailloux, O., Endriss, U.: Arguing about voting rules. In: AAMAS. pp. 287–295
(2016)
14. Carroll, G.: Design for weakly structured environments. In: The future of economic
design, pp. 27–33. Springer (2019)
15. Chakraborti, T., Sreedharan, S., Kambhampati, S.: The emerging landscape of ex-
plainable automated planning & decision making. In: IJCAI. pp. 4803–4811 (2020)
16. d’Eon, G., Larson, K.: Testing axioms against human reward divisions in cooper-
ative games. In: AAMAS. pp. 312–320 (2020)
17. Fairstein, R., Lauz, A., Meir, R., Gal, K.: Modeling people’s voting behavior with
poll information. In: AAMAS. pp. 1422–1430 (2019)
18. Freedman, R., Borg, J.S., Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Dickerson, J.P., Conitzer, V.:
Adapting a kidney exchange algorithm to align with human values. In: AAAI. pp.
1636––1645 (2018)
19. Gal, Y., Mash, M., Procaccia, A.D., Zick, Y.: Which is the fairest (rent division)
of them all? In: ACM EC. pp. 67–84 (2016)
20. Garfinkel, S., Matthews, J., Shapiro, S.S., Smith, J.M.: Toward algorithmic trans-
parency and accountability. Communications of the ACM 60(9), 5–5 (2017)
21. Georgara, A., Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.A., Sierra, C.: Building contrastive explana-
tions for multi-agent team formation. In: AAMAS (2022)
22. Goddard, K., Roudsari, A., Wyatt, J.C.: Automation bias: a systematic review of
frequency, effect mediators, and mitigators. JAMIA (2012)
23. Goldman, J., Procaccia, A.D.: Spliddit: Unleashing fair division algorithms. ACM
SIGecom Exchanges 13(2) (2015)
24. Hart, S.: Shapley value. In: Game Theory, pp. 210–216. Springer (1989)
25. Hurwicz, L.: Optimality and informational eﬀiciency in resource allocation pro-
cesses. Mathematical methods in the social sciences (1960)
26. Kirsten, M., Cailloux, O.: Towards automatic argumentation about voting rules.
In: APIA (2018)
27. Knapp, D.L.: Justification of matching outcomes. Ph.D. thesis, Master’s thesis,
ILLC, University of Amsterdam (2022)

18
Suryanarayana et al.
28. Kominers, S.D.: Good markets (really do) make good neighbors. ACM SIGecom
Exchanges 16(2), 12–26 (2019)
29. Kraus, S., Azaria, A., Fiosina, J., Greve, M., Hazon, N., Kolbe, L., Lembcke, T.B.,
Muller, J.P., Schleibaum, S., Vollrath, M.: Ai for explaining decisions in multi-agent
environments. In: AAAI. pp. 13534–13538 (2020)
30. Kyropoulou, M., Ortega, J., Segal-Halevi, E.: Fair cake-cutting in practice. In:
ACM EC. pp. 547–548 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3328526.3329592, https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3328526.3329592
31. Lai, V., Tan, C.: On human predictions with explanations and predictions of ma-
chine learning models: A case study on deception detection. In: ACM FAccT. pp.
29–38 (2019)
32. Langley, P.: Explainable, normative, and justified agency. In: AAAI. pp. 9775–9779
(2019)
33. Lavi, R.: Mechanism design. Complex Social and Behavioral Systems: Game The-
ory and Agent-Based Models pp. 317–333 (2020)
34. Lee, M.K., Baykal, S.: Algorithmic mediation in group decisions: Fairness percep-
tions of algorithmically mediated vs. discussion-based social division. In: CSCW.
pp. 1035–1048 (2017)
35. Lee, M.K., Jain, A., Cha, H.J., Ojha, S., Kusbit, D.: Procedural justice in algo-
rithmic fairness: Leveraging transparency and outcome control for fair algorithmic
mediation. CSCW pp. 1–26 (2019)
36. Lee, M.K., Kusbit, D., Kahng, A., Kim, J.T., Yuan, X., Chan, A., See, D., Nooth-
igattu, R., Lee, S., Psomas, A., et al.: Webuildai: Participatory framework for al-
gorithmic governance. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
3(CSCW), 1–35 (2019)
37. Mattei, N.: Closing the loop: Bringing humans into empirical computational social
choice and preference reasoning. In: IJCAI. pp. 5169–5173 (2021)
38. McCune, D., McCune, L.: How can we compare different voting methods? a voting
theory project. PRIMUS 29(5), 487–501 (2019)
39. McKelvey, R.D., Palfrey, T.R.: An experimental study of the centipede game.
Econometrica pp. 803–836 (1992)
40. Mennle, T., Weiss, M., Philipp, B., Seuken, S.: The power of local manipulation
strategies in assignment mechanisms. In: IJCAI. pp. 82––89 (2015)
41. Miller, T.: Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences.
Artificial intelligence 267, 1–38 (2019)
42. Mohseni, S., Zarei, N., Ragan, E.D.: A multidisciplinary survey and framework for
design and evaluation of explainable ai systems. ACM TiiS 11(3-4), 1–45 (2021)
43. Mosca, F., Such, J.: An explainable assistant for multiuser privacy. Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 36(1), 1–45 (2022)
44. Mothilal, R.K., Sharma, A., Tan, C.: Explaining machine learning classifiers
through diverse counterfactual explanations. In: ACM FAccT. pp. 607–617 (2020)
45. Nardi, O.: A Graph-Based Algorithm for the Automated Justification of Collective
Decisions. Master’s thesis, ILLC, University of Amsterdam (2021)
46. Nardi, O., Boixel, A., Endriss, U.: A graph-based algorithm for the automated
justification of collective decisions. In: AAMAS (2022)
47. Nisan, N., Ronen, A.: Algorithmic mechanism design. Games and Economic be-
havior 35(1-2), 166–196 (2001)
48. Nizri, M., Hazon, N., Azaria, A.: Explainable shapley-based allocation. In: AAAI
(2022)

Explainability in Mechanism Design: Recent Advances and the Road Ahead
19
49. Noothigattu, R., Gaikwad, S., Awad, E., Dsouza, S., Rahwan, I., Ravikumar, P.,
Procaccia, A.: A voting-based system for ethical decision making. In: Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 32 (2018)
50. Noti, G., Syrgkanis, V.: Bid prediction in repeated auctions with learning. In: The
Web Conference. pp. 3953–3964 (2021)
51. Nourani, M., Kabir, S., Mohseni, S., Ragan, E.D.: The effects of meaningful and
meaningless explanations on trust and perceived system accuracy in intelligent
systems. In: AAAI. pp. 97–105 (2019)
52. Obraztsova, S., Polukarov, M., Rabinovich, Z., Elkind, E.: Doodle poll games. In:
AAMAS. pp. 876–884 (2017)
53. Papadimitriou, C.: Algorithms, games, and the internet. In: STOC. pp. 749–753
(2001)
54. Peters, D., Pierczyski, G., Shah, N., Skowron, P.: Market-based explanations of
collective decisions. In: AAAI. pp. 5656–5663 (2021)
55. Peters, D., Procaccia, A.D., Psomas, A., Zhou, Z.: Explainable voting. NeurIPS
33, 1525–1534 (2020)
56. Pozanco, A., Mosca, F., Zehtabi, P., Magazzeni, D., Kraus, S.: Explaining
preference-driven schedules: the expres framework. In: ICAPS (to appear) (2022)
57. Procaccia, A.D.: Axioms should explain solutions. In: The Future of Economic
Design, pp. 195–199. Springer (2019)
58. Rosenfeld, A., Kraus, S.: Providing arguments in discussions on the basis of the
prediction of human argumentative behavior. ACM TiiS 6(4), 1–33 (2016)
59. Rosenfeld, A., Richardson, A.: Explainability in human–agent systems. JAAMAS
33(6), 673–705 (2019)
60. Roth, A.E.: The economics of matching: Stability and incentives. Mathematics of
operations research 7(4), 617–628 (1982)
61. Scheuerman, J., Harman, J., Mattei, N., Venable, K.B.: Modeling voters in multi-
winner approval voting. In: AAAI. vol. 35, pp. 5709–5716 (2021)
62. Schumann, C., Foster, J., Mattei, N., Dickerson, J.: We need fairness and explain-
ability in algorithmic hiring. In: AAMAS. pp. 1716––1720 (2020)
63. Schwartz, S.H.: An overview of the schwartz theory of basic values. Online readings
in Psychology and Culture 2(1), 2307–0919 (2012)
64. Shapley, L.S.: A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games
28(2), 307–317 (1953)
65. Suryanarayana, S.A., Sarne, D., Kraus, S.: Justifying social-choice mechanism out-
come for improving participant satisfaction. In: AAMAS (2022)
66. Tal, M., Meir, R., Gal, Y.: A study of human behavior in online voting. In: AAMAS.
pp. 665–673 (2015)
67. Uhde, A., Schlicker, N., Wallach, D.P., Hassenzahl, M.: Fairness and decision-
making in collaborative shift scheduling systems. In: CHI. pp. 1–13 (2020)
68. Zahedi, Z., Sengupta, S., Kambhampati, S.: Why didn’t you allocate this task to
them?’negotiation-aware task allocation and contrastive explanation generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.01640 (2020)
69. Zhang, Y., Chen, X., et al.: Explainable recommendation: A survey and new per-
spectives. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval 14(1), 1–101 (2020)

