
Ever Wonder Why?


EVER
WONDER
WHY?
and Other
Controversial
Essays
Thomas Sowell
HOOVER INSTITUTION PRESS
Stanford University
Stanford, California

The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, founded
at Stanford University in 1919 by Herbert Hoover, who went on
to become the thirty-ﬁrst president of the United States, is an
interdisciplinary research center for advanced study on domestic
and international affairs. The views expressed in its publications are
entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views
of the staff, ofﬁcers, or Board of Overseers of the Hoover Institution.
www.hoover.org
Hoover Institution Press Publication No. 548
Copyright  2006 by Thomas Sowell
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written
permission of the publisher.
First printing, 2006
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Manufactured in the United States of America
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements
of the American National Standard for Information Sciences—
Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992. 

Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN 0-8179-4752-3

Half the harm that is done in this world is due to
people who want to feel important. They don’t
mean to do harm—but the harm does not interest
them. Or they do not see it, or they justify it because
they are absorbed in the endless struggle to think
well of themselves.
T. S. Eliot


Contents
Preface
xiii
part i: the culture wars
Ever Wonder Why?
3
Animal Rites
6
“Us” or “Them”?
9
Twisted History
12
Explaining to the Grand Kids
15
Human Livestock
18
The Wright Stuff
21
The Legacy of Eric Hoffer
24
One-Uppers versus Survival
27
The Equality Dogma
30
The Inequality Dogma
33
Equality, Inequality, and Fate
36
Hiroshima
39
The Tyranny of Visions
42
The Tyranny of Visions: Part II
45
The Tyranny of Visions: Part III
48
The Immigration Taboo
51
The Left Monopoly
54
I Beg to Disagree
57
4th Estate or 5th Column?
60
part ii: economic issues
Why Economists Are Not Popular
65
Housing Hurdles
68
The “Cost” of Medical Care
71

viii
Contents
Subsidies Are All Wet
74
A Taxing Experience
77
Proﬁts without Honor
80
Proﬁts without Honor: Part II
83
Two Earthquakes
86
Peter Bauer (1915–2002)
89
Journalists and Economics
92
Stock Crash Aftermath
95
Milton Friedman at 90
98
“Price Gouging” in Florida
101
Economic “Power”
104
A Relic of the Recent Past
107
Who Can Afford It?
110
Free-Lunch Medicine
113
Free-Lunch Medicine: Part II
116
Free-Lunch Medicine: Part III
119
Manufacturing Confusion
122
A Cold Shower
125
An Old “New Vision”
128
Third World Sweatshops
131
Third World Sweatshops: Part II
134
Privatizing Social Security
137
Privatizing Social Security: Part II
140
“Living Wage” Kills Jobs
143
A Happy Birthday?
146
part iii: legal issues
Calculated Confusion
151
Judges and Judgment
154
Justice for Little Angelo
157
Property Rites
160
Property Rites: Part II
163
Property Rites: Part III
166

ix
Contents
Foreign Law Is Not Law
169
Medical Lawsuits
172
Fixing the Jury System
175
Half a Century after Brown
178
Half a Century after Brown: Part II
181
Half a Century after Brown: Part III
184
Umpires, Judges, and Others
187
Big Business and Quotas
190
The Grand Fraud
193
The Grand Fraud: Part II
196
The Grand Fraud: Part III
199
The Grand Fraud: Part IV
202
Saving Quotas
205
The High Cost of Nuances
208
The Polio Fallacy
211
part iv: political issues
Spoiled Brat Politics
217
Spoiled Brat Politics: Part II
220
The “Compassion” Racket
223
Ronald Reagan (1911–2004)
226
Gun Control Myths
229
Gun Control Myths: Part II
232
A Painful Anniversary
235
The High Cost of Shibboleths
238
“Why Do They Hate Us?”
241
Foreign “Allies”
244
My Platform
247
The Oldest Fraud
250
The Left’s Vision
253
The Left’s Vocabulary
256
Abstract People
259
Looking Back
262

x
Contents
part v: social issues
Mealy Mouth Media
267
Achievements and Their Causes
270
Talkers versus Doers
273
Talkers versus Doers: Part II
276
Liberals and Class
279
Liberals and Class: Part II
282
Liberals and Class: Part III
285
The Autism “Spectrum”
288
The High Cost of Busybodies
291
The High Cost of Busybodies: Part II
294
The High Cost of Busybodies: Part III
297
The High Cost of Busybodies: Part IV
300
“Partial Truth” Abortion
303
Lying about Yosemite
306
Growing Old
309
April Fools’ Party
312
part vi: education issues
Choosing a College
317
The Idiocy of “Relevance”
320
Julian Stanley and Bright Children
323
For What Purpose?
326
School Performances
329
School Performances: Part II
332
School Performances: Part III
335
College Admissions Voodoo
338
Summer De-Programming
341
Fat in California’s Budget
344
A Scary Report
347
“Teaching to the Test”
350
“Teaching to the Test”: Part II
353

xi
Contents
“Teaching to the Test”: Part III
356
Smart “Problems”
359
Vouchers Vindicated
362
Artiﬁcial Stupidity
365
“Good” Teachers
368
A Sign of the Times
371
Suspicious Stats
374
Peers and Pied Pipers
377
part vii: racial issues
Older Budweiser
383
Rosa Parks and History
386
“Friends” of Blacks
389
“Friends” of Blacks: Part II
392
Recycled “Racism”
395
Dangerous Democracy?
398
Are Cops Racist?
401
Rattling the Chains
404
Roasting Walter Williams
407
“Diversity” in India
410
Race and IQ
413
Race and IQ: Part II
416
Race and IQ: Part III
419
An Old War and a New One
422
Silly Letters
425
Black History Month
428
Bravo for Bill Cosby
431
Quota “Logic”
434
Quota “Logic”: Part II
437
part viii: random thoughts
Random Thoughts
443


Preface
Many explanations are given for the events of our time
and the events in history. One of the most common
explanations is that various external circumstances led or
forced people to do this or that, and one of the most
overlooked explanations is that various internal drives led
them to do the things they did, including things that made
no sense in terms of the external circumstances. One of
these
internal
drives—especially
the
desire
“to
feel
important,” in T.S. Eliot’s words—ﬁts many notions and
actions that would be hard to explain otherwise.
The desire of individuals and groups to puff themselves
up by imposing their vision on other people is a recurring
theme in the culture wars discussed in the ﬁrst section of
the essays that follow. Such attempts at self-aggrandizement
in the name of noble-sounding crusades are too often called
“idealism” rather than the narrow ego trip that it is.
Right after the section containing essays on culture war
issues comes the largest section in this book, on economic
issues. The reason for so many essays on economics is not
just the importance of the subject itself but also the utter
confusion that reigns among the general public, and even
among the intelligentsia, over very basic principles of
economics—and even very basic words, like “wages,” “taxes,”
or the “national debt.”
The great Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
said that we need education in the obvious more than
exploration of the obscure. It is especially important to

xiv
Preface
explain economics so plainly that it becomes obvious
because so many in politics and the media have created so
much confusion in the process of spinning issues to ﬁt their
own agendas. Those who want a complete introduction to
the subject can read my Basic Economics but the essays here
simply try to clarify particular misconceptions on particular
issues.
A wide range of legal, social, racial, and educational
issues are dealt with in the other sections of this book. All
of these essays ﬁrst appeared as syndicated columns carried
in newspapers across the country. As such, they had to be
readable and concise, and they often dealt with issues that
were in the news. However, from the large number of these
columns written over the past few years I have selected for
publication here those columns which deal with issues of
continuing relevance and interest.
While
I
take
responsibility
for
all
the
conclusions
reached in these essays, I must also acknowledge the work
of others that made these writings possible. First of all, there
is my research assistant, Na Liu, whose insights as well as
diligence have enabled me to discuss the wide range of
topics covered in these columns with a background of
knowledge to draw on. She has been very ably assisted by the
dedicated work of Elizabeth Costa. All this is made possible
by the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, where we
are all employed and which has generously supported our
research. Finally, I must acknowledge the contribution of
Karen Duryea, my editor at Creators Syndicate, who has
caught many a typographical or grammatical error in my
columns, as well as inadvertent misstatements, saving me
from public embarrassment.
While many serious issues are discussed in these pages,

xv
Preface
sometimes there is also a little humor, without which it
would be hard to face many of life’s realities.
Thomas Sowell
Hoover Institution
Stanford University


PART I
THE CULTURE WARS


Ever Wonder Why?
When you have seen scenes of poverty and squalor in
many Third World countries, either in person or in pictures,
have you ever wondered why we in America have been
spared such a fate?
When you have learned of the bitter oppressions that so
many people have suffered under, in despotic countries
around the world, have you ever wondered why Americans
have been spared?
Have
scenes
of
government-sponsored
carnage
and
lethal mob violence in countries like Rwanda or in the
Balkans ever made you wonder why such horrifying scenes
are not found on the streets of America?
Nothing is easier than to take for granted what we are
used to, and to imagine that it is more or less natural, so
that it requires no explanation. Instead, many Americans
demand explanations of why things are not even better and
express indignation that they are not.
Some people think the issue is whether the glass is half
empty or half full. More fundamentally, the question is
whether the glass started out empty or started out full.
Those who are constantly looking for the “root causes”
of poverty, of crime, and of other national and international
problems, act as if prosperity and law-abiding behavior were
so natural that it is their absence which has to be explained.
But a casual glance around the world today, or back through
history, would dispel any notion that good things just
happen naturally, much less inevitably.

4
ever wonder why?
The United States of America is the exception, not the
rule. Once we realize that America is an exception, we
might even have a sense of gratitude for having been born
here,
even
if
gratitude has become un-cool in many
quarters. At the very least, we might develop some concern
for seeing that whatever has made this country better off is
not lost or discarded—or eroded away, bit by bit, until it is
gone.
Those among us who are constantly rhapsodizing about
“change” in vague and general terms seem to have no fear
that a blank check for change can be a huge risk in a world
where so many other countries that are different are also far
worse off.
Chirping about “change” may produce a giddy sense of
excitement or of personal exaltation but, as usual, the devil
is in the details. Even despotic countries that have embraced
sweeping changes have often found that these were changes
for the worse.
The czars in Russia, the shah of Iran, the Batista regime
in Cuba, were all despotic. But they look like sweethearts
compared to the regimes that followed. For example, the
czars never executed as many people in half a century as
Stalin did in one day.
Even the best countries must make changes and the
United States has made many economic, social, and political
changes for the better. But that is wholly different from
making “change” a mantra.
To be for or against “change” in general is childish.
Everything depends on the speciﬁcs. To be for generic
“change” is to say that what we have is so bad that any
change is likely to be for the better.
Such a pose may make some people feel superior to
others who ﬁnd much that is worth preserving in our values,

5
The Culture Wars
traditions and institutions. The status quo is never sacrosanct
but its very existence proves that it is viable, as seductive
theoretical alternatives may not turn out to be.
Most
Americans
take
our
values,
traditions
and
institutions so much for granted that they ﬁnd it hard to
realize how much all these things are under constant attack
in our schools, our colleges, and in much of the press, the
movies and literature.
There is a culture war going on within the United
States—and in fact, within Western civilization as a whole—
which may ultimately have as much to do with our survival,
or failure to survive, as the war on terrorism.
There are all sorts of ﬁnancial, ideological, and psychic
rewards for undermining American society and its values.
Unless some of us realize the existence of this culture war,
and the high stakes in it, we can lose what cost those
Americans before us so much to win and preserve.

Animal Rites
If you think there is a limit to how much childishness there
is among Californians, you may want to reconsider—
especially for Californians in academic communities.
Recently a mountain lion was discovered up in a tree in
Palo Alto, a residential community adjacent to Stanford
University. This was at about the time of day when a nearby
school was getting ready to let out. There had already been
an incident of a horse being found mauled by some animal
on Stanford land, and some thought it might have been a
mountain lion that did it.
Fearing that the mountain lion might ﬁnd one of the
local school children a tempting target, the police shot and
killed the animal. Outrage against the police erupted up
and down the San Francisco peninsula and as far away as
Marin County, on the other side of the Golden Gate Bridge,
more than 30 miles away.
According to the San Francisco Chronicle, “The police
agency has been ﬂooded with outraged calls and e-mails
from people inﬂamed by TV news videotape of the lion
lolling peacefully in a tree just before an ofﬁcer shot it to
death with a high-powered riﬂe.”
Yes, the mountain lion was sitting peacefully. That is
what cats do before they pounce—usually very swiftly.
Second-guessers
always
have
easy
alternatives.
One
protester
against
“the
murdering
of
such
a
beautiful

7
The Culture Wars
creature” said that it “easily could have been removed from
the premises and relocated” and that the “dirty blood-thirsty
bastards” who killed it should be ashamed of themselves.
The protester offered no helpful hints on how you
“easily” remove a mountain lion from a tree—and certainly
did not volunteer to demonstrate how to do it in person the
next time the police ﬁnd a mountain lion up a tree in a
residential neighborhood.
Animal rights advocates said the police could have given
the mountain lion “a chance” by attempting to tranquilize it
while it was up in the tree, and save shooting as a last resort
if it turned aggressive.
A makeshift shrine has been erected on the spot where
the mountain lion died. Flowers, cards and photos have
been placed around it.
This is an academic community where indignation is a
way of life. Those engaged in moral exhibitionism have no
time for mundane realities.
The police, of course, have to deal with mundane
realities all the time. Not long before this episode, the
police had tried to capture three mountain lion cubs by
shooting them with tranquilizers. They missed on two out of
three tries with one cub.
What if the police had shot a tranquilizer gun at the
adult mountain lion in the tree and missed? Would they
have had a chance to get off a second shot at a swiftly
moving target before he pounced on one of the hundreds
of children that were soon to be leaving school near him?
Moral exhibitionists never make allowance for the police
missing, whether with tranquilizers shot at mountain lions or
bullets ﬁred at a criminal. The perpetually indignant are
forever wondering why it took so many shots.
It would never occur to people with academic degrees

8
ever wonder why?
and
professorships
that
they
are
both
ignorant
and
incompetent in vast areas of human life, much less that they
should keep that in mind before they vent their emotions
and wax self-righteous.
Degrees show that you have knowledge in some special
area. Too often they embolden people to pontiﬁcate on a
wide range of other subjects where they don’t know what
they are talking about.
The fact that academics are overwhelmingly of the
political left is perfectly consistent with their assumption that
third
parties—especially
third
parties
like
themselves—
should be controlling the decisions of other people who
have ﬁrst-hand knowledge and experience.
The cops probably haven’t read Chaucer and don’t know
what existentialism is. But they may know what danger is.
Some Palo Alto parents of small children living near
where the mountain lion was killed said that the police did
the right thing. There are still some pockets of sanity, even
in Palo Alto.

“Us” or “Them”?
A reader recently sent me an e-mail about a woman he had
met and fallen for. Apparently the attraction was mutual—
until one fateful day the subject of the environment came
up.
She was absolutely opposed to any drilling for oil in
Alaska, on grounds of what harm she said it would do to the
environment.
He argued that, since oil was going to be drilled for
somewhere in the world anyway, was it not better to drill
where there were environmental laws to provide at least
some kinds of safeguards, rather than in countries where
there were none?
That was the end of a beautiful relationship.
Environmentalist true believers don’t think in terms of
trade-offs and cost-beneﬁt analysis. There are things that are
sacred to them. Trying to get them to compromise on those
things would be like trying to convince a Muslim to eat
pork, if it was only twice a week.
Compromise and tolerance are not the hallmarks of true
believers. What they believe in goes to the heart of what they
are. As far as true believers are concerned, you are either
one of Us or one of Them.
The man apparently thought that it was just a question
of which policy would produce which results. But many
issues that look on the surface like they are just about which
alternative would best serve the general public are really

10
ever wonder why?
about being one of Us or one of Them—and this woman
was not about to become one of Them.
Many
crusades
of
the
political
left
have
been
misunderstood by people who do not realize that these
crusades
are
about
establishing
the
identity
and
the
superiority of the crusaders.
T.S. Eliot understood this more than half a century ago
when he wrote: “Half the harm that is done in this world is
due to people who want to feel important. They don’t mean
to do harm—but the harm does not interest them. Or they
do not see it, or they justify it because they are absorbed in
the endless struggle to think well of themselves.”
In this case, the man thought he was asking the woman
to accept a certain policy as the lesser of two evils, when in
fact he was asking her to give up her sense of being one of
the morally anointed.
This is not unique to our times or to environmentalists.
Back during the 1930s, in the years leading up to World War
II, one of the fashionable self-indulgences of the left in
Britain was to argue that the British should disarm “as an
example to others” in order to serve the interests of peace.
When economist Roy Harrod asked one of his friends
whether she thought that disarming Britain would cause
Hitler to disarm, her reply was: “Oh, Roy, have you lost all
your idealism?”
In other words, it was not really about which policy
would
produce
what
results.
It
was
about
personal
identiﬁcation with lofty goals and kindred souls.
The
ostensible
goal
of
peace
was
window-dressing.
Ultimately
it
was
not
a
question
whether
arming
or
disarming Britain was more likely to deter Hitler. It was a
question of which policy would best establish the moral

11
The Culture Wars
superiority of the anointed and solidify their identiﬁcation
with one another.
“Peace” movements are not judged by the empirical test
of how often they actually produce peace or how often their
disarmament tempts an aggressor into war. It is not an
empirical question. It is an article of faith and a badge of
identity.
Yasser Arafat was awarded the Nobel Prize for peace—
not for actually producing peace but for being part of what
was called “the peace process” in the Middle East, based on
fashionable
notions
that
were
common
bonds
among
members of what are called “peace movements” around the
world.
Meanwhile, nobody suggested awarding a Nobel Prize for
peace to Ronald Reagan, just because he brought the
nuclear dangers of a decades-long cold war to an end. He
did it the opposite way from how members of “peace
movements” thought it should be done.
Reagan beefed up the military and entered into an “arms
race” that he knew would bankrupt the Soviet Union if they
didn’t back off, even though arms races are anathema to
members of “peace movements.”
The fact that events proved him right was no excuse, as
far as members of “peace movements” were concerned. As
far as they were concerned, he was not one of Us. He was
one of Them.

Twisted History
One of the reasons our children do not measure up
academically to children in other countries is that so much
time is spent in American classrooms twisting our history for
ideological purposes.
“How would you feel if you were a Native American who
saw the European invaders taking away your land?” is the
kind of question our children are likely to be confronted
with in our schools. It is a classic example of trying to look
at the past with the assumptions—and the ignorance—of the
present.
One of the things we take for granted today is that it is
wrong
to
take
other
people’s
land
by
force. Neither
American Indians nor the European invaders believed that.
Both took other people’s land by force—as did Asians,
Africans, Arabs, Polynesians, and others. The Indians no
doubt regretted losing so many battles. But that is wholly
different from saying that they thought battles were the
wrong way to settle the question of who would control the
land.
Today’s child cannot possibly put himself or herself in
the mindset of Indians centuries ago, without inﬁnitely
more knowledge of history than our schools have ever
taught.
Nor is
understanding history the purpose of such
questions. The purpose is to score points against Western
society. In short, propaganda has replaced education as the
goal of too many “educators.”

13
The Culture Wars
Schools are not the only institutions that twist history to
score ideological points. “Never Forget That They Owned
Lots of Slaves” is the huge headline across the front page of
the New York Times’ book review section in its December 14,
2004 issue. Inside was an indictment of George Washington
and Thomas Jefferson.
Of all the tragic facts about the history of slavery, the
most astonishing to an American today is that, although
slavery was a worldwide institution for thousands of years,
nowhere in the world was slavery a controversial issue prior
to the 18th century.
People of every race and color were enslaved—and
enslaved others. White people were still being bought and
sold
as
slaves
in
the
Ottoman
Empire, decades after
American blacks were freed.
Everyone hated the idea of being a slave but few had any
qualms about enslaving others. Slavery was just not an issue,
not even among intellectuals, much less among political
leaders, until the 18th century—and then it was an issue
only in Western civilization.
Among those who turned against slavery in the 18th
century were George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Patrick
Henry and other American leaders. You could research all
of 18th century Africa or Asia or the Middle East without
ﬁnding any comparable rejection of slavery there.
But who is singled out for scathing criticism today?
American leaders of the 18th century.
Deciding that slavery was wrong was much easier than
deciding what to do with millions of people from another
continent, of another race, and without any historical
preparation for living as free citizens in a society like that of
the United States, where they were 20 percent of the total
population.

14
ever wonder why?
It
is
clear
from
the
private
correspondence
of
Washington, Jefferson, and many others that their moral
rejection of slavery was unambiguous, but the practical
question of what to do now had them bafﬂed. That would
remain so for more than half a century.
In 1862, a ship carrying slaves from Africa to Cuba, in
violation of a ban on the international slave trade, was
captured on the high seas by the U.S. Navy. The crew were
imprisoned and the captain was hanged in the United
States—despite the fact that slavery itself was still legal at the
time in Africa, in Cuba, and in the United States.
What does this tell us? That enslaving people was
considered an abomination but what to do with millions of
people who were already enslaved was not equally clear.
That question was ﬁnally answered by a war in which one
life was lost for every six people freed. Maybe that was the
only answer. But don’t pretend today that it was an easy
answer—or that those who grappled with the dilemma in
the 18th century were some special villains, when most
leaders and most people around the world at that time saw
nothing wrong with slavery.
Incidentally,
the
September
2004
issue
of
National
Geographic had an article about the millions of people still
enslaved around the world right now. But where was the
moral indignation about that?

Explaining to the Grand Kids
Those of us who are optimists believe that someday sanity
will return to our society. Our media, our ofﬁcials—perhaps
even our schools and colleges—will begin to talk sense.
Those of you who are young may live to see it.
But there is a down side to sanity. Once there is a whole
generation raised to think—to examine evidence and use
logic—you are going to be confronted with a need to
explain to your grandchildren how our generation could
have done the things we did. You don’t want your grand
kids to think that your whole generation was crazy.
“Grandpa,” they will say, “today we were reading in
history—”
“History?”
“Yes,
Grandpa.
There’s
a
subject
in
school
called
history.”
“Well, we didn’t have that back in my day. We had social
studies or current events or multiculturalism. But we didn’t
have this thing you call history.”
“Well, history is about what happened in the past,
Grandpa—like back when you were young.”
“I’ll be darned.”
“Anyway, we learned in history today that back in your
times, people who refused to work were supported by
people who did work. Is that true, Grandpa?”
“Well, yes, we were compassionate to the poor and the
downtrodden, like the homeless and such.”
“Why were people homeless, Grandpa?”

16
ever wonder why?
“They didn’t have enough money to buy houses or rent
apartments.”
“Were you homeless, Grandpa?”
“No. I had a regular job and used part of my salary to
pay the rent.”
“Why didn’t the homeless do that?”
“Well, it is hard to explain. They had a different kind of
lifestyle, they sort of dropped out of society. They lived a
more laid back kind of way.”
“Took drugs?”
“Yeah, drugs, alcohol, stuff like that.”
“And you gave them money that you had worked for,
Grandpa?”
“Well, not so much personally, but I paid taxes and the
government gave money to the homeless, provided places
for them to sleep, and so forth.”
“But you voted for the government, Grandpa.”
“Yeah, most of the time.”
“If the voters didn’t want their money spent this way, the
elected ofﬁcials wouldn’t have done it.”
“You sure do a lot of thinking things out, honey.”
“That’s called logic. They teach that in school too.”
“Logic? I heard something about it vaguely, but we
didn’t have time for it in school when I was young. We had
to express our feelings about things like trees and animal
rights and being non-judgmental.”
“You weren’t supposed to have judgment, Grandpa?”
“Well, if you were judgmental, that might hurt someone
else’s self-esteem.”
“So you couldn’t tell the homeless to go get a job like
you had, because it would hurt their self-esteem?”
“Exactly. It would be cultural imperialism—and that

17
The Culture Wars
would be wrong because one culture is just as good as
another.”
“But, Grandpa, in our history class we learned that
people from all over the world were trying desperately to get
into the United States—some paying to get smuggled in
from Mexico or Asia, some trying to cross the Caribbean in
leaky boats and drowning.”
“Why, yes, that happened.”
“But, if all cultures were equal, why were these people
risking their lives trying to go from one culture to another?”
“I never really thought about that, honey. Gee, they must
be working you pretty hard in school, to have you doing all
this thinking.”
“Aren’t people supposed to think, Grandpa?”
“I suppose it’s all right for those who like it. I don’t want
to be judgmental.”

Human Livestock
An old television special featured great boxing matches of
the past, including a video of a match between legendary
light-heavyweight champion Archie Moore and a young
Canadian ﬁghter named Yvon Durelle. In that ﬁght, each
man was knocked down four times. Since Archie Moore was
also among those serving as commentators on the program,
someone asked him if he knew that this was a great boxing
match while he was ﬁghting it.
“Yes!” he replied emphatically. At the time, he had said
to himself: “This is the kind of ﬁght that any ﬁghter would
love to be in—a knockdown, drag-out—and emerge the
winner.”
Overcoming adversity is one of our great desires and one
of our great sources of pride. But it is something that our
anointed deep thinkers strive to eliminate from our lives,
through everything from grade inﬂation to the welfare state.
The
anointed
want
to
eliminate
stress,
challenge,
striving, and competition. They want the necessities of life to
be supplied as “rights”—which is to say, at the taxpayers’
expense, without anyone’s being forced to work for those
necessities, except of course the taxpayers.
Nothing is to be earned. “Self-esteem” is to be dispensed
to school children as largess from the teacher. Adults are to
have their medical care and other necessities dispensed as
largess from the government. People are to be mixed and
matched by race and sex and whatever else the anointed

19
The Culture Wars
want to take into account, in order to present whatever kind
of picture the anointed think should be presented.
This is a vision of human beings as livestock to be fed by
the government and herded and tended by the anointed. All
the things that make us human beings are to be removed
from our lives and we are to live as denatured creatures
controlled and directed by our betters.
Those things that help human beings be independent
and
self-reliant—whether
automobiles,
guns,
the
free
market, or vouchers—provoke instant hostility from the
anointed.
Automobiles enable you to come and go as you wish,
without so much as a “by your leave” to your betters. The
very idea that other people will go where they want, live
where they want, how they want, and send their children to
whatever schools they choose, is galling to the anointed, for
it denies the very specialness that is at the heart of their
picture of themselves.
Guns are completely inappropriate for the kind of sheep-
like
people
the
anointed
envision
or
the
orderly,
prepackaged world in which they are to live. When you are
in mortal danger, you are supposed to dial 911, so that the
police can arrive on the scene some time later, identify your
body, and ﬁle reports in triplicate.
The free market is a daily assault on the vision of the
anointed. Just think of all those millions of people out there
buying whatever they want, whenever they want, whether or
not the anointed think it is good for them.
Think of those people earning whatever incomes they
happen to get from producing goods or services for other
people, at prices resulting from supply and demand, with
the anointed cut out of the loop entirely and standing on

20
ever wonder why?
the sidelines in helpless frustration, unable to impose their
particular vision of “social justice.”
The welfare state is not really about the welfare of the
masses. It is about the egos of the elites.
One of the most dangerous things about the welfare
state is that it breaks the connection between what people
have produced and what they consume, at least in many
people’s minds. For the society as a whole, that connection
remains as ﬁxed as ever, but the welfare state makes it
possible for individuals to think of money or goods as just
arbitrary dispensations.
Thus those who have less can feel a grievance against
“society” and are less inhibited about stealing or vandalizing.
And the very concept of gratitude or obligation disappears—
even the obligation of common decency out of respect for
other people. The next time you see a bum leaving drug
needles in a park where children play or urinating in the
street, you are seeing your tax dollars at work and the end
result of the vision of the anointed.

The Wright Stuff
One of the greatest inventions of the 20th century—
indeed, one of the landmark inventions in the history of the
human race—was the work of a couple of young men who
had never gone to college and who were just bicycle
mechanics in Dayton, Ohio.
That part of the United States is often referred to
disdainfully as “ﬂyover country” because it is part of America
that the east coast and west coast elites ﬂy over on their way
to what they consider more important places. But they are
able to ﬂy over it only because of those mechanics in
Dayton.
The Wright brothers’ ﬁrst airplane ﬂight was only about
120 feet—roughly the distance from home plate to second
base—and not as long as the wingspan of a 747. But it began
one of the longest journeys ever taken by the human race,
and that journey is not over yet, as we soar farther into
space.
Man had dreamed of ﬂying for centuries and others
were hard at work on the project in various places around
the world when the Wright brothers ﬁnally got their plane
off the ground on December 17, 1903. It didn’t matter how
long or how short the ﬂight was. What mattered was that
they showed that it could be done.
Alas, Orville and Wilbur Wright are today pigeon-holed
as “dead white males” whom we are supposed to ignore, if
not deplore. Had either of them been a woman, or black or
any of a number of other specially singled out groups, this

22
ever wonder why?
hundredth anniversary of their ﬂight would be a national
holiday, with an orgy of parades and speeches across the
length and breadth of the country.
Recently, a reporter for a well-known magazine phoned
me to check on some facts about famous people who talked
late and whom I had mentioned in my book, The Einstein
Syndrome. Her editor wanted to know why there was not
more “diversity” among the people I cited. Almost all of
them were men, for example, and white men at that.
The vast majority of people who talk late are boys and I
had no control over that. In a predominantly white society,
it should not be surprising that famous men who talked late
were mostly white. No doubt in China most would be
Chinese.
The reporter seemed somewhat relieved when I pointed
out that the distinguished mathematician Julia Robinson
and famed 19th century concert pianist Clara Schumann
were among the women discussed in my book. Ramanujan,
a self-taught mathematical genius from India, came to my
attention right after the book went into print, but the
reporter seemed happy to be able to add his name to the
list of famous late-talkers.
This mania for “diversity” has spread far and wide. When
I looked through my nieces’ high school math book, I saw
many pictures of noted mathematicians but—judging by
those pictures—you would never dream that anything worth
noting had ever been done in mathematics by any white
males.
This
petty-minded
falsiﬁcation
of
history
is
less
disturbing than the indoctrination-minded “educators” who
are twisting reality to ﬁt their vision. Those who cannot tell
the difference between education and brainwashing do not
belong in our schools.

23
The Culture Wars
History
is
what
happened, not what we
wish had
happened or what a theory says should have happened. One
of the reasons for the great value of history is that it allows
us to check our current beliefs against hard facts from
around the world and across the centuries.
But
history
cannot
be
a
reality
check
for
today’s
fashionable visions when history is itself shaped by those
visions. When that happens, we are sealing ourselves up in a
closed world of assumptions.
There is no evidence that the Wright brothers intended
the airplane to be ﬂown, or ridden in, only by white people.
Many of the great breakthroughs in science and technology
were gifts to the whole human race. Those whose efforts
created these breakthroughs were exalted because of their
contributions to mankind, not to their particular tribe or
sex.
In trying to cheapen those people as “dead white males”
we only cheapen ourselves and do nothing to promote
similar achievements by people of every description. When
the Wright brothers rose off the ground, we all rose off the
ground.

The Legacy of Eric Hoffer
The twentieth anniversary of the death of Eric Hoffer
passed with very little notice of one of the most incisive
thinkers of his time—a man whose writings continue to have
great relevance to our times.
How many people today even know of this remarkable
man with no formal schooling, who spent his life in manual
labor—most of it as a longshoreman—and who wrote some
of the most insightful commentary on our society and trends
in the world?
You need only read one of his classics like The True
Believer: Thoughts on the Nature of Mass Movements to realize
that you are seeing the work of an intellectual giant.
Having spent several years in blindness when most other
children were in school, Hoffer could only do manual labor
after he recovered his eyesight, but he was determined to
educate himself. He began by looking for a big book with
small print to take with him as he set out on a job as a
migratory farm worker.
The book that turned out to ﬁll this bill—based on size
and words—was the essays of Montaigne. Over the years, he
read many landmark books, including Hitler’s Mein Kampf.
If ever there was a walking advertisement for the Great
Books approach to education, it was Eric Hoffer.
Among Hoffer’s insights about mass movements was that
they are an outlet for people whose individual signiﬁcance
is meager in the eyes of the world and—more important—
in their own eyes. He pointed out that the leaders of the

25
The Culture Wars
Nazi movement were men whose artistic and intellectual
aspirations were wholly frustrated.
Hoffer said: “The less justiﬁed a man is in claiming
excellence for his own self, the more ready he is to claim all
excellence for his nation, his religion, his race or his holy
cause.”
People who are fulﬁlled in their own lives and careers
are not the ones attracted to mass movements: “A man is
likely to mind his own business when it is worth minding,”
Hoffer said. “When it is not, he takes his mind off his own
meaningless affairs by minding other people’s business.”
What Hoffer was describing was the political busybody,
the zealot for a cause—the “true believer,” who ﬁlled the
ranks of ideological movements that created the totalitarian
tyrannies of the 20th century.
In a comment very relevant to the later disintegration of
the
Soviet
bloc
in
Eastern
Europe
and
the
fall
of
Communism in the Soviet Union itself, he observed that
totalitarian governments’ “moment of greatest danger is
when they begin to reform, that is to say, when they begin
to show liberal tendencies.”
Mikhail Gorbachev’s place in history was secured by his
failure to understand that and his willingness to believe that
a decent and humane Communist society was possible. But,
once the people in Eastern Europe no longer had to fear
tanks or the gulags, the statues of Lenin and Stalin began
being toppled from their pedestals, like the governments
they represented.
Contrary to the prevailing assumptions of his time, Eric
Hoffer did not believe that revolutionary movements were
based on the sufferings of the downtrodden. “Where people
toil from sunrise to sunset for a bare living, they nurse no

26
ever wonder why?
grievances and dream no dreams,” he said. He had spent
years living among such people and being one of them.
Hoffer’s insights may help explain something that many
of us have found very puzzling—the offspring of wealthy
families spending their lives and their inherited money
backing
radical
movements.
He
said:
“Unlimited
opportunities can be as potent a cause of frustration as a
paucity or lack of opportunities.”
What can people with inherited fortunes do that is at all
commensurate with their unlimited opportunities, much less
what their parents or grandparents did to create the fortune
in the ﬁrst place, starting from far fewer opportunities?
Like the frustrated artists and failed intellectuals who
turn to mass movements for fulﬁllment, rich heirs cannot
win the game of comparison of individual achievements. So
they
must
change
the
game.
As
zealots
for
radical
movements, they often attack the very things that made their
own good fortune possible, as well as undermining the
freedom and well-being of other people.

One-Uppers versus Survival
Among the many commemorations of the September 11th
anniversary, the one at Berkeley was unique. The American
ﬂag was banned because it might offend people from other
countries. “The Star Spangled Banner” was banned because
it was considered too militaristic, while “God Bless America”
was not regarded as an acceptable substitute because God is
politically incorrect in Berkeley.
This might all be just an incidental sidelight on the
silliness of Berkeley, except that such attitudes are far more
widespread among academics, the literati, and the glitterati.
Too often such attitudes are based on nothing more
substantial than a desire to be part of the self-anointed elite
who are one-up on everyone else.
Being one-up is so important to some people that it
colors the way they see every issue and can even override
concern for their own safety in a world of international
terrorism. One of the ways of being one-up is to jump on
the bandwagon of the latest fads, like being non-judgmental
or supporting multiculturalism and deconstruction. These
clever sophistries are the self-indulgences of sheltered and
comfortable people.
Does anyone suffering the agonies of some terrible
disease question whether what he is experiencing is real or
just a matter of “perceptions” that are “socially constructed”?
Does a mother whose child has died in her arms question
whether that is of any greater signiﬁcance than swatting a
mosquito? Do people who risk their lives trying to escape

28
ever wonder why?
from some brutal dictatorship and reach American soil
regard all cultures as “equally valid”?
People can deﬁne things inside their own heads any way
they want to. It is only when they pretend to be talking
about things outside their heads, in the real world, that they
spread intellectual confusion and social chaos. Many a
foolish policy is based on trying to make the real world
match the picture inside someone’s head.
Since all people and all cultures are equal—inside the
heads of the one-uppers—any disparities in the real world
are seen as injustices to be corrected. Therefore, if a high
school punishes more black males than Asian females for
misconduct, then apparently that school must be racist and
should be sued.
Differences in income, mortality rates, unemployment,
and innumerable other things are all automatically suspect
as evils of society, because different groups cannot possibly
be behaving differently, since they are equal inside the
heads of the one-uppers. Countries that are poor cannot
possibly be less productive, but must have been “exploited”
somehow.
People who think this way are especially dangerous when
we are facing mortal perils, such as international terrorism.
Since there is moral equivalence inside their heads, their
conclusion is that we must have done something wrong to
make terrorists hate us.
It will never occur to such people that the kind of envy
and resentments which they themselves promote incessantly
may be behind the hatred from those who are lagging far
behind the progress of the West, and who can achieve
signiﬁcance only by destruction.
We cannot do anything about what is inside other
people’s heads—except let it stay there and not get inside

29
The Culture Wars
ours. But getting inside our heads, and especially inside the
heads of our children, is the compelling urge of those who
want to make the real world outside match their inner
vision.
Why? Because theirs is a very self-ﬂattering vision, which
establishes them as morally one-up on the rest of us. Going
against the common sense of ordinary people is the key to
their self-exaltation, whether they are favoring criminals over
victims, animals over humans, or other countries over
America.
In a long war against terrorism, where we may have to
both suffer and inﬂict terrible devastation, unity and resolve
are the keys to enduring and prevailing. One-uppers are the
last thing we need. They are enemies within, who can be the
most dangerous kinds of enemies.
If they are so preoccupied with ﬂattering their own
vanity that they do not understand that their own survival is
at stake, so be it. But the tragedy is that millions of other
people’s survival is also at stake.

The Equality Dogma
A statement in this column that black students usually do
not perform as well in school as white students or Asian
American students brought ﬁerce objections. Some people
seemed to think that this was a personal opinion—or even
an immoral remark.
It never seemed to occur to them that this was a
veriﬁable fact, shown by innumerable studies over the years
by many scholars of various races. As John Adams said, more
than two centuries ago: “Facts are stubborn things, and
whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates
of our passions, they cannot alter the state of facts and
evidence.”
More is involved than a confusion between facts and
opinions. The reigning dogma of our time is equality—and
anything that seems to go against that dogma creates an
automatic response, much like the conditioned responses of
Pavlov’s dog.
When discussing equality, we must at least be clear in
our own minds as to what we mean: Equality of what?
Performance? Potential? Treatment? Humanity? Too often,
fervor for the word serves as a substitute for clarity as to its
meaning.
It is an undeniable fact that different groups have
different performances across a whole spectrum of activities.
Does anyone seriously believe that whites usually play
basketball just as well as blacks? Is anyone surprised when

31
The Culture Wars
Asian American youngsters walk off with science prizes, year
after year?
When it comes to performance, huge disparities are the
rule rather than the exception. And performance is what
pays off.
Those who are politically correct may try to claim that
these disparities are all “stereotypes” or “perceptions” but
hard data show the best selling beers in America to be those
created by people of German ancestry. It is the same story
on the other side of the world, where China’s famed
Tsingtao beer was also created by Germans. And Germans
have been leading beer brewers in Europe, Australia, and
South America.
What
upsets
some
people
is
the
inference
that
performance
differences
reﬂect
innate
differences
in
potential. But there are huge differences in all the things
that turn potential into performance.
Back in the
early
19th
century, a Russian ofﬁcial
reported
that
even
the
poorest
Jews
there
somehow
managed to have books in their homes and “their entire
population studies,” while books were virtually unknown
among most of the surrounding population.
When
C-SPAN’s
Brian
Lamb
asked
author
Abigail
Thernstrom why Jews scored so high on mental tests, she
replied: “They have been preparing for them for a thousand
years.”
A
recent
study by the United Nations shows that
publications per capita in Europe today are at least ten times
as numerous as in the Arab countries or in Africa. How
could equal potential lead to equal performance when there
are such great disparities in the intervening factors?
The fact that some societies have long educated both
girls and boys, while others have not bothered to educate

32
ever wonder why?
most girls, means that some societies have thrown away half
their
inborn
talents
and
abilities.
How
could
the
performances of such societies not be different?
Recognizing the equal humanity of all peoples, and a
need to treat everyone with decency and compassion, is very
different from insisting on a dogma that their performances
are all equal.
It is not just politically correct people but government
agencies and the highest courts in the land that dogmatize
against any recognition of differences in performances
among
groups.
Statistical
differences
in
outcomes
automatically fall under suspicion of discrimination, as if the
groups themselves could not possibly be any different in
behavior or performance.
Any school that disciplines black boys much more
frequently than Asian American girls can be risking a federal
lawsuit, as if there could not possibly be any differences in
behavior among the children themselves. Employers can be
judged guilty of discrimination, even if no one can ﬁnd a
single person who was discriminated against, if their hiring
and promotions data show differences among ethnic groups
or between women and men.
The biggest losers from these dogmatic notions are
people who very much need to change their behavior, but
from whom that crucial knowledge is withheld by their
“leaders” and “friends.”

The Inequality Dogma
This is truly the age of dogma when it comes to differences
between groups. Some will blindly deny that intergroup
differences
in
performances
are
anything
other
than
“stereotypes,” “perceptions,” or “discrimination.”
At the other end of the spectrum, the dogma is that
mental differences especially, whether among individuals or
groups, are innate in the genes. Reaction against this view is
so strong in some places that it can literally be a federal case
if schools give IQ tests to black children.
Both these opposing views go back for centuries. Back in
the 18th century, Adam Smith said that the difference
between porters and philosophers was due to education and
suggested that there are fewer innate differences among
human beings than among dogs.
On the other side, an Islamic scholar of the 10th century
noted that Europeans grow more pale the farther north you
go and also that the “farther they are to the north the more
stupid, gross, and brutish they are.”
This correlation between skin color and mental ability
would of course be anathema to the politically correct
today—and the question as to whether it was true or false
would never get off the ground. But what were the facts, as
of the 10th century?
Since antiquity, Mediterranean Europe—especially at the
eastern end—had been far more advanced than northern
Europe in technology, organization, literacy and all the
things that make for a more advanced society. The fact that

34
ever wonder why?
this has all changed in the centuries since then does not
mean that this 10th century scholar was not correct in what
he said when he said it.
At the very least, he was there and we were not.
Unfortunately, facts have played a very subordinate role
in much discussion of differences among groups, races,
nations, and civilizations—whether among those arguing for
innate equality or for innate inequality.
In the early 20th century, many believers in innate
inequality presented what may have seemed like a logically
airtight argument that our national IQ was in danger of
declining over time, because people with low IQs usually
had more children than people with high IQs. The eugenics
movement and the birth control movement sought to
counter this trend by reducing the number of children born
to low IQ people.
The logical airtightness of this argument turned out to
be its greatest vulnerability when confronted with hard facts.
Extensive research by Professor James R. Flynn, an American
expatriate in New Zealand, has shown that in fact whole
nations have had their performances on mental tests rise by
substantial amounts over the years.
This should never have happened if IQ tests measured
innate ability, predetermined by genes. Yet Professor Flynn’s
work, widely recognized among scholars, showed more than
a dozen countries where whole generations answered more
IQ questions correctly than their parents or grandparents
had.
Because IQ tests by deﬁnition have an average score of
100, the standards keep getting changed. In other words, if
the average person answers 42 questions correctly on a given
IQ test at a given time, then 42 correct answers will be
counted as an IQ of 100.

35
The Culture Wars
A generation later, if the average person answers 53
questions correctly on that same test, then 53 correct
answers will be deﬁned as an IQ of 100. What this means is
that there was nothing to indicate how much IQ test results
were improving until Professor Flynn went all the way back
to the original raw scores and discovered how much they
had risen over the generations.
The time is long overdue to let facts be acknowledged as
facts, whatever our differing philosophies or hopes may be.
The preponderance of evidence is that northern Europeans
were not nearly as advanced as southern Europeans in the
10th century. If there had been IQ tests given then, the
northerners would undoubtedly have come in a poor
second.
By the time real IQ tests had been developed and given
in early 20th century America, immigrants from northern
Europe scored higher than immigrants from southern
Europe, many of the latter having IQs similar to those of
American blacks. We don’t need to ﬁght the tests. We need
to change the reality.

Equality, Inequality, and Fate
One of the confusions that plagues discussions of equality
and inequality is a confusion between the vagaries of fate
and the sins of man. There are plenty of both but they need
to be sharply distinguished from one another.
The plain fact that there are large differences among
individuals in incomes, occupations and whole ways of life
dependent upon these things has been widely seen as
“unfair,” especially when the accident of birth has had much
to do with these large economic and social differences.
Life is unfair. There is no point denying it. Indeed, it is
hard even to imagine how life could possibly be fair, given
all the innumerable factors that go into individual success or
failure—and how these factors vary greatly from one person
to another, one group to another, and one nation or
civilization to another.
Whatever the potentialities with which anyone enters the
world, the development of those potentialities into speciﬁc
skills and abilities depends on each individual’s parents,
schools, peers and the surrounding culture and its values.
These are never the same for everyone.
Eskimos no doubt have all the intelligence required to
grow
pineapples
but
they
are
unlikely
to
have
the
experience to do so. Nor are Hawaiians likely to know how
to hunt seals in the Arctic. Children who grow up in homes
where sports are discussed constantly, but science is not, are
unlikely to have the same goals or careers as children who
grow up in homes where the reverse is true.

37
The Culture Wars
None of this is really anyone’s fault, not even that
universal scapegoat, “society.” These are simply the vagaries
of fate.
For thousands of years, the whole Western Hemisphere
had no opportunity to develop in the same way as Europe
or Asia, because horses and oxen enabled Europeans and
Asians to build their agriculture and their transport around
these beasts of burden—neither of which existed in the
Western Hemisphere until they were brought here by
European invaders.
Whole ways of life had to be different on this half of the
planet from what they were on the vast Eurasian land mass.
Whose fault was that?
Some ethnic groups have an average age that is a decade
older than the average age of others, and whole countries
like Germany and Italy have average ages that are two
decades older than the average age in Afghanistan or
Yemen.
Is that a level playing ﬁeld? No! It is an unfair advantage
to those with more experience and the increased capabilities
that come with experience.
Other
differences
are
due
to
the
sins
of
man—
discrimination, conquest, slavery and more. Yet, whatever
the
sources
of
the
differences
among
people,
those
differences are huge and the economic consequences are
huge.
None of this is hard to understand in itself. But much of
it gets confused and twisted by the rhetoric, the visions and
the crusades of the intelligentsia, politicians, mush heads
and hot heads.
Even our courts of law are ready to consider different
distributions of groups in employment as evidence that the
employer discriminated, since it is apparently beyond the

38
ever wonder why?
pale to consider that the groups themselves may differ,
whether in quantiﬁable ways like age or in intangible ways
like attitudes.
So deeply ingrained is this egalitarian dogma that
different rates of passing tests from one group to another
are taken as evidence that something is wrong with the tests.
Different rates of promotion at work or in school are taken
as virtual proof that the employer or the school is doing
something wrong.
Best-selling author Shelby Steele has argued persuasively
that whites are afraid of being considered racists and blacks
are afraid of being considered innately inferior—and that
both do many foolish and counterproductive things as a
result. Such attitudes apply even beyond racial issues.
A nation’s laws and policies need to serve more serious
purposes than allowing people to escape their psychological
hangups. The time is overdue for these laws and policies to
be based on realities and geared toward consequences.

Hiroshima
Every August, there are some Americans who insist on
wringing their hands over the dropping of the atomic bomb
on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, so it was perhaps
inevitable that such people would have an orgy of wallowing
in guilt on the 60th anniversary of that tragic day. Time
magazine has page after page of photographs of people
scarred by the radiation, as if General Sherman had not
already said long ago that war is hell.
Winston Churchill once spoke of the secrets of the atom,
“hitherto mercifully withheld from man.” We can all lament
that this terrible power of mass destruction has been
revealed to the world and fear its ominous consequences for
us all, including our children and grandchildren. But that is
wholly different from saying that a great moral evil was
committed when the ﬁrst atomic bombs were dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
What was new about these bombs was the technology,
not the morality. More people were killed with ordinary
bombs in German cities or in Tokyo. Vastly more people
were killed with ordinary bullets and cannon on the Russian
front. Morality is about what you do to people, not the
technology you use.
The guilt-mongers have twisted the facts of history
beyond recognition in order to say that it was unnecessary
to drop those atomic bombs. Japan was going to lose the war
anyway, they say. What they don’t say is—at what price in
American lives? Or even in Japanese lives?

40
ever wonder why?
Much of the self-righteous nonsense that abounds on so
many subjects cannot stand up to three questions: (1)
Compared to what? (2) At what cost? and (3) What are the
hard facts?
The alternative to the atomic bombs was an invasion of
Japan, which was already being planned, and those plans
included casualty estimates even more staggering than the
deaths that have left a sea of crosses in American cemeteries
at Normandy and elsewhere. “Revisionist” historians have
come up with casualty estimates a small fraction of what the
American
and
British
military
leaders
responsible
for
planning the invasion of Japan had come up with.
Who are we to believe, those who had personally
experienced the horrors of the war in the Paciﬁc, and who
had a lifetime of military experience, or leftist historians hot
to ﬁnd something else to blame America for?
During the island-hopping war in the Paciﬁc, it was not
uncommon for thousands of Japanese troops to ﬁght to the
death on an island, while the number captured were a few
dozen. Even some Japanese soldiers too badly wounded to
stand would lie where they fell until an American medical
corpsman approached to treat their wounds—and then they
would set off a grenade to kill them both.
In the air the same spirit led the kamikaze pilots to
deliberately crash their planes into American ships and
bombers.
Japan’s
plans
for defense
against invasion involved
mobilizing the civilian population, including women and
children, for the same suicidal battle tactics. That invasion
could have been the greatest bloodbath in history.
No mass killing, especially of civilians, can leave any
humane person happy. But compared to what? Compared to

41
The Culture Wars
killing many times more Japanese and seeing many times
more Americans die?
We might have gotten a negotiated peace if we had
dropped the “unconditional surrender” demand. But at
what cost? Seeing a militaristic Japan arise again in a few
years, this time armed with nuclear weapons that they would
not have hesitated for one minute to drop on Americans?
As it was, the unconditional surrender of Japan enabled
General Douglas MacArthur to engineer one of the great
historic transformations of a nation from militarism to
paciﬁsm, to the relief of hundreds of millions of their
neighbors, who had suffered horribly at the hands of their
Japanese conquerors.
The facts may deprive the revisionists of their platform
for lashing out at America and for the ego trip of moral
preening but, fear not, they will ﬁnd or manufacture other
occasions for that. The rest of us need to understand what
irresponsible frauds they are—and how the stakes are too
high to let the 4th estate succeed as a 5th column
undermining
the
society
on
which
our
children
and
grandchildren’s security will depend.

The Tyranny of Visions
At long last there is some reconsideration of the child
molestation hysteria that has sent innocent people to jail for
long terms behind bars, often with zero evidence and with
testimony from children who have been heavily pressured or
manipulated by “experts.”
Genuine child molesters certainly belong behind bars
and a case could be made that they should never be allowed
out again. But that is wholly different from saying that an
unsubstantiated allegation should be automatically believed
in a court of law.
The New York Times Magazine in its September 19, 2004
issue had a long article featuring one of the children who
made false accusations against a man who spent 15 years in
prison as a result. The supposed victim now says that all of
it was a lie. Why did he lie? Because “experts” leaned on him
to say what they wanted him to say and he was just a kid at
the time.
Were those “experts” trying to frame this particular man?
Probably
not.
More
likely,
they
just
had
a
set
of
preconceptions about the world—a vision—that made them
believe that the accused man was guilty, so they saw their
duty as getting the kid to testify in a way that would get a
conviction.
CBS News probably didn’t set out to frame President
Bush with a forged document about his National Guard
service. More likely, the story they heard ﬁt their vision of
the world so strongly that they believed it—and brushed

43
The Culture Wars
aside any witness or expert who told them something
different.
Visions are powerful things. For some people, visions
make facts unnecessary and can even override facts to the
contrary.
In the years leading up to the Bolshevik revolution in
Russia, Lenin developed a whole vision of the world of the
past, the present, and the future. Although he spoke in the
name of the workers, he never bothered to ask what actual
ﬂesh-and-blood workers thought. In his years of exile before
returning to lead a revolution, he never bothered to go
where workers lived or worked.
Lenin was just the ﬁrst of the great vision-driven dictators
of the 20th century. Like Hitler and Mao after him, Lenin
was prepared to sacriﬁce the lives of millions of human
beings on the altar to his vision.
Even in democratic nations, there are people who can
impose their vision on other people, with no consequences
for being wrong and no requirement that they prove
themselves right.
Social workers have for years tried to stop white couples
from adopting orphans from minority groups because that
goes against their vision. They don’t need a speck of
evidence to back up their preconceptions.
Many minority children have been ripped out of the only
home they have ever known by social workers who have sent
them off to live among strangers, or a whole succession of
strangers in foster homes, simply because a vision says that
this is better than having them grow up with a white couple
who have raised them from infancy.
Everyone has visions but everyone is not in a position to
indulge those visions, or to impose them on other people,
without suffering any consequences for being wrong. Even

44
ever wonder why?
the biggest businesses can ﬁnd themselves looking red ink
in the face if their idea of what the public wants turns out
to be different from what the public will buy.
Federal judges, however, pay no price for being wrong,
even if the costs to others—sometimes the whole society—
turn out to be catastrophic. When murder rates skyrocketed
after 1960s judges started conjuring up new “rights” out of
thin air for criminals, there were no consequences for those
judges, who had lifetime appointments and were not likely
to be living in high-crime neighborhoods.
The political left has long favored putting more and
more decisions in the hands of people who pay no price for
being
wrong—not
only
judges
but
zoning
boards,
environmental commissions and, internationally, the United
Nations and the World Court. This is a vision of the wise
and the virtuous imposing their wisdom and virtue on the
lesser people who make up the rest of humanity.
Egalitarians are often in the vanguard of those seeking
to promote this most dangerous of all inequalities—the
inequality of unaccountable power in the service of a vision.

The Tyranny of Visions: Part II
Some people think of California as a place where many
kooky ideas originate. It is that but there is more to it than
that.
California has long had more than its fair share of
busybodies with a vision of the world in which it is necessary
for them to force other people to do Good Things. That is
not just a vision of the world, it is a vision of themselves—a
very ﬂattering vision that they are not likely to give up for
anything so mundane as facts or logic.
One of the latest examples is a recent ruling by one of
the many busybody commissions in California that people
who build houses, or just remodel their homes, will in the
future have to have more ﬂuorescent lights and even install
motion sensors to control lights—all in the name of saving
energy.
Motion sensors? Yes. If you are in a room where motion
sensors control the lights, sitting still for a while will cause
the lights to go off automatically.
The idea of the anointed busybodies is that we lesser
people often leave the lights on when we walk out of a
room, thereby wasting energy. The answer, as in so many
other cases, is to impose their superior wisdom and virtue by
forcing us to do a Good Thing—in this case install motion
sensors to turn out the lights automatically when there is no
one moving in the room.
If you are one of those people who just likes to sit still
and think for a while, or perhaps listen to music or watch

46
ever wonder why?
television, look for the lights to start going off if you are in
California—and get used to having to wave your arms or
shake your legs in order to get them to come back on again.
But it’s a Good Thing.
The world is full of Good Things, which is why there are
so many laws and regulations increasingly intruding into our
lives and restricting what we can do, even in our own homes.
The vision of imposing Good Things means an ever-growing
petty tyranny.
In
some
countries,
where
such
visions
are
more
sweeping, the tyranny is far from petty. Around the world
and for thousands of years, human beings have not been
able to leave other human beings alone.
Just think of all the centuries in which Christians tried to
force Jews to change their religion or Muslims tried to force
other people to adopt Islam. Was there nothing better to do
with all that time and energy except persecute people for
having different beliefs?
Some people obviously thought it was a Good Thing to
have other people believe what they believed or to unify the
country with one religion. Like today’s busybodies, they
seldom stopped to consider the cost of the Good Thing they
wanted done.
Whole
economies
have
been
ruined
by
expelling
productive minorities who happened to have a different
religion or belonged to a different race. After Spain
expelled the Moriscoes in the 16th century, one of the
religious leaders who had advocated their expulsion asked:
“Who will make our shoes now?”
That would have been a very good question to ask before
expelling the Moriscoes. Similar questions might well have
been asked before France’s persecution of the Huguenots
led them to ﬂee in the 17th century, taking many productive

47
The Culture Wars
enterprises from France with them. Twentieth century
examples are too numerous to cite.
Good Things have costs, often costs out of all proportion
to whatever good they might do. But notions like trade-offs
and diminishing returns seldom deter zealots, whose own
egos are served by their zealotry in imposing their vision,
however costly or counterproductive it may be for others.
The whole environmental extremist movement is based
on doing Good Things, in utter disregard of costs or
diminishing returns.
The idea that DDT might leave residues with harmful
effects on the eggs of some birds was enough to set off a
worldwide environmental crusade to ban the use of that
insecticide. The resurgence of malaria after that ban has
cost millions of human lives.
Green zealots are not about to reconsider, on this or a
whole range of other issues. Their vision triumphed, their
superior wisdom and virtue were afﬁrmed, and that is what
it is ultimately all about. To admit, even to themselves, that
their ego trips have cost other people their lives would be
too much.

The Tyranny of Visions: Part III
Nowhere is the tyranny of visions more absolute than with
issues involving safety. Attempts to talk about costs, trade-offs
or diminishing returns are only likely to provoke safety
zealots to respond with something like, “If it saves just one
human life, it is worth it!”
That immediately establishes the safety zealot as being
on a higher moral plane than those who stoop to consider
crass materialistic costs. And being morally one-up is what a
great deal of zealotry is all about.
The vision of zealots is not just a vision of the world. It
is a vision of themselves as special people in that world. The
down side is that such a heavy ego investment makes
reconsideration of the issues highly unlikely. Ego trumps
mundane facts or dry logic.
If the recent hurricanes that have swept across the
Caribbean and Florida prove anything, it should be that
wealth saves many human lives. Deaths from hurricane
Jeanne in the Caribbean have been in the thousands while
the death toll in Florida was less than a dozen.
The difference is that Florida is far more afﬂuent.
Houses
there
can
be
built
to
withstand
more
stress.
Ambulances can rush more people more quickly to better
equipped medical facilities. It has been estimated that more
than 95 percent of the deaths from natural disasters
worldwide occur in the poorer countries.
How does this affect safety issues?
Safety laws and regulations all have costs—not just

49
The Culture Wars
money outlays but other restrictions that reduce the rate of
production of wealth. If wealth is itself one of the biggest
lifesavers, costly safety devices cannot automatically be
considered justiﬁed “if it saves just one human life” when
the wealth it forfeits could have saved many lives.
Everything depends on the particular safety rule or
device. Some save many lives at small costs and others save
few, if any, lives at huge costs.
Diminishing returns matter as well, though these are
seldom taken into account by safety zealots.
Many dangerous impurities can be removed from water
or air at costs that virtually everyone will agree are worth it.
But there is no such thing as “pure water” or “pure air,” so
the only real question is how far you want to go in removing
impurities—and at what cost.
Impurities that are deadly at high concentrations can
become harmless at sufﬁciently low concentrations. In
extremely minute traces, even arsenic has been found to
have beneﬁcial effects. But the vision of “pure water” keeps
zealots pushing for removing ever more minute traces of
ever more questionable impurities, regardless of how much
more it costs or how little good it does—if any.
Alcohol takes huge numbers of lives every year, whether
in automobile accidents, liver disease or innumerable foolish
risks taken while “under the inﬂuence.” Yet studies show
that a very moderate daily intake of alcohol reduces
hypertension and the incidence of dementia. Everything
depends on how much.
Trade-offs and diminishing returns are not the stuff from
which heady visions and dramatic crusades are made. For
that you need goals to be reached “at all costs” and a clash
between heroes and villains. This appeals to the young and
to those who remain adolescents all their lives.

50
ever wonder why?
The realities of life force most of us to grow up, whether
we want to or not. But for people protected from realities
by
being
born rich, or
by having lifetime tenure as
academics or federal judges, maturity is optional.
Many of the most extreme safety and environmental
crusaders are rich busybodies or academics and their
students, and they are often helped by judges whose rulings
allow them to violate other people’s rights while pursuing
their own vision.
The “thousand natural shocks that ﬂesh is heir to” have
become a thousand reasons for lawsuits against those who
produce anything that is not “safe.”
Nothing is categorically safe. But few things are as
dangerous as those who are pursuing a safety vision that
ministers to their egos, with the costs being paid by others.

The Immigration Taboo
Immigration has joined the long list of subjects on which it
is taboo to talk sense in plain English. At the heart of much
confusion about immigration is the notion that we “need”
immigrants—legal or illegal—to do work that Americans
won’t do.
What we “need” depends on what it costs and what we
are willing to pay. If I were a billionaire, I might “need” my
own private jet. But I can remember a time when my family
didn’t even “need” electricity.
Leaving prices out of the picture is probably the source
of more fallacies in economics than any other single
misconception. At current wages for low-level jobs and
current levels of welfare, there are indeed many jobs that
Americans will not take.
The
fact
that
immigrants—and
especially
illegal
immigrants—will take those jobs is the very reason the wage
levels will not rise enough to attract Americans.
This is not rocket science. It is elementary supply and
demand. Yet we continue to hear about the “need” for
immigrants to do jobs that Americans will not do—even
though these are all jobs that Americans have done for
generations before mass illegal immigration became a way
of life.
There is more to this issue than economics. The same
mindless substitution of rhetoric for thinking that prevails
on economic issues also prevails on other aspects of
immigration.

52
ever wonder why?
Bombings in London, Madrid and the 9/11 terrorist
attacks here are all part of the high price being paid today
for decades of importing human time bombs from the Arab
world. That in turn has been the fruit of an unwillingness to
ﬁlter out people according to the countries they come from.
That squeamishness is still with us today, as shown by all
the hand-wringing about “proﬁling” Middle Eastern airline
passengers.
No doubt most Middle Eastern airline passengers are not
carrying any weapons or any bombs—and wouldn’t be, even
if there were no airport security to go through. But it is also
true that most of the time you will not be harmed by playing
Russian roulette.
Europeans and Americans have for decades been playing
Russian roulette with their loose immigration policies. The
intelligentsia have told us that it would be wrong, and even
racist, to set limits based on where the immigrants come
from.
There are thousands of Americans who might still be
alive if we had banned immigration from Saudi Arabia—and
perhaps that might be more important than the rhetoric of
the intelligentsia.
In that rhetoric, all differences between peoples are
magically
transformed
into
mere
“stereotypes”
and
“perceptions.” This blithely ignores hard data showing, for
example, that people who come here from some countries
are ten times more likely to go on welfare than people from
some other countries.
The media and the intelligentsia love to say that most
immigrants, from whatever group, are good people. But
what “most” people from a given country are like is
irrelevant.
If 85 percent of group A are ﬁne people and 95 percent

53
The Culture Wars
of group B are ﬁne people, that means you are going to be
importing three times as many undesirables when you let in
people from Group A.
Citizen-of-the-world types are resistant to the idea of
tightening our borders, and especially resistant to the idea
of making a distinction between people from different
countries. But the real problem is not their self-righteous
fetishes but the fact that they have intimidated so many
other people into silence.
In the current climate of political correctness it is taboo
even to mention facts that go against the rosy picture of
immigrants—for example, the fact that Russia and Nigeria
are always listed among the most corrupt countries on earth,
and that Russian and Nigerian immigrants in the United
States have already established patterns of crime well known
to law enforcement but kept from the public by the
mainstream media.
Self-preservation used to be called the ﬁrst law of nature.
But today self-preservation has been superseded by a need
to preserve the prevailing rhetoric and visions. Immigration
is just one of the things we can no longer discuss rationally
as a result.

The Left Monopoly
Recently Albert Hunt’s last column for the Wall Street
Journal mentioned how he was recruited by the late and
great Robert L. Bartley, who made that newspaper’s editorial
page unsurpassed in quality. What made the hiring of Albert
Hunt especially signiﬁcant was that Bartley was a staunch
conservative in the Reagan tradition, while Hunt is a
standard issue liberal.
It was precisely for that reason that Bartley wanted Hunt
to write for the Wall Street Journal, so that readers would be
sure to get more than one side of the issues discussed.
Many years ago, when I was teaching economics at
UCLA, we likewise had a staunchly conservative department.
We were sometimes called the west coast branch of the
University of Chicago, because so many of us had studied
under Milton Friedman and other leaders of “the Chicago
school” of economists.
Like Bob Bartley, we wanted our students to see more
than one way of looking at economics. One young, liberal-
minded economist was regarded by some as a possible
permanent member of the department, to add variety.
He never really measured up to our expectations, but he
was probably kept on longer than he would have been if he
had been a conservative economist, because of hopes that
he would turn out to be better than he did.
Even though the word “diversity” has become a mantra
on the left, there is no such drive for intellectual diversity in

55
The Culture Wars
bastions of the left, such as academia or the mainstream
media.
In recent years, the liberal media have at least added
some token conservatives, but our colleges and universities
are content with whole departments consisting solely of
people ranging from the left to the far left. In academia,
“diversity” in practice too often means simply white leftists,
black leftists, female leftists and Hispanic leftists.
Perhaps it was the remarkable popularity of conservative
talk radio and the meteoric rise of the Fox News channel
that
led
liberal
TV
networks
to
begin
adding
some
conservatives to their lineups. No such competitive pressures
operate in academia.
There are a few good small conservative colleges like
Hillsdale or Grove City, but Ivy League schools have no
conservative rivals of comparable size and prominence, and
neither do most state universities. A student can spend four
years at many colleges and universities and graduate with no
real awareness of any other viewpoints than those on the
left.
College and university faculties do not simply happen to
be leftist. Too often ideological questions are asked at
faculty job interviews and ideological litmus tests are applied
in hiring. One reason for the prominence of conservative
think tanks is that so many top scholars who are not leftists
do not ﬁnd a home in academia and go to work for think
tanks instead.
Not even visiting speakers with a conservative viewpoint
are tolerated on many campuses. It seems incredible that
there would be fears that a one-hour lecture would undo
years
of
indoctrination.
But
perhaps
it
is
just
sheer
intolerance that creates hostility to anyone expressing ideas
contrary to the prevailing notions of the left.

56
ever wonder why?
Students often report that their professors react against
them for stating a viewpoint different from the prevailing
orthodoxy of the left. They can be ridiculed in class
discussions or given low grades on exams.
Dartmouth College has been carrying on a running
battle
with
the
conservative
student
newspaper,
the
Dartmouth Review, from the moment it was founded many
years
ago.
On
some
campuses,
conservative
student
newspapers are seized and destroyed by leftist students or
even burned publicly, with little or no effort by the college
administration to maintain freedom of speech.
A student at Lewis College in Colorado was actually
kicked by a professor for wearing a sweatshirt proclaiming
his Republican views. This happened at a birthday party, of
all places, and the professor has been quoted as saying that
her only regret was that her kick was not “harder and
higher.”
The American Council of Trustees and Alumni, which
monitors campus intolerance, is trying to get some action
taken against that professor. Good luck.

I Beg to Disagree
My
assistant
sorts
the
incoming
mail
into
various
categories, such as “critical mail,” “fan mail,” etc. But the so-
called critical mail is seldom critical. It may be bombastic or
vituperative or full of pop psychology, but it seldom presents
a critical argument based on facts or logic.
Too many people today act as if no one can honestly
disagree with them. If you have a difference of opinion with
them, you are considered to be not merely in error but in
sin. You are a racist, a homophobe or whatever the villain of
the day happens to be.
Disagreements are inevitable whenever there are human
beings but we seem to be in an era when the art of
disagreeing is vanishing. That is a huge loss because out of
disagreements have often come deeper understandings than
either side had before confronting each other’s arguments.
Even wacko ideas have led to progress, when dealt with
critically, in terms of logic and evidence. Astrology led to
astronomy. The medieval notion of turning lead into gold—
alchemy—led
to
chemistry,
from
which
have
come
everything from a wide range of industrial products and
consumer goods to more productive agriculture and life-
saving drugs.
Where an argument starts is far less important than
where it ﬁnishes because the logic and evidence in between
is crucial. Unfortunately, our educational system is not only
failing to teach critical thinking, it is often itself a source of

58
ever wonder why?
confused
rhetoric
and
emotional
venting
in
place
of
systematic reasoning.
It is hard to think of a stronger argument for teaching
people to examine arguments critically than the tragic
history of 20th century totalitarianism and its horrors in
peace and war. Dictators often gained total power over a
whole nation by their ability to arouse emotions and evade
thought.
Watch old newsreels of Hitler and see the adoring and
enraptured look on the faces in his audience. Then read
what he said and see if it makes any sense whatever. Yet he
convinced
others—and
himself—that
he
had
a
great
message and a great mission.
The same could be said of Lenin, of Mao, of Pol Pot,
and of countless other despots, large and small, who
brought devastation to the people they ruled. It is not even
necessary to look solely at government leaders. Cult leader
Jim Jones used the same ability to sway people’s emotions
and numb their brains to lead them ultimately to mass
deaths in his Guiana compound.
Instead of trying to propagandize children to hug trees
and recycle garbage, our schools would be put to better use
teaching them how to analyze and test what is said by people
who advocate tree-hugging, recycling, and innumerable
other causes across the political spectrum.
The point is not to teach them correct conclusions but
to teach them to be able to use their own minds to analyze
the issues that will come up in the years ahead, which may
have nothing to do with recycling or any of the other issues
of our time.
Rational disagreement can be not only useful but
stimulating. Many years ago, when my friend and colleague
Walter Williams and I worked on the same research project,

59
The Culture Wars
he and I kept up a running debate on the reasons why
blacks excelled in some sports and were virtually non-
existent in others.
Walter was convinced that the reasons were physical
while I thought the reasons were social and economic.
Walter would show me articles on physiology from scholarly
journals, using them as explanations of why blacks had so
many top basketball players and few, if any, swimming
champions.
We never settled that issue but it provided lively debates
and we may both have learned something.
I even met my wife as a result of a disagreement. She
read something of mine that she disagreed with and told a
mutual friend. He in turn suggested that we get together for
lunch and hash out our differences.
Although we have now been married more than 20 years,
we have still not completely settled our differences over that
issue. But when we met our attention turned to other things.
There are a lot of reasons to be able to have rational
discussions about things on which people disagree.

4th Estate or 5th Column?
There are still people in the mainstream media who
profess bewilderment that they are accused of being biased.
But you need to look no further than reporting on the war
in Iraq to see the bias staring you in the face, day after day,
on the front page of the New York Times and in much of the
rest of the media.
If a battle ends with Americans killing a hundred
guerrillas and terrorists, while sustaining ten fatalities, that is
an American victory. But not in the mainstream media. The
headline is more likely to read: “Ten More Americans Killed
in Iraq Today.”
This kind of journalism can turn victory into defeat in
print or on TV. Kept up long enough, it can even end up
with real defeat, when support for the war collapses at home
and abroad.
One of the biggest American victories during the Second
World War was called “the great Marianas turkey shoot”
because American ﬁghter pilots shot down more than 340
Japanese planes over the Marianas islands while losing just
30 American planes. But what if our current reporting
practices had been used back then?
The story, as printed and broadcast, could have been:
“Today eighteen American pilots were killed and ﬁve more
severely wounded, as the Japanese blasted more than two
dozen American planes out of the sky.” A steady diet of that
kind of one-sided reporting and our whole war effort against
Japan might have collapsed.

61
The Culture Wars
Whether the one-sided reporting of the war in Vietnam
was a factor in the American defeat there used to be a
matter of controversy. But, in recent years, high ofﬁcials of
the Communist government of Vietnam have themselves
admitted that they lost the war on the battleﬁelds but won it
in the U.S. media and on the streets of America, where
political pressures from the anti-war movement threw away
the victory for which thousands of American lives had been
sacriﬁced.
Too many in the media today regard the reporting of
the Vietnam war as one of their greatest triumphs. It
certainly showed the power of the media—but also its
irresponsibility. Some in the media today seem determined
to recapture those glory days by the way they report on
events in the Iraq war.
First, there is the mainstream media’s almost exclusive
focus on American casualties in Iraq, with little or no
attention to the often much larger casualties inﬂicted on the
guerrillas and terrorists from inside and outside Iraq.
Since terrorists are pouring into Iraq in response to calls
from international terrorist networks, the number of those
who are killed is especially important, for these are people
who will no longer be around to launch more attacks on
American soil. Iraq has become a magnet for enemies of the
United States, a place where they can be killed wholesale,
thousands of miles away.
With all the turmoil and bloodshed in Iraq, both military
and
civilian
people
returning
from
that
country
are
increasingly
expressing
amazement
at
the
difference
between what they have seen with their own eyes and the far
worse, one-sided picture that the media presents to the
public here.
Our media cannot even call terrorists “terrorists,” but

62
ever wonder why?
instead give these cutthroats the bland name, “insurgents.”
You might think that these were like the underground
ﬁghters in Nazi-occupied Europe during World War II.
The most obvious difference is that the underground in
Europe did not go around targeting innocent civilians. As
for
the
Nazis,
they
tried
to
deny
the
atrocities they
committed. But today the “insurgents” in Iraq are proud of
their barbarism, videotape it, and publicize it—often with
the help of the Western media.
Real insurgents want to get the occupying power out of
their country. But the fastest way to get Americans out of
Iraq would be to do the opposite of what these “insurgents”
are doing. Just by letting peace and order return, those who
want to see American troops gone would speed their
departure.
The
United
States
has
voluntarily
pulled
out
of
conquered
territory
all
around
the
world,
including
neighboring Kuwait during the ﬁrst Gulf war. But the real
goal of the guerrillas and terrorists is to prevent democracy
from arising in the Middle East.
Still, much of the Western media even cannot call a
spade a spade. The Fourth Estate sometimes seems more
like a Fifth Column.

PART II
ECONOMIC ISSUES


Why Economists Are
Not Popular
One of the many reasons why economists are unpopular is
that they keep reminding people that things have costs, that
there is no free lunch. People already know that—but they
like to forget it when there is something they have their
hearts set on.
Economists don’t have to say anything when people are
buying things at a shopping mall or at an automobile
dealership.
The
price
tags
convey
the
situation
in
unmistakable terms. It is when people are voting for nice-
sounding things which politicians have dreamed up that
economists are likely to point out that the costs ignored by
politicians are going to have to be paid, one way or
another—and that you have to weigh those costs against
whatever beneﬁts you expect.
Who wants to put on green eye shades and start adding
up the numbers when someone grandly proclaims, “access
to health care for all” or “clean air” or “saving the
environment”? Economists are strictly party-poopers at times
like these. They are often gate crashers too, since usually
nobody asked them how much these things would cost or
even thought about these issues in such terms.
Some of the more persistent or insensitive economists
may even raise questions about the goals themselves. How
much health care at the taxpayers’ expense? In Britain, a 12-
year-old girl was given breast implants. That much health
care?
Meanwhile, Britain’s skyrocketing medical costs of taking

66
ever wonder why?
care of things that people would never have spent their own
money to take care of forced cutbacks and delays in more
urgently needed medical treatments. One woman’s cancer
operation was postponed so many times by the British health
service that, by the time the system could take her, the
disease was now too far gone for medical help—and she
died.
Economists could have told anyone in advance that
making things “free” causes excessive use by some, leaving
less for others with more urgent needs that have to remain
unsatisﬁed. Rent control, for example, has led to more
housing being occupied by some, who would not have paid
the market price for as large an apartment as they live in,
while others cannot ﬁnd any housing that they can afford in
the city, and have to live far away and commute to work.
Clean air? There is no such thing and never has been.
There is only air with varying degrees of impurities, varying
amounts of which can be removed at varying costs.
Removing the kinds of things that choke our lungs or
otherwise threaten our health is usually not that expensive.
But science is becoming capable of detecting ever more
minute traces of impurities with ever more insigniﬁcant
consequences. Yet where is the politician who is going to
resist calls for removing more impurities in the name of
“clean air”?
Who is going to resist calls to “save the environment”?
Only an economist is likely to ask, “Save it from what or
from whom—and at what price?”
Bumper
stickers
in
and
around
Redwood
City,
California, long proclaimed: “Save Pete’s Harbor.” What did
that even mean? In practice, it meant letting one set of
people use it as a marina and preventing other people from
replacing the marina with housing.

67
Economic Issues
When the Constitution of the United States says that the
government owes “equal protection” to all its citizens, why
should the government intervene on behalf of one set of
contending citizens against another, much less call that
“saving” the environment? People have been bidding against
one another for the same resources for centuries. Why
replace that process with politicians’ control? The 20th
century was a virtual laboratory test of political control of
economic activities—and it was such a dismal failure that
even socialists and communists began abandoning that way
of doing things by the 1990s.
Even when you don’t realize that you are bidding against
other people, you are. When you drive into a ﬁlling station
and ﬁll up your tank with gasoline, you are bidding against
people who want petroleum in the form of heating oil,
plastics, or Vaseline.
Lunches don’t get free just because you don’t see the
prices on the menu. And economists don’t get popular by
reminding people of that.

Housing Hurdles
A new study shows that you need an income of about
$104,000 to buy an average home on the San Francisco
peninsula with a 20 percent down payment. Since the
average price of a home in this area is more than half a
million dollars, the 20 percent down payment itself would be
more than $100,000.
These aren’t mansions we are talking about. Often they
are little nondescript houses packed pretty close together.
Who can afford to buy a home in such an area? Not
many. California is among the states with the lowest rates of
home ownership. Moreover, many of those who do own
homes in coastal California bought them long ago, before
the state’s home prices went sky high in the wake of severe
building restrictions promoted by environmental extremists.
Things are not much better when it comes to renting. A
calculation
of
how
many
hours
someone
making
the
minimum wage would have to work to pay the rent on a
one-bedroom apartment in this general area showed that, in
San Jose, a minimum-wage worker would have to work 168
hours just to pay the rent.
At 40 hours a week, that means working the whole
month to pay rent, with nothing left over for frills like food
and clothing. Tell this to someone on the Left Coast and the
answer will come back immediately: Raise the minimum
wage!
If people cannot afford even a one-bedroom apartment
while making minimum wages, they certainly cannot afford

69
Economic Issues
it when they are unemployed—and minimum wage laws
have a track record around the world of increasing the
unemployment rate.
Many people are so struck by California’s outrageous
housing prices that they do not realize that money is just
one of the costs of the innumerable restrictions and
requirements imposed on anyone who wants to build
anything in those parts of California where environmental
zealots are dominant—which includes most of the coast and
the whole San Francisco Bay area.
Whether costs take the form of money or of long
commutes,
highway
congestion
and
the
deaths
that
inevitably result, the fundamental problem is that few
people stop to think through the consequences of turning
fashionable notions into laws.
Among the many restrictions on building in those parts
of
California
dominated
by
environmental
zealots
are
restrictions on the height of buildings. Some people think
that it is enough to say that they don’t want California to
start looking like Manhattan.
But what if we stop and think through the consequences
of height restrictions? First of all, rents are going to have to
be higher, but that is just the beginning.
Why are rents going to have to be higher? Because two
ﬁve story buildings take up twice as much land as one ten-
story building housing the same total number of people.
In a state like California, where the cost of land is often
higher than the cost of what is built on the land, using twice
as much land per apartment means that rents are going to
have to be much higher—perhaps twice as high or more—
to cover the additional costs created by height restrictions.
With more land being required to house the same
number
of
people,
this
also
means
that
the
whole

70
ever wonder why?
metropolitan area is going to have to be larger than it would
be if it could expand upward instead of just outward. More
people are going to have to commute to work.
Those who impose height restrictions can ignore such
things.
A
few
blithe
words
about
not
wanting
their
community to look like Manhattan are usually about all the
thought they give to the subject. It would never occur to
them to ask the real question: How much don’t you want it
to look like Manhattan? How high a price are you prepared
to pay?
A doubling of rent and 3 additional highway fatalities a
year? A tripling of rents and 10 additional highway fatalities
a year?
Whatever the answer, the point is that height restrictions
are not a free lunch—whether the costs are measured in
money or in lives. A lot of people who cannot afford it are
paying heavily for the ego trips of environmental zealots.

The “Cost” of Medical Care
If you ask most people about the cost of medical care, they
may tell you how much they have to pay per visit to their
doctor’s ofﬁce or the monthly bill for their prescription
drugs. But these are not the costs of medical care. These are
the prices paid.
The difference between prices and costs is not just a ﬁne
distinction made by economists. Prices are what pay for
costs—and if they do not pay enough to cover the costs,
then centuries of history in countries around the world show
that the supply is going to decline in quantity or quality, or
both. In the case of medical care, the supply is a matter of
life and death.
The average medical student graduates with a debt of
more than $100,000. The cost per doctor of running an
ofﬁce is more than $100 an hour. The average cost of
developing a new pharmaceutical drug is $800 million.
These are among the costs of medical care.
When politicians talk about “bringing down the cost of
medical care,” they are not talking about reducing any of
these costs by one cent. They are talking about forcing
prices down through one scheme or another.
All the existing efforts to control the rising expenses of
medical
care—whether
by
government,
insurance
companies, or health maintenance organizations—are about
holding down the amount of money they have to pay out,
not about reducing any of the real costs.
Many of the same politicians who are gung ho for

72
ever wonder why?
imposing price controls on prescription drugs, or for
importing Canadian price controls by importing American
medicines from Canada, have not the slightest interest in
stopping frivolous lawsuits against doctors, hospitals, or drug
companies—which are huge costs.
Price control zealots likewise seldom have any interest in
reducing the amount of federal requirements for getting a
drug approved for sale to the public—a process that can
easily drag on for a decade or more, costing millions of
dollars, and also costing the lives of those who die while
waiting for the drug to be approved by bureaucrats at the
Food and Drug Administration.
For political purposes, what “bringing down the cost of
medical care” means is some quick ﬁx that will win votes at
the next election, regardless of what the repercussions are
thereafter.
What are those repercussions?
If the bureaucratic hassles that doctors have to go
through make their huge investment in time and money
going to medical school not seem worthwhile, some can
retire early and some can take jobs no longer involving
treating patients. Either way, the supply of medical care can
begin to decline, even in the short run.
In the long run, medical school may no longer look like
such a good investment to many in the younger generation.
Britain, which has had government-run medical care for
more than half a century, has to import doctors from the
Third World, where medical school standards are lower.
So long as there are warm bodies with “M.D.” after their
names, there is no decline in supply, as far as politicians are
concerned. Only the patients will ﬁnd out, the hard way,
what declining quality means.
No law passed by more than 500 members of Congress is

73
Economic Issues
going to be simple or even consistent. There are already
125,000 pages of Medicare regulations. “Universal health
care” can only mean more.
I saw a vivid example of what bureaucratic medical care
meant back in 1959, when I had a summer job at the
headquarters
of
the
U.S.
Public
Health
Service
in
Washington. Around 5 o’clock one afternoon, a man had a
heart attack on the street near our ofﬁce.
He was taken to the nurse’s room and was asked if he
were a federal employee. If he was, he could be sent to the
large, modern medical facility right there in the Public
Health Service headquarters. But he was not a government
employee, so an ambulance was summoned from a local
hospital.
By the time this ambulance made its way through miles
of downtown Washington rush-hour trafﬁc, the man was
dead. He died waiting for a doctor, in a building full of
doctors. That is what bureaucracy means.
Making
a
government-run
medical
care
system
mandatory—“universal” is the pretty word for mandatory—
means that we will all have no choice but to be caught up
in that bureaucratic maze.

Subsidies Are All Wet
For years we have been hearing about a water shortage in
the western states. To most people, that might suggest that
there just is not enough water for all the people in those
states. But, when an economist hears the word “shortage,” it
has an entirely different meaning.
What speciﬁcally is a shortage? It is a situation where you
are willing to pay the price but simply cannot ﬁnd as much
as you want. To an economist, the question is: Why doesn’t
the price rise then? If it did, some people would demand
less and others would supply more until supply and demand
balanced.
Put differently, a shortage is a sign that somebody is
keeping the price artiﬁcially lower than it would be if supply
and demand were allowed to operate freely. That is precisely
why there is a water shortage in the western states.
Even in California’s dry Central Valley, less than 10
percent of the water available from federal water projects is
used by cities and industries. The vast majority of it is used
by farmers, who pay a fraction of what urban users pay,
thanks to federal price ﬁxing.
Like everything that is made artiﬁcially cheap, water is
used lavishly, including the growing of crops like cotton that
require huge amounts of water. It is one thing to grow
cotton in Southern states with abundant rainfall. It is
something else to grow it out in a California desert with
water supplied largely at the taxpayers’ expense.
The long-term contracts under which this ridiculous

75
Economic Issues
arrangement goes on expire this year, so theoretically these
contracts could be renegotiated so that everyone who uses
water supplied by federal water projects has to pay his own
way and cover the costs of the operation. Alas, this is an
election year, so you can bet the rent money that no such
thing is going to happen.
A Department of the Interior spokesman explains it this
way: “We don’t think it is a good idea for California or the
nation to adopt punitive pricing proposals that might have
the effect of driving more agriculture out of existence.”
Isn’t that a lovely thought? Apparently the only people
toward whom the government can be “punitive” are the
taxpayers.
We live in what is often called a proﬁt system but, as
Milton Friedman explained long ago, it is really a proﬁt-and-
loss system. The losses are just as important as the proﬁts,
though not nearly as popular.
Running up losses because you are using resources that
are more valuable somewhere else is precisely what forces
you to stop the waste. If you are too stubborn to stop, then
you will get stopped by bankruptcy.
In other words, some enterprises should be forced out of
existence, however much that might shock the delicate
sensibilities of the Department of the Interior during an
election year.
As for agriculture, we have been running chronic
agricultural surpluses for more than half a century and
scrambling to ﬁnd some way to store it, export it or just
plain give it away. So many other countries have the same
problem that we might be able to eat heartily—and remain
overweight—even if we stopped farming entirely and bought
up their agricultural surpluses instead.
Things are never going to get to that point. But it

76
ever wonder why?
illustrates how fraudulent it is for the government, the
environmentalists or farm lobbies to try to scare us with the
specter of losing agricultural land.
Incidentally, these same kinds of policies can be found
halfway around the world in India, where government-
subsidized water is used so lavishly that the water table is
falling in the Punjab. Similar incentives produce similar
results in various times and places.
Nobody is going to risk losing the farm vote during an
election year. However, even though rationality is not likely
to triumph when government water contracts are renewed
this year, it should be possible to put limits on the insanity.
First of all, the contracts could be set for much shorter
periods, to limit how much longer the damage goes on. And
they could be set to expire in an odd-numbered year, when
there are no federal elections.

A Taxing Experience
When liberals in the media or in politics start being
alarmed about the national debt, it means just one thing:
They want higher taxes. The thought of reducing spending
would never cross their minds.
As we are endlessly reminded, the federal government’s
debt
has
reached
record
levels
during
the
Bush
administration. That enables the liberal media to use their
favorite word—“crisis”—and adds urgency to doing their
favorite thing, raising taxes.
Since we have a larger population than ever and a larger
national income than ever, it should hardly be surprising
that we also have a larger national debt than ever. But what
does it mean?
Donald Trump probably has a bigger debt than I do—
and less reason to worry about it. Debt means nothing
unless you compare it to your income or wealth.
How does our national debt today compare to our
national income? As a percentage of the national income,
the privately held national debt today is lower than it was a
decade
ago,
during
the
Clinton
administration,
when
liberals did not seem at all panicked as they seem today.
If someone were to produce a political dictionary, “crisis”
would be deﬁned as a desire to pass a law and “national
debt” would be deﬁned as a desire to raise taxes. And the
two in combination would mean a desire to discredit the
existing administration.
If it seems that raising taxes is the only way to reduce the

78
ever wonder why?
national debt, at least when so much spending is mandated
by “entitlement” programs, that only shows the need for an
economic dictionary. “Taxes” is one of those treacherous
words with more than one meaning, enabling politicians to
shift back and forth between meanings when they talk.
Unless spending is reduced, then of course more tax
revenues are necessary in order to reduce a deﬁcit or bring
down a debt. But tax revenues and tax rates are two
different things, even though the same word—“taxes”—is
used to refer to both.
What “tax cuts” cut is the tax rate. But tax revenues can
rise, fall, or stay the same when tax rates are cut. Everything
depends on what happens to income.
Tax revenues rose after the Kennedy tax cuts of the
1960s and the Reagan tax cuts of the 1980s because incomes
rose.
Incomes
are
likewise
rising
during
the
Bush
administration today.
If Congress can just reduce the rate of increase in
spending, rising tax revenues can reduce the deﬁcit and
eventually eliminate it. But of course that will not give
liberals an excuse to raise tax rates or even to denounce “tax
cuts for the rich.”
There was a time when the purpose of taxes was to pay
for the inevitable costs of government. To the political left,
however, taxes have long been seen as a way to redistribute
income and ﬁnance other social experiments based on
liberal ideology.
Given that agenda, it is hardly surprising that some of
the biggest spending liberals can go into hysterics over the
national debt, especially when that debt exists under a
conservative administration of the opposite party.
This does not mean that nothing needs to be done
about the national debt or about our tax system. A lot could

79
Economic Issues
be done about both—but it would not be what liberals want
done.
Promoting the growth of the national economy would be
one of the fastest and best ways of reducing the national
debt. We could, for example, stop letting little bands of self-
righteous activists stiﬂe the building of homes or businesses
under “open space” laws and stop the drilling of oil off-
shore, on-shore, or elsewhere.
As for taxes, we could stop taxing productivity and start
taxing consumption. After all, productivity is what makes a
society more prosperous.
Despite
political
use
of
the
envy
factor
to
cause
resentment of people whose high productivity earns high
incomes, someone who is adding to the total wealth of this
country is not depriving you of anything. But someone who
is consuming the nation’s wealth without contributing
anything to it, is costing you and everyone else who is
carrying his share of the load. Yet our tax system penalizes
those who are producing wealth in order to subsidize those
who are only consuming it.
Tax reform is overdue, national debt or no national
debt.

Proﬁts without Honor
Proﬁts
are
certainly
without
honor
among
the
intelligentsia. The very word produces negative reactions,
even from people who cannot give you a single reason why
money carrying that label is worse than money called by
other names.
Many professional athletes and entertainers earn salaries
higher than what the vast majority of business owners earn
as proﬁts, yet there is no moral indignation from those who
are in the business of moral indignation.
Some claim not to be against proﬁts, as such, but against
“obscene proﬁts.” Yet they offer no clue as to how we are to
tell obscene proﬁts from R-rated proﬁts or PG-13 proﬁts.
One
of
the
supposedly
damning
charges
against
pharmaceutical companies is that they earn those famous
obscene proﬁts. The ﬁgure of 18 percent is thrown around
and may even be accurate, for all I know. But it doesn’t
make enough difference to bother checking it out.
The unspoken assumption—and fallacy—is that high
proﬁts mean high prices. But, back in the heyday of the
A & P grocery chain, its proﬁt rate never fell below 20
percent for a whole decade—and it was at that time the pre-
eminent grocery chain in the country precisely because of
its low prices and high quality.
Then, as conditions changed, other grocery chains found
ways to operate at lower costs, enabling them to charge even
lower prices than A & P, taking away its customers.
It has been estimated that a supermarket today makes a

81
Economic Issues
clear proﬁt of about a penny on a dollar of sales. If that
sounds pretty skimpy, remember that it is collecting that
penny
on
every
dollar
at
several
cash
registers
simultaneously and, in many cases, around the clock.
When a supermarket sells out its entire contents in about
two weeks, that means that the dollar on which it made a
penny of proﬁt in the ﬁrst half of January comes back for
them to make another penny in the second half of January.
By the end of the year, that dollar has come back 25 times
and earned 26 cents.
Does that mean that the supermarket is making a 26
percent rate of proﬁt? Not at all. The rate of proﬁt on sales
differs from the rate of proﬁt on investment, which is what
really counts.
The point here is that the relationship between prices
and the rate of return on investment can be very tenuous.
Small grocery stores, with slower turnover, can be struggling
to survive while charging higher prices than those in a
prospering supermarket.
Why have both local and national governments in recent
years begun having many of their traditional functions, from
garbage collection to running prisons, done by private
companies? Because these private, proﬁt-making companies
can usually get the job done cheaper and better.
If proﬁts were just extra costs arbitrarily added on to the
costs of production, then non-proﬁt institutions or whole
countries that operated without proﬁt, such as the Soviet
Union, would have had lower costs. Almost invariably,
however, enterprises that operate without the incentive of
proﬁt have had higher costs, not lower costs.
It
was
not
a
free-market
think
tank,
but
Soviet
economists, who pointed out that Soviet industry used far
more inputs to produce a given output than did market

82
ever wonder why?
economies like Germany, Japan or the United States.
Economically
illiterate
people—which,
unfortunately
includes much of the intelligentsia—have never understood
the role of proﬁt as an incentive to keep costs down.
To the economically illiterate, if some company makes a
million dollars in proﬁt, this means that their products cost
a million dollars more than they would have cost without
proﬁts. It never occurs to such people that these products
might cost several million dollars more to produce if they
were
produced
by
enterprises
operating
without
the
incentives to be efﬁcient created by the prospect of proﬁts
and the fear of losses.
If “obscene proﬁts” are what cause pharmaceutical drugs
to cost so much, why haven’t socialist countries set up their
own
government-owned
pharmaceutical
enterprises
to
produce
drugs
more
cheaply?
Why
don’t
non-proﬁt
organizations here do that?
It is because rhetoric is cheap but creating drugs is not.
Recent estimates are that it costs $800 million per new drug.
That is why drug prices are so high. But needless suffering
and premature deaths are even higher costs.

Proﬁts without Honor: Part II
Those who rail against proﬁts and “greed” seldom stop to
think through what they are saying, much less go check the
facts.
Most of the great American fortunes—Rockefeller, Ford,
Carnegie, etc.—came from ﬁnding more efﬁcient ways to
produce a product or service at a lower cost, so that it could
be sold at a lower price and attract more customers. If
making a fortune represents greed, then greed is what drives
prices down.
None
of
this
matters
to
people
who
have
been
conditioned to respond to the word “proﬁt” automatically,
much as Pavlov’s dog was conditioned to respond to certain
sounds.
“Never speak to me of proﬁt,” India’s legendary leader
Pandit
Nehru
once
said
to
that
country’s
leading
industrialist. “It’s a dirty word.” Policies based on that
attitude cost millions of Indians a better life for decades, by
stiﬂing India’s businesses.
Indian businesses ﬂourished around the world—except
in India. Only after India’s severe restrictions on business
were lifted in the past dozen years has its economic growth
taken off, creating rising incomes, employment and tax
revenues. This poverty-stricken country could have had all
those things 40 years earlier, except for a prejudice against
a word.
Unthinking prejudices and suspicions about proﬁts are
often matched by unthinking gullibility about “non-proﬁt”

84
ever wonder why?
organizations. No matter what money may be called, both
individuals and organizations must have it in order to
survive.
Businesses get their money from those who buy their
goods and services. Non-proﬁt organizations are crucially
dependent on money from other people—either voluntary
donations, tax money from the government, or money
extracted from businesses through lawsuits.
Where there is a product or service of widely recognized
value, such as education or medical care, schools and
hospitals can attract donations on that basis. But there are
other non-proﬁt organizations which can survive only by
inspiring fears and anger that bring in donations.
For these kinds of non-proﬁt organizations, the sky is
always falling or we are threatened with seeing the last few
patches of unspoiled land paved over for shopping malls,
virtually everything is “unsafe,” we are running out of
natural
resources,
and
air
and
water
are
becoming
dangerously polluted.
Facts do no make a dent in these claims. No matter how
much data show air and water pollution to be far less than
in the past, that only a small fraction of the land of this
country is paved over, or that there are far more known
reserves of natural resources today than there were half a
century ago, or that life expectancy is increasing despite
innumerable “dangers” proclaimed by hysteria-mongers, the
media continue to take these people seriously because non-
proﬁt is equated with unbiased.
The media treat “consumer advocates,” for example, as
if they had some expertise, rather than propaganda skills.
But there are no qualiﬁcations whatever required to become
a “consumer advocate.” Nor is there any test whatever for
whether a “public interest” law ﬁrm in fact serves the public

85
Economic Issues
interest, rather than ﬁlling its own coffers with damage
awards
or
advancing
its
own
ideological
agenda
with
harassing lawsuits.
Unlike proﬁt-seeking businesses, which must keep down
costs in order to survive, many of the costs created by non-
proﬁt organizations fall entirely on others. Those others
include not only their donors but also those who pay in
many ways for the government-imposed restrictions created
at the urging of non-proﬁt crusaders.
These costs include sky-high housing prices in places
where non-proﬁt organizations can get state and local
governments to forbid, restrict or harass anyone seeking to
build homes or apartments. Frivolous lawsuits by “public-
interest” law ﬁrms drive up prices with huge damage awards
against businesses, doctors, and others.
The biggest costs may be paid by people needing
medical
care
in
places
where
expensive
malpractice
insurance, brought on by frivolous lawsuits, has driven
doctors away.
These are very high prices to pay for a halo around
words like “non-proﬁt,” “public interest” or “consumer
advocate.”

Two Earthquakes
Within a week of each other, two earthquakes struck on
opposite sides of the world—an earthquake measuring 6.5
on the Richter scale in California and a 6.6 earthquake in
Iran. But, however similar the earthquakes, the human costs
were enormously different.
The deaths in Iran have been counted in the tens of
thousands. In California, the deaths did not reach double
digits. Why the difference? In one word, wealth.
Wealth enables homes, buildings and other structures to
be built to withstand greater stresses. Wealth permits the
creation of modern transportation that can quickly carry
injured people to medical facilities. It enables those facilities
to be equipped with more advanced medical apparatus and
supplies, and amply staffed with highly trained doctors and
support staff.
Those who disdain wealth as crass materialism need to
understand that wealth is one of the biggest life-saving
factors in the world. As an economist in India has pointed
out, “95% of deaths from natural hazards occur in poor
countries.”
You can also see the effect of wealth by looking at the
same country at different times. The biggest hurricane to hit
the United States was hurricane Andrew in 1992 but it took
fewer than 50 lives. Yet another hurricane, back in 1900,
took at least 6,000 lives in Galveston.
The difference was that the United States was a much
richer country in 1992. It had earlier warning from more

87
Economic Issues
advanced weather tracking equipment. It had better roads
and more cars in which to evacuate an area before a
hurricane strikes, as well as more and better equipment for
digging victims out of debris, and better medical treatment
available for those who needed it.
Those who preen themselves on their “compassion” for
the poor, and who disdain wealth, are being inconsistent, if
not hypocritical. Wealth is the only thing that can prevent
poverty. However, if you are not trying to prevent poverty
but to exploit it for political purposes, that is another story.
There
is
another
side
to
the
story
of
these
two
earthquakes and their consequences. It gives the lie to the
dogma being propagandized incessantly, from the schools to
the media, that one culture is just as good as another.
It is just as good to lose tens of thousands of lives as not
to? What hogwash! It is just as good to lack modern
medicine, modern transportation, and modern industry as it
is to have them? Who is kidding whom?
This
dogmatism
prevails
at
home
as
well
as
internationally. Cultures that lead to most children being
born to single mothers are just as good as cultures where
children grow up with two parents—if you believe the
dogma.
Facts say the opposite. Whether it is education, crime, or
poverty, there are huge differences between single-parent
families and two-parent families.
Even race doesn’t make as much difference in outcomes.
The poverty rate among black married couples is in single
digits. The infant mortality rate among black married
women with only a high school diploma is lower than the
infant mortality rate among white unmarried women who
have been to college.
None of this makes a dent in those who promote the big

88
ever wonder why?
lie that one culture is just as good as another. What does it
even mean to say that? Does it mean that facts ﬁt the
dogma? Or does it just mean that they choose to use words
in a certain way? It may not make any difference in their
theories, but only in the real world.
None of this means that one culture is better than
another for all purposes. The cheap vulgarity and brutal
ugliness of so much of our media is a legitimate complaint
at home and abroad. The sheer silliness of our fad-ridden
public schools is a national disgrace.
By the same token, cultures that are less advanced in
some ways often have contributions to make in other ways.
We all take different things from different cultures to create
our own personal lifestyles. We need to stop pretending that
it makes no difference when all the facts show that it makes
a huge difference, from poverty to matters of life and death.

Peter Bauer (1915–2002)
The death of Peter Bauer cannot pass unmarked. He was
one of those people to whom we all owe a great debt,
whether we realize it or not. He insisted on talking sense,
even when dangerous nonsense was at the height of its
popularity.
In the last two decades of his life, he was Lord Bauer,
courtesy of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. For
most of his career, however, he was Professor Peter Bauer of
the London School of Economics. His specialty was the
economics of under-developed countries.
The dominant orthodoxy in development economics was
that Third World countries were trapped in a vicious cycle
of poverty that could be broken only by massive foreign aid
from the more prosperous industrial nations of the world.
This was in keeping with a more general vision on the left
that people were essentially divided into three categories—
the heartless, the helpless, and wonderful people like
themselves, who would rescue the helpless by playing Lady
Bountiful with the taxpayers’ money.
Peter Bauer never bought any part of that vision. He had
too much respect for people in the Third World, where he
had lived for years, to think of them as helpless. “Before
1886,” he pointed out, “there was not one cocoa tree in
British West Africa. By the 1930s, there were millions of
acres under cocoa there, all owned and operated by
Africans.” He rejected “condescension toward the ordinary

90
ever wonder why?
people” of the Third World and “the classiﬁcation of groups
as helpless.”
Third World people were just as capable of responding
to the incentives of a market economy as anyone else,
according
to
Professor
Bauer,
despite
development
economists like Gunnar Myrdal who depicted them as
needing government planning imposed on them to get
ahead. Development economists’ hostility to the market and
“contempt for ordinary people” were to Bauer “only two
sides of the same coin.”
If poverty was a trap from which there was no escape,
Bauer declared, we would all still be living in the stone age,
since all countries were once as poor as Third World nations
are today.
Peter Bauer considered it arbitrary and self-serving to
call
international
transfers
of
money
to
Third
World
governments “foreign aid.” Whether it was an aid or a
hindrance was an empirical question. Sometimes it could
turn out to be simply “transferring money from poor people
in rich countries to rich people in poor countries.”
Bauer likewise rejected “overpopulation” as a cause of
Third World poverty, even though that was also one of the
key dogmas of development economics. Like so much else
that derived from the liberal-left vision of the world,
“overpopulation” theories served as justiﬁcations for running
other people’s lives.
Peter
Bauer
pointed
out
that
many
Third
World
countries were much more thinly populated than such
prosperous industrial nations as Japan, which has ten times
the population density of sub-Saharan Africa. Moreover,
some Third World countries had ample fertile land, much
of it lying unused, and often also had valuable natural
resources, such as were lacking in Japan.

91
Economic Issues
The later research of Hernando de Soto, published in
his book The Mystery of Capital, added still more evidence
that supported Peter Bauer’s thesis that Third World people
were capable of creating wealth, even if their governments
followed economically counterproductive policies that held
them back.
For decades on end, Peter Bauer stood virtually alone in
opposing the prevailing dogmas of development economists.
They in turn dismissed him as someone far outside the
mainstream. But, with the passing years and the repeated
and catastrophic failures of policies and programs based on
the theories of development economics, the orthodoxy
began to erode and ﬁnally to collapse.
At
the
end
of
his
life,
Peter
Bauer
was
in
the
mainstream—not because he had moved but because the
mainstream had now moved over to where he had been all
along. It is a painful reﬂection on those who award Nobel
Prizes that Gunnar Myrdal received one and Peter Bauer did
not. Yet, on the eve of his death, Lord Bauer was awarded
the Milton Friedman prize, worth half a million dollars, for
his work.
Peter Bauer’s career should be an inspiration to all those
who ﬁght an uphill battle against prevailing orthodoxies.

Journalists and Economics
A recent front-page story in the Wall Street Journal told of
rising hunger and malnutrition amid chronic agricultural
surpluses in India. India is now exporting wheat, and even
donating some to Afghanistan, while malnutrition is a
growing problem within India itself.
This situation is both paradoxical and tragic, but what is
also remarkable is that the long article about it omits the
one key word that explains such a painful paradox: Price.
There can be a surplus of any given thing at any given
time. But a chronic surplus of the same thing, year after
year, means that somebody is preventing the price from
falling. Otherwise the excess supply would drive down the
price, leading producers to produce less—and consumers to
consume more—until the surplus was gone.
What is happening in India is that the government is
keeping the price of wheat and some other agricultural
produce from falling. That is exactly what the government
of the United States has been doing for more than half a
century, leading to chronic agricultural surpluses here as
well. Nor are India and the United States the only countries
with such policies, leading to such results.
Although Americans are wrestling with obesity while
Indians are suffering malnutrition, the economic principle
is the same—and that principle is totally ignored by the
reporters writing this story for the Wall Street Journal.
There is no special need to single out the Wall Street
Journal
for
this
criticism,
except
that
when
economic

93
Economic Issues
illiteracy shows up in one of the highest quality publications
in the country that shows one of the great deﬁciencies of
journalists in general.
One of the many jobs offered to me over the years, to
my wife’s astonishment, was a job as dean of a school of
journalism. While I was not about to give up my own
research and writing, in order to get tangled up in campus
politics, the offer made me think about what a school of
journalism ought to be teaching people whose jobs will be
to inform the public.
They ﬁrst and foremost ought to know what they are
talking about, which requires a solid grounding in history,
statistics, science—and economics. Since journalists are
reporting on so many things with economic implications,
they should have at least a year of introductory economics.
People with a basic knowledge of economics would
understand that words like “surplus” and “shortage” imply
another word that may not be mentioned explicitly: Price.
And chronic surpluses or chronic shortages imply price
controls.
Conversely, price controls imply chronic surpluses or
shortages—depending
on
whether
price
controls
keep
prices from falling to the level they would reach under
supply and demand or keep them from rising to that level.
Controls that keep prices from falling to the level they
would reach in response to supply and demand include not
only agricultural price supports like those in India but also
minimum
wage
laws,
which
are
equally
common
in
countries around the world. Just as an artiﬁcially high price
for wheat set by the government leads to a chronic surplus
of wheat, so an artiﬁcially high price for labor set by the
government leads to a surplus of labor—better known as
unemployment.

94
ever wonder why?
Since all workers are not the same, this unemployment
is concentrated among the less skilled and less experienced
workers. Many of them are simply priced out of a job.
In
the
United
States,
for
example,
the
highest
unemployment rates are almost invariably among black
teenagers. But this was not always the case.
Although the federal minimum wage law was passed in
1938, wartime inﬂation during the Second World War
meant that the minimum wage law had no major effect until
a new round of increases in the minimum wage level began
in 1950. Unemployment rates among black teenagers before
then were a fraction of what they are today—and no higher
than among white teenagers.
The time is long overdue for schools of journalism to
start teaching economics. It would eliminate much of the
nonsense and hysteria in the media, and with it perhaps
some of the demagoguery in politics.

Stock Crash Aftermath
What can be even worse than a stock market crash—
including the great crash of 1929—are politicians rushing in
to ﬁx things. At one time, it was widely assumed that the
1929 crash led directly to the Great Depression that lasted
throughout the decade of the 1930s. Now more and more
people who have studied that era have come to the
conclusion that what the government did to help was itself
one of the biggest reasons why the depression went so deep
and lasted so long.
Even a liberal economist like John Kenneth Galbraith
described the actions of the Federal Reserve in response to
the
1929
crash
as
“shockingly
incompetent.”
Neither
Republican President Herbert Hoover nor his Democratic
successor, Franklin D. Roosevelt had a clue about economics
or a policy that made any sense.
Both
sought
to
keep
prices—including
wages—up,
despite the fact that the money supply had declined by one
third. How was the country supposed to buy all the output
at existing prices, and employ all the workers at existing
wages, when there was so much less money?
One of Herbert Hoover’s biographers said aptly that he
was a great man but not a great president. Anyone who
doubts his greatness should study the history of his massive
program to feed starving people in Europe during and after
the First World War.
Most people would have raised the money ﬁrst and then
bought the food, but Hoover realized that people would be

96
ever wonder why?
dying while he was raising money. So he risked his own
personal fortune by buying the food ﬁrst, hoping to raise
enough money later from donations to recover all the
millions of dollars it would take to pay for the food. It
worked out in the end, but it didn’t have to.
Had Hoover never become president, he would have
gone
down
in
history
as
simply
one
of
the
great
humanitarians of the 20th century. As it was, he was
demonized politically for decades as the calloused president
who refused to take responsibility to help those ruined by
the depression.
In reality, it was Hoover—not FDR—who became the
ﬁrst president to throw the power of the federal government
into the effort to get the country out of a depression. In
recent years, it has become more widely acknowledged that
Roosevelt’s New Deal was essentially Hoover’s policies raised
to the next exponent, spending on a more lavish scale and
saddling the country with counterproductive programs that
have lasted into the next century.
The fact that the ﬁrst government efforts to get the
country out of a depression—by both Hoover and FDR—
were followed by the longest depression in our history has
also not been lost on some economists. Quite aside from the
speciﬁc harm done by speciﬁc programs, the general
uncertainty
generated
by
unpredictable
government
interventions made investors reluctant to make the long-
term commitments needed to generate more jobs, more
output, and more purchasing power.
Not
only
the
Federal
Reserve
and
two
presidents
managed to make the Great Depression worse, so did
Congress. When Congress passed the Hawley-Smoot tariff of
1930,
it
contributed
to
a
worldwide
contraction
in

97
Economic Issues
international trade, as country after country tried to “save
jobs” by protectionism.
The notion that the stock market crash of 1929 caused
the Great Depression that ravaged the 1930s has long been
popular on the left, since this blames capitalism and casts
government in the role of rescuer of the economy. However,
Professor Peter Temin of MIT has pointed out that in 1987
the “stock market fell almost exactly the same amount on
almost exactly the same days of the year”—and there was no
depression.
The Reagan administration was not the New Deal. The
economy recovered quickly on its own and kept on growing.
This year’s scandals and stock market collapse could not
have come at a worse time, with an election coming up and
no other big issues around for politicians to use. It is also
worth noting that there are only two economists in Congress
and hundreds of lawyers, ready to say and do whatever will
look good and feel good at the moment.
If Congress passes laws that put corporate crooks behind
bars for a long time, that is ﬁne. But if it passes laws that will
enable politicians to micro-manage businesses, that is a
proven formula for big economic problems for a long time
to come.

Milton Friedman at 90
Milton Friedman’s 90th birthday provides an occasion to
think back on his role as the pre-eminent economist of the
20th century. To those of us who were privileged to be his
students, he also stands out as a great teacher.
When I was a graduate student at the University of
Chicago, back in 1959, one day I was waiting outside
Professor Friedman’s ofﬁce when another graduate student
passed by. He noticed my exam paper on my lap and
exclaimed: “You got a B?”
“Yes,” I said. “Is that bad?”
“There were only two B’s in the whole class,” he replied.
“How many A’s?” I asked.
“There were no A’s!”
Today, this kind of grading might be considered to
represent a “tough love” philosophy of teaching. I don’t
know about love, but it was certainly tough.
Professor Friedman also did not let students arrive late
at his lectures and distract the class by their entrance. Once
I arrived a couple of minutes late for class and had to turn
around and go back to the dormitory.
All the way back, I thought about the fact that I would
be held responsible for what was said in that lecture, even
though I never heard it. Thereafter, I was always in my seat
when Milton Friedman walked in to give his lecture.
On a term paper, I wrote that either (a) this would
happen or (b) that would happen. Professor Friedman
wrote in the margin: “Or (c) your analysis is wrong.”

99
Economic Issues
“Where was my analysis wrong?” I asked him.
“I didn’t say your analysis was wrong,” he replied. “I just
wanted you to keep that possibility in mind.”
Perhaps the best way to summarize all this is to say that
Milton Friedman is a wonderful human being—especially
outside the classroom. It has been a much greater pleasure
to listen to his lectures in later years, after I was no longer
going to be quizzed on them, and a special pleasure to
appear on a couple of television programs with him and to
meet him on social occasions.
Milton Friedman’s enduring legacy will long outlast the
memories of his students and extends beyond the ﬁeld of
economics. John Maynard Keynes was the reigning demi-god
among economists when Friedman’s career began, and
Friedman himself was at ﬁrst a follower of Keynesian
doctrines and liberal politics.
Yet no one did more to dismantle both Keynesian
economics and liberal welfare-state thinking. As late as the
1950s, those with the prevailing Keynesian orthodoxy were
still able to depict Milton Friedman as a fringe ﬁgure,
clinging
to
an
outmoded
way
of
thinking.
But
the
intellectual power of his ideas, the fortitude with which he
persevered,
and
the
ever
more
apparent
failures
of
Keynesian analyses and policies, began to change all that,
even before Professor Friedman was awarded the Nobel
Prize in economics in 1976.
A towering intellect seldom goes together with practical
wisdom, or perhaps even common sense. However, Milton
Friedman not only excelled in the scholarly journals but also
on the television screen, presenting the basics of economics
in a way that the general public could understand.
His mini-series “Free to Choose” was a classic that made
economic principles clear to all with living examples. His

100
ever wonder why?
good nature and good humor also came through in a way
that attracted and held an audience.
Although Friedrich Hayek launched the ﬁrst major
challenge to the prevailing thinking behind the welfare state
and socialism with his 1944 book The Road to Serfdom, Milton
Friedman became the dominant intellectual force among
those who turned back the leftward tide that once seemed
to be the wave of the future. Without Milton Friedman’s
role in changing the minds of so many Americans, it is hard
to imagine how Ronald Reagan could have been elected
president.
Nor was Friedman’s inﬂuence conﬁned to the United
States. His ideas reached around the world, not only among
economists, but also in political circles which began to
understand why left-wing ideas that sounded so good
produced results that were so bad.
Milton Friedman rates a 21-gun salute on his birthday.
Or perhaps a 90-gun salute would be more appropriate.

“Price Gouging” in Florida
In the wake of the hurricanes in Florida, the state’s
attorney general has received thousands of complaints of
“price gouging” by stores, hotels, and others charging far
higher prices than usual during this emergency.
“Price gouging” is one of those emotionally powerful but
economically meaningless expressions that most economists
pay no attention to, because it seems too confused to bother
with.
But
a
distinguished
economist
named
Joseph
Schumpeter once pointed out that it is a mistake to dismiss
some ideas as too silly to discuss, because that only allows
fallacies to ﬂourish—and their consequences can be very
serious.
Charges of “price gouging” usually arise when prices are
signiﬁcantly higher than what people have been used to.
Florida’s laws in fact make it illegal to charge much more
during an emergency than the average price over some
previous 30-day period.
This raises questions that go to the heart of economics:
What are prices for? What role do they play in the economy?
Prices are not just arbitrary numbers plucked out of the
air. Nor are the price levels that you happen to be used to
any more special or “fair” than other prices that are higher
or lower.
What do prices do? They not only allow sellers to recover
their costs, they force buyers to restrict how much they
demand.
More
generally,
prices
cause goods and the

102
ever wonder why?
resources that produce goods to ﬂow in one direction
through the economy rather than in a different direction.
How do “price gouging” and laws against it ﬁt into this?
When either supply or demand changes, prices change.
When the law prevents this, as with Florida’s anti-price-
gouging laws, that reduces the ﬂow of resources to where
they would be most in demand. At the same time, price
control reduces the need for the consumer to limit his
demands on existing goods and resources.
None of this is peculiar to Florida. For centuries, in
countries around the world, laws limiting how high prices
are allowed to go have led to consumers demanding more
than was being supplied, while suppliers cut back on what
they supplied. Thus rent control has consistently led to
housing shortages and price controls on food have led to
hunger and even starvation.
Among the complaints in Florida is that hotels have
raised their prices. One hotel whose rooms normally cost
$40 a night now charged $109 a night, and another hotel
whose rooms likewise normally cost $40 a night now charged
$160 a night.
Those who are long on indignation and short on
economics may say that these hotels were now “charging all
that the trafﬁc will bear.” But they were probably charging
all that the trafﬁc would bear when such hotels were
charging $40 a night.
The real question is: Why will the trafﬁc bear more now?
Obviously because supply and demand have both changed.
Since both homes and hotels have been damaged or
destroyed by the hurricanes, there are now more people
seeking more rooms from fewer hotels.
What if prices were frozen where they were before all
this happened?

103
Economic Issues
Those who got to the hotel ﬁrst would ﬁll up the rooms
and those who got there later would be out of luck—and
perhaps out of doors or out of the community. At higher
prices, a family that might have rented one room for the
parents and another for the children will now double up in
just one room because of the “exorbitant” prices. That
leaves another room for someone else.
Someone whose home was damaged, but not destroyed,
may decide to stay home and make do in less than ideal
conditions, rather than pay the higher prices at the local
hotel. That too will leave another room for someone whose
home was damaged worse or destroyed.
In short, the new prices make as much economic sense
under the new conditions as the old prices made under the
old conditions.
It is essentially the same story when stores in Florida are
selling ice, plywood, gasoline, or other things for prices that
reﬂect today’s supply and demand, rather than yesterday’s
supply and demand. Price controls will not cause new
supplies to be rushed in nearly as fast as higher prices will.
None of this is rocket science. But Justice Oliver Wendell
Holmes said, “we need education in the obvious more than
investigation of the obscure.”

Economic “Power”
“Is Wal-Mart Good for America?”
That is the headline on a New York Times story about the
country’s largest retailer. The very idea that third parties
should be deciding whether a particular business is good for
the whole country shows incredible chutzpa.
The people who shop at Wal-Mart can decide whether
that is good for them or not. But the intelligentsia are
worried about something called Wal-Mart’s “market power.”
Apparently this giant chain sells 30 percent of all the
disposable diapers in the country and the Times reporter
refers to the prospect of “Wal-Mart amassing even more
market power.”
Just what “power” does a sales percentage represent? Not
one of the people who bought their disposable diapers at
Wal-Mart was forced to do so. I can’t remember ever having
bought anything from Wal-Mart and there is not the
slightest thing that they can do to make me.
The misleading use of words constitutes a large part of
what is called anti-trust law. “Market power” is just one of
those misleading phrases. In anti-trust lingo, a company that
sells 30 percent of the disposable diapers is said to “control”
30 percent of the market for that product. But they control
nothing.
Let them jack up their prices and they will ﬁnd
themselves lucky to sell 3 percent of the disposable diapers.
They will discover that they are just as disposable as their
diapers.

105
Economic Issues
Much is made of the fact that Wal-Mart has 3,000 stores
in the United States and is planning to add 1,000 more. At
one time, the A & P grocery chain had 15,000 stores but
now they have shrunk so drastically that there are probably
millions of people—especially in the younger generation—
who don’t even know that they exist.
An anti-trust lawsuit back in the 1940s claimed that
A & P “controlled” a large share of the market for groceries.
But they controlled nothing. As the society around them
changed in the 1950s, A & P began losing millions of dollars
a year, being forced to close thousands of stores and
become a shadow of its former self.
Let the people who run Wal-Mart start believing the talk
about how they “control” the market and, a few years down
the road, people will be saying “Wal-Who?”
With Wal-Mart, as with A & P before them, the big
bugaboo is that their low prices put competing stores out of
business. Could anyone ever have doubted that low-cost
stores win customers away from higher-cost stores?
It is one of the painful signs of the immaturity and lack
of realism among the intelligentsia that many of them
regard this as a “problem” to be “solved.” Trade-offs have
been with us ever since the late unpleasantness in the
Garden of Eden.
How could industries have found all the millions of
workers required to create the vast increase in output that
raised American standards of living over the past hundred
years, except by taking these workers away from the farms?
Historians have lamented the plight of the hand-loom
weavers
after
power
looms
began
replacing
them
in
England. But how could the poor have been able to afford
to buy adequate new clothing unless the price was brought
down to their income level by mass production machinery?

106
ever wonder why?
Judge Robert Bork once said that somebody always gets
hurt in a court room. Somebody always gets hurt in an
economy that is growing. You can’t keep on doing things
the old way and still get the beneﬁts of the new way.
This is not rocket science. But apparently some people
just refuse to accept its logical implications. Unfortunately,
some of those people are in Congress or in courtrooms
practicing
anti-trust
law.
And
then
there
are
the
intelligentsia, perpetuating the mushy mindset that enables
this counterproductive farce to go on.
This refusal to accept the fact that beneﬁts have costs is
especially prevalent in discussions of international trade.
President Bush’s ill-advised tariff on foreign steel was a
classic example of trying to “save jobs” in one industry by
policies which cost far more jobs in other industries making
products with artiﬁcially expensive steel. Fortunately, he
reversed himself.
Is it still news that there is no free lunch?

A Relic of the Recent Past
Only in California would a city that is less than 50 years
old have a historical society. But, in California, anything
more than a couple of decades old is considered historic
and anything that is a century old is considered to be
ancient history.
Nevertheless,
the
Foster
City
Historical Society has
performed a useful service by publishing a little book titled
simply “Foster City.” It details the building of an attractive
middle-class community with about 30,000 people on what
was once swamp land.
What makes this story of more than local interest is that
Foster City is the kind of community that would be difﬁcult
to build today and, in many places, virtually impossible. The
very idea of draining a swamp—a sacrosanct “wetland”—
would arouse the fury of environmental zealots.
Legalistic hassles over “environmental impact” reports
alone
might
be
enough
to
bankrupt
the
builders.
Environmental impact reports often have little or nothing to
do with the environment and everything to do with stopping
development.
Nothing is easier than to claim that there will be horrible
environmental
consequences
from
building
something.
Moreover, there
is
no penalty whatsoever for making
charges that can cost others millions of dollars to research
and prove wrong.
The whole purpose of the charges may be precisely to
cause builders to lose millions of dollars and perhaps have

108
ever wonder why?
to give up the whole idea of building anything where the
green zealots don’t want anything built.
Foster City was built in the 1960s, just before the
environmental protection racket went big time, with the aid
of legislation and court decisions that gave green zealots the
power to impose huge costs on others at little or no cost to
themselves.
Nowhere is that power wielded more ruthlessly today
than in San Mateo County, where Foster City is located. But,
back when Foster City was built, the biggest challenges were
physical.
In addition to draining the swamp, levees had to be built
to hold back the tide waters of San Francisco Bay, and the
land had to be ﬁlled in to make it strong enough to support
the weight of homes and buildings.
Critics claimed that the ﬁrst big earthquake would
devastate a community built on land-ﬁll—but their claims
had no such legal clout as such claims would gain during
the 1970s. In reality, Foster City came through the big 1989
earthquake with ﬂying colors, while buildings collapsed and
ﬁres broke out from broken gas lines elsewhere in the San
Francisco Bay area.
While
Foster
City
is
something
of
a
triumph—a
beautifully laid out community of attractive homes and
condominiums, with parks and lovely lagoons on which
boats sail, and miles of bicycle paths—it is also a reminder
of the tragedy that no such community can be created today
in many places, including the county in which it is located.
It is not that there is no vacant land left in San Mateo
County. On the contrary, more than half the county consists
of vacant land on which laws forbid the building of
anything. Yet environmentalists there, as elsewhere, conjure

109
Economic Issues
up a vision in which the last few patches of greenery are
threatened with being paved over.
Even when they are proved wrong by inescapable facts,
green zealots often fall back on runaway extrapolations,
claiming that they must stop development now or there will
be ever increasing population densities, more pollution,
more this, more that.
Runaway extrapolations are the last refuge of hysteria
mongers when confronted with facts that demolish their lies.
Think about it: The temperature has risen about 10 degrees
since this morning. If you extrapolate that, we will all be
burned
to
a
crisp
before
the
end
of
the
month.
Extrapolations prove nothing.
Ironically, many of the same people who have made
“development” a dirty word that arouses outrage have
nevertheless often looked favorably on “redevelopment.”
What is the difference? Development means private
initiative
to
build
what
people
are
willing
to
buy.
Redevelopment means government tearing down “blighted”
areas, so that whatever bureaucrats and politicians want can
be built. Few redevelopments are anywhere near as well
done as Foster City.

Who Can Afford It?
“Who can afford to buy a house in this place?” my wife
asked, when I read her the average prices of homes in
various northern California communities.
“We certainly can’t,” I said. Our home has more than
doubled in value since we bought it 11 years ago. We
couldn’t live here if we had to pay today’s prices. This is not
unusual on the peninsula stretching from San Francisco to
Silicon Valley.
Home prices can be very misleading in this area because
many—if not most—of the people living here never paid
those prices. These are the prices of current home sales.
They are the prices that newcomers moving in have to pay.
That fact has a lot to do with skyrocketing home prices.
The people who vote on the laws which severely restrict
building, create costly bureaucratic delays, and impose
arbitrary planning commission notions will not have to pay
a dime toward the huge costs being imposed on anyone
trying to build anything in the San Francisco Bay area.
Newcomers get stuck with those costs.
The biggest of these costs is the cost of the land rather
than the cost of the houses themselves. The average price of
homes is a million dollars in some San Francisco Bay area
communities where it would be hard to ﬁnd a single house
that anyone would call a mansion.
Nor are there many new homes being built in these
communities. Old homes are simply being bid up in price,

111
Economic Issues
precisely
because
it
is
either
impossible
or
ruinously
expensive to build new homes.
Unlike other places, where people trying to sell their
houses usually have an asking price that they bring down
somewhat in the course of negotiations with a prospective
buyer, in the San Francisco Bay area the asking price is
usually bid up during the competition among people who
want to buy.
Someone who bought a home for $100,000 back in the
1970s may put it on sale for $700,000 today—and watch the
buyers bid it up to $900,000. The average home price in San
Mateo County, where it is nearly impossible to build
anything, is $921,000.
There are a lot of nice middle-class homes in San Mateo
County, and some rather modest homes, but very few
mansions.
One of the middle-class communities in the county is
Foster City, a planned community built back in the 1960s.
When the ﬁrst homes went on sale there in 1963, you could
buy a three-bedroom house for as little as $22,000. If you
wanted something bigger or more fancy, or in a more scenic
location, you could still get it for under $50,000.
Today, the average price of a home in Foster City is $1.2
million.
People
who
wring
their
hands
about
a
need
for
“affordable housing” seldom consider that the way to have
affordable housing is to stop making it unaffordable. Foster
City housing was affordable before the restrictive land use
laws in this area made all housing astronomically expensive.
Contrary to the vision of the left, it was the free market
which produced affordable housing—before government
intervention made housing unaffordable.
None
of
this
is
rocket
science.
Anyone
who
can

112
ever wonder why?
understand
the
concept
of
supply
and
demand
can
understand that putting most of the land in a whole county
off-limits to building will cause the price of the remaining
land to rise.
It is the land, rather than the houses that are built on it,
which has become astronomically expensive in places with
extreme “open space” laws and other severe restrictions on
the use of land. In some places without such laws, a house
can be bought for a fraction of what that same house would
cost in parts of California.
The people who push restrictive laws and policies often
try
to
blame
everything
else
for
high
housing
costs.
“Overpopulation” is one such red herring. In reality, the
population of San Mateo County has declined by 9,000
people in the past four years while housing prices have risen
sharply.
Ironically, a consummately selﬁsh policy of creating costs
that force newcomers to pay high prices which existing
homeowners will not have to pay is often wrapped in the
mantle of idealism and washed down with pious expressions
of hope for some way to try to create “affordable housing.”

Free-Lunch Medicine
It is always fascinating to see elementary economics make
front-page news. It was front-page news in the Wall Street
Journal of November 12, 2003 that there are long waiting
times for seeing medical specialists in Canada and in other
countries
with
government-controlled
medical
care
systems—but
not
in
the
United
States,
where
some
politicians are trying to get us to imitate those countries.
Shortages where the government sets prices have been
common in countries around the world, for centuries on
end, whether these shortages have taken the form of waiting
lists, black markets, or other ways of coping with the fact
that what people demand at an artiﬁcially low price exceeds
what other people will supply at such prices.
This principle is not limited to medical care. There were
waiting lines for food, undershirts, and all sorts of other
things in the Communist bloc countries in Eastern Europe
before the collapse of Communism in that region. You had
to get on a waiting list to buy a poorly made car in India
before
they
began
to
free
up
their
economy
from
government controls.
You could go back literally thousands of years and ﬁnd
shortages under price controls in the Roman Empire or in
ancient Babylon. But it is still front-page news today because
elementary economics has not yet sunk in.
An OECD study shows that the percentage of patients
waiting more than 4 months for elective surgery in English-
speaking countries is in single digits only in the United

114
ever wonder why?
States, where we “lack” the “beneﬁts” of a government-run
medical system.
In Canada 27 percent of patients wait more than 4
months and in Britain 38 percent. Elective surgery includes
some heart surgery.
Depending on what you are suffering from, and how
much you are suffering, longer waits can be a cost that far
outweighs
monetary
savings
under
price
control
or
government subsidies. Sometimes the wait can be fatal.
There is another kind of waiting—waiting for new
medicines to be developed for scourges like cancer, AIDS,
and
Alzheimer’s.
Countries
with
price
controls
on
pharmaceutical drugs have far fewer of such drugs created
than the United States does.
Yet Americans, who produce a wholly disproportionate
share of the world’s new life-saving drugs, are being asked
to imitate price control policies in countries where such
policies have dried up the costly research behind such
discoveries.
These countries have left the development of new drugs
to the United States. But if we follow their example by
killing the goose that lays the golden egg, who can we turn
to for developing new medicines? This could be the most
costly free lunch of all.
None of the various schemes for lowering the prices of
medicines seems willing to face up to the simple fact that
each new medicine developed costs hundreds of millions of
dollars. This huge inescapable fact just seems to evaporate
from the discussion as politicians vie with one another for
the best way to make these medicines “affordable” at
“reasonable” prices.
Politicians who claim to be able to “bring down the cost
of health care” are talking about bringing down the prices

115
Economic Issues
charged. But prices are not costs. Prices are what pay for
costs.
No matter how much lower the government sets the
prices paid to doctors, hospitals, or pharmaceutical drug
manufacturers, none of this reduces the costs in the
slightest.
It still takes just as much time, equipment, and training
to turn a medical school student into a doctor. It still takes
just as many hospitals to care for the sick. It still takes just as
many years of scientiﬁc research and clinical trials to create
a new medicine.
Those
who
are
dying
to
control
the
prices
of
pharmaceutical drugs are oblivious to the fact that other
people may be literally dying unnecessarily if they succeed.
There is no free lunch, even though politicians get elected
by promising free lunches.
Government price controls on medicines and medical
care simply mean that these costs do not all get covered.
This works in the short run—and the short run is what
politicians are interested in, because elections are held in
the short run. But the rest of us had better think ahead, if
we value our health.

Free-Lunch Medicine: Part II
Any attempt at a rational discussion of the economic
realities of government-controlled medical care is almost
certain to run up against the trump card of the political left:
The Poor.
The image that is often invoked is that of the elderly
poor,
forced
to
choose
between
food
and
medical
treatment. Who could be so heartless as to abandon them
to the vagaries of the free market?
This has proved to be a very effective political strategy
for extending government power, not only over medical
care but also over housing and other sectors of the
economy.
The phoniness of this argument becomes apparent the
moment you suggest that money be set aside speciﬁcally for
dealing with the special problems of the poor, rather than
bringing
whole
sectors
of
the
economy
under
the
dominance of politicians, bureaucrats and judges.
The amount of money needed to take care of the poor
is often some minute fraction of what sweeping new
government programs cost. But, while big government
liberals are willing to use the poor as human shields in their
political battles, their more basic strategy is to proclaim that
everyone has a “right” to some “basic need” that they want
the government to provide.
As a matter of practical politics, programs for the poor
alone do not have as large a constituency as programs to
give everybody some beneﬁt, so that we can all have the

117
Economic Issues
illusion of getting something for nothing—or at some
arbitrarily deﬁned “reasonable” or “affordable” price.
It is completely unreasonable to talk about reasonable
prices.
Such talk amounts to saying that economic realities have
to adjust to what we are willing to pay, because we are not
going to adjust to economic realities. The biggest economic
reality that gets ignored in discussions of medical care is that
developing a single new medicine or training a single new
doctor takes huge amounts of resources.
What we think we can afford has nothing to do with what
pharmaceutical drugs cost to develop. Nor does it have
anything to do with the costs of training a new doctor or
building a new hospital. We are either going to pay those
costs or we are not going to get the quantity or the quality
that we want.
Schemes for re-importing American drugs from Canada
or buying in bulk from pharmaceutical companies are
essentially ways of shifting costs around—without reducing
these costs by one cent. Already government agencies,
HMOs and others are engaged in shifting medical costs onto
somebody else. But, for society as a whole, there is no
somebody else.
No matter how much the costs are shifted around in
clever shell games, those costs do not go away. That is the
hard reality which no political rhetoric can change.
The only reason such rhetoric has even the appearance
of plausibility is that price controls work in the short run—
and that is good enough for politicians, since elections are
held in the short run. After all, when the government drives
down prices paid to doctors, hospitals or pharmaceutical
companies, there is not much that doctors, hospitals or
pharmaceutical companies can do about it immediately.

118
ever wonder why?
Doctors are not going to give up practicing medicine
and become truck drivers. Medical schools are not going to
be turned into bowling alleys or hospitals into skating rinks.
Pharmaceutical
companies
cannot
suddenly
shift
to
manufacturing cars. So price controls seem to work in the
short run—but only in the short run.
When you confront doctors with more hassles with
bureaucrats and lower payments for their services, do not
expect the medical profession to remain as attractive to
bright young people deciding what careers to follow. In the
long run, every single doctor is going to have to be replaced
by someone from the younger generation, or else we are
going to have a shortage of doctors.
Britain, for example, has had government-run medical
care for decades and nearly half their doctors are imported,
often from Third World countries with lower standards of
medical training. Canadian hospitals have less modern
equipment available than American hospitals do. They
depend on American medicines after destroying incentives
to develop their own with price controls.
Is this what we are supposed to imitate?

Free-Lunch Medicine: Part III
A successful political crusade is incomplete without a
villain. To play St. George, you need a dragon. The crusade
for government control of medical care has made the
pharmaceutical industry its villain.
First, there are the “unconscionable” proﬁts of the ﬁrms
producing medications. Since there is no deﬁnition of
unconscionable
proﬁts,
this
gives
the
politicians
great
ﬂexibility. And, because there are a number of different
ways of computing proﬁt rates, that gives them even more
ﬂexibility.
A couple of years ago, during the Anthrax scare, there
were loud denunciations of Bayer, the manufacturer of the
leading drug for treating Anthrax, by liberal Senators like
Ted Kennedy and Chuck Schumer. They claimed that Bayer
was making too much proﬁt on that drug and should lower
the price during a national emergency.
Just for the record, it would have cost 50 dollars to use
the drug in question for the time it was needed, after which
you could switch to other and less expensive drugs. Also for
the record, Bayer operated at a loss during that quarter.
When even losses are considered to be unconscionable
proﬁts, you can see how ﬂexible these terms are in the
hands of political demagogues.
No doubt Bayer was making money on that particular
drug but pharmaceutical drugs are a risky business, with
many money-losing ventures that have to be covered by the
proﬁts on those drugs that do make money.

120
ever wonder why?
Ask yourself: If you had some money saved for your
retirement and someone suggested that you invest it in the
pharmaceutical industry, would all the denunciations of the
industry by politicians, and threats to crack down with
legislation, make you more willing or less willing to risk
investing your money there?
Put differently, how high a rate of return would you
require before putting your money into most industries, as
compared to how high a rate of return you would require
before
being
willing
to
invest
in
the
pharmaceutical
industry? With liberals breathing ﬁre about “unconscionable
proﬁts”
and
threatening
punitive
legislation,
the
pharmaceutical industry would probably have to offer you a
higher rate of return before you would risk investing in drug
companies.
You might have to make an “unconscionable” rate of
return to make the risk worth taking.
You can see the same process at work in some Third
World countries, where local demagogues blame these
countries’ poverty on “exploitation” by foreign investors and
threaten
to
put a
stop
to
it. Whether
or not these
demagogues actually follow through and carry out their
threats, such talk can cause foreign investors to stay away.
They say talk is cheap but political demagoguery can
have very high costs. In the case of pharmaceutical drugs,
these costs go beyond money to needless pain, disabilities
and death, when the rate of new drug discovery suffers from
threatening political rhetoric that discourages investment.
Now that we have talked about the dragon, what about
St. George? Proponents of government-controlled medical
care point out that, despite much longer waits for many
medical treatments in Canada, Canadian life expectancy is

121
Economic Issues
slightly higher than that of Americans. Apparently St.
George is a success.
That might be decisive evidence if medical care were the
only determinant of life expectancy. But even the ﬁnest
medical care in the world cannot help people who are
killing themselves, whether suddenly with a gun or more
slowly with drugs or obesity or other dangerous lifestyles.
Americans, for example, are obese more than twice as
often as Canadians and our murder rates are higher. Those
who resist the idea of personal responsibility are quick to
blame objective circumstances, such as medical care.
Some years ago, there were media outcries because black
pregnant women received less prenatal care than white
pregnant women and their infant mortality rates were
higher. But Americans of Chinese, Japanese, and Filipino
ancestry also had less prenatal care than whites—and lower
infant mortality rates than whites.
The effects of personal behavior cannot be ignored.
Neither can the inescapable costs of medical care.

Manufacturing Confusion
“Manufacturing jobs” has become a battle cry of those
who oppose free trade and are sounding an alarm about
American jobs being exported to lower-wage countries
overseas. However, manufacturing jobs are much less of a
problem than manufacturing confusion.
Much of what is being said confuses what is true of one
sector of the economy with what is true of the economy as a
whole. Every modern economy is constantly changing in
technology and organization. This means that resources—
human resources as well as natural resources and other
inputs—are constantly being sent off in new directions as
things are being produced in new ways.
This
happens
whether
there
is
or
is
not
free
international trade. At the beginning of the 20th century, 10
million American farmers and farm laborers produced the
food to feed a population of 76 million people. By the end
of the century, fewer than 2 million people on the farms
were feeding a population of more than 250 million. In
other words, more than 8 million agricultural jobs were
“lost.”
Between 1990 and 1995, more than 17 million American
workers throughout the economy lost their jobs. But there
were never 17 million workers unemployed during this
period, any more than the 8 million agricultural workers
were unemployed before.
People moved on to other jobs. Unemployment rates in
fact hit new lows in the 1990s. None of this is rocket science.

123
Economic Issues
But when the very same things happen in the international
economy, it is much easier to spread alarm and manufacture
confusion.
There is no question that many computer programming
jobs have moved from the United States to India. But this is
just a half-truth, which can be worse than a lie. As
management consultant Peter Drucker points out in the
current issue of Fortune magazine, there are also foreign jobs
moving to the United States.
In Drucker’s words, “Nobody seems to realize that we
import twice or three times as many jobs as we export. I’m
talking about the jobs created by foreign companies coming
into the U.S.,” such as Japanese automobile plants making
Toyotas and Hondas on American soil.
“Siemens alone has 60,000 employees in the United
States,” Drucker points out. “We are exporting low-skill, low-
paying jobs but are importing high-skill, high-paying jobs.”
None of this is much consolation if you are one of the
people being displaced from a job that you thought would
last indeﬁnitely. But few jobs last indeﬁnitely. You cannot
advance the standard of living by continuing to do the same
things in the same ways.
Progress means change, whether those changes originate
domestically or internationally. Even when a given job
carries the same title, often you cannot hold that job while
continuing to do things the way they were done 20 years
ago—or, in the case of computers, 5 years ago.
The grand fallacy of those who oppose free trade is that
low-wage countries take jobs away from high-wage countries.
While that is true for some particular jobs in some particular
cases, it is another half-truth that is more misleading than
an outright lie.
While
American
companies
can
hire
computer

124
ever wonder why?
programmers in India to replace higher paid American
programmers,
that
is
because
of
India’s
outstanding
education in computer engineering. By and large, however,
the average productivity of Indian workers is about 15
percent of that of American workers.
In other words, if you hired Indian workers and paid
them one-ﬁfth of what you paid American workers, it would
cost you more to get a given job done in India. That is the
rule and computer programming is the exception.
Facts are blithely ignored by those who simply assume
that low-wage countries have an advantage in international
trade. But high-wage countries have been exporting to low-
wage countries for centuries. The vast majority of foreign
investments
by
American
companies
are
in
high-wage
countries, despite great outcries about how multinational
corporations are “exploiting” Third World workers.
Apparently
facts
do
not
matter
to
those
who
are
manufacturing confusion about manufacturing jobs.

A Cold Shower
Sometimes a phrase betrays a whole mindset. Someone
quoted in the New York Times recently referred to the Bush
tax cut as one in which “most of the beneﬁts would be
showered on the richest taxpayers.”
Keeping money that you yourself earned is called having
beneﬁts “showered” on you! By this reasoning, anyone who
has the power to take something from you and doesn’t take
it all is “showering” beneﬁts on you. Anyone who has a gun
and doesn’t use it to kill you is showering life itself on you.
Big spenders and big taxers never want to face the fact
that wealth is not created by government, but by the people
that the government taxes. Moreover, these are seldom
simply people who “happen to have money,” as the phrase
goes.
Most people who have money usually got it by providing
other people with something that they wanted badly enough
to pay for it. This is never called “public service” by the
politically correct. Selling people what they want, in order to
get what you want, is called “greed.”
It’s public service when you decide what other people
“really” need and impose it at the taxpayers’ expense. It’s
public service when you create hoops for other people to
jump through—rules to follow, forms to ﬁll out, lives to be
lived as you prescribe—all for their own good.
Given this mindset, you can see why letting people keep
more of the money they earn is considered to be indulging

126
ever wonder why?
them with beneﬁts that the government “showers” on them.
It is like subsidizing sin.
Anyone who has read The Federalist Papers—or who has
read between the lines in the Constitution—knows that the
people who founded this country had a great fear of
government’s power over individuals. They knew that there
are always busybodies who cannot be happy unless they are
telling other people what to do and forcing them to do it.
Property rights were put into the Constitution to keep
politicians on a short leash, instead of letting them roam at
will over the land and treat the wealth created by others as
something for them to dispense as largess and use to buy
votes.
People had the right to bear arms, so that they could
defend themselves, instead of letting their safety and the
safety of their families be yet another playground for bright
ideas about crime and criminals, such as unsubstantiated
theories
about
“root
causes”
and
pious
hopes
about
“rehabilitation” of criminals and “prevention” of crime.
It is not just a question about the rightness or wrongness
of
particular
notions
in
isolation,
but
the
unending
proliferation of these notions. Every little wonderful bright
idea has its rationale. It will make us safer, or smarter, or
more sensitive. Above all, it will make us more like the
anointed who have thought up these grandiose notions.
To those with this self-ﬂattering mindset, if they think it
is more important to look out for caribou than to look out
for people, then you must be a slob if you think people are
more important than caribou.
When you add up all the requirements, restrictions, re-
education, and re-diculous ideas dreamed by all the 57
varieties of busybodies, you end up hemmed in like a rat
backed into a corner.

127
Economic Issues
Literally from the moment you wake up in the morning
and take a shower (with a government-prescribed rate of
water ﬂow) to the time you ﬂush the toilet (also with a
government-prescribed water ﬂow rate) for the last time
before going to bed, your life has been laid out for you.

An Old “New Vision”
Despite the fanfare of a televised speech at the National
Press Club in Washington, a very old and hackneyed set of
proposals was unveiled as a “new vision” for the creation of
“affordable housing.” The speech was by Richard Ravitch,
co-chairman with former Congresswoman Susan Molinari of
what is called the Millennial Housing Commission, a group
making recommendations to Congress on housing policy.
These
two
members
of
the
New
York
political
establishment produced the kinds of proposals that such
people
have
been
turning
out
for
years.
“Affordable
housing” for them means government-subsidized housing,
and their report essentially spells out innumerable schemes
by which the taxpayers can pick up part or all of the tab for
tenants or home buyers.
Contrary to this political report, a recent economic and
statistical
analysis
by
Professors
Edward
L.
Glaeser
of
Harvard and Joseph E. Gyourko of the Wharton School of
Business concludes: “America is not facing a nationwide
affordable housing crisis.” There are astronomical housing
prices in particular places for reasons peculiar to those
places. The principal reason is the price of land.
“In large areas of the country,” they ﬁnd, “housing costs
are quite close to the cost of new construction.” These areas
“represent the bulk of American housing” and they are areas
where “land is quite cheap.”
In high-price areas, “housing is expensive because of
artiﬁcial limits on construction created by the regulation of

129
Economic Issues
new housing.” In other words, the government—which is
depicted by Molinari and Ravitch as the savior of those
seeking “affordable housing”—is in fact the very reason why
housing is so unaffordable in some places, according to
scholars who have actually analyzed the hard data.
What kinds of differences in housing prices are we
talking about? The average home price nationwide is about
$150,000 but it is $500,000 in the area extending from San
Francisco to Silicon Valley, about 30 miles south of the city.
Nor is this price difference due to grander homes in
California. Very ordinary homes just have grand prices.
You can in fact buy magniﬁcent homes in some parts of
the country for less than rather nondescript houses in
pricier California communities. A recent issue of the Wall
Street Journal had an advertisement for a 4 bedroom, 6 bath
home, with 4,370 square feet of space and “a screen-
enclosed pool/spa,” located adjacent to a golf course and
country club, for $550,000. It was in Leesburg, Florida.
Meanwhile, in Palo Alto, California, two houses were
advertised at nearly double that price—$1,095,000 each—
and neither house had as much as 1,500 square feet of
space. Nor were they located anywhere other than on an
ordinary city street, and no swimming pool was mentioned
in either ad.
Many things go into determining the price of housing,
both homes and apartments. But, after taking numerous
factors
into
consideration,
the
Harvard
and
Wharton
professors found that the key factor was the cost of the land
on which the housing was built.
Their statistical analysis indicates that a home on a
quarter-acre lot in Chicago is likely to sell for about
$140,000 more than its construction costs. In San Diego it
sells for $285,000 more than construction costs, in New York

130
ever wonder why?
City $350,000 more and in San Francisco nearly $700,000
more than construction costs.
“Only in particular areas, especially New York City and
California, do housing prices diverge substantially from the
costs of new construction,” according to the study. Why the
astronomical housing prices in some places? Strict zoning
laws “are highly correlated with high prices,” Glaeser and
Gyourko ﬁnd.
Long delays in getting permits to build are major factors
in high housing prices. Millions of dollars can be tied up
while
bureaucrats
dawdle
and
environmentalists
carp.
Indeed, delay is one of the chief weapons of environmental
extremists who don’t want anything built, and who know
that delays cost developers a bundle. In the end, that ends
up costing home buyers and apartment tenants a bundle.
More government is not the solution. Big, intrusive
government is what creates the problem.

Third World Sweatshops
“Low-Wage Costa Ricans Make Baseballs for Millionaires.”
That was the headline on one of those New York Times
“news” stories that continued its recent tradition of editorials
disguised as news. The headline said it all but the story ran
on and on anyway, with details and quotes that added
nothing to the familiar story that Third World workers don’t
earn nearly as much money as most Americans, even when
they work for rich American companies.
Perhaps the best refutation of the implied message of
this “news” story also appeared in the New York Times, in a
frankly labeled op-ed piece by the paper’s own Nicholas D.
Kristof. Writing from Cambodia, Kristof reported: “Here in
Cambodia factory jobs are in such demand that workers
usually have to bribe a factory insider with a month’s salary
just to get hired.”
The workers in Cambodia receive even lower wages than
those in Costa Rica. But the difference is that the report
from
Cambodia
spelled
out
what
the
local
workers’
alternatives were and how anxious they are to get the jobs
denounced by intellectuals and politicians who live in
afﬂuent countries.
“Nhep Chanda averages 75 cents a day for her efforts.
For her, the idea of being exploited in a garment factory—
working only six days a week, inside instead of in the
broiling sun, for up to $2 a day—is a dream.”
By and large, multinational companies pay about double
the
local
wages
in
Third
World
countries.
As
for

132
ever wonder why?
“exploitation,” the vast majority of American investment
overseas
goes
to
high-wage
countries,
not
low-wage
countries.
Why
are
these
international
capitalists
passing
up
supposedly golden opportunities for exploitation? Because
they understand economics better than most intellectuals
and politicians, who are content to score cheap points,
without worrying about the logic or the consequences.
If
outsiders
succeed
in
pressuring
or
forcing
multinational companies to pay higher wages, that will make
it more economical for those companies to relocate many of
their operations to more afﬂuent countries, where the
higher productivity of the workers there will cover the
higher wage rates.
Net result: Third World workers will be worse off for
having lost better jobs than most of them can ﬁnd locally.
Meanwhile, Western intellectuals and politicians will be
congratulating themselves for having ended exploitation.
At the heart of all this is a confusion between the
vagaries of fate and the sins of man. All of us wish that
workers in Costa Rica and Cambodia, not to mention other
poor countries, were able to earn higher pay and live better
lives. But wishing will not make it so and causing them to
lose their jobs will not help.
It is tragic that people in some societies simply have not
had the same opportunities to develop more valuable skills
and that those societies have not had economic and political
systems that promote material progress comparable to that
in most Western countries.
Low pay is one symptom of that fact—and changing the
symptom will not change the underlying problem, which is
that the people in such countries got a raw deal from fate,
history, geography or culture. These are the vagaries of fate

133
Economic Issues
but the left tries to turn this into the sins of man by blaming
Western employers, who are in fact providing these workers
with better options than they had before.
The left-wing spin is that the poor are poor because the
rich are rich. That opens the door for a big power-grab by
the left in the name of “fairness” or “social justice” or
whatever other rhetoric resonates with the unwary and the
ill-informed.
Unfortunately, the left’s theory does not also resonate
with the facts. Whether domestically or internationally,
investors looking for the highest rates of return usually steer
clear of poor areas and put their money where there are
people with more advanced skills, living in more prosperous
countries, even if businesses have to pay much higher
salaries in such places.
The United States, for example, has long invested more
in Canada than in all of poverty-stricken sub-Saharan Africa,
where wage rates are a fraction of Canadian wage rates. If
the facts mattered—and if the poor really mattered to their
supposed saviors—the implications of that would have been
understood long ago.

Third World Sweatshops: Part II
Those who vent their moral indignation over low pay for
Third World workers employed by multinational companies
ignore the plain fact that these workers’ employers are
usually supplying them with better opportunities than they
had before, while those who are morally indignant on their
behalf are providing them with nothing.
Some
of
the
more
rational
among
the
indignant
crusaders
for
“social
justice”
may
concede
that
the
employers are usually offering better pay than Third World
workers would have had otherwise. But they see no reason
why wealthy corporations should not pay wages more like
the wages paid in afﬂuent countries.
There are at least two reasons why not—one economic
and one moral.
The economic reason is that output per man-hour in
Third World countries is usually some fraction of what it is
in Western industrial nations such as the United States. Pay
rates raised without regard to productivity are a virtual
guarantee of unemployment, whether it is done in the name
of ending “exploitation” in the Third World or providing “a
living wage” in the United States.
Most modern industrial nations have minimum wage
laws
but
those
with
higher
minimum
wage
rates
or
additional mandated workers’ beneﬁts tend to have higher
unemployment rates.
Germany, for example, has perhaps the most employer-
provided beneﬁts mandated by government. These beneﬁts

135
Economic Issues
include such huge severance pay that ﬁring anyone is likely
to be uneconomical. The costs of these beneﬁts have been
estimated as roughly double those of employer-provided
beneﬁts in the United States.
If you think that is great for the workers, remember that
there is no free lunch, for workers or anybody else. The
high cost of labor and the difﬁculties of ﬁring anyone mean
that employers are reluctant to hire, even when times are
booming.
It is often cheaper to expand output by using more
labor-saving machines, or to work the existing workforce
overtime,
rather
than
hire
more
employees.
While
Americans become alarmed when unemployment reaches 6
percent, double-digit unemployment has been common in
Germany.
At one time, neither Switzerland nor Hong Kong had
minimum wage laws. Last year, The Economist magazine
reported: “Switzerland’s unemployment rate neared a ﬁve-
year high of 3.9% in February.” For most countries that have
minimum wage laws, a 3.9 % unemployment rate would be
a ﬁve-year low, if not wholly unattainable.
Back when Hong Kong was a British colony and its wage
rates were set by supply and demand, the Wall Street Journal
reported that its unemployment rate was less than 2 percent.
Then, after China took over Hong Kong and mandated
various worker beneﬁts—which add to labor costs, the same
as higher wage rates—Hong Kong’s unemployment rate
went over 8%.
This was not high by European standards but it was
unprecedented for Hong Kong. There is no free lunch in
any part of the world.
Why
cannot
rich
multinational
corporations
simply

136
ever wonder why?
absorb the losses of paying Third World workers more than
their productivity is worth? Why shouldn’t they?
First of all, multi-billion-dollar corporations are seldom
owned by multi-billionaires. They are usually owned by
thousands, if not millions, of stockholders, most of whom
are nowhere close to being billionaires. Some may be
teachers, nurses, mechanics, clerks and others who own
stock indirectly by paying into pension funds that buy these
stocks.
Indeed, the average incomes of all the stockholders—
direct and indirect—may be no greater than the average
incomes of those intellectuals, politicians, and others who
want them to absorb the costs of higher pay in the Third
World.
But
if
teachers,
nurses,
mechanics,
and clerks are
supposed to accept less money to live on in their retirement
years, why shouldn’t similar donations to the Third World
come from reporters for the New York Times or Ivy League
professors, movie stars or others who are morally indignant?
Or is this just one of many things that the morally
indignant think is worth having others pay for, but not
worth enough to pay for themselves?

Privatizing Social Security
Would you sign a contract that enabled the other party to
change the terms of that contract at will, while you could
neither stop him nor make any changes of your own?
Probably not. Yet that is exactly what happens when you pay
money into Social Security.
No matter what you were promised or at what age you
were supposed to get it, the government can always pass a
new law that changes all of that. But you still have to pay
into the system.
A private annuity plan run by an insurance company is
legally required to pay you what was promised, when it was
promised, and to maintain assets sufﬁcient to redeem its
promises.
Why are liberals against letting people put part of their
Social Security payments into private investments?
Risk is one of their arguments. Al Gore incessantly
repeated the phrase “a risky scheme” during the 2000
election campaign and risk still seems to be the big
objection to letting people put their own money where they
want.
Some liberals may actually believe that politicians know
what is best for you better than you know yourself. That is,
after all, the philosophy behind many other government
programs.
Another
reason
for
liberal
opposition
to
private
investment of Social Security payments is that it deprives
them of control of billions of dollars that they have been

138
ever wonder why?
spending from the Social Security trust fund for years. They
can buy a lot of votes with all sorts of giveaway programs,
ﬁnanced by money taken from Social Security.
As for the risk of making private investments, that might
be a real concern if people were putting their money into
commodity speculation or other volatile markets. Most
people have better sense and privatization could limit where
Social Security premiums could be invested.
Although the stock market bounces up and down from
day to day, people are not investing today in order to retire
next week. They begin paying Social Security premiums
when they ﬁrst get a job and they retire 40 or 50 years later.
Stocks are far less risky in the long run than they are in
the short run because the ups and downs balance out over
a long period of time. It is virtually impossible to ﬁnd any
40-year or 50-year period in which the stock market has not
paid a higher rate of return on your money than you get
from Social Security.
You may get a slightly lower pension if you retire when
the stock market is down than if you retire when the stock
market is up—but even the lower pension is going to be
more than you would get paying the same amount of money
into Social Security.
Risks can be minimized in many ways. There are some
mutual funds that simply buy a mixture of the stocks that
make up the Dow Jones average (or Standard & Poor’s), so
that their clients will have the kind of return on their
investments that the stock market as a whole has. They don’t
make a killing but they don’t get killed either.
How did Social Security get into its present mess in the
ﬁrst place? Because politicians made it the “risky scheme”
that they now claim privatization would be.

139
Economic Issues
The same political expediency which caused Social
Security to be called “insurance,” in order to get public
support, guaranteed that it would be nothing of the sort.
Unlike an insurance company, Social Security has never had
enough money to pay for all the pensions it promised.

Privatizing Social Security:
Part II
Current Senate hearings on “mandatory retirement” may
have more than a little relevance to the huge question of
how to “save” Social Security. Unfortunately, there is far too
little attention being paid to the question of why Social
Security requires saving in the ﬁrst place.
The key problem with Social Security is that it has never
taken in enough to cover all the pensions it promised to
pay. Promises win votes but collecting enough money to pay
for those promises does not.
Should we be surprised that politicians take the easy way
out by promising a lot and leaving it to future politicians to
ﬁgure out how to pay for what was promised—or how to
disguise their welshing on those promises?
We hear a lot about how changing demographics have
created a problem for Social Security, since people now live
longer, changing the ratio of people paying into the system
compared to people getting money out of the system.
But you don’t see insurance companies wringing their
hands about how they can’t pay out the pensions they
promised when they sold annuities.
That
is
because
each
generation’s
premiums
were
invested to create additional future wealth to pay for that
generation’s
pensions,
regardless
of
whether
the
next
generation is large or small. The big difference between
private
annuities
and
Social
Security
is
that
private
investment creates future wealth for the country as a whole
and Social Security does not.

141
Economic Issues
More total wealth through privatization offers some hope
of solving the problem of inadequate wealth to pay the
pensions that Social Security promised to the baby boomers.
Otherwise,
the
government
will
have
to
welsh on
its
promises, because the amount of tax increase needed
exceeds what is politically feasible.
That is where so-called “mandatory retirement” comes
in. That concept is as fraudulent as calling Social Security
“insurance” when it has in fact always been a pyramid
scheme, where each generation depends on the next
generation to pay its pensions.
There has never been any such thing as mandatory
retirement. By contract or custom, employers have had a
general practice of no longer employing people after they
reached a certain age. But there has been no requirement
that those people retire. Many—if not most—have in fact
continued
working
elsewhere,
often
while
drawing
a
pension.
By passing laws forbidding “mandatory retirement,” the
government reduced the number of older people who
would otherwise have retired and begun drawing Social
Security pensions. This self-serving transfer of billions of
dollars in ﬁnancial liabilities from the government to private
employers was thus presented as a virtuous rescue of older
workers from unfair discrimination.
Never
mind
that
the
Constitution
forbids
the
government from changing the terms of private contracts.
Never mind that younger workers ﬁnd their upward path
blocked by older workers whom the employer cannot get rid
of without legal hassles.
All of this is washed down with lofty rhetoric about how
age need not mean a decline in efﬁciency, about how our
senior citizens still have much to contribute, about how

142
ever wonder why?
older Americans are “breaking the silver ceiling,” in the
words of Senator John Breaux at recent Senate hearings.
In
other
words,
the
assumption
is
that
individual
employers looking directly at individual workers, whose work
they are already familiar with, are not smart enough to make
as
good
a
judgment
as
distant
politicians
talking
in
generalities.
Even in the past, when a particular employer’s obligation
to employ workers expired at a certain age, there was
nothing to prevent a mutual agreement for particular
workers to continue working past that age, when the
employer saw that the particular worker’s productivity made
this advisable and the worker wanted to continue on.
In short, neither Senate hearings nor “expert” witnesses
were necessary. Much of this is a charade to allow the
government to raise or eliminate remaining retirement ages,
in order to escape from the impossible situation that
politicians created when they designed Social Security as a
pyramid scheme.

“Living Wage” Kills Jobs
Give credit where credit is due. The political left is great
with words. Conservatives have never been able to come up
with such seductive phrases as the left mass produces.
While conservatives may talk about a need for “judicial
restraint,” liberals cry out for “social justice.” If someone asks
you why they should be in favor of judicial restraint, you
have got to sit them down and go into a long explanation
about Constitutional government and its implications and
prerequisites.
But
“social
justice”?
No
explanation
needed.
No
deﬁnition. No facts. Everybody is for it. Do you want social
injustice?
The latest verbal coup of the left is the phrase “a living
wage.” Who is so hard-hearted or mean-spirited that they do
not want people to be able to make enough money to live
on?
Unfortunately, the effort and talent that the left puts
into coining great phrases is seldom put into analysis or
evidence. The living wage campaign shows that as well.
Just what is a living wage? It usually means enough
income to support a family of four on one paycheck. This
idea has swept through various communities, churches and
academic institutions.
Facts have never yet caught up with this idea and analysis
is lagging even farther behind.
First of all, do most low-wage workers actually have a
family of four to support on one paycheck? According to a

144
ever wonder why?
recent study by the Cato Institute, fewer than one out of ﬁve
minimum wage workers has a family to support. Workers
earning the minimum wage are usually young people just
starting out.
So the premise is false from the beginning. But it is still
a great phrase, and rhetoric is apparently what matters,
considering all the politicians, academics and church groups
who are stampeding all and sundry toward the living wage
concept.
What the so-called living wage really amounts to is simply
a local minimum wage policy requiring much higher pay
rates than the federal minimum wage law. It’s another name
for a higher minimum wage.
Since
there
have
been
minimum
wage
laws
for
generations, not only in the United States, but in other
countries around the world, you might think that we would
want to look at what actually happens when such laws are
enacted, as distinguished from what was hoped would
happen.
Neither the advocates of this new minimum wage policy
nor the media—much less politicians—show any interest
whatsoever in facts about the consequences of minimum
wage laws.
Most studies of minimum wage laws in countries around
the world show that fewer people are employed at artiﬁcially
higher
wage
rates.
Moreover,
unemployment
falls
disproportionately on lower skilled workers, younger and
inexperienced workers, and workers from minority groups.
The new Cato Institute study cites data showing job
losses in places where living wage laws have been imposed.
This should not be the least bit surprising. Making anything
more expensive almost invariably leads to fewer purchases.
That includes labor.

145
Economic Issues
While
trying
to
solve
a
non-problem—supporting
families that don’t exist, in most cases—the living wage
crusade creates a very real problem of low-skilled workers
having trouble ﬁnding a job at all.
People in minimum wage jobs do not stay at the
minimum wage permanently. Their pay increases as they
accumulate experience and develop skills. It increases an
average of 30 percent in just their ﬁrst year of employment,
according to the Cato Institute study. Other studies show
that low-income people become average-income people in a
few years and high-income people later in life.
All of this depends on their having a job in the ﬁrst
place, however. But the living wage kills jobs.
As imposed wage rates rise, so do job qualiﬁcations, so
that
less
skilled
or
less
experienced
workers
become
“unemployable.” Think about it. Every one of us would be
“unemployable” if our pay rates were raised high enough.
I would love to believe that the Hoover Institution would
continue to hire me if I demanded double my current
salary. But you notice that I don’t make any such demand.
Third parties need to stop making such demands for other
people. It is more important for people to have jobs than
for busybodies to feel noble.

A Happy Birthday?
Only a few economic historians are likely to notice that
June 17th marks the 75th anniversary of the signing of the
Hawley-Smoot tariff bill, and even economic historians are
unlikely to be nostalgic about that disastrous legislation.
Why not leave the bad news of the past in the past? After
all, we have our own problems today.
Unfortunately, the same kind of thinking that led to the
Hawley-Smoot tariffs is still alive and well—and in full
youthful vigor—in the media and in politics today.
At
the
heart
of
past
and
present
arguments
for
restricting
imports
that
compete
with
American-made
products is the notion that these imports will cost Americans
their jobs. That fear was even more understandable back in
1930, when the Great Depression was getting under way and
unemployment was at 9 percent.
The Hawley-Smoot bill raised American tariffs to record
high levels, in an attempt to protect existing jobs and in
hopes of helping the unemployed ﬁnd work producing
things that the United States had previously been importing
from other countries. Many businesses were in favor of the
new tariffs, hoping to retain or expand their markets, and
farmers were especially big supporters of the Hawley-Smoot
tariffs.
Who was opposed?
Most of the leading economists in the country were
opposed. A front-page headline in the New York Times of May
5, 1930 read: “1,028 Economists Ask Hoover to Veto

147
Economic Issues
Pending Tariff Bill.” Those signing this public appeal against
the new tariffs included many of the top economists of the
day—25 professors of economics at Harvard, 26 at the
University of Chicago, and 28 at Columbia.
But, to a politician, what do 1,028 votes matter in a
country the size of the United States? Congressman Hawley
and Senator Smoot both ignored them, as did President
Herbert Hoover, who signed the legislation into law the next
month.
The economic reasons for not restricting international
trade then were the same as they are today. The only
difference is that what happened then gives us a free home
demonstration of what can be expected to happen if we go
that route again.
The economists’ appeal spelled it out: “The proponents
of higher tariffs claim that the increase in rates will give
work to the idle. This is not true. We cannot increase
employment by restricting trade.”
If 9 percent unemployment was troublesome in 1930,
when the Hawley-Smoot tariff was passed, it was nothing
compared to the 16 percent unemployment the next year
and the 25 percent unemployment two years after that. The
annual rate of unemployment in the United States never got
back down to the 9 percent level again during the entire
decade of the 1930s.
American industry as a whole operated at a loss for two
consecutive years. Farmers, who had given strong support to
the Hawley-Smoot tariffs, saw their own exports cut by two-
thirds as countries around the world retaliated against
American tariffs by restricting their imports of American
industrial and agricultural products.
The economists’ appeal had warned of “retaliatory
tariffs” that would set off a wave of international trade

148
ever wonder why?
restrictions which would hurt all countries economically.
After everything that these economists had warned about
happened, tariffs began to be reduced but throughout the
1930s they remained above where they were before the
Hawley-Smoot tariffs—and so did unemployment.
Many factors, of course, affected the Great Depression of
the 1930s. But later economists looking back have seen the
Hawley-Smoot
tariff
as
one
of
the
factors
needlessly
prolonging the economic disaster.
How much wiser are we today? Not much, if at all.
Talk about import restrictions or complaints about
“outsourcing”
today
proceed
with
the
same
mindless
disregard of what other nations are doing and will do.
People who throw around statistics about how many
American jobs have been outsourced don’t even mention
how many Americans have jobs that have been outsourced
from other countries, much less how many Americans will
lose those jobs if we start a new round of international trade
restrictions.

PART III
LEGAL ISSUES


Calculated Confusion
Those who want to see judges who will apply the law
instead of imposing their own policies face not only political
obstruction to the appointment of such judges but also
calculated confusion about the very words used in discussing
what is at issue.
Judges who impose their own preferences, instead of
following the law as it is written, have long been known as
“judicial activists” while those who carry out the law, instead
of rewriting it to suit themselves, have been said to be
following the “original intent” of the law.
But now a massive effort to muddy the waters has been
launched by those who want judges who will continue to
impose the liberal agenda from the bench. Words like
“activists” and “intent” are being twisted beyond recognition.
Senator Patrick Leahy has redeﬁned “activist” judges to
make the least activist Justices on the Supreme Court—
Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas—suddenly activists by
his new deﬁnition.
Senator Leahy has said: “The two most activist judges we
have right now are Justice Thomas and Justice Scalia, who
have struck down and thus written laws of their own in place
of congressional laws more than anybody else on the current
Supreme Court.”
One of the major functions of the Supreme Court for
more than two centuries has been to strike down acts of
Congress, the President, or the lower courts when any of
these
exceed
the
authority
granted
to
them
by
the

152
ever wonder why?
Constitution. Calling this “judicial activism” is playing games
with words and befogging the real issues.
When Justices Scalia and Thomas enforce the limits set
by the Constitution, that is not writing “their own new laws,”
no matter what Senator Leahy claims.
Those who are writing their own new laws are people
like Justice John Paul Stevens, who arbitrarily expanded the
Constitution’s authorization of government taking of private
property for “public use” to allow the taking of private
property for a “public purpose”—which can be anything
under the sun.
It is one thing to allow the government to take land
needed to build a military base or a dam and something
very different to allow the government to bulldoze people’s
homes to turn the land over to a private developer to build
casinos or shopping malls.
Liberal law professors have joined in the redeﬁning of
words. One has given a numerical meaning to “judicial
activism” by counting how many laws particular justices have
declared unconstitutional. As Mark Twain said, there are
three kinds of lies—lies, damned lies, and statistics.
Another
law
professor,
Stanley
Fish
of
Florida
International University, likewise befogs the obvious with
elegant nonsense.
Those who try to follow the “original intent” of the
Constitution cannot do so, according to Professor Fish,
because “the author’s intent” cannot be discerned, “so the
intention behind a text can always be challenged by
someone else who marshals different evidence for an
alternative intention.”
Clever, but no cigar.
While the phrase “original intent” has been used as a
loose label for the philosophy of judges who believe in

153
Legal Issues
sticking to the law as it is written, judges with this philosophy
have been very explicit, for more than a century, that they
did not—repeat, not—mean getting inside the heads of
those who wrote the Constitution.
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes said it in plain English,
that interpreting what was meant by someone who wrote a
law was not trying to “get into his mind” because the issue
was “not what this man meant, but what those words would
mean in the mouth of a normal speaker of English, using
them in the circumstances in which they were used.”
Such contemporary followers of Holmes as Judge Robert
Bork have said the same thing in different words. More
important, nobody ever voted on what was in the back of
someone else’s mind. They voted on the plain meaning of
obvious words.
There is no confusion between the government’s taking
land for its own use and seizing land to turn it over to
somebody
else.
The
only
confusion
is
the
calculated
confusion of the partisans of judicial activists.

Judges and Judgment
Many years ago, someone did a study of the IQs of
municipal transit drivers and their accident rates. Those with
below-average IQs had higher rates of accidents, as you
might expect. What was unexpected was the discovery that
drivers with IQs above a certain level also had higher rates
of accidents.
Apparently driving a bus or trolley was not enough to
keep the minds of very bright people occupied. So their
minds wandered and they had more than their share of
accidents as a result.
Something similar may have contributed to disasters in
our legal system, especially in appellate courts, where the
issue is not simply whether someone was innocent or guilty,
or who caused what damage, but how all this ﬁts into the
framework of Constitutional law.
The Constitution of the United States is not some
esoteric document, written to be understood only by people
with high IQs and postgraduate education. It is written in
rather plain language.
There is even a sort of instructors’ guide on what the
Constitution means in The Federalist Papers—a collection of
popular 18th century essays by those who helped write the
Constitution, explaining why they did what they did.
Despite all this, appellate court decisions interpreting
Constitutional law today are often a huge maze of tangled
reasoning, obscure concepts and complex confusion. The
motto over the entrance to the Supreme Court of the

155
Legal Issues
United States says, “Equal Justice Under Law” but sometimes
you might wish that it said: “Brevity is the soul of wit.”
It is not that the cases are so complicated in themselves
but that high-IQ judges have turned simple realities into
complex metaphysics. A few years ago, the Supreme Court
voted 5 to 4 that carrying a gun near a school was not
interstate commerce. To most people, the decision was
obvious. So why 5 to 4?
You might think the decision should have been nine to
nothing and it should not have taken more than one page
to explain. Yet the good justices tied themselves into knots
with lengthy explanations of their votes for and against.
The reason this decision was so complex and caused
such consternation among some legal scholars was that
previous generations of Supreme Court justices had turned
the Constitution’s simple concept of interstate commerce
into
a
complicated
rationalization
of
Congress’
ever
expanding exercises of power that it was never given when
the Constitution was written.
Although the 10th Amendment says pretty plainly that
the federal government can do only what it is speciﬁcally
authorized to do, while the people can do whatever they are
not speciﬁcally forbidden to do, this was not good enough
for those who had visions of a more active government in
Washington.
The terribly clever people who were put on the courts
kept “interpreting” Congress’ power to regulate interstate
commerce so broadly that anything they wanted to regulate
was
called
“interstate
commerce.”
Thus
the
interstate
commerce clause was used to virtually repeal the 10th
Amendment.
Judges got so clever back in the 1940s that even a man
who grew food for himself in his own backyard was said to

156
ever wonder why?
be affecting interstate commerce—and was therefore subject
to the power of Congress.
After
generations
of
this
kind
of
runaway
“interpretation” of the Constitution, it was a shock to some
legal scholars when the Supreme Court decided—5 to 4—
that Congress could not pass a federal law forbidding people
from carrying guns near local schools.
Most states had such laws anyway, and all states had the
authority to pass such laws if they wanted to, so this decision
did not leave school children unprotected. It just put a stop
to one of the thousands of extensions of federal power
beyond what the Constitution authorized.
These over-extensions of federal power were not due
simply to the ideological biases of judges, though that was
undoubtedly a big factor. It also grew out of judges with
more brainpower than was necessary to deal with 90 percent
of the cases that came before them. High IQs and low self-
discipline led to more wrecks in the law, just as among
municipal transit drivers.

Justice for Little Angelo
Little Angelo ﬁnally got justice, though he died too young
to even know what justice meant. Angelo Marinda lived only
eight months and it took more than twice that long to
convict his father of his murder.
Tragically, the policies and the mindset among the
authorities responsible for the well-being of children—the
practices and notions that put this baby at risk—are still in
place and more such tragedies are just waiting to happen.
Little Angelo came to the authorities’ attention only 12 days
after he was born, when he turned up at a hospital with
broken bones.
How would a baby less than two weeks old have broken
bones? And what do you do about it?
Many of us would say that you get that baby away from
whoever broke his bones and never let them near him
again. But that is not what the “experts” say. Experts always
have “solutions.” How else are they going to be experts?
The fashionable solution is called “family reuniﬁcation
services.” The severity of little Angelo’s injuries would have
made it legally possible to simply take him away and put him
up for adoption by one of the many couples who are hoping
to adopt a baby.
But no. Through the magic of “family reuniﬁcation
services” parents are supposed to be changed so that they
will no longer be abusive.
A social worker told the court two years ago that the San
Mateo County Children and Family Services Agency “will be

158
ever wonder why?
recommending reuniﬁcation services, as the parents are
receptive to receiving services.” The fact that little Angelo’s
sister had already had to be removed from that same home
did not seem to dampen this optimism.
At the heart of all this is the pretense to knowledge that
we simply do not have and may never have. There are all
sorts of lofty phrases about teaching “parenting skills” or
“anger management” or other pious hopes. And children’s
lives are being risked on such unsubstantiated notions.
Little Angelo himself apparently knew better. After
months in a foster home, he was allowed back for a visit with
his parents and “had a look of fear in his eyes” when he saw
them.
But “expertise” brushes aside what non-experts believe—
and little Angelo was not an expert, at least not in the eyes
of the social workers who were in charge of his fate. The fact
that he had returned from a previous visit with bruises did
not make a dent on the experts.
Social workers thought it would be nice if little Angelo
could have a two-day unsupervised visit with his parents at
Christmas. It was a visit from which he would not return
alive.
Now, more than 16 months after the baby’s death,
Angelo’s father has been convicted of having literally shaken
him to death.
Incidentally, there were experts who testiﬁed on the
father’s behalf at the trial, one of whom gave testimony that
contradicted what he himself had written in a book. This
expert had never seen little Angelo, dead or alive.
The time is long overdue for us to stop pretending to
know things that nobody knows—not even people with
impressive letters in front of their names or behind their
names. Whether these experts are simply cynical guns for

159
Legal Issues
hire or really believe their own theories and rhetoric is
beside
the
point.
Unsubstantiated
theories
are
no
foundation for risking the lives of the helpless.
How anyone could break the bones of a newborn baby is
something that people may speculate about. But to claim to
know how to turn such parents into decent human beings is
reckless. And to risk a baby’s life on such speculation is
criminal.
It is too bad that only one man will go to jail for this
crime. There ought to be room in a cell somewhere for the
social workers and their bosses who made this murder
possible in the face of blatant evidence about the dangers
that an infant could see, even if the responsible adults
refused to see.
The pretense of knowledge allows judges, social workers,
and
others
to
“do
something”
by
sending
people
to
“training” in “parenting skills” and other psychobabble with
no track record of success. And it allows children like little
Angelo to be killed.

Property Rites
Two centuries ago, British Prime Minister William Pitt said
that the poorest man in the country is so secure in his little
cottage that the King of England and his men “dare not
cross the threshold” without his permission. That is what
property rights are all about—keeping the government off
the backs of the people.
Beginning last September 19th, however, laws went into
effect giving the British public the right to walk on certain
privately owned land. These are large estates that critics on
the left have called “private kingdoms,” which are to be
private no more.
Envy and resentment of the rich have always been potent
political
weapons
for
those
seeking
the
expansion
of
government power.
Often the power ﬁrst applied to the rich gradually comes
down the income scale to apply to people who are far from
rich, just as the income tax has done. But it may be a while
before ordinary Britons ﬁnd that their own little cottage
gardens can be trampled on by strangers.
In Norway and Sweden, people are not only allowed to
walk on other people’s privately owned land but also to go
riding and skiing there and to pick fruit. Europe has long
been politically further to the left than the United States, so
it provides a sneak preview of where our own liberals are
headed.
In the more left-leaning parts of California, for example,
public access to privately owned land is being pushed under

161
Legal Issues
a variety of labels. A builder in San Mateo, California,
wanted to wall off a small development for the elderly, in
the interest of security, but was told by the Planning
Commission that he must allow “street presence” rather
than block out the public, if he expects to get their approval
to build.
Some private homeowners on the Monterey peninsula
have discovered that they are not quite as private as they
would like to be because local authorities there have created
an easement which allows the public to have access to a road
across their property.
Ofﬁcials who violate homeowners’ property rights may
have some pretty words that are in vogue in their circles but
they pay no price if strangers burglarize or vandalize homes
to which they have been given free access, or even murder
the homeowners.
Paying a price is what decision-making through a market
is
all
about.
But
getting
something
for
nothing
is
increasingly what politics is all about. Why anyone would
expect better decisions to be made by third parties who pay
no price for being wrong is one of the mysteries of our time.
All across this country, planning commissions, zoning
boards, and environmental agencies take more and more
decisions out of the hands of the people, who are told in
increasing detail what they can and cannot do on their own
property.
People who live where there are strong winds and tall
trees with shallow roots on their property know that this a
formula for falling trees to create costly damage or even
death. But these homeowners have in some places found
that they cannot cut down those trees because that would go
against environmental fetishes.
Rivers and streams may need to be dredged, in order to

162
ever wonder why?
prevent ﬂooding, but the danger of a ﬂooded home or a
drowned child is not a price that has to be paid by
bureaucrats at an environmental agency that is preoccupied
with keeping everything “natural.”
The Constitution of the United States protected property
rights for the same reason that it protected other rights—a
fear, based on the history of the human race, that those with
power would abuse it if you let them. But liberal judges have
increasingly “interpreted” the Constitution’s property rights
out of existence when those rights have gotten in the way of
government ofﬁcials promoting liberal agendas.
Although much of this arbitrary power is wielded by
unelected ofﬁcials on zoning boards, planning commissions,
and
the
like,
the
laws
that
create
these
boards
and
commissions are passed by elected ofﬁcials whom we can
vote out of ofﬁce. But that requires that we stop letting
ourselves be duped by pretty phrases like “open space” or
“smart growth.” There will never be a lack of pretty phrases,
if that is all it takes to get us to give up our rights and
submit to those who can feel fulﬁlled in their own lives only
when they are controlling our lives.

Property Rites: Part II
When I was house-hunting, one of the things that struck
me about the house that I eventually settled on was the fact
that there were no curtains or shades on the bathroom
window in the back. The reason was that there was no one
living on the steep hillside in back, which was covered with
trees.
Since I don’t own that hillside, someday someone may
decide
to
build
houses
there,
which
means
that
the
bathroom would then require curtains or shades and our
back porch would no longer be as private. Fortunately for
me, local restrictive laws currently prevent houses from
being built on that hillside.
Also fortunately for me, my continued criticisms of such
laws in this column have not made a dent in the local
authorities. But suppose that someday either the courts will
strike down land use restrictions or local ofﬁcials will respect
property rights.
Maybe I will be long gone by then and the new owner of
this house will be angry at the diminished privacy—and
consequently the diminished value of the house, caused by
the building of houses on the hillside. Would that anger be
justiﬁed?
The fundamental question is: What did the homeowner
buy? And would the change in laws deprive him of what he
paid for? Since the house and the wooded hillside are
separate properties, the homeowner never paid for a hillside
wooded in perpetuity.

164
ever wonder why?
If whoever owns the hillside ﬁnds that his property is
worth more with houses on it, what right does the adjacent
homeowner have to deprive the other owner of the beneﬁts
of building on that hillside or selling it to a builder?
True, my house was worth more because of the privacy
provided by the wooded hillside. But there was no guarantee
that the hill would remain wooded forever. Whoever buys
the house buys its current privacy and the chance—not a
certainty—that the hill will remain wooded.
If a homeowner wanted a guarantee that the hill would
remain as is, he could have bought the hill. That way he
would be paying for what he wanted, rather than expecting
the government to deprive someone else for his beneﬁt.
Many restrictive land use laws in effect turn a chance
that someone paid for into a guarantee that they did not pay
for, such as a guarantee that a given community would
retain its existing character.
Existing homeowners get huge windfall gains, in the
form of rising appreciation of their homes, when laws
prevent farmers from selling their land for the purpose of
building houses. It’s supply and demand.
Without laws restricting land use, supply and demand
would make much farm land more valuable for building
homes that people want, rather than creating agricultural
surpluses that people don’t want, but are forced to pay for
as taxpayers under our agricultural subsidy laws.
The rationale is the “preservation” of agricultural land.
But nothing is easier than to dream up a rationale to put a
ﬁg leaf on naked self-interest. Far from being in danger of
losing our food supply, for more than half a century we have
had chronic agricultural surpluses.
Another rationale for laws restricting land use is that
“open space” is a good thing, that it prevents “overcrowding”

165
Legal Issues
for example. But preventing people from building homes in
one place only makes the crowding greater in other places.
This is just another ﬁg leaf for the self-interest of those who
want other people to be forced to live somewhere else.
Esthetics or other beneﬁts of “open space,” can be a
good thing. But how good? When you have to buy up the
land in competition with others who want to use it for their
purposes, that is when you have to put your money where
your mouth is.
When the power of government is used to take the land
off the market, instead of buying it, then the Constitutional
right of “equal protection of the laws” is denied to others.
None of this is rocket science. But it does require taking
a
moment
to
think.
Unfortunately,
our
schools
are
increasingly turning out people who can only “feel” and who
are therefore easy prey for those who know how to use
rhetoric to manipulate emotions.

Property Rites: Part III
You may own your own home and expect to live there the
rest of your life. But keep your bags packed, because the
Supreme Court of the United States has decreed that local
politicians can take your property away and turn it over to
someone else, just by using the magic words “public
purpose.”
We’re not talking about the government taking your
home in order to build a reservoir or a highway for the
beneﬁt of the public. The Constitution always allowed the
government to take private property for “public use,”
provided the property owner was paid “just compensation.”
What the latest Supreme Court decision does with verbal
sleight-of-hand is change the Constitution’s requirement of
“public use” to a more expansive power to conﬁscate private
property for whatever is called “public purpose”—including
turning that property over to some other private party.
In this case—Kelo v. New London—the private parties to
whom
the
government
would
turn
over
conﬁscated
properties
include
a
hotel,
restaurants,
shops,
and
a
pharmaceutical company.
These are not public uses, as the Constitution requires,
but are said to serve “public purposes,” as courts have
expanded the concept beyond the language of the 5th
Amendment—reﬂecting those “evolving” circumstances so
dear to judges who rewrite the Constitution to suit their own
tastes.
No sane person has ever denied that circumstances

167
Legal Issues
change
or
that
laws
need
to
change
to
meet
new
circumstances. But that is wholly different from saying that
judges are the ones to decide which laws need changing and
in what way at what time.
What are legislatures for except to legislate? What is the
separation
of
powers
for
except
to
keep
legislative,
executive, and judicial powers separate?
When the 5 to 4 Supreme Court majority “rejected any
literal requirement that condemned property be put into
use for the general public” because of the “evolving needs
of society,” it violated the Constitutional separation of
powers on which the American system of government is
based.
When
the
Supreme
Court
majority
referred to its
“deference to legislative judgments” about the taking of
property, it was as disingenuous as it was inconsistent. If
Constitutional rights of individuals are to be waved aside
because of “deference” to another branch of government,
then the citizens may as well not have Constitutional rights.
What are these rights supposed to protect the citizens
from, if not the government?
This very Court showed no such deference to a state’s
law permitting the execution of murderers who were not yet
18. Such selective “deference” amounts to judicial policy-
making rather than the carrying out of the law.
Surely the justices must know that politicians whose
whole careers have been built on their ability to spin words
can always come up with some words that will claim that
there is what they can call a “public purpose” in what they
are doing.
How many private homeowners can afford to litigate
such claims all the way up and down the judicial food chain?
Apartment dwellers who are thrown out on the street by the

168
ever wonder why?
bulldozers are even less able to defend themselves with
litigation.
The best that can be said for the Supreme Court
majority’s opinion is that it follows—and extends—certain
judicial precedents. But, as Justice Clarence Thomas said in
dissent, these “misguided lines of precedent” need to be
reconsidered, so as to “return to the original meaning of the
Public Use Clause” in the Constitution.
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor’s dissent points out that
the ﬁve Justices in the majority—Ginsburg, Breyer, Souter,
Stevens, and Kennedy—“wash out any distinction between
private and public use of property.” As a result, she adds:
“The specter of condemnation hangs over all property.
Nothing is to prevent the State from replacing any Motel 6
with a Ritz-Carlton, any home with a shopping mall, or any
farm with a factory.”
In other words, politicians can replace your home with
whatever they expect will pay more taxes than you do—and
call their money grab a “public purpose.”

Foreign Law Is Not Law
One of the ironies of our time is that economists have
been
discovering
the
importance
of
law,
as
such—as
distinguished from the speciﬁc merits of particular laws—
while judges seem increasingly to be losing sight of the rule
of law.
“I can hardly imagine any laws so bad, to which I would
not rather be subject than to the caprice of a man,” John
Stuart Mill said more than a century and a half ago.
Modern economists usually have in mind the economic
advantages to a society of having a framework of known,
enduring, and dependable rules—the rule of law—within
which economic activities can be planned and long-term
commitments and investments can be made. But Mill saw
the beneﬁts of living under known rules to extend far
beyond economic beneﬁts.
Mill spoke of the danger of having to lead “a life of
anxiety lest by some of my acts I should unwittingly infringe
against a will which had never been made known to me.”
Some of today’s vague and ambiguous anti-trust, anti-
discrimination, and environmental laws strike like lightning
out of the blue to hit people who had no idea that they were
doing something wrong.
The Constitution of the United States expressly forbad
retroactive laws—“ex post facto” laws, it called them—but
judicial decisions creating new rights, duties, and nuances
out of thin air are for all practical purposes ex post facto
law.

170
ever wonder why?
“Evolving standards” are also ex post facto law, for who
can know in advance how someone else’s standards are
going to evolve, much less which evolving standards will get
a majority of the votes in the Supreme Court?
The recent practice of using foreign laws as bases for
judicial decisions about American laws likewise turns law
into the caprices that John Stuart Mill feared more than he
feared bad laws.
There is no such thing as generic foreign law. There are
the speciﬁc laws of France and the very different speciﬁc
laws of Saudi Arabia and of hundreds of other countries
around the world. It is a matter of individual prejudice or
caprice which of these laws any given judge chooses to cite.
Justice Anthony Kennedy, for example, referred to
foreign laws as a reason for declaring an American state’s
law unconstitutional because it permitted the execution of
murderers who were not yet 18 years old, which some
foreign governments do not. In other words, laws enacted
by the elected representatives of an American state can be
wiped out if people in Spain or New Zealand think
otherwise.
Not only does this prevent the millions of people who
want to be law-abiding citizens from knowing which laws to
abide by, it deprives American voters of the right of self-
government through elected representatives that is at the
heart of American society.
If our votes decide only which candidates get which
ofﬁces,
but
not
what
laws
and
policies
those elected
representatives can enact for us to live under, our elections
will become more and more like placebos, with the real
power being exercised from the judicial bench by people we
never voted for.
Liberal judicial activists have been citing laws from

171
Legal Issues
countries more to the political left than the United States is,
but there is no reason why other judges at other times could
not cite very different laws to justify or rationalize decisions
that could not be justiﬁed or rationalized on the basis of the
Constitution of the United States that all judges have sworn
to uphold.
In one of Justice Clarence Thomas’ opinions, he noted
in passing that the distinguished British 18th century legal
scholar William Blackstone had said that people condemned
to death should be executed within 48 hours. Surely this is
not an idea that liberal judicial activists would want to
import and Justice Thomas did not rely on it.
But there is no reason in principle why this or any other
ideas from abroad should be any less eligible to be imported
than the ideas from foreign countries which have been
cherry-picked
from
an
almost
endless
assortment
of
possibilities.
The question is not even whether particular foreign laws
should become American law. It is not possible for them to
become American law, in the sense of rules known in
advance, unless they are openly enacted into law by elected
ofﬁcials, rather than imposed by judicial ﬁat after the fact.

Medical Lawsuits
When a friend told me recently that he was going to
undergo a painful medical procedure to see if he has
cancer, it reminded me of a time years ago when I faced a
similar prospect. The testing procedure in my case would
have been both painful and with some risk of infection.
Fortunately, it was a two-part procedure. The ﬁrst part
was uncomfortable but not painful or with any great risk of
infection. After a young doctor had put me through that
part, an older specialist took over and examined the
results—and he decided not to proceed with the second
part of the test.
When my wife asked me if that meant that I did not have
cancer, my answer was, “No.”
“What it means,” I said, “was that the doctor weighed the
alternatives and decided that, since the chance that I had
cancer was sufﬁciently small, and the danger of infection
from the test itself was sufﬁciently large, the best choice was
not to go any further.”
My wife seemed not completely put at ease by that, so I
added: “Like anybody else, this doctor can be wrong. But, if
it turns out that I do have cancer and die, I don’t want
anybody to sue that man. Nobody is infallible and no patient
has a right to infallibility.”
Since this was many years ago, apparently the doctor’s
choice was the right one. But how many doctors feel free to
make such choices in today’s legal climate, where frivolous

173
Legal Issues
lawsuits and junk science can lead to multimillion-dollar
awards or settlements?
After so many megabucks awards grew out of claims that
babies born with cerebral palsy could have been spared if
only the doctor had delivered them by Caesarean section,
C-section births rose sharply. But it did not reduce cerebral
palsy.
While the C-section births may not protect babies from
cerebral palsy, they protect doctors from being ruined
ﬁnancially by glib lawyers and gullible juries. Those lawyers
who claim that their big-bucks awards don’t add much to
the cost of medical care are counting only the sums of
money they collect.
But needless operations and needless tests are not free,
either ﬁnancially or otherwise.
Today, I cannot help wondering whether my friend is
going to be put through a painful procedure for his sake or
because the doctor dares not fail to do this test, for fear of
a lawsuit somewhere down the road. This is one of the
hidden costs of frivolous lawsuits and runaway damage
awards, quite aside from the sums of money pocketed by
lawyers.
When I was growing up, it would never have occurred to
me that Dr. Chaney, our family physician, was doing
anything other than giving it his best shot for the sake of
our health.
It probably never occurred to Dr. Chaney that we might
sue him. For one thing, he knew we didn’t have enough
money to hire a lawyer, so that was out of the question in
the ﬁrst place.
Trust between doctor and patient is not a small thing.
Sometimes it can be the difference between life and death.
Our laws recognize the enormous importance of that

174
ever wonder why?
relationship by exempting doctors from having to testify to
what a patient has told them, even if it is a murder case.
To go to these lengths to protect the doctor-patient
relationship—and then blithely throw it away with easy
access to frivolous lawsuits makes no sense. Neither does
creating a massive medical bureaucracy to pay for treatments
and medication, where that means that patients can go only
to those doctors preselected for them by some insurance
company or the government.
One of my favorite doctors retired early and spent some
time explaining to me why he was doing so. The growing
red tape was bad enough but the deterioration of the
doctor-patient relationship soured him even more.
Earlier in his career, patients came to him because
someone had recommended him and they came with a
wholly different attitude from that of someone who had
been assigned to him by an insurance company. He now
found much more of a distrustful, if not adversarial, attitude
that didn’t do him any good or the patient any good.
That may be the biggest cost of our current bureaucratic
and legal environment.

Fixing the Jury System
Now that the case against Tyco executives has ended in a
mistrial, there is much outcry against the juror whose
holdout will cause a $12 million trial to have to be done all
over again from scratch. Whether that juror was principled
or
just
pig-headed,
this
trial
reveals
something
more
fundamentally wrong with our jury system—and with the
media.
It was not some trashy supermarket scandal sheet, but
the Wall Street Journal and the New York Post, that published
the juror’s name. The Associated Press published her
photograph. It was not this juror’s holdout itself which
ultimately led to a mistrial but a report of her receiving a
phone call and a letter that were seen as putting pressure
on her.
The jury was described as being minutes away from
reaching a verdict when the judge called a mistrial. But the
judge was right. There was no way of knowing whether the
holdout juror was now agreeing with the other 11 because
of an outside threat.
The media who are condemning this woman ought to be
condemning themselves for their own irresponsibility, which
is not only costing taxpayers millions of dollars but can
corrupt the whole system of justice. The New York Times
pioneered such irresponsibility years ago, when it published
the name of the foreman of the jury that acquitted the
policemen who beat Rodney King.
Newspapers have every right to complain about any jury

176
ever wonder why?
verdict they don’t like. But that is wholly different from
putting jurors in personal jeopardy when they don’t vote the
way the media wants them to vote. Do we want future jurors
to decide cases on the basis of facts or on the basis of fear?
In the Diallo police shooting case four years ago, a
witness whose testimony tended to support the defense was
forced by the prosecutor to reveal in open court not only
his name and address, but also the very apartment in which
he and his family lived.
In an atmosphere where mobs were being whipped up
outside the courthouse by demagogues, this was a shot
across the bow of any other potential witness who might
testify in ways that the prosecutor did not like.
Do you wonder why witnesses do not come forward?
When they do come forward, are they supposed to testify to
what they actually saw or to what they think will keep them
out of trouble?
If we are serious about wanting justice in our courts,
then we need to start getting serious about preventing
witnesses and jurors from being intimidated. We might start
by getting all cameras out of the courtroom.
There is no reason why the identity of the jurors has to
be known by the media. The whole jury could be put
behind one-way glass, so that they can see the proceedings
but cannot be seen. It can be made a felony to publish their
names.
The requirement for unanimous jury verdicts is long
overdue for reconsideration. One pig-headed juror can
cause not only a costly mistrial but also verdicts that do not
reﬂect the seriousness of the crime.
People who commit murder should be convicted of
murder,
not
manslaughter
because
one
juror
is
too
squeamish to risk the death penalty. There are too many

177
Legal Issues
people around who think they have “a right to my own
opinion,” as they put it, which translates as: “My mind is
made up, so don’t confuse me with the facts.”
The time is also long overdue to reconsider the current
practice of having jurors selected with vetoes by the lawyers
in the case. When prospective jurors are given 30-page
questionnaires
made
up
by
lawyers,
asking
intrusive
questions about their personal lives and beliefs, the situation
has gotten completely out of hand.
Courts do not exist for the sake of lawyers but for the
sake of the public. Allowing lawyers to ﬁsh around in hopes
of ﬁnding one mush head who can save their client makes
no sense.
Anonymous jurors, selected by lottery, and not restricted
to unanimous verdicts, should be good enough for anyone
in an inherently imperfect world. In such a system, cranks
and ideologues would not have nearly the leverage that they
do now.
There could also be professional jurors, trained in the
law, for cases involving complex legal issues. That would cost
more—or rather, the cost would be visible in money, rather
than hidden in the corruption of the legal system, the way it
is now.

Half a Century after Brown
May 17, 1954 saw one of the most momentous decisions
in the history of the Supreme Court of the United States.
Some observers who were there said that one of the black-
robed justices sat on the great bench with tears in his eyes.
The case was of course Brown v. Board of Education, and
the decision declared that racially segregated schools were
unconstitutional. In rapid succession, all kinds of other
racial segregation, which were common across most of the
South and even in some border states, were likewise
declared unconstitutional.
This was a reversal of the old 1896 Supreme Court
decision in Plessy v. Ferguson that racially “separate but equal”
facilities were constitutional—and an end to the pretense
that the segregated facilities for blacks were in fact equal.
As a young government clerk going to a black college at
night—Howard University in Washington—I ﬁrst heard of
the decision when our professor entered the classroom in
an obvious state of agitation and announced that something
momentous had happened that day, and that we would
discuss that, instead of the planned lesson.
As
various
people
around
the
room
expressed
themselves, it was clear that we were all in favor of the
decision. In fact, many of my classmates seemed to have the
most Utopian expectations that this was going to lead to
some magic solution to problems of race and poverty. When
my turn came, I said:
“It’s been more than ﬁfty years since Plessy v. Ferguson—

179
Legal Issues
and we still don’t have ‘separate but equal.’ What makes you
think this is going to go any faster?”
This discordant note was brushed aside in the general
celebration. My classmates seemed to think that racial
integration was going to do it all. They were not alone.
Looking back after half a century, what has Brown v.
Board of Education accomplished and what has it failed to
accomplish? What has it made worse?
After a very long struggle, the courts ﬁnally put an end
to ofﬁcial racial segregation in states where it had been a
barrier and a degradation to blacks. This included the
District of Columbia, whose schools were racially segregated.
The anticipated economic beneﬁts, however, lagged far
behind. Blacks were already rising out of poverty at a rapid
rate that was not accelerated by the civil rights laws and
court decisions of the 1950s and 1960s, though of course the
progress continued. Yet half a century of political spin has
convinced much of the media and the public that black
progress began with the civil rights revolution.
It did not. The ﬁrst two decades after 1940 saw a more
rapid rise of blacks out of poverty and into higher paying
jobs than the decades following the Civil Rights Act of 1964
or the afﬁrmative action policies that began in the 1970s.
Check out the facts.
The key fallacy underlying the civil rights vision was that
all black economic lags were due to racial discrimination.
That assumption has survived to this day, in the courts, in
the media, in academia, and above all in politics.
No amount of factual evidence can make a dent in that
assumption. This means that a now largely futile crusade
against discrimination distracts attention from the urgent
need to upgrade educational standards and job skills among
blacks.

180
ever wonder why?
Where has Brown v. Board of Education been positively
harmful?
The ﬂimsy and cavalier reasoning used by the Supreme
Court, which based its decision on grounds that would
hardly sustain a conviction for jay-walking, set a pattern of
judicial activism that has put American law in disarray on all
sorts of issues that extend far beyond racial cases. The
pretense that the Court was interpreting the Constitution of
the United States added insult to injury.
The Court got away with this, despite some calls for
impeachment, because it was outlawing a set of racial
practices that the country as a whole found abhorrent. If the
justices took a few liberties with the law and the facts, who
cared?
After half a century of unbridled judicial activism on
many fronts, we now know that victims of frivolous lawsuits
and violent crime cared, among others. And restoring law to
our courts may take another 50 years—if it can be done at
all.

Half a Century after Brown:
Part II
The landmark case of Brown v. Board of Education was
immediately about schools, even though it quickly became a
precedent
for
outlawing
racial
segregation
in
other
government-controlled institutions and programs.
What was the basis for that landmark decision and what
have been the actual effects of Brown v. Board of Education
on the education of black students?
The key sentence in the Brown decision was: “Separate
educational facilities are inherently unequal.” It was not just
that the previous “separate but equal” doctrine was not
being followed in practice. Rather, the Supreme Court
argued that there was no way to make separate schools
equal. All-black schools were inherently inferior.
It so happened that, within walking distance of the
Supreme Court where this sweeping pronouncement was
made, there was an all-black high school that had produced
quality education for more than 80 years. Back in 1899 this
school outscored two out of three white academic high
schools in Washington on standardized tests.
Today, in the 21st century, it would be considered
Utopian even to hope for such a result. Moreover, this was
not an isolated ﬂuke. This same school had an average IQ
of 111 in 1939—ﬁfteen years before the Supreme Court
declared such things impossible.
Most schools for blacks were in fact inferior, mainly
because most were in the South, where the educational
standards for blacks and whites alike tended to be lower.

182
ever wonder why?
Racial discrimination, as distinguished from segregation
alone, tended to make black schools the worst of all.
This was not due to their being all black, however. Back
in the early 1940s, the black schools in Harlem had test
scores
very
similar
to
those
in
white
working
class
neighborhoods on New York’s lower east side. Sometimes
the Harlem schools’ scores were a little higher than those of
schools on the lower east side, and sometimes they were a
little lower, but these scores were always comparable.
In short, it was not segregation, as such, that made
schools inferior. If this seems like hair-splitting, consider the
consequences of the Supreme Court’s reasoning.
Once you say that racial separation makes the education
itself inferior, you are launched on a course that leads
straight to court-ordered busing of school children hither
and yon to mix and match them racially, in hopes of
educational improvement.
The polarization and bitterness of this crusade has lasted
for decades—and has left black children still far behind
educationally. Many are now much further below national
norms than black students were in Harlem more than half a
century ago.
Medical authorities have long recognized that a quack
remedy that is harmless in itself can nevertheless be fatal in
its effects, if it keeps sick people from getting the treatment
that can cure them. Racial mixing and matching has been
the great quack remedy for the educational lags of black
school children that has substituted for higher standards
and harder work.
Brown v. Board of Education did not prescribe compulsory
busing for racial balance. But the logic of its argument led
inexorably to that conclusion, whether that was the original
intent or not.

183
Legal Issues
More broadly, both the explicit language and the
implicit
assumptions
of
the
Supreme
Court
in
Brown
depicted the answer to problems of blacks in general as
being essentially the changing of white people. This was yet
another line of reasoning that led straight into a blind alley.
Today, there are all-black schools that succeed, all-black
schools that fail, and racially mixed schools that do either.
Neither race nor racial segregation can explain such things.
But both can serve as distractions from the task of creating
higher standards and harder work.
The judicial mythology of racial mixing has led to an
absurd situation where a white student can get into a
selective public high school in San Francisco with lower
qualiﬁcations than a Chinese American student. This farcical
consequence of judicial mythology about a need for racial
mixing does nothing to improve education for blacks or
anyone else.

Half a Century after Brown:
Part III
Although Brown v. Board of Education dealt with race and
with schools, its judicial philosophy spread rapidly to issues
having nothing to do with race or schools. In the half
century since Brown, judges at all levels have become
unelected legislators imposing the vision of the political left
across a wide spectrum.
For example, the anti-business vision of the left was
apparent in another Supreme Court case with Brown in its
title—Brown Shoe Co. v. United States. In this 1962 case, the
same Chief Justice Earl Warren who delivered the landmark
racial decision now ruled that a merger between the Brown
Shoe Company and the Kinney retail shoe store chain had
to be broken up.
Why? Because the Kinney chain, which sold about one
percent of the shoes in the United States, could be
“foreclosed” to other shoe manufacturers if it merged with
Brown Shoe. According to Chief Justice Warren, such
mergers, “if left unchecked, will be likely ‘substantially to
lessen competition.’”
If ever there was a runaway extrapolation, this was it. If
Brown and Kinney had been allowed to remain merged,
together they would still have sold less than 6 percent of the
shoes in the United States. But the Warren Court wanted to
nip monopoly in the bud.
The same anti-business bias has over the years allowed
frivolous lawsuits, based on junk science, to ruin or destroy
companies and whole industries, costing vast numbers of

185
Legal Issues
workers their jobs. All of this happened, not because the
written
laws
compelled
it,
but
because
activist
judges
stretched and twisted the laws to ﬁt their own biases and
preconceptions.
Nowhere did this free-wheeling judicial activism do more
damage to more people than in the Warren Court’s
remaking of the criminal law.
Under the much disdained “traditional” approach of
criminal law, murders had been declining dramatically over
the years. The murder rate in 1960 was just under half of
what it had been in 1934.
All of that changed quickly and dramatically for the
worse after the Warren Court began imposing its own
notions about crime in the 1960s. The most famous of these
changes was the “Miranda warning” that police have to give
suspects, stating that they have a right to remain silent and
to have an attorney supplied free.
For more than a century and a half, not one of the great
Supreme Court Justices—not Holmes, not Brandeis, nor
anybody else—had ever discovered any such requirement in
the Constitution of the United States. Nor had Congress
passed any law requiring any such thing.
It was just another part of the liberal vision imposed
from the bench by an unelected judiciary. Moreover,
Miranda was just one in a string of Supreme Court decisions
that made it easier for criminals to escape punishment.
The theory was that a more “enlightened” understanding
of crime would reduce the crime rate. Whatever the
plausibility of this belief, the facts to the contrary were
devastating.
The murder rate, which had been going down for
decades, suddenly shot up. By 1974, the murder rate was
twice as high as in 1961. The average person’s chances of

186
ever wonder why?
becoming a victim of a violent crime tripled between 1960
and 1976.
Anyone can make a mistake but judicial mistakes are set
in concrete. Moreover, the very possibility that they might be
mistaken never seemed to occur to headstrong justices.
When
a
former
police
commissioner
addressed
a
gathering of judges in 1965, warning of the consequences to
expect from their rulings in criminal cases, Justices Warren
and Brennan “roared with laughter,” according to the New
York Times, when a law professor poured scorn and derision
on the commissioner’s statements.
How many crime victims or their widows or orphans
would have laughed is another question.
Brown v. Board of Education was not just about race or
schools
but
was
about
a
whole
judicial
mindset with
ramiﬁcations
across
a
whole
spectrum
of
issues—and
reverberations that are still with us in the 21st century. Its
pluses and minuses have to be added up with that in mind.

Umpires, Judges, and Others
Major
league
umpires
are
complaining
about
an
electronic device that is being used to check how accurately
they are calling balls and strikes. They say that the device
itself is too variable to be relied on.
Whatever the merits of each side in this issue, it all
sounds much like judges complaining about restrictive
sentencing guidelines and the “three strikes and you are
out” laws which lock up repeat felons for life. From neither
the
umpires
nor
the
judges
is
there
the
slightest
acknowledgement
that
their
own
willful
and
arbitrary
behavior is what brought on this reaction.
For years now, there have been complaints that every
umpire seems to have his own personal strike zone, despite
the rules of baseball which specify what is a strike and what
is a ball. Some umpires have even complained when
television cameras took overhead pictures showing that
some pitches that were called strikes had in fact never
passed over any part of the plate.
Some umpires called “high strikes,” some called “low
strikes” and some were said to retaliate against pitchers or
batters who complain by adjusting the size of the strike zone
to their disadvantage.
All of history says that arbitrary power goes to people’s
heads, whether they are umpires, judges, or Howell Raines
of the New York Times. When judges get headstrong and
disregard the rules, the consequences can be far more
disastrous than they are in a baseball game or a newspaper.

188
ever wonder why?
Only after years—indeed, decades—of judges bending
over backwards to let criminals off the hook have legislators
begun passing laws to keep felons behind bars where they
belong, instead of out on the street victimizing more people.
These laws are not perfect, but those who whine about their
imperfections pass over in utter silence the reckless judicial
behavior that made such laws necessary.
It is much the same story in our public schools.
Teachers’ unions complain bitterly about outside testing of
students, claiming that the tests are ﬂawed, that “teaching to
the test” distorts education and miscellaneous other whines
and smoke screens.
The cold fact is that these tests came about only after
decades of dumbing down of academic standards—which
the education establishment ignored, denied or blamed on
every conceivable thing other than themselves. Anything
wrong with parents, students or society was taken as proof
that there was nothing wrong with the schools.
All the complaints about the imperfections of the tests
fail to acknowledge the irresponsible self-indulgences—
including iron-clad tenure for incompetent teachers—that
made tests necessary.
I don’t know whether the new electronic camera for
calling balls and strikes is better or worse than the umpires,
or how much it will improve over time. But I do know that
it was not just a bolt from the blue.
Neither were the restrictions put on judges who seemed
hell-bent to let murderers roam the streets again. Nor were
tests for schools where students are treated as a captive
audience to be propagandized with political correctness or
as guinea pigs to be experimented with to try out the latest
fads.
We the public have been far too trusting and gullible

189
Legal Issues
when it comes to putting arbitrary powers in the hands of
people who are not accountable to anyone.
One group that has not yet been reined in are social
workers, who have wreaked havoc in the lives of children,
whether by ripping them out of their homes because of
unsubstantiated accusations by anonymous informants or by
putting them back into homes where they have already been
abused—and where some have subsequently been killed.
Like teachers, social workers indulge themselves in all
sorts of unsubstantiated notions which turn into dogmas
when their establishment refuses to test those notions
against evidence. Dogmas about teaching “parenting skills”
or “anger management” can cost children their lives.
Accountability may be old-fashioned but it is still not
obsolete. It is our only hope when there are headstrong
people with power.

Big Business and Quotas
Anyone who thinks that business is gung ho for the free
market has just not been paying attention to business. Adam
Smith knew better, back in the 18th century.
Although he was the patron saint of capitalism, Smith
was
no
fan
of
capitalists.
Any
policy
advocated
by
businessmen, he said, “ought never to be adopted till after
having been long and carefully examined, not only with the
most scrupulous, but with the most suspicious attention.”
In our own time, as in Adam Smith’s time, businesses
have not hesitated to advocate government interference with
free markets. Tariffs on steel and other import restrictions
are obvious examples. Many, if not most, anti-trust cases
begin with some business complaining because a competitor
is gaining market share by charging lower prices or offering
an improved product.
While businesses will use the rhetoric of the free market
when it suits their purpose, they will dump it in a minute
when it does not. Against this background, it is not
surprising that big business is ﬁling briefs in favor of
afﬁrmative action in the University of Michigan case before
the Supreme Court.
Big business has long been in favor of racial quotas.
When an effort was begun back in the 1980s, within the
Reagan administration, to get rid of afﬁrmative action, the
inﬂuence of corporate America helped squelch this effort.
Why does big business want racial quotas? Because it is
in their own self-interest.

191
Legal Issues
If
a
corporation
does
not
have
enough
minority
employees to satisfy government agencies, that can lead to
racial discrimination lawsuits. But if they hire by quotas and
quotas are outlawed, they can be sued by whites for reverse
discrimination. Keeping afﬁrmative action legal solves their
problem.
But that is not how it was presented in the January 27,
2003 issue of BusinessWeek, where columnist Roger O.
Crockett portrayed corporations as courageously “sticking
out their necks” for the sake of that mystic thing called
“diversity.”
Sticking their necks out? Just who is going to do what to
them for supporting quotas? It is safer than playing checkers
with your maiden aunt.
If there is anything more ridiculous than endlessly
repeating the magic word “diversity,” it is trying to come up
with plausible arguments in favor of the racial quotas that
this euphemism really means.
According to BusinessWeek, corporate CEOs “believe that
as minorities’ share of the U.S. population has mounted,
diversity has become a critical workforce requirement.” They
get this diversity by hiring graduates of “a campus where
diversity thrives” because that is where “students develop an
understanding of different cultures.” And that, in turn
means that these graduates know how to “appeal to a variety
of consumers” as well as how to get along with “colleagues
and clientele from many ethnic backgrounds.”
How do companies in Japan manage to sell everything
from cars to cameras, in countries around the world,
without having that mystic “diversity”? How does a country
with such a racially homogeneous population even manage
to educate its young people if “diversity” is such an essential
factor in education?

192
ever wonder why?
Yet big business CEOs “rightly worry,” according to
BusinessWeek, that without racial quotas the result would be
“a smaller supply of minority college grads, which would
damage the economy and the society alike.”
Actually, the result of getting rid of racial quotas in
college admissions is likely to be a larger supply of minority
college
graduates,
because
minority
students
will
be
attending colleges where they meet the same standards as
others and are more likely to be able to do the work and
graduate, instead of punching out as often as they do when
they are admitted under lower standards.
The end of afﬁrmative action in state colleges and
universities in California and Texas has not led to declining
enrollments of minorities, but to their redistribution among
academic institutions. But facts carry no such weight as the
“diversity” mantra.

The Grand Fraud
No issue has been more saturated with dishonesty than the
issue of racial quotas and preferences. Many defenders of
afﬁrmative action are not even honest enough to admit that
they are talking about quotas and preferences, even though
everyone knows that that is what afﬁrmative action amounts
to in practice.
Despite all the gushing about the mystical beneﬁts of
“diversity” in higher education, a recent study by respected
academic scholars found that “college diversity programs fail
to raise standards” and that “a majority of faculty members
and
administrators
recognize
this
when
speaking
anonymously.”
This study by Stanley Rothman, Seymour Martin Lipset,
and Neil Nevitte found that “of those who think that
preferences have some impact on academic standards those
believing it negative exceed those believing it positive by 15
to 1.”
Poll after poll over the years has shown that most faculty
members
and
most
students
are
opposed
to
double
standards in college admissions. Yet professors who will
come out publicly and say what they say privately in these
polls are as rare as hen’s teeth.
Such
two-faced
talk
is
pervasive
in
academia
and
elsewhere. A few years ago, in Berkeley, there was a big ﬁght
over whether a faculty vote on afﬁrmative action would be
by secret ballot or open vote. Both sides knew that the result

194
ever wonder why?
of a secret ballot would be the direct opposite of the result
in a public vote at a faculty meeting.
When any policy can only be defended by lies and
duplicity, there is something fundamentally wrong with that
policy. Virtually every argument in favor of afﬁrmative action
is demonstrably false. It is the grand fraud of our time.
The need for “role models” of the same race or sex is a
key dogma behind afﬁrmative action in hiring black or
female professors. But a recent study titled Increasing Faculty
Diversity found “no empirical evidence to support the belief
that same-sex, same-ethnicity role models are any more
effective than white male role models.”
The related notion that a certain “critical mass” of black
students is needed on a given campus, in order that these
students can feel comfortable enough to do their best, has
become dogma without a speck of evidence being offered or
asked for. Such evidence as there is points in the opposite
direction.
Without afﬁrmative action, its advocates claim, few black
students would be able to get into college. In reality, there
are today more black students in the University of California
system and in the University of Texas system than there were
before these systems ended afﬁrmative action.
These black students are simply distributed differently
within both systems—no longer being mismatched with
institutions whose standards they don’t meet. They now have
a better chance of graduating.
What of the idea that afﬁrmative action has helped
blacks rise out of poverty and is needed to continue that
rise? A far higher proportion of blacks in poverty rose out
of poverty in the twenty years between 1940 and 1960—that
is, before any major federal civil rights legislation—than in
the more than 40 years since then. This trend continued in

195
Legal Issues
the 1960s, at a slower pace. The decade of the 1970s—the
ﬁrst afﬁrmative action decade—saw virtually no change in
the poverty rate among blacks.
In other words, most blacks lifted themselves out of
poverty but liberal politicians and black “leaders” have
claimed credit. One side effect is that many whites wonder
why blacks cannot lift themselves out of poverty like other
groups, when that is in fact what most blacks have done.
Afﬁrmative action is great for black millionaires but it
has done little or nothing for most people in the ghetto.
Most minority business owners who get preferences in
government contracts have net worths of more than one
million dollars.
One of the big barriers to any rational discussion of
afﬁrmative action is that many of those who are for or
against it are for or against the theory or the rationales
behind group preferences and quotas. As for facts, the
defenders simply lie.

The Grand Fraud: Part II
Fraud is as pervasive in arguments for afﬁrmative action for
women as in arguments for afﬁrmative action for blacks. In
fact, a whole fraudulent history has been concocted to
explain the changing economic position of women over the
years.
In the feminist movement’s version of history, women’s
changing economic position is explained by women’s being
repressed by men until they began to be rescued in the
1960s
by
the
women’s
movement,
anti-discrimination
policies, and afﬁrmative action.
Hard facts tell a very different story. Women had
achieved a higher representation in higher education and in
many professions in earlier decades of the twentieth century
than
they
had
when
the
feminist
movement
became
prominent in the 1960s.
This earlier success can hardly be attributed to Gloria
Steinem, Betty Friedan and the like. Nor should they be
allowed to claim credit for the later resumption of that
earlier trend, which had more to do with demographics
than politics.
The percentage of master’s degrees and doctoral degrees
that went to women was never as great during any year of
the 1950s or 1960s as that percentage was back in 1930. The
percentage of women who were listed in “Who’s Who in
America” was twice as high in 1902 as in 1958.
Women
were
also
better
represented
in
higher
education and in a number of professions in the 1920s or

197
Legal Issues
1930s than they were in the 1950s or 1960s, though none of
this ﬁts the fashionable fairy tales of the feminists.
Women received 34 percent of the bachelor’s degrees in
1920 but only 24 percent in 1950. In mathematics, women’s
share of doctorates declined from 15 percent to 5 percent
over a span of decades, and in economics from 10 percent
to 2 percent.
What was going on? After all, there was no feminist
movement and no afﬁrmative action in those earlier years
when women were doing better.
What really happened was that, as the birth rate fell from
the late nineteenth century into the 1930s, women rose in
the professions and in the postgraduate education necessary
for these professions. Then, as women began marrying
younger and having more children during the years of the
baby boom, their representation in both the professions and
in the education that led to those professions fell.
There
is
nothing
mysterious
about
the
fact
that
motherhood is a time-consuming activity, leaving less time to
pursue professional careers. It is just plain common sense—
which is to say, it does not provide the moral melodrama
needed by movements such as radical feminism.
In later years, as women again began to have fewer
children, they rose again in higher education and in the
professions, though it was often some years before they
regained the position they had achieved decades earlier. But
now their rise was accompanied by a drumbeat of feminist
propaganda, loudly claiming credit.
Yet the role of motherhood in explaining male-female
differences is far more readily demonstrated. Data from
more than 30 years ago show that women who remained
unmarried and worked continuously from high school into

198
ever wonder why?
their thirties earned higher incomes than men of the same
description.
What about the rise of women’s income relative to that
of men after the 1960s? Surely that must have been due to
the feminist movement or to afﬁrmative action, no? No!
What the hard data show is that more women began
working full time, both absolutely and relative to men.
Obviously, full-time workers get paid more than part-time
workers.
Among those women who worked full-time and year
around, their income as a percentage of the income of men
of the same description showed no real trend throughout
the 1960s and 1970s, despite all the hoopla about the
feminist movement and afﬁrmative action.
The income of women who worked full-time and year
around began an upward trend relative to the income of
men in the 1980s—during the Reagan administration, which
is not when most feminists would claim to have had their
biggest impact.
How do the feminists explain away all this earlier history
of women’s progress? They don’t. They ignore it. By the
simple expedient of tracing women’s progress only since the
1960s, the fraud is protected from contact with inconvenient
facts.

The Grand Fraud: Part III
If you would like to be taller than you are, do you think
that joining a basketball team would help? After all, statistics
prove that members of basketball teams are taller than other
people.
If this seems like a strange way to reason, it is the same
kind of reasoning used by those who argue that minority
students need afﬁrmative action to get into top-rated
colleges
and
universities,
because
graduates
of
those
institutions have more upscale careers.
I am sure that my graduating class at Harvard has had a
high income. After all, it contained a Rockefeller and the
Aga Khan, so even if the rest of us became unemployed
bums, the class would still have a high average income. Of
course, that wouldn’t do the rest of us any good.
As hand-wringing begins in many quarters over the
prospect that afﬁrmative action might end, and fewer black
students get admitted to Ivy League schools and ﬂagship
state universities, it is well to keep in mind that statistics
about how well the graduates of such institutions do in later
life may have little or no relevance to those black students
who are admitted under lower standards.
Most black students who enter college do not graduate—
and
that
is
especially
so
for
those
admitted
with
qualiﬁcations well below those of the other students at the
same institution. So how well the graduates of this or that
college or university do in later life has no relevance to

200
ever wonder why?
those who do not survive to make it up to the graduation
platform.
These casualties of the double-standards admissions
process do not even get the dignity of being recognized as
the “collateral damage” of afﬁrmative action. They would
have been far better off succeeding on some campus where
the
admissions
standards
matched
their
academic
background and capabilities.
For example, a study some years ago showed that the
average black student at MIT scored in the top 10 percent
in mathematics among students nationwide—but in the
bottom 10 percent at MIT. One-fourth of those black
students failed to graduate.
There is neither glory nor money to be had from
ﬂunking
out
of
MIT.
But
you
can
have
a
fulﬁlling
professional career after graduating from Texas Tech or Cal
State Pomona.
The end of afﬁrmative action in the state-supported
universities
of
California
and
Texas
was
decried
and
denounced by those who said that it would mean the end of
black students’ “access” to college, the “resegregation of
higher
education”
and
other
irresponsible
rhetorical
ﬂourishes.
In reality, the end of afﬁrmative action in California and
Texas state institutions meant that fewer black students
would go to Berkeley or Austin, and more would go to other
state colleges and universities in the same systems. There are
now more black students in these systems than there were
under afﬁrmative action.
A liberal think tank in New York has joined the hand-
wringing over the current University of Michigan afﬁrmative
action case, currently under consideration by the U. S.
Supreme Court, by publishing statistics supposedly showing

201
Legal Issues
how the percentage of minority students will decline in
selective colleges. But being admitted to a selective college
does not make anyone become a better student, any more
than joining a basketball team makes anyone taller.
In reality, afﬁrmative action increases the chance that a
minority student will fail where the standards are higher,
instead of succeeding where the standards are at a level that
matches the student’s academic capabilities.
Incidentally, when a minority student is admitted to a
highly-rated college without meeting the standards, do you
think that the white student who is displaced to make room
is likely to be a Rockefeller or the Aga Khan? Or is the white
student who is turned down more likely to be the son or
daughter of some working-class family who is kept out so
that the son or daughter of a black doctor can get in and
make the statistics look good?
Both those who are kept out, despite meeting the
qualiﬁcations standards, and those who are let in without
meeting those standards, are likely to lose from afﬁrmative
action.

The Grand Fraud: Part IV
Someone once said of Lillian Hellman that every word she
uttered was a lie, including “and” and “the.” Many defenders
of afﬁrmative action deserve a Lillian Hellman award.
Not only is much of what they say contradicted by readily
available facts, much of what they say publicly contradicts
what they themselves say privately. Often their very reasons
for favoring afﬁrmative action are false.
Supposedly, afﬁrmative action in college admissions is to
help black students. But why are so many big businesses
ﬁling
briefs
with
the
Supreme
Court
in
support
of
afﬁrmative action in academia? Is it because they are so
gung ho for black students? Or does this have something to
do with their own bottom line?
Big business has a lot to lose if the courts stop buying
the “diversity” mantra that has now become the stock
defense of group preferences and quotas. Take away the
legal protection of afﬁrmative action and businesses can be
sued by blacks if they are “under-represented” and by whites
if blacks get hired with lower qualiﬁcations to make the
numbers look good.
It would be a lawyer’s heaven and a corporate CEO’s
hell. Money that might otherwise go to the stockholders or
into reinvestment in the business would instead end up in
the pockets of trial lawyers. Trying to steer a course between
statistical
“under-representation”
and
“reverse
discrimination”
would
be
a
task
that
would
be
as
interminable as it is impossible.

203
Legal Issues
At the heart of the problem is that the courts have
allowed both private plaintiffs and government agencies to
equate statistical disparity with discrimination. At the very
least, the burden of proof shifts to the employer—and
usually nobody can prove anything, so the employer loses.
Since it is virtually impossible to ﬁnd two groups with the
same qualiﬁcations in any industry or in any country,
applying
the
same
standards
to
all
applicants
for
employment or promotion virtually guarantees a “disparate
impact”
on
different
groups—which
in
turn
virtually
guarantees charges of discrimination.
Even when the same employer hires people for different
jobs—say, third basemen and centerﬁelders—there can be
very different racial representation in those two jobs. Check
out the races of third basemen and centerﬁelders in the
major leagues. Is the employer a racist when he hires third
basemen but not a racist when he hires centerﬁelders?
You may have seen hundreds of black football players
score touchdowns but when did you last see a black player
kick the point after? Do you believe that white clubowners
are willing to hire black running backs and wide receivers,
and to pay them millions of dollars each, but that those very
same clubowners cannot abide the thought of a black man
kicking a football through the uprights?
These are just some of the absurd conclusions you would
have to reach if you took “disparate impact” statistics
seriously. But disparate impact theory is like the emperor
who has no clothes. Everybody knows he has no clothes. But
they have to pretend that he does. Otherwise, the whole
system is in jeopardy.
Take away disparate impact theory and you would have
widespread unemployment in government agencies that
enforce anti-discrimination laws. Trial lawyers might have so

204
ever wonder why?
much time on their hands that they would have to sue more
doctors, in order to make ends meet.
Back during the Reagan administration, when there was
some
talk
about
a
new
presidential
executive
order,
rescinding
the
executive
orders
of
Presidents
Lyndon
Johnson and Richard Nixon, on which afﬁrmative action is
based, big business made their opposition known and the
idea was quietly dropped.
This was not the Reagan administration’s ﬁnest hour.
Nor was it the Supreme Court’s ﬁnest hour when the justices
made their ﬁrst big ruling on afﬁrmative action, 25 years
ago, and ended up with a cacophony of opinions, as they
tried to square the circle and split the baby, so that quotas
could continue—provided that you didn’t call them quotas.
There has been a quarter of a century of national
discord based on their indecision.

Saving Quotas
There was some talk recently about upcoming vacancies on
the
Supreme
Court
because
some
retirements
were
expected. However, the High Court’s decision on afﬁrmative
action suggests that there are already vacancies, even though
no one has resigned. We can only hope that, when President
Bush gets a chance to nominate replacements, he does not
ﬁll an existing vacancy with another vacancy.
Justice
Sandra
Day
O’Connor’s
majority
decision
upholding afﬁrmative action in admissions to the University
of
Michigan Law School
was her classic split-the-baby
formula, washed down with rambling rhetoric, and making
a mockery of the law. This decision provoked not only
dissent from four other justices, but sarcasm and disgust—as
it should have.
Justice O’Connor’s argument is hard to summarize
because it consists largely of repeating unsubstantiated
claims about the “educational beneﬁts that ﬂow from a
diverse student body” and the need for a “critical mass” of
minority students for their own educational needs and those
of other students. She uses the phrase “compelling interest”
to get around the 14th Amendment’s requirement of equal
treatment, much as earlier generations of justices used the
phrase “interstate commerce” to evade Constitutional limits
on the powers of Congress.
This
exercise
in
verbal
dexterity
included
the
pronouncement that “race-conscious admissions policies
must be limited in time,” that “all government use of race

206
ever wonder why?
must have a logical end point.” But, having uttered these
pieties, Justice O’Connor imposed no time limit nor deﬁned
any criterion for an end point. In other words, she talked
the talk but she didn’t walk the walk.
Justice Antonin Scalia’s response was that the “mystical
‘critical mass’ justiﬁcation” for racial preferences “challenges
even
the
most
gullible
mind.”
He
pointed
out
how
academics who talk about multiculturalism and diversity in
the courts have “tribalism and racial segregation” on their
own
campuses,
including
“minority-only
student
organizations,
separate
minority
housing
opportunities,
separate minority student centers, even separate minority-
only graduation ceremonies.”
Verbal pieties and cynical realities have thoroughly
corrupted afﬁrmative action from the beginning. A quarter
of a century ago, the Bakke case brought a great outpouring
of noble rhetoric from the Supreme Court but the bottom
line was that you could continue to have racial quotas, so
long as you didn’t call them racial quotas.
Today’s Supreme Court has not only reafﬁrmed that
principle—or lack of principle—but also, by striking down a
companion case involving undergraduate admissions, added
that you can’t blatantly award points for race. That would be
giving the game away so obviously that even the great
unwashed masses would see what you are doing.
Racial preferences and quotas are favored by what Justice
Clarence Thomas’ dissent called “the know-it-all elites.” It
has become a badge of their identity and what its actual
consequences are for others in the real world is of no real
interest to them. Justice Thomas is unimpressed by the
endlessly repeated mantra of “diversity,” which to him is just
“a fashionable catch-phrase.”
Far from buying Justice O’Connor’s many reiterations of

207
Legal Issues
claims for its educational beneﬁts, Justice Thomas cited
empirical studies indicating that the much vaunted diversity
“actually impairs learning among black students.”
No one epitomizes the know-it-all elites more than the
New York Times, whose front-page story by Linda Greenhouse
refers to “the broad societal consensus in favor of afﬁrmative
action in higher education,” despite polls which have
repeatedly shown the public’s grave misgivings about racial
quotas and preferences.
Justice Thomas’ devastating dissent is deftly evaded by
Ms. Greenhouse, who says that he “took as his text not the
briefs but his own life story.”
If you want to ﬁnd out whether you can rely on what the
New York Times says, now that Jayson Blair is gone, read
Justice Thomas’ dissent for yourself and see if you can ﬁnd
anything there that would lead you to believe that it was
about his own life story.

The High Cost of Nuances
The Supreme Court’s recent decision saying that the
federal government can prosecute those using marijuana for
medical purposes, even when state laws permit such use, has
been seen by many as an issue of being for or against
marijuana. But the real signiﬁcance of this decision has little
to do with marijuana and everything to do with the kind of
government that we, our children, and our children’s
children are going to live under.
The 10th Amendment to the Constitution says that all
powers not granted to the federal government belong to the
states or to the people.
Those who wrote the Constitution clearly understood
that power is dangerous and needs to be limited by being
separated—separated not only into the three branches of
the national government but also separated as between the
whole national government, on the one hand, and the states
and the people on the other.
Too many people today judge court decisions by whether
the court is “for” or “against” this or that policy. It is not the
court’s job to be for or against any policy but to apply the
law.
The question before the Supreme Court was not whether
allowing the medicinal use of marijuana was a good policy
or a bad policy. The legal question was whether Congress
had
the
authority
under
the
Constitution to regulate
something that happened entirely within the boundaries of
a given state.

209
Legal Issues
For decades, judges have allowed the federal government
to expand its powers by saying that it was authorized by the
Constitution to regulate “interstate commerce.” But how can
something that happens entirely within the borders of one
state be called “interstate commerce”?
Back in 1942, the Supreme Court authorized the vastly
expanded powers of the federal government under Franklin
D. Roosevelt’s administration by declaring that a man who
grew food for himself on his own land was somehow
“affecting” prices of goods in interstate commerce and so
the federal government had a right to regulate him.
Stretching and straining the law this way means that
anything the federal government wants to do can be given
the magic label “interstate commerce”—and the limits on
federal power under the 10th Amendment vanish into thin
air.
Judicial activists love to believe that they can apply the
law in a “nuanced” way, allowing the federal government to
regulate some activities that do not cross state lines but not
others. The problem is that Justice Sandra Day O’Connor’s
nuances
are
different
from
Justice
Antonin
Scalia’s
nuances—not only in the medical marijuana case but in
numerous other cases.
Courts that go in for nuanced applications of the law can
produce a lot of 5 to 4 decisions, with different coalitions of
justices voting for and against different parts of the same
decision.
A much bigger and more fundamental problem is that
millions of ordinary citizens, without legal training, have a
hard time ﬁguring out when they are or are not breaking
the law. Nuanced courts, instead of drawing a line in the
sand, spread a lot of fog across the landscape.
Justice Clarence Thomas cut through that fog in his

210
ever wonder why?
dissent when he said that the people involved in this case
“use marijuana that has never been bought or sold, that has
never crossed state lines, and that has had no demonstrable
effect on the national market for marijuana.”
Instead of going in for fashionable “nuance” talk, Justice
Thomas drew a line in the sand: “If Congress can regulate
this under the Commerce Clause, then it can regulate
virtually anything—and the Federal Government is no
longer one of limited and enumerated powers.”
In short, the kinds of limitations on the power of the
national government created by the Constitution are being
nuanced out of existence by the courts.
Ironically, this decision was announced during the same
week when Janice Rogers Brown was conﬁrmed to the
Circuit Court of Appeals. One of the complaints against her
was that she had criticized the 1942 decision expanding the
meaning of “interstate commerce.” In other words, her
position on this was the same as that of Clarence Thomas—
and both are anathema to liberals.

The Polio Fallacy
The disappearance of an American teenager in Aruba has
been more than a tragedy for her and for her family. It is
the latest of many tragedies to strike trusting people who
have long been sheltered from dangers and who have acted
as if there were no dangers.
Not only individuals but whole nations have lost their
sense of danger after having been protected from those
dangers.
After
the
devastating
disease
of
polio
was
ﬁnally
conquered by vaccines, back in the 1960s, the number of
people afﬂicted declined almost to the vanishing point.
Some people then began to see no need to take the vaccine,
since apparently no one was getting polio any more, so who
was there to catch it from?
The result was a needless resurgence of crippling and
death from this terrible disease.
The kind of thinking involved in the polio fallacy has
appeared in many other contexts. When some public
disorder gets underway and a massive arrival of police on
the scene brings everything under control immediately,
many in the media and in politics deplore such “over-
reaction” on the part of the police to a minor disturbance.
It never occurs to such people that it was precisely the
arrival of huge numbers of cops on the scene that brought
the disturbance to a screeching halt without having to use
force.
During the Cold War, Communist expansionism around

212
ever wonder why?
the world somehow never struck Western Europe, which was
protected by the American nuclear umbrella. Western
Europeans often accused the United States of unnecessary
militarism. American military power was like the polio
vaccine that was considered unnecessary.
The latest version of the polio fallacy is the demonizing
of the Patriot Act. Some people are yelling louder than ever
that they have been silenced, that we have had our freedom
destroyed, all as a result of the Patriot Act.
Let us go back to square one, to the terrorist attacks of
9/11, which were the reason for passage of the Patriot Act.
Do you remember how long every major public event—
the World Series, Christmas celebrations, the Super Bowl—
was a time of fear of a new terrorist attack? Do you
remember all the advice to stock up on medicines or food,
so that we could ride out any new terrorist onslaught?
Do you remember all the places that terrorists were
expected to strike? The different colors of national alerts
being announced regularly?
Now, after years have passed without any of these feared
disasters actually happening, the eroding of a sense of
danger has led many to repeat the polio fallacy and act as if
the dangers from which we have been protected did not
exist—and
that
the
enhanced
protection
is
therefore
unnecessary.
The many crackdowns on domestic terrorists under the
Patriot Act, as well as the ability to intercept and disrupt
their communications under the powers of that Act, receive
little or no credit for the fact that there has been no
repetition of anything like 9/11.
The man principally responsible for law enforcement
crackdowns on terrorists in the United States during this
dangerous period—Attorney General John Ashcroft—not

213
Legal Issues
only received no gratitude for our safety, the complacency
to which that safety led allowed many to indulge themselves
in the luxury of vilifying Ashcroft at every turn.
Like the police who arrive in large numbers to quell
disturbances and are then accused of “over-reacting,” the
Patriot Act has been depicted as an over-reaction to terrorist
activity. Indeed, the very word “terrorist” has been banned
in much of the politically correct media.
The Patriot Act is no closer to perfection than anything
else human. It has costs, as every beneﬁt has had costs, hard
as it is for many among the intelligentsia to accept anything
less than “win-win” situations.
“I have a real problem with fascism,” as one lady in a
trendy California bookstore said ﬁercely, when discussing
the Patriot Act.
She was aghast when I replied, “I hadn’t noticed any
fascism.”
Have you?


PART IV
POLITICAL ISSUES


Spoiled Brat Politics
An editorial in a recent issue of the National Geographic’s
Traveler magazine complained that kayakers in Maine found
“residential development” near national parks and urged its
readers to use their “inﬂuence” to prevent such things.
“You are the stakeholders in our national parks,” it said.
Really? What stake do kayakers and others of like mind
have that is not also a stake held by people who build the
vacation homes whose presence offends the kayak set?
Homeowners are just as much citizens and taxpayers as
kayakers are, and they are even entitled to equal treatment
under the 14th Amendment.
The essence of bigotry is denying others the same rights
you claim for yourself. Green bigots are a classic example.
The idea that government is supposed to make your
desires override the desires of other citizens has spread from
the green bigots to other groups who claim privileges in the
name of rights.
In California, a group of golfers in wheelchairs are suing
a hotel chain for not providing them with special carts that
will enable them to navigate the local hotel’s golf course
more comfortably and play the game better.
According to a newspaper account, the kinds of carts the
golfers in wheelchairs want “have rotating seats so a golfer
can swing and strike a ball from the tee, the fairway and on
the green without getting out of the vehicle.” If golfers want
this kind of cart, there is nothing to stop them from buying

218
ever wonder why?
one—except that they would rather have other people be
forced to pay for it.
One of the golfers in this lawsuit has been conﬁned to a
wheelchair as a result of a diving accident and another as a
result of a gunshot wound. Apparently the hotel had
nothing to do with either event.
There was a time when people would have said that the
hotel
is
not
responsible
for
these
golfers
being
in
wheelchairs and therefore it has no obligation to spend
additional money for special carts in order to help their
scores on the links. But that was before the Americans with
Disabilities Act, under which the hotel is being sued.
If the government wanted to do something for the
disabled or the handicapped, it could have spent its own tax
money to do so. Instead, it passed the Americans with
Disabilities
Act,
which
created
a
right
to
sue
private
institutions, in order to force them to spend their money to
solve the problems of individuals with special problems or
special desires, whether serious or frivolous.
It was a lawyer’s full-employment act, creating another
legally recognized victim group, empowered to claim special
privileges, at other people’s expense, in the name of equal
rights.
Nor could such legislation make the usual claim that it
was
coming
to
the
defense
of
the
poor
and
the
downtrodden. Golf courses are not the natural habitat of the
poor and the downtrodden.
One of the plaintiffs in the golf-course lawsuit has been
the managing partner in a large law ﬁrm. He says, “I just
want the same opportunity as everyone else” to “get out and
play 18 holes with my friends and colleagues.”
Equal opportunity does not mean equal results, despite

219
Political Issues
how many laws and policies proceed as if it does, or how
much fashionable rhetoric equates the two.
An example of that rhetoric was the title of a recent New
York Times column: “A Ticket to Bias.” That column recalled
bitterly the experience of a woman in a wheelchair who
bought a $300 ticket to a rock concert but was unable to see
when other people around her stood up. This was equated
with “bias” on the part of those who ran the arena.
The woman in the wheelchair declared, “true equality
remains a dream out of reach.” Apparently only equality of
results is “true” equality.
A
recent
publication
of
the
American
Historical
Association shows this same confusion when it says that
doors “are largely closed” to people who want to become
historians if they didn’t graduate from a top-tier college. In
other words, unequal results proves bias that closed doors,
according to this rhetoric.
Confusion between equal opportunity and equal results
is a dangerous confusion behind many kinds of spoiled brat
politics.

Spoiled Brat Politics: Part II
The idea that what I want overrides what you want has
increasingly become part of our thinking, our policies and
even our laws. There is literally a federal case before the
Supreme Court over the fact that many colleges and
universities refuse to allow military recruiters on campus.
Why? Because, as the academics will tell you, they are
opposed to the military, either in general or because they
think the military are discriminating against homosexuals or
for whatever other reasons they have.
These academics have every right to be against the
military, for any reason or for no reason.
If they don’t like the military, they can stay away from
the military, since there is no draft. But what they want is to
keep other people away from the military, by preventing
students from hearing what the military recruiters have to
say, as students hear what recruiters from all sorts of other
institutions and movements have to say on campus.
The reason there is a legal issue is that a federal law has
been passed, saying that colleges and universities that forbid
military recruiters from coming on campus are no longer
eligible to receive federal money.
Academics are outraged. They see this law as a violation
of their freedom—including their right to violate their
students’ freedom. It is classic spoiled brat politics, based on
the idea that what I want overrides what you want.
The same principle underlies growing legal restrictions

221
Political Issues
on building anything that existing residents in a community
don’t want built.
A young “planning consultant” to a local politician in
New York says: “These neighborhoods substantially have not
changed in 40 years. What we are trying to do is make sure
they are recognizable 40 years from now. I don’t think there
is anything wrong with that. In fact, in many other places in
the
country, that is
celebrated. So why shouldn’t we
celebrate it here?”
That young man probably has a bright future in politics,
where the ability to confuse the issues is a highly rewarded
talent.
“Everybody is doing it” is a very effective political
argument, requiring neither facts nor logic, and widely
accepted in this era of dumbed-down education. Focusing
on the beneﬁts to some and ignoring the costs to others is
another tried-and-true political tactic.
Since people who are already in a community are the
ones who vote, making what they want override what other
people want is a winner in spoiled brat politics.
At one time, courts took seriously the 14th Amendment’s
guarantee of equal rights for all, regardless of where they
lived and voted. Courts even enforced the 5th Amendment’s
guarantee of property rights.
In other words, local voters and local politicians could
not arbitrarily deprive other people of the right to come in
and buy and use property as they saw ﬁt, simply because
some
planning
consultants
or
planning
commissions
preferred
that
they
do
otherwise.
But
Constitutional
protection
of
property
rights
is
no
longer
“in
the
mainstream” of fashionable legal thinking.
Let’s go back to square one. The people who bought
homes in a neighborhood 40 years ago did not buy the

222
ever wonder why?
neighborhood, nor did they pay for a guarantee that the
neighborhood would stay the same for 40 years, much less
in perpetuity.
The only way the government can give current residents
such a guarantee is to take away other people’s property
rights, which exist precisely in order to keep politicians at
bay.
Buying a chance and asking the government to turn that
chance into a guarantee has become a common occurrence
under spoiled brat politics.
When you buy a home with a great view of the ocean,
you do not pay for a guarantee that nothing will ever be
built between you and the ocean. You ask politicians to give
that to you, at someone else’s expense.
Some people even call that idealism because you are
“preserving” something good. But preserving it from whom?
And why is what you want more important than what they
want?

The “Compassion” Racket
Our hearts automatically go out to the people of Florida,
who are being battered by a series of hurricanes in rapid
succession. But we have brains as well as hearts—and the
time is long overdue to start using them.
Hurricanes come through Florida every year about this
time. And, every year, politicians get to parade their
compassion by showering the taxpayers’ money on the
places that have been struck.
What would happen if they didn’t?
First of all, not as many people would build homes in the
path of a well-known disaster that comes around like
clockwork virtually every year. Those who did would buy
insurance that covers the costs of the risks they choose to
take.
That
insurance
would not
be
cheap—which would
provide yet another reason for people to locate out of
harm’s way. The net result would be fewer lives lost and less
property damage. Is it not more compassionate to seek this
result, even if it would deprive politicians of television time?
In ABC reporter John Stossel’s witty and insightful book
Give Me A Break, he discusses how he built a beach house
with only “a hundred feet of sand” between him and the
ocean. It gave him a great view—and a great chance of
disaster.
His father warned him of the danger but an architect
pointed out that the government would pick up the tab if
anything happened to his house. A few years later, storm-

224
ever wonder why?
driven ocean waves came in and ﬂooded the ground ﬂoor
of Stossel’s home. The government paid to have it restored.
Still later, the waves came in again, and this time took
out
the
whole
house.
The
government
paid
again.
Fortunately for the taxpayers, Stossel then decided that
enough was enough.
In politics, throwing the taxpayers’ money at disasters is
supposed to show your compassion. But robbing Peter to
pay Paul is not compassion. It is politics.
The crucial fact is that a society does not have one dime
more money to devote to the resources available to help
victims of natural disasters by sending that money through
government
agencies.
All
that
it
does
is
change
the
incentives in such a way as to subsidize risky behavior.
The
same
money
can
just
as
well
come
through
insurance companies. Even if most insurance companies are
unwilling to insure people living in particularly vulnerable
areas, or living in homes that are inadequate to withstand
hurricane-force
winds,
there
are
always
insurers
who
specialize in high risks—and who charge correspondingly
higher premiums.
Lloyds of London, for example, has already been moving
into the market for insurance for homes costing half a
million dollars or more and located along coastal waters,
whether in Florida or the Hamptons or elsewhere. If rich
people want to put their mansions at risk, there is no reason
why they shouldn’t pay the costs, instead of forcing the
taxpayers to pay those costs.
What about “the poor”? As in so many other cases, the
poor are the human shields behind which big-government
advocates advance. If you are seriously concerned about the
poor themselves, you can always subsidize them and avoid
subsidizing others by having means tests.

225
Political Issues
Means tests are anathema to the political left because it
puts an end to their game of hiding behind the poor.
Compassion is a laudable feeling but it can also be a
political racket.
As with so many government programs that people have
come to rely on, phasing out state and federal disaster relief
programs would not be easy. In an election year, it is
impossible.
Fortunately, there are years in between elections, in
which it is at least theoretically possible to talk sense.
Whether the risks are hurricanes, earthquakes, ﬂoods or
forest ﬁres, people who have gotten themselves out on a
limb by taking risks in the expectation that the government
will bail them out can be gradually weaned away from that
expectation by phasing out disaster relief.
The alternative is to keep on forcing taxpayers to be
patsies forever, while politicians bask in the glow of the
compassion racket by throwing the taxpayers’ money hither
and yon, while the media applaud the courage of those who
rebuild in the path of known disasters.

Ronald Reagan (1911–2004)
There are many ways to judge a President or anyone else.
One old-fashioned way is by results. A more popular way in
recent years has been by how well someone ﬁts the
preconceptions of the intelligentsia or the media.
By the ﬁrst test, Ronald Reagan was the most successful
President of the United States in the 20th century. By the
second test, he was a complete failure.
Time and time again President Reagan went against what
the smug smarties inside the beltway and on the TV tube
said. And time and again he got results.
It started even before Ronald Reagan was elected. When
the Republicans nominated Governor Reagan in 1980,
according to the late Washington Post editor Meg Greenﬁeld,
“people I knew in the Carter White House were ecstatic.”
They considered Reagan “not nearly smart enough”—as
liberals measure smart.
The fact that Ronald Reagan beat President Jimmy
Carter by a landslide did not cause any re-evaluation of his
intelligence. It was luck or malaise or something else,
liberals thought.
Now the media line was that this cowboy from California
would be taught a lesson when he got to Washington and
had to play in the big leagues against the savvy guys on
Capitol Hill.
The
new
President
succeeded
in
putting
through
Congress
big
changes
that
were
called
“the
Reagan
revolution.” And he did it without ever having his party in

227
Political Issues
control of both houses of Congress. But these results caused
no re-evaluation of Ronald Reagan.
One of his ﬁrst acts as President was to end price
controls on petroleum. The New York Times condescendingly
dismissed
Reagan’s
reliance
on
the
free
market
and
repeated widespread predictions of “declining domestic oil
production” and skyrocketing gasoline prices.
The price of gasoline fell by more than 60 cents a gallon.
More luck, apparently.
Where
the
new
President
would
really
get
his
comeuppance, the smart money said, was in foreign affairs,
where a former governor had no experience. Not only were
President Reagan’s ideas about foreign policy considered
naive and dangerously reckless, he would be going up
against the wily Soviet rulers who were old hands at this
stuff.
When Ronald Reagan referred to the Soviet Union as an
“evil empire,” there were howls of disapproval in the media.
When he proposed meeting a Soviet nuclear buildup in
Eastern Europe with an American nuclear buildup in
Western Europe, there were alarms that he was going to get
us into a war.
The result? President Reagan’s policies not only did not
get us into a war, they put an end to the Cold War that had
been going on for decades.
Meanwhile, Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev, who was
the media’s idea of a brilliant and sophisticated man, had a
whole Communist empire collapse under him when his
policies were put into effect. Eastern Europe broke free and
Gorbachev woke up one morning to ﬁnd that the Soviet
Union that he was head of no longer existed—and that he
was now a nobody in the new Russian state.
But that was just bad luck, apparently.

228
ever wonder why?
For decades it had been considered the height of
political wisdom to accept as given that the Soviet bloc was
here to stay—and its expansion was so inevitable that it
would be foolhardy to try to stop it.
The Soviet bloc had in fact expanded through seven
consecutive
administrations
of
both
Republicans
and
Democrats. The ﬁrst territory the Communists ever lost was
Grenada, when Ronald Reagan sent in American troops.
But, once again, results carried no weight with the
intelligentsia and the media.
Reagan was considered to be completely out of touch
when he said that Communism was “another sad, bizarre
chapter in human history whose last pages even now are
being written.” But how many “smart” people saw the end of
the Soviet Union coming?
Ronald Reagan left this country—and the world—a far
better place than he found it. And he smiled while he did
it. That’s greatness—if you judge by results.

Gun Control Myths
Professor Joyce Lee Malcolm of Bentley College deserves
some sort of special prize for taking on the thankless task of
talking
sense
on
a
subject
where
nonsense
is
deeply
entrenched and ﬁercely dogmatic. In her recently published
book, Guns and Violence, Professor Malcolm examines the
history of ﬁrearms, gun control laws and violent crime in
England. What makes this more than an exercise in history
is its relevance to current controversies over gun control in
America.
Gun
control
zealots
love
to
make
highly
selective
international comparisons of gun ownership and murder
rates. But Joyce Lee Malcolm points out some of the pitfalls
in that approach. For example, the murder rate in New York
City has been more than ﬁve times that of London for two
centuries—and during most of that time neither city had
any gun control laws.
In 1911, New York state instituted one of the most severe
gun control laws in the United States, while serious gun
control laws did not begin in England until nearly a decade
later. But New York City still continued to have far higher
murder rates than London.
If we are serious about the role of guns and gun control
as factors in differing rates of violence between countries,
then we need to do what history professor Joyce Lee
Malcolm does—examine the history of guns and violence. In
England, as she points out, over the centuries “violent crime

230
ever wonder why?
continued to decline markedly at the very time that guns
were becoming increasingly available.”
England’s Bill of Rights in 1688 was quite unambiguous
that the right of a private individual to be armed was an
individual right, independently of any collective right of
militias. Guns were as freely available to Englishmen as to
Americans, on into the early 20th century.
Nor was gun control in England a response to any
ﬁrearms murder crisis. Over a period of three years near the
end of the 19th century, “there were only 59 fatalities from
handguns in a population of nearly 30 million people,”
according
to
Professor
Malcolm.
“Of
these,
19
were
accidents, 35 were suicides and only 3 were homicides—an
average of one a year.”
The rise of the interventionist state in early 20th century
England included efforts to restrict ownership of guns. After
the First World War, gun control laws began restricting the
possession of ﬁrearms. Then, after the Second World War,
these restrictions grew more severe, eventually disarming the
civilian population of England—or at least the law-abiding
part of it.
It was during this period of severe restrictions on owning
ﬁrearms that crime rates in general, and the murder rate in
particular, began to rise in England. “As the number of legal
ﬁrearms have dwindled, the numbers of armed crimes have
risen,” Professor Malcolm points out.
In 1954, there were only a dozen armed robberies in
London but, by the 1990s, there were more than a hundred
times as many. In England, as in the United States, drastic
crackdowns on gun ownership by law-abiding citizens were
accompanied by ever greater leniency to criminals. In both
countries, this turned out to be a formula for disaster.
While England has not yet reached the American level

231
Political Issues
of murders, it has already surpassed the United States in
rates of robbery and burglary. Moreover, in recent years the
murder rate in England has been going up under still more
severe gun control laws, while the murder rate in the United
States has been going down as more and more states have
allowed private citizens to carry concealed weapons—and
have begun locking up more criminals.
In both countries, facts have no effect whatever on the
dogmas of gun control zealots. The fact that most guns used
to murder people in England were not legally purchased has
no effect on their faith in gun control laws there, any more
than faith in such laws here is affected by the fact that the
gun used by the recent Beltway snipers was not purchased
legally either.
In England as in America, sensational gun crimes have
been
seized
upon
and
used
politically
to
promote
crackdowns on gun ownership by law-abiding citizens, while
doing nothing about criminals. American zealots for the
Brady Bill say nothing about the fact that the man who shot
James Brady and tried to assassinate President Reagan has
been out walking the streets on furlough.

Gun Control Myths: Part II
Talking facts to gun control zealots is only likely to make
them angry. But the rest of us need to know what the facts
are. More than that, we need to know that much of what the
gun controllers claim as facts will not stand up under
scrutiny.
The grand dogma of the gun controllers is that places
with severe restrictions on the ownership of ﬁrearms have
lower rates of murder and other gun crimes. How do they
prove this? Simple. They make comparisons of places where
this is true and ignore all comparisons of places where the
opposite is true.
Gun control zealots compare the United States and
England
to
show
that
murder
rates
are
lower where
restrictions on ownership of ﬁrearms are more severe. But
you could just as easily compare Switzerland and Germany,
the Swiss having lower murder rates than the Germans, even
though gun ownership is three times higher in Switzerland.
Other countries with high rates of gun ownership and low
murder rates include Israel, New Zealand, and Finland.
Within the United States, rural areas have higher rates of
gun ownership and lower rates of murder, whites have
higher rates of gun ownership than blacks and much lower
murder rates. For the country as a whole, hand gun
ownership doubled in the late 20th century, while the
murder rate went down. But such facts are not mentioned
by gun control zealots or by the liberal media.
Another dogma among gun control supporters is that

233
Political Issues
having a gun in the home for self-defense is futile and is
only likely to increase the chances of your getting hurt or
killed. Your best bet is to offer no resistance to an intruder,
according to this dogma.
Actual research tells just the opposite story. People who
have not resisted have gotten hurt twice as often as people
who resisted with a ﬁrearm. Those who resisted without a
ﬁrearm of course got hurt the most often.
Such facts are simply ignored by gun control zealots.
They prefer to cite a study published some years ago in the
New England Journal of Medicine and demolished by a number
of scholars since then. According to this discredited study,
people with guns in their homes were more likely to be
murdered.
How did they arrive at this conclusion? By taking people
who were murdered in their homes, ﬁnding out how many
had guns in the house, and then comparing them with
people who were not murdered in their homes.
Using similar reasoning, you might be able to show that
people who hire bodyguards are more likely to get killed
than
people
who
don’t.
Obviously,
people
who
hire
bodyguards already feel at risk, but does that mean that the
bodyguards are the reason for the risk? Similarly illogical
reasoning has been used by counting how many intruders
were killed by homeowners with guns and comparing that
with the number of family members killed with those guns.
But this is a nonsense comparison because most people who
keep guns in their homes do not do so in hopes of killing
intruders.
Most uses of guns in self-defense—whether in the home
or elsewhere—do not involve actually pulling the trigger.
When the intended victim turns out to have a gun in his

234
ever wonder why?
hand, the attacker usually has enough brains to back off. But
the lives saved this way do not get counted.
People killed at home by family members are highly
atypical. The great majority of these victims have had to call
the police to their homes before, because of domestic
violence, and just over half have had the cops out several
times. These are not just ordinary people who happened to
lose their temper when a gun was at hand.
Neither are most “children” who are killed by guns just
toddlers who happened to ﬁnd a loaded weapon lying
around. More of those “children” are members of teenage
criminal gangs who kill each other deliberately.
Some small children do in fact get accidentally killed by
guns in the home—but fewer than drown in bathtubs. Is
anyone for banning bathtubs? Moreover, the number of
fatal gun accidents fell, over the years, while the number of
guns was increasing by tens of millions. None of this
supports the assumption that more guns mean more fatal
accidents.
Most of the gun controllers’ arguments are a house of
cards. No wonder they don’t want any hard facts coming
near them.

A Painful Anniversary
August 20, 2004 marked the 40th anniversary of one of the
major turning points in American social history. That was
the
date
on
which
President
Lyndon
Johnson
signed
legislation creating his “War on Poverty” program in 1964.
Never had there been such a comprehensive program to
tackle poverty at its roots, to offer more opportunities to
those starting out in life, to rehabilitate those who had fallen
by
the
wayside, and
to
make
dependent people self-
supporting. Its intentions were the best. But we know what
road is paved with good intentions.
The War on Poverty represented the crowning triumph
of the liberal vision of society—and of government programs
as
the
solution
to
social
problems.
The
disastrous
consequences that followed have made the word “liberal” so
much of a political liability that today even candidates with
long left-wing track records have evaded or denied that
designation.
In the liberal vision, slums bred crime. But brand new
government housing projects almost immediately became
new centers of crime and quickly degenerated into new
slums. Many of these projects later had to be demolished.
Unfortunately, the assumptions behind those projects were
not demolished, but live on in other disastrous programs,
such as Section 8 housing.
Rates of teenage pregnancy and venereal disease had
been going down for years before the new 1960s attitudes
toward sex spread rapidly through the schools, helped by

236
ever wonder why?
War on Poverty money. These downward trends suddenly
reversed and skyrocketed.
The murder rate had also been going down, for decades,
and in 1960 was just under half of what it had been in 1934.
Then the new 1960s policies toward curing the “root causes”
of crime and creating new “rights” for criminals began.
Rates of violent crime, including murder, skyrocketed.
The black family, which had survived centuries of slavery
and discrimination, began rapidly disintegrating in the
liberal welfare state that subsidized unwed pregnancy and
changed welfare from an emergency rescue to a way of life.
Government social programs such as the War on Poverty
were considered a way to reduce urban riots. Such programs
increased sharply during the 1960s. So did urban riots.
Later,
during
the
Reagan
administration,
which
was
denounced for not promoting social programs, there were
far fewer urban riots.
Neither
the
media
nor
most
of
our
educational
institutions question the assumptions behind the War on
Poverty. Even conservatives often attribute much of the
progress that has been made by lower-income people to
these programs.
For example, the usually insightful quarterly magazine
City Journal says in its current issue: “Beginning in the mid-
sixties, the condition of most black Americans improved
markedly.”
That is completely false and misleading.
The economic rise of blacks began decades earlier,
before any of the legislation and policies that are credited
with producing that rise. The continuation of the rise of
blacks out of poverty did not—repeat, did not—accelerate
during the 1960s.
The poverty rate among black families fell from 87

237
Political Issues
percent in 1940 to 47 percent in 1960, during an era of
virtually no major civil rights legislation or anti-poverty
programs. It dropped another 17 percentage points during
the decade of the 1960s and one percentage point during
the 1970s, but this continuation of the previous trend was
neither unprecedented nor something to be arbitrarily
attributed to the programs like the War on Poverty.
In various skilled trades, the incomes of blacks relative to
whites more than doubled between 1936 and 1959—that is,
before the magic 1960s decade when supposedly all progress
began. The rise of blacks in professional and other high-
level occupations was greater in the years immediately
preceding the Civil Rights Act of 1964 than in the years
afterwards.
While some good things did come out of the 1960s, as
out of many other decades, so did major social disasters that
continue to plague us today. Many of those disasters began
quite clearly during the 1960s.
But what are mere facts compared to a heady vision?
Liberal
assumptions—“two
Americas,”
for
example—are
being recycled this election year, even by candidates who
evade the “liberal” label.

The High Cost of Shibboleths
A recent e-mail from a reader said that he could not ﬁnd
the word “shibboleth” in his desk dictionary, even though he
had seen this word in my column. That was an unfortunate
omission in his dictionary because shibboleths explain a lot
about what is said and done in politics today.
Back in Biblical times, the word “shibboleth” was used as
a password, because people from one side could say it easily
and their enemies couldn’t. It identiﬁed who you were and
which side you were on.
Today, many things that are said and done in our
political life serve that same purpose—and often make no
sense
otherwise.
When
people
say
that
they
are
for
“diversity” or gun control or campaign ﬁnance reform, they
are declaring themselves to be on one side in the political
wars as a whole. In their own eyes, their positions on such
issues identify them as one of the good, caring and
compassionate people.
What political shibboleths do is transform questions
about facts, causation and evidence into questions about
personal identity and moral worth. Shibboleths are also a
great labor-saving device. You don’t need to ﬁnd out what
the actual consequences of afﬁrmative action have been if
being for “diversity” serves the purpose of identifying you as
one of those good people who care about racial justice and
the advancement of the disadvantaged.
You don’t have to ﬁnd out what actually happens when
there are more relaxed or more stringent gun control laws,

239
Political Issues
if you only need to show that you are on the side of the
angels. How many lives have actually been lost under one
policy versus the other is a factual question whose answer
you need not bother learning.
Mere facts cannot compete with shibboleths when it
comes to making people feel good. Moreover, shibboleths
keep off the agenda the painful question of how dangerous
it is to have policies which impact millions of human beings
without a thorough knowledge of the hard facts needed to
understand just what that impact has actually been.
Shibboleths are the life blood of the media. Stories
which seem to support the side of the angels are trumpeted
from coast to coast, while stories which support the other
side are either downplayed or ignored altogether.
For example, vicious crimes committed by white people
against black people are big news because these stories ﬁt
the shibboleths which establish the moral identity of the
journalists who tell these stories. Vicious crimes committed
by blacks against whites are not big news because these
stories undermine the shibboleths—or, as it is phrased,
“feed
stereotypes.”
Ditto
with
stories
about
crimes
committed
by
the
homeless,
homosexuals
and
others
favored by current shibboleths.
Shibboleths
are
dangerous,
not
only
because
they
mobilize political support for policies that most of the
supporters have not thought through, but also because these
badges of identity make it harder to reverse those policies
when they turn out to be counterproductive or even
disastrous. When admitting a mistake means renouncing
one’s identity as one of “us” and being identiﬁed with a
demonized “them,” do not expect as many people to do it
as if all that was involved was the question whether policy A
produces better results than policy B.

240
ever wonder why?
Those who strain for moral equivalence—itself one of
the shibboleths of our time—may assume that shibboleths
are part of all political or ideological positions. But, for at
least two centuries, shibboleths have been at the heart of the
ideology of the left, whether moderate left or radical left.
Assumptions of being more concerned, caring and
compassionate than their opponents can be found on the
left from Godwin and Condorcet in the 18th century to a
whole
galaxy
of
liberal-left
journalists,
academics,
organizations and movements today. But there were no such
assumptions in the writings of Adam Smith in the 18th
century or in those of Milton Friedman today. It was enough
for them to say that their opponents were mistaken and
their policies harmful—and why.
What we need are more factual arguments and counter-
arguments. With shibboleths, we are ﬂying blind into the
future, through mountains of hard facts that are being
ignored when they contradict the vision that gives many
people their sense of self-worth.

“Why Do They Hate Us?”
The idea that what goes around comes around applies not
only to individuals but to nations and whole civilizations. It
was just a few centuries ago—not long, as history is
measured—that China had the highest standard of living in
the world and the Dutch were the world’s largest exporters,
while North Africans were enslaving a million Europeans.
Nowhere
have
whole
peoples
seen
their
situation
reversed more visibly or more painfully than the peoples of
the Islamic world. In medieval times, Europe lagged far
behind
the
Islamic
world
in
science,
mathematics,
scholarship, and military power.
Even such ancient European thinkers as Plato and
Aristotle became known to Europeans of the Middle Ages
only after their writings, which had been translated into
Arabic, were translated back into European languages.
Today that is all reversed. The number of books per
person in Europe is more than ten times that in Africa and
the Middle East. The number of books translated into
Arabic over the past thousand years is about the same as the
number translated into Spanish in one year.
There are only 18 computers per thousand persons in
the Arab world, compared to 78 per thousand persons
worldwide. Fewer than 400 industrial patents were issued to
people in the Arab countries during the last two decades of
the 20th century, while 15,000 industrial patents were issued
to South Koreans alone.
Human beings do not always take reversals of fortune

242
ever wonder why?
gracefully. Still less can those who were once on top quietly
accept seeing others leaving them far behind economically,
intellectually, and militarily.
Those in the Islamic world have for centuries been
taught to regard themselves as far superior to the “inﬁdels”
of the West, while everything they see with their own eyes
now tells them otherwise. Worse yet, what the whole world
sees with their own eyes tells them that the Middle East has
made few contributions to human advancement in our
times.
Even Middle Eastern oil was largely discovered and
processed by people from the West. After oil, the Middle
East’s most prominent export has been terrorism.
Those who look at the world in rationalistic terms may
say that the Middle East can use some of its vast oil wealth
to expand its own educated classes and move back to the
forefront of human achievement. They did it once, why not
do it again?
All sorts of things can be done in the long run, but you
have to live through the short run to get there. Moreover,
even the short run, as history is measured, can be pretty
long in terms of the human lifespan.
Even if the Islamic world set such goals and committed
the material resources and individual efforts required, they
could not expect to pull abreast of the West for generations,
even if the West stood still. More realistically, it would take
centuries, as it took the West centuries to catch up to them.
What will happen in the meantime? Are millions of
proud human beings supposed to quietly accept inferiority
for
themselves
and
their
children,
and
perhaps
their
children’s children?
Or are they more likely to listen to demagogues, whether
political or religious, who tell them that their lowly place in

243
Political Issues
the world is due to the evils of others—the West, the
Americans, the Jews?
If the peoples of the Islamic world disregarded such
demagogues, they would be the exceptions, rather than the
rule, among people who lag painfully far behind others.
Even in the West, there have been powerful political
movements based on the notion that the rich have gotten
rich by keeping others poor—and that things need to be set
right “by all means necessary.”
These means seldom include concentration on self-
improvement, with 19th-century Japan being one of the rare
exceptions. Lashing out at others is far more immediately
satisfying—and
modern
communications,
transportation,
and weaponry make it far easier to lash out destructively
across great distances.
Against this background, we may want to consider the
question asked by hand-wringers in the West: Why do they
hate us? Maybe it is because the alternative to hating us is to
hate themselves.

Foreign “Allies”
To those who do not want to face up to hard and brutal
choices in a nuclear age, the magic formula is to turn to
something called “the international community”—or, more
concretely, the United Nations or “our European allies.” As
with so many rhetorical solutions to hard problems, the
speciﬁc realities behind the rhetoric get very little attention.
What is the actual track record of the UN or Europe? Is
it something to rely on, in life and death decisions?
The UN stood idly by in Rwanda while mass slaughters
went on. The UN passed resolution after resolution on Iraq
for years, without taking any action to enforce them. Indeed,
the UN was part of the massive corruption in the oil-for-food
program, which enabled Saddam Hussein to divert money
intended to feed the Iraqi people into buying weapons and
palaces for himself.
When
the
UN
seated
Libya
on
its
human
rights
committee, that was a sign of its moral bankruptcy. So was
its
conference
on
racism,
which
featured
anti-Semitic
propaganda by Arab countries.
What of our European allies, who are automatically
assumed to be so much wiser and more sophisticated than
American “cowboy” presidents, whether Reagan or Bush?
Europe’s track record throughout the 20th century was
one unbelievable disaster after another. European countries
blundered their way into two world wars—from which every
country involved emerged worse off than before, with a

245
Political Issues
continent devastated and its people hungry amid the rubble.
Both times American food fed them.
The
two
biggest
ideological
disasters
of
the
20th
century—Communism and Fascism—were both created in
Europe. Both of these blind fanaticisms led to innocent
civilians being killed by the millions, during peacetime as
well as in wars.
For more than half a century, Western Europe has not
had to defend itself because it has been protected by the
American nuclear umbrella. Without that, there was nothing
to stop the Soviet army from marching right across the
continent to the Atlantic Ocean.
American protection enabled Western Europe to neglect
its own military defenses, and in some cases use their armed
forces as another government featherbedding program.
NATO’s forces include unionized soldiers who absorb a
much higher share of Europe’s military spending than do
American soldiers in the U.S. That leaves less money for
NATO to buy up-to-date equipment.
NATO’s troops get generous vacations and light enough
schedules that many of them have part-time civilian jobs.
The average age of soldiers in Belgium is 40, compared to
28 for American soldiers.
No country could afford to have to ﬁght a war with over-
age soldiers and obsolete equipment, unless its military
defense was left to someone else. That someone else is the
United States.
Like so many people who have been sheltered from the
harsh realities of life and not forced to stand on their own
two feet, Western Europeans have been able to indulge
themselves
in
illusions.
The
most
unrealistic
of
these
illusions has been that we can just talk our way out of

246
ever wonder why?
international threats with “negotiations,” treaties and UN
resolutions.
That approach was tried for two decades after the First
World War. That is what led to the Second World War.
France was the worst. In the 1920s, its foreign minister
Aristide Briand negotiated much-ballyhooed agreements
renouncing war—agreements that won him the Nobel Prize
but did nothing to deter war. In fact, such things lulled
peaceful countries into a dangerous complacency that
emboldened aggressor nations.
France’s record of cowardice and betrayal of its allies
during the 1930s, was climaxed by its own surrender to
Hitler after just six weeks of ﬁghting in 1940. At the 11th
hour, France appealed to the United States, which was not
in the war at that point, for military equipment—that is, for
the kind of “unilateral” American intervention at which the
French would sneer so often in later years.
Are these the people to whom we should defer on life-
and-death questions? Are our actions to be limited to what
is acceptable to the lowest common denominator at the UN
or in Europe? Are the lofty rhetoric and condescending airs
of foreigners to impress us more than their dismal track
records?

My Platform
From time to time some kind readers suggest that I run for
public ofﬁce, including President of the United States. No
need for those on the left to panic. It is not going to
happen.
Such suggestions, however, cause me to imagine what my
platform would be if I were in politics. Once you see what
that platform would be, you can understand why it will never
happen.
Since politicians like to have campaign slogans, instead
of “Bring it On!” my slogan might be “Get rid of it!” to
describe all the laws, policies, and government agencies that
I would abolish.
A
more
positive
slogan
would
be
“Conservative
Radicalism.”
That
is, my policies
would be
based on
traditional values but would make radical changes in order
to restore or enhance those values.
Cabinet-level
departments,
for
example,
would
be
reduced to just two—the Defense Department and the State
Department, with the latter purged of the weak-kneed
internationalist crowd who have dominated it for so long.
Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, etc., would
all be abolished as just money-wasting bureaucracies serving
outside special interests, instead of the people whose taxes
support them.
Government subsidies would be drastically reduced,
starting at the top. That is, there would be a prohibition
against giving a dime of government money to anyone

248
ever wonder why?
whose annual income or total assets exceed one billion
dollars. Why should agricultural subsidies be going to Ted
Turner and David Rockefeller, or “universal health care” pay
for their medicine?
Who could object to cutting off subsidies to billionaires?
Once that was done, however, the next step would be to cut
off millionaires. Then we could proceed on down the
income scale until people making a hundred grand a year
could no longer expect to be subsidized with the taxpayer’s
money.
The great advantage of this way of proceeding is that it
would rob the media of opportunities to run sob stories
about how some poor person was hurt by cutbacks in some
government program—even when the vast majority of those
who
were
hurt
were
the
bureaucrats
who
run
these
programs and slick special interests who hide behind the
poor.
By the time we got down to cutting off all government
subsidies to people making $100,000 a year or more, the
federal budget would probably not only be balanced but
have a surplus. Of course, there would be hordes of
unemployed
bureaucrats
being
interviewed
on
TV,
complaining that the world was going to end without their
vital contributions. But that could be brushed aside.
With all the money saved by ending vast numbers of
subsidies, the government could afford to pay the kinds of
salaries that would attract highly qualiﬁed people from the
private sector. For example, if every member of Congress
were paid a million dollars a year, that would cost less than
one percent of what it costs to run the Department of
Agriculture.
As
things
stand
today,
a
successful doctor, lawyer,
executive, engineer or economist would lose money by

249
Political Issues
becoming a member of Congress. This means that Congress
is largely ﬁlled with people who either already have great
wealth or people who don’t have what it takes to earn a high
income in the private sector—or people hungry for power,
who are the worst of all.
These are not the kinds of people who should dominate
the making of laws in Congress or enforcing them in the
courts. Short-sighted critics might object that the kinds of
people we have in politics and the courts don’t deserve to
get a million dollars a year. But that is the very reason for
trying to get better people.
If a million dollars a year won’t do it, you could raise the
pay to ten million and it would still be chump change
compared to what is wasted by cheap politicians, who turn
out to be very expensive politicians when wasting the
taxpayers’ money.
Then there should be term limits. In fact, elected
ofﬁcials should be limited to just one term. Otherwise, they
and their staffs would be spending most of their time doing
things to get re-elected in all but the last term.
These are just some of the things I would do in the
name of “conservative radicalism.” But it may be enough to
show why there is no clear and present danger of my being
nominated, much less elected.

The Oldest Fraud
Election frauds are nothing new and neither are political
frauds in general. The oldest fraud is the belief that the
political left is the party of the poor and the downtrodden.
The 2004 election results in California were only the
latest evidence to give the lie to that belief. While the state
as a whole went for Kerry, 55 percent versus 44 percent for
Bush, the various counties ranged from 71 percent Bush to
83 percent Kerry. The most afﬂuent counties were where
Kerry had his strongest support.
In Marin County, where the average home price is
$750,000, 73 percent of the votes went for Kerry. In
Alameda County, where Berkeley is located, it was 74
percent Kerry. San Francisco, with the highest rents of any
major city in the country, gave 83 percent of its votes to
Kerry.
Out where ordinary people live, it was a different story.
Thirty-six counties went for Bush versus 22 counties for
Kerry, and usually by more balanced vote totals, though
Bush went over 70 percent in less fashionable places like
Lassen County and Modoc County. If you have never heard
of them, there’s a reason.
It was much the same story on the votes for Proposition
66, which would have limited the “three strikes” law that
puts career criminals away for life. Afﬂuent voters living
insulated lives in places well removed from high-crime
neighborhoods have the luxury of worrying about whether

251
Political Issues
we are not being nice enough to hoodlums, criminals and
terrorists.
They don’t like the “three strikes” law and want it
weakened.
While
most
California
voters
opposed
any
weakening of that law, a majority of the voters in the
afﬂuent and heavily pro-Kerry counties mentioned wanted
us to stop being so mean to criminals.
This pattern is not conﬁned to California and it is not
new. There were limousine liberals before there were
limousines. The same pattern applies when you go even
further left on the political spectrum, to socialists and
communists.
The British Labor Party’s leader in the heyday of its
socialist zealotry was Clement Attlee, who grew up in a large
home with servants—and this was not the only home his
family owned. Meanwhile, Margaret Thatcher’s family ran a
grocery store and lived upstairs over it.
While the British Labor Party was afﬁliated with labor
unions, it was the afﬂuent and the intellectuals in the party
who
had
the
most left-wing ideologies and the most
unrealistic policies. In the years leading up to World War II,
the Labor Party was for disarmament while Hitler was
arming Germany to the teeth across the Channel.
Eventually, it was the labor union component of the
party that insisted on some sanity, so that Britain could
begin preparing to defend itself militarily—not a moment
too soon.
When
Karl
Marx
and
Friedrich
Engels
wrote
the
Communist Manifesto, they were a couple of spoiled young
men from rich families. All their talk about the working class
was just talk, but it appealed to other such young men who
liked heady talk.
As Engels himself put it, when the Communist group for

252
ever wonder why?
whom the Manifesto was written was choosing delegates, “a
working man was proposed for appearances sake, but those
who proposed him voted for me.” This may have been the
ﬁrst rigged election of the Communist movement but it was
certainly not the last.
All sorts of modern extremist movements, such as the
Weathermen in the United States or the Baader-Meinhof
gang in Germany, have attracted a disproportionate number
of the afﬂuent in general and the intellectuals in particular.
Such people may speak in the name of the downtrodden
but they themselves are often people who have time on their
hands to nurse their pet notions about the world and their
fancies about themselves as leaders of the poor, saviors of
the environment or whatever happens to be the Big Deal du
jour.
Osama bin Laden is not someone embittered by poverty.
He is from a very rich family and has had both the time to
nurse his resentments of the West and the money to
organize terrorists to lash out in the only way that can give
them any signiﬁcance.
The belief that liberal, left-wing or extremist movements
are for the poor may or may not be the biggest fraud but it
is certainly the oldest.

The Left’s Vision
Santa Monica, California, has decreed a ﬁne of $2,500 a
day—for not cutting your hedges!
Has someone discovered some terrible health hazard or
other danger from hedges that are too high? Not at all. The
politicians who run Santa Monica have simply decided that
people should not be able to build a high wall of hedges
around themselves.
Santa
Monica
has
long
been
called
“the
People’s
Republic of Santa Monica” for all the far left laws and
rhetoric
it
generates.
Like
other
governments
called
“people’s republic,” the last thing they care about is people.
The ideology, or even whims, of those in power routinely
take away other people’s right to live their own lives as they
see ﬁt.
Santa Monica is not unique. Wherever you get enough
far left people in power, you can ﬁnd a similar willingness
to force everyone into collectivist conformity at all costs.
Too often these selﬁsh ego trips of the left are called
idealism, and issues are discussed in terms of the wonderful
goals
they
proclaim—“social
justice,”
“open
space”
or
“saving” this or that—rather than in terms of what is actually
being done and the costs entailed on others, even when that
cost is $2,500 a day.
None of this is peculiar to the United States. In fact, the
same mindset is more prevalent in a number of Western
European countries and has been carried even further in
practice.

254
ever wonder why?
In Britain, for example, the right to defend yourself is
being taken away in many ways. Gun control laws there have
not only tightened restrictions on gun ownership—with the
murder rate rising as they do—these laws ban anything that
looks like a gun, especially if it is used in self-defense.
Britons who have held burglars in their homes until the
police arrived, by using toy pistols, have been arrested along
with the burglars. To the collectivist mindset, independent
self-help of any sort is a threat to their vision of the
government as the sole source of protection and direction.
If someone attacks you in Britain and you knock him
down, you are not allowed to hit him again or you will be
charged with assault. Apparently they think that someone
who has been knocked down is now harmless. People who
have
led
sufﬁciently
sheltered
lives
may
believe
such
things—and impose such notions on others through the
power of government.
The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) has even
advised that you are not to yell “help” when you are attacked
in a public place. You are to yell “Call the police.”
Both self-defense and coming to the aid of others are
lumped together as “vigilante” actions. That mindset has
made inroads into the American media as well.
Years
ago,
Bernard
Goetz
was
called
“the
subway
vigilante” in the media because he shot some young
hoodlums who attacked him directly. He had sat quietly
minding his own business while the thugs harassed other
people in the same subway car. But even to defend himself
was “vigilante” action, as far as those in the liberal media
were concerned.
The left takes its vision seriously—more seriously than it
takes the rights of other people. They want to be our
shepherds. But that requires us to be sheep.

255
Political Issues
Even in the raising of our own children, the left wants to
take charge—without taking responsibility. Schools have
long ago taken over the role of introducing children to sex
when, how, and with whatever beliefs are in vogue. But, if
your child ends up pregnant or stricken with AIDS, that is
your problem, not theirs.
In some European countries, it is illegal to spank your
own children. They apparently believe, like Hillary Clinton,
that “it takes a village” to raise a child. But, if the child ends
up rotten, it is not the village that lies awake at night. It is
the parents.
Making other people’s decisions for them without being
held accountable for the consequences is the left’s vision in
many different contexts—including outsourcing our foreign
policy to the United Nations or to the International Court
of Justice, whom nobody elected and whom nobody can
hold accountable.
Hedges in Santa Monica are just one of the signs of our
times. The left wants to cut our freedom down, not just
hedges.

The Left’s Vocabulary
A recent angry e-mail from a reader said that certain issues
should not be determined by “the dictates of the market.”
With a mere turn of a phrase, he had turned reality upside
down.
Decisions
by
people
free
to
make
their
mutual
accommodations
with
other
free
people
were
called
“dictates” while having third parties tell all of them what
they could and couldn’t do was not.
Verbal coups have long been a specialty of the left.
Totalitarian countries on the left have called themselves
“people’s democracies” and used the egalitarian greeting
“comrade”—even though some comrades had the arbitrary
power of life and death over other comrades.
In democratic countries, where public opinion matters,
the left has used its verbal talents to change the whole
meaning of words and to substitute new words, so that issues
would be debated in terms of their redeﬁned vocabulary,
instead of the real substance of the issues.
Words which have acquired connotations from the actual
experiences of millions of human beings over generations,
or even centuries, have been replaced by new words that
wipe
out
those
connotations
and
substitute
more
fashionable notions of the left.
The word “swamp,” for example, has been all but erased
from the language. Swamps were messy, sometimes smelly,
places where mosquitoes bred and sometimes snakes lurked.
The left has replaced the word “swamp” with “wetlands,” a

257
Political Issues
word spoken in pious tones usually reserved for sacred
things.
The point of this verbal sleight-of-hand is to impose the
left’s notions of how other people can use their own land.
Restrictive laws about “wetlands” have imposed huge costs
on farmers and other owners of land that happened to have
a certain amount of water on it.
Another word that the left has virtually banished from
the language is “bum.” Centuries of experience with idlers
who refused to work and who hung around on the streets
making
a
nuisance—and
sometimes
a
menace—of
themselves were erased from our memories as the left
verbally transformed those same people into a sacred icon,
“the homeless.”
As with swamps, what was once messy and smelly was now
turned into something we had a duty to protect. It was now
our
duty
to
support
people
who
refused
to
support
themselves.
Crimes committed by bums are covered up by the media,
by verbally transforming “the homeless” into “transients” or
“drifters”
whenever
they
commit
crimes.
Thus
“the
homeless” are the only group you never hear of committing
any crimes.
More to the point, third parties’ notions are imposed by
the power of the government to raise our taxes to support
people who are raising hell on our streets and in parks
where it has often become too dangerous for our children
to play.
The left has a whole vocabulary devoted to depicting
people who do not meet standards as people who have been
denied “access.”
Whether it is academic standards, job qualiﬁcations or
credit requirements, those who do not measure up are said

258
ever wonder why?
to have been deprived of “opportunity,” “rights” or “social
justice.”
The word games of the left—from the mantra of
“diversity” to the pieties of “compassion”—are not just
games. They are ways of imposing power by evading issues
of substance through the use of seductive rhetoric.
“Rights,” for example, have become an all-purpose term
used for evading both facts and logic by saying that people
have a “right” to whatever the left wants to give them by
taking from others.
For centuries, rights were exemptions from government
power, as in the Bill of Rights. Now the left has redeﬁned
rights as things that can be demanded from the taxpayers,
or from private employers or others, on behalf of people
who accept no mutual obligations, even for common
decency.
At one time, educators tried to teach students to
carefully deﬁne words and systematically analyze arguments.
They said, “We are here to teach you how to think, not what
to think.”
Today, they are teaching students what to think—
political correctness. Instead of knowledge, students are
given “self-esteem,” so that they can vent their ignorance
with conﬁdence.

Abstract People
Most people have to deal with the reality that confronts
them. They start with that reality and try to do the best they
can within its limitations and within their own limitations.
But there are large and growing numbers of people—
especially among the intelligentsia—whose starting point is
some abstraction that they wish to apply to reality. For
example,
even
in
the
face
of
a
worldwide
terrorist
organization that has declared open warfare on every
American man, woman and child, those whose starting point
is abstraction focus on the “civil rights” of terrorists.
No one in World War II worried about Hitler’s or
Goering’s civil rights. The very concept would have been
considered absurd. Hitler and Goering were not part of our
civil world. In fact, they were trying to destroy that world
and replace it with their own tyranny. That is exactly what
the world terrorist networks are trying to do today.
How can anyone have rights within a framework that he
rejects
and
is
trying
to
destroy?
Rights
are
not
just
abstractions plucked out of thin air. Rights are part of a
whole set of mutual obligations binding people together. If
enemy
soldiers
have
any
rights,
it
is
as
a
result
of
international agreements such as the Geneva Convention on
prisoners of war. And they have those rights only after they
have surrendered and become prisoners of war.
So long as they are still ﬁghting, enemy soldiers do not
even have the right to live, without which all other rights are
meaningless. If these enemy soldiers have inﬁltrated wearing

260
ever wonder why?
civilian clothes or disguised in the uniform of some other
country,
then
they
can
be
killed
legally,
even
after
surrendering. Spies have been shot or hanged for centuries.
At one time, all this would have been considered too
obvious to require saying. But today, when some people talk
blithely about “animal rights,” as if animals were part of
some system of mutual obligations, even the obvious has to
be explained to some of the products of our dumbed-down
education.
A sense of decency limits what we do to enemies or to
animals, but this is not a matter of rights, civil or otherwise.
Nor is it a threat to the rights of American citizens when we
fail to treat foreign terrorists as if they were American
citizens. Citizens are people who have a legal obligation to
play by certain rules, and who are therefore protected by
that same national system of rules. But people who are
trying to destroy both the citizens and the rules they live by
have no such claim.
The hand-wringers among us seem to be worried that
foreign terrorists are not being treated as nicely as they
would like or that illegal aliens from the Middle East will be
“singled out” to be sent back where they came from. In the
abstract, there is no more reason to focus on Middle Eastern
males than on Scandinavian females, when it comes to
deporting illegal aliens. It is just that we do not live in the
abstract. We live in the world that exists. And we want to
keep on living.
Some of these hand-wringers even seem to think that we
have to “set an example” that will vindicate us in the eyes of
“world opinion.” In short, they put these abstractions ﬁrst—
ahead of the deadly realities facing us now and in the years
ahead.
Why the United States of America needs to vindicate

261
Political Issues
itself in the eyes of the despotic and failing governments
that make up much of the rest of the world is a mystery.
Whether foreigners will in fact respect us for bending over
backward or despise us for our apologetic weakness is
another question.
Worse
yet,
other
nations
considering
whether
to
cooperate or ally themselves with us—at some risk to
themselves—will
have
to
consider
whether
we
are
dependable and realistic enough to make the gamble
worthwhile
or
whether
we
are
terminally
addicted to
shibboleths that can jeopardize ourselves and them.
The great political afﬂiction of the 20th century was
putting abstractions ahead of ﬂesh-and-blood human beings,
especially in ideological totalitarian states under Nazism and
Communism. Do we need to repeat that staggering tragedy
in the 21st century?

Looking Back
We may look back on some eras as heroic—that of the
founding fathers or “the greatest generation” that fought
World War II—but some eras we look back on in disbelief
at the utter stupidity with which people ruined their
economies or blundered into wars in which every country
involved ended up worse off than before.
How will people a century from now look back on our
era? Fortunately, most of us will be long gone by then, so we
will be spared the embarrassment of seeing ourselves
judged.
What will future generations say about how we behaved
when confronted by international terrorist organizations
that
have
repeatedly
demonstrated
their
cutthroat
ruthlessness and now had the prospect of getting nuclear
weapons from rogue nations like Iran and North Korea?
What will future generations think when they see the
front
pages
of
our
leading
newspapers
repeatedly
preoccupied
with
whether
we
are
treating
captured
cutthroats nicely enough? What will they think when they
see the Geneva Convention invoked to protect people who
are excluded from protection by the Geneva Convention?
During
World
War
II,
German
soldiers
who
were
captured not wearing the uniform of their own army were
simply lined up against a wall and shot dead by American
troops.
This was not a scandal. Far from being covered up by the
military, movies were taken of the executions and have since

263
Political Issues
been shown on the History Channel. We understood then
that the Geneva Convention protected people who obeyed
the Geneva Convention, not those who didn’t—as terrorists
today certainly do not.
What will those who look back on these times think
when they see that the American Civil Liberties Union, and
others who have made excuses for all sorts of criminals, were
pushing for the prosecution of our own troops for life-and-
death decisions they had a split second to make in the heat
of combat?
The frivolous demands made on our military—that they
protect museums while ﬁghting for their lives, that they
tiptoe around mosques from which people are shooting at
them—betray an irresponsibility made worse by ingratitude
toward men who have put their lives on the line to protect
us.
It is impossible to ﬁght a war without heroism. Yet can
you name a single American military hero acclaimed by the
media for an act of courage in combat? Such courage is
systematically ignored by most of the media.
If American troops kill a hundred terrorists in battle and
lose ten of their own men doing it, the only headline will
be: “Ten More Americans Killed in Iraq Today.”
Those in the media who have carped at the military for
years, and have repeatedly opposed military spending, are
now claiming to be “honoring” our military by making a big
production out of publishing the names of all those killed
in Iraq. Will future generations see through this hypocrisy—
and wonder why we did not?
What will the generations of the future say if we allow
Iran and North Korea to develop nuclear weapons, which
are then turned over to terrorists who can begin to
annihilate American cities?

264
ever wonder why?
Our descendants will wonder how we could have let this
happen, when we had the power to destroy any nation
posing such a threat. Knowing that we had the power, they
would have to wonder why we did not have the will—and
why it was so obvious that we did not.
Nothing will more painfully reveal the irresponsible
frivolity of our times than the many demands in the media
and in politics that we act only with the approval of the
United Nations and after winning over “world opinion.”
How long this will take and what our enemies will be
doing in the meantime while we are going through these
futile exercises is something that gets very little attention.
Do you remember Osama bin Laden warning us, on the
eve of the 2004 elections, that he would retaliate against
those parts of the United States that voted for Bush? The
United States is not Spain, so we disregarded his threats.
But
what
of
future
generations,
after
international
terrorists
get
nuclear
weapons?
And
what
will
our
descendants think of us—will they ever forgive us—for
leaving them in such a desperate situation because we were
paralyzed by a desire to placate “world opinion”?

PART V
SOCIAL ISSUES


Mealy Mouth Media
The British Broadcasting Corporation has made itself look
ridiculous by issuing orders that its reporters are not to refer
to Saddam Hussein as an ex-dictator. Apparently using the
word “dictator” would compromise the BBC’s neutrality and
call its objectivity into question.
Unfortunately, the BBC is not alone. In much of the
American mainstream media, terrorists are referred to as
“militants”
or
“insurgents.”
Rioters
are
called
“demonstrators.”
As American ﬂags went up around the country in the
wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks, even the wearing of
little American ﬂag lapel pins by TV journalists was banned
by some broadcasters, with the notable exception of Fox
News.
What makes all this straining for neutrality more than
just another passing silliness is that it reveals a serious
confusion between neutrality and objectivity. Such verbal
posturing has been at its worst in some of the most biased
media, such as the BBC.
During World War II, legendary journalist Edward R.
Murrow never pretended to be neutral as between the Nazis
and the Allies. Yet you would have trouble today ﬁnding
anyone in the media with anything resembling the stature
and integrity of Ed Murrow.
Honesty does not require posturing. In fact, the two
things
are
incompatible.
Nor
does
objectivity
require
neutrality.

268
ever wonder why?
Medical science is no less scientiﬁcally objective because
it is completely biased in favor of people and against
bacteria. Medical researchers are studying cancer cells with
scientiﬁc objectivity in order to discover what the hard facts
are about those cells, regardless of anyone’s preconceived
beliefs. But they are doing so precisely in order to destroy
cancer cells and, if possible, prevent their existence in the
ﬁrst place.
Objectivity refers to an honest seeking of the truth,
whatever that truth may turn out to be and regardless of
what its implications might be. Neutrality refers to a
preconceived “balance,” which subordinates the truth to a
preconception.
Journalists
who
reported
the
horrors
of
the
Nazi
concentration camps were not violating canons of objectivity
by failing to use such neutral language as calling these
places “residential facilities” or those who ran them “hosts.”
Nor did the use of the term “dictator” to describe Hitler
mean that World War II journalists did not come up to the
supposedly high standards of today’s media. What does the
much-vaunted “public’s right to know” mean when mealy
mouth words ﬁlter out essential facts?
During the Cold War, the confusion between objectivity
and neutrality led many journalists to balance negative
things said about the Soviet Union with negative things said
about the United States. In the circles of the media
anointed, a phrase like “the free world” was disdained
because it violated this verbal neutrality.
Journalistic sophisticates referred to “the so-called free
world.” Meanwhile, for decades on end, in countries around
the globe, millions of ordinary human beings broke the
personal
ties
of
a
lifetime,
left
behind
their
worldly
belongings, and took desperate chances with their lives, and

269
Social Issues
with the lives of their children—all in order to try to escape
to “the so-called free world.”
One of the pious phrases of the mealy mouth media is
that “the truth lies somewhere in between.” It may or it may
not. Only after you have found the truth do you know where
it is.
For years, there were people who denied that there was
a famine in the Soviet Union during the 1930s and others
who said that millions died during that famine. Did the
truth lie somewhere in between?
The leading scholar who argued that millions starved
during Stalin’s man-made famine was Robert Conquest of
the Hoover Institution, often described in the media as a
right-wing think tank. When Mikhail Gorbachev ﬁnally
opened the ofﬁcial records in the last days of the Soviet
Union, it turned out that even more people had died during
the famine than Dr. Conquest had estimated.
The truth is where you ﬁnd it—and you don’t ﬁnd it
with a preconceived “balance” expressed in mealy mouth
words.

Achievements and Their Causes
In this age of specialization, experts are said to know more
and more about less and less. There are undoubtedly
specialists who can tell you more than you ever wanted to
know about toenails or toads. However, the grand study of
sweeping events has not died out entirely.
What could be more sweeping than a book titled Human
Accomplishment? It is Charles Murray’s latest book and it is
dynamite.
The subtitle spells out how sweeping this book is: The
Pursuit of Excellence in the Arts and Sciences, 800 B.C. to 1950.
It is more than a historical survey of the landmark ﬁgures in
many ﬁelds from various cultures around the world. It is an
analysis of where, why, and how historic advances have been
made in some places and not in others.
Just to pose this as a question goes against the grain of
today’s multiculturalism, in which all cultures are seen as
equally valuable, and the non-judgmentalism that is too
squeamish to declare some achievements more important
than others.
Charles Murray, however, clearly believes that being able
to cure fatal diseases is more important than some other
things and that Rembrandt was a greater artist than your
local sidewalk cartoon sketcher. Most people might regard
this as obvious common sense but some of the intelligentsia
may be seething with resentment at seeing their pet fetishes
ignored.
Once you begin looking at the history of great human

271
Social Issues
achievements—whether in science or art, mathematics or
literature—you discover that they are not random over time
or random from one place to another. They cluster in time
and in space.
Landmark
ﬁgures
in
Western
art
clustered
in
the
northern half of the Italian peninsula in the 15th to the
17th centuries and on the Channel coast of France and the
Netherlands in the 19th through the mid-20th centuries.
Landmark ﬁgures in literature, science and music have all
had their own special concentrations at different times and
places.
What never seems to have happened, either in Western
or non-Western civilizations, was a random distribution of
achievements. Even at the individual level, achievements are
skewed.
Among professional golfers, for example, just over half
have never won any tournament, anywhere. Even among the
relatively small number who have ever won a major golf
tournament, more than half have won just one. But Jack
Nicklaus won 18.
Cities have been the scene of more than their share of
great achievements in many ﬁelds. This is not just because
many people have been concentrated in cities. Even in
proportion to population, cities have turned out far more
than their share of leading ﬁgures.
Particular groups have also had more than their share of
spectacular achievements. In the ﬁrst half of the 20th
century, Jews won 14 percent of all Nobel Prizes in literature
and the sciences combined, and in the second half of the
century they won 29 percent. In both periods, Jews were less
than one percent of the world’s population.
Once we understand that achievements are not random
and never have been, the question that arises is: What causes

272
ever wonder why?
so much more achievement in some places than in others,
at
some
times
rather
than
others,
and
among
some
individuals and groups more than others?
Charles Murray’s answers to these big question are too
long for a newspaper column and can be found in the book.
But just to have established a basis for such questions is a
major contribution.
Let us not forget that we live in a time when a failure to
have a random distribution of individuals and groups in the
workplace or on an academic campus is regarded as a sign
of bias or discrimination. The very thought that groups
might differ among themselves in the required skills,
attitudes
and
performances
is
anathema
to
many
in
academia, the media and even the courts.
This study of landmark achievements is itself a landmark
achievement. If it does no more than get people to think
about things that have been accepted as social dogmas, that
will be a major contribution.

Talkers versus Doers
The big divide in this country is not between Democrats
and Republicans, or women and men, but between talkers
and doers.
Think about the things that have improved our lives the
most
over
the
past
century—medical
advances,
the
transportation
revolution,
huge
increases
in
consumer
goods, dramatic improvements in housing, the computer
revolution. The people who created these things—the
doers—are not popular heroes. Our heroes are the talkers
who complain about the doers.
Those who have created nothing have maintained a
constant barrage of criticism against those who created
something, because that something was considered to be not
good enough or the beneﬁts turned out to have costs.
Every time I get on my bicycle and go pedalling down
the road, I remember from my childhood that old geezers
in their 70s didn’t go biking in those days. They sat around
on the porch in their rocking chairs.
Partly that was the style of the times but partly it was
because old people did not have the energy and vigor that
they have today. Much of that has been due to medical
advances that not only added years to our lives but life to
our years.
Doctors and hospitals have helped but much of the
improvement in our health has been due to pharmaceutical
drugs that keep us from having to go to hospitals, and have

274
ever wonder why?
enabled doctors to head off many serious medical problems
with prescriptions.
Yet the people who produce pharmaceutical drugs have
been under heated political attack for years—attacks which
often do not let the facts get in their way.
During the anthrax scare of 2001, for example, the
maker of the leading antidote for anthrax was accused of
making “obscene proﬁts” even though (1) the total cost of
treatment with their drug was just $50 and (2) the company
actually operated at a loss while they were being denounced
for obscene proﬁts.
People who know nothing about advertising, nothing
about pharmaceuticals, and nothing about economics have
been loudly proclaiming that the drug companies spend too
much on advertising—and demanding that the government
pass laws based on their ignorance.
Today, we take the automobile so much for granted that
it is hard to realize what an expansion of the life of ordinary
people it represented. There was a time when most people
lived and died within a 50-mile radius of where they were
born.
The automobile opened a whole new world to these
people. It also enabled those living in overcrowded cities to
spread out into suburbs and get some elbow room. Trucks
got goods to people more cheaply and ambulances got
people to hospitals faster to save their lives.
Yet who among the people who did this are today
regarded as being as big a hero as Ralph Nader, who put
himself on the map with complaints about cars in general
and the Corvair in particular?
Hard data on automobile safety and tests conducted on
the Corvair both undermined Nader’s claims. But he will
always be a hero to the talkers. So will those who complain

275
Social Issues
about commerce and industry that have raised our standard
of living to levels that our grandparents would not have
dreamed of.
Home-ownership is far more widespread among ordinary
people today than in the past because of entrepreneurs who
have ﬁgured out how to produce more, bigger and better
houses at prices that more and more people could afford.
But can you name any of those entrepreneurs who have
been celebrated for their contributions to their fellow
human beings?
Probably not. In California, anyone in the business of
producing housing is more likely to be demonized as a
“developer,” a word that causes hostile reactions among
Californians
conditioned
to
respond
negatively—and
automatically, like Pavlov’s dog.
As for computers, no one made them more usable by
more people around the world than Microsoft. And no one
has been hit with more or bigger lawsuits as a result.
Why can’t the talkers leave the doers alone? Perhaps it is
because that would leave the talkers on the sidelines, with
their uselessness being painfully obvious to all, instead of
being in the limelight and “making a difference”—even if
that difference is usually negative.

Talkers versus Doers: Part II
The fact that beneﬁts have costs means that those who
create these beneﬁts are tempting targets for accusations
from those who know how to dramatize the costs. This
means that the doers are constantly on the defensive when
attacked by the talkers.
These attacks are especially effective in a society where
most people have not been taught to weigh costs against
beneﬁts or to subject hot rhetoric to cold logic.
“Safety” issues are ideal for talkers because nothing is
absolutely safe. A vaccine may save the lives of 10,000
children but, if ﬁve children die from the vaccine itself, that
can set off loud denunciations of “corporate irresponsibility”
and “greed” on the part of the companies that produced the
vaccine.
Some people die from reactions to peanut butter. If the
government banned every food from which some people
can die, we would all die of starvation. If they banned every
vaccine or drug from which people die, more people would
die from diseases.
More than sloppy thinking and runaway rhetoric enables
the talkers to harass the doers. The ever-growing jungle of
laws and regulations provides a virtually unlimited number
of grounds for lawsuits.
The talkers are in their natural habitat in courts where
judges allow junk science to be used as evidence and juries
are gullible enough to be impressed by glib and clever
lawyers. The low cost of attacks and the high cost of defense

277
Social Issues
tilts the system in favor of the talkers, especially since the
talkers need pay no price for having made totally unfounded
accusations.
Both the talkers and the doers know this. That is why the
doers so often settle out of court, rather than be tied up in
endless litigation. This is then taken as proof of guilt.
Anyone who wants to build anything can be hit with
costly
delays
by
environmental
activists
demanding
environmental impact reports. It doesn’t matter what the
facts are, the talkers can always demand more information
and object to the analysis.
All this takes time—and more time adds to the costs of
borrowed money, on which interest must be paid, no matter
whether the building for which it was borrowed is being
built
or
the
machines
and
workers
are
idled
while
speculative complaints are being investigated by bureaucrats
who are in no hurry.
Not only the legal system and the regulatory bureaucrats
enable talkers to impose high costs on the doers at low costs
to themselves. So does the talkers’ ready access to the media.
Talkers are usually more articulate than doers, since talk
is their specialty. Moreover, they can stage demonstrations
that the media will not only broadcast but give free air time
for the talkers to make their accusations.
Jesse Jackson has made a science—and a lucrative
occupation—out
of
accusations
of
“racism”
against
businesses. There is no way to prove that you are not a
racist, so the doer’s choice is to pay off the talker or face
losses of customers from either the bad publicity or an
organized boycott.
These kinds of incentives and constraints help explain a
strange anomaly that many have noticed—big corporations

278
ever wonder why?
contributing
much
more
to
left-wing
causes
than
to
conservative or libertarian causes.
“For every $1.00 major corporations gave to conservative
and free-market groups, they gave $4.61 to organizations
seeking more government,” according to a study by the
Capital Research Center, a Washington think tank.
Why? According to the Capital Research Center: “Many
advocacy groups win corporate funding by threatening
lawsuits
and
boycotts
and
by
petitioning
government
regulatory bodies. Regulatory policies, in particular, give
corporations a built-in incentive to pay-off left-wing activists.”
Talkers cultivate an aura of morally lofty goals, while
depicting
doers
as
mere
selﬁsh
money-grubbers.
But
professional talkers are pretty good at collecting big bucks,
some through legalized extortion and others by creating
huge windfall gains as their building restrictions cause
housing prices to skyrocket.
The talkers’ admirers include people struggling to pay
inﬂated apartment rents and make huge monthly mortgage
payments. Even their victims often admire the talkers more
than the doers.

Liberals and Class
The new trinity among liberal intellectuals is race, class
and gender. Deﬁning any of these terms is not easy, but it is
also not difﬁcult for liberals, because they seldom bother to
deﬁne them at all.
The oldest, and perhaps still the most compelling, of
these concerns is class. In the vision of the left, we are born,
live, and die in a particular class—unless, of course, we give
power to the left to change all that.
The latest statistics seized upon to support this class-
ridden view of America and other Western societies show
that most people in a given part of the income distribution
are the children of other people born into that same part of
the income distribution.
Among men born in families in the bottom 25 percent
of income earners only 32 percent end up in the top half of
the income distribution. And among men born to families
in the top 25 percent in income earners, only 34 percent
end up down in the bottom half.
How startling is that?
More to the point, does this show that people are
trapped in poverty or can coast through life on their
parents’ wealth? Does it show that “society” denies “access”
to the poor?
Could it just possibly show that the kind of values and
behavior which lead a family to succeed or fail are also likely
to be passed on to their children and lead them to succeed
or fail as well? If so, how much can government policy—

280
ever wonder why?
liberal or conservative—change that in any fundamental
way?
One
recent story
attempting to show that upward
mobility is a “myth” in America today nevertheless noted in
passing that many recent immigrants and their children
have had “extraordinary upward mobility.”
If this is a class-ridden society denying “access” to upward
mobility to those at the bottom, why is it that immigrants
can come here at the bottom and then rise to the top?
One obvious reason is that many poor immigrants come
here with very different ambitions and values from that of
poor Americans born into our welfare state and imbued
with notions growing out of attitudes of dependency and
resentments of other people’s success.
The fundamental reason that many people do not rise is
not that class barriers prevent it but that they do not
develop the skills, values and attitudes which cause people
to rise.
The liberal welfare state means they don’t have to and
liberal multiculturalism says they don’t need to change their
values because one culture is just as good as another. In
other words, liberalism is not part of the solution, but part
of the problem.
Racism is supposed to put insuperable barriers in the
path of non-whites anyway, so why knock yourself out trying?
This is another deadly message, especially for the young.
But if immigrants from Korea or India, Vietnamese
refugees, and others can come here and move right on up
the ladder, despite not being white, why are black and white
Americans at the bottom more likely to stay at the bottom?
The
same
counterproductive
and
self-destructive
attitudes toward education, work and ordinary civility found
in many of America’s ghettos can also be found in lower-

281
Social Issues
class British communities. Anyone who doubts it should read
British doctor Theodore Dalrymple’s book Life at the Bottom
about the white lower class communities in which he has
worked.
These
chaotic
and
violence-prone
communities
in
Britain do not have the excuse of racism or a legacy of
slavery.
What
they
do
have
in
common
with
similar
communities in the United States is a similar reliance on the
welfare state and a similar set of intellectuals making excuses
for their behavior and denouncing anyone who wants them
to change their ways.
The
latest
round
of
statistics
emboldens
more
intellectuals to blame “society” for the failure of many
people at the bottom to rise to the top. Realistically, if nearly
a third of people born to families in the bottom quarter of
income earners rise into the top half, that is not a bad
record.
If more were doing so in the past, that does not
necessarily mean that “society” is holding them down more
today. It may easily mean that the welfare state and liberal
ideology both make it less necessary today for them to
change their own behavior.

Liberals and Class: Part II
Someone once deﬁned a social problem as a situation in
which
the
real
world
differs
from
the
theories
of
intellectuals. To the intelligentsia, it follows, as the night
follows the day, that it is the real world that is wrong and
which needs to change.
Having imagined a world in which each individual has
the same probability of success as anyone else, intellectuals
have been shocked and outraged that the real world is
nowhere close to that ideal. Vast amounts of time and
resources have been devoted to trying to ﬁgure out what is
stopping this ideal from being realized—as if there was ever
any reason to expect it to be realized.
Despite all the words and numbers thrown around when
discussing this situation, the terms used are so sloppy that it
is hard even to know what the issues are, much less how to
resolve them.
Back in mid-May, both the New York Times and the Wall
Street Journal had front-page stories about class differences
and class mobility. The Times’ article was the ﬁrst in a long
series that is still going on a month later. Both papers
reached similar conclusions, based on a similar sloppy use
of the word “mobility.”
The Times referred to “the chance of moving up from
one class to another” and the Wall Street Journal referred to
“the odds that a child born in poverty will climb to wealth.”
But the odds or probabilities against something happening
are no measure of whether opportunity exists.

283
Social Issues
Anyone who saw me play basketball and saw Michael
Jordan play basketball when we were both youngsters would
have given odds of a zillion to one that he was more likely
to make the NBA than I was. Does that mean I was denied
opportunity or access, that there were barriers put up
against me, that the playing ﬁeld was not level?
Or did it mean that Michael Jordan—and virtually
everyone else—played basketball a lot better than I did?
A huge literature on social mobility often pays little or
no attention to the fact that different individuals and groups
have different skills, desires, attitudes and numerous other
factors, including luck. If mobility is deﬁned as being free to
move, then we can all have the same mobility, even if some
end up moving faster than others and some of the others do
not move at all.
A car capable of going 100 miles an hour can sit in a
garage all year long without moving. But that does not mean
that it has no mobility.
When each individual and each group trails the long
shadow of their cultural history, they are unlikely even to
want to do the same things, much less be willing to put out
the same efforts and make the same sacriﬁces to achieve the
same goals. Many are like the car that is sitting still in the
garage, even though it is capable of going 100 mph.
So long as each generation raises its own children,
people from different backgrounds are going to be raised
with different values and habits. Even in a world with zero
barriers to upward mobility, they would move at different
speeds and in different directions.
If there is less upward movement today than in the past,
that is by no means proof that external barriers are
responsible. The welfare state and multiculturalism both
reduce the incentives of the poor to adopt new ways of life

284
ever wonder why?
that would help them rise up the economic ladder. The last
thing
the
poor
need
is
another
dose
of
such
counterproductive liberal medicine.
Many comparisons of “classes” are in fact comparisons of
people in different income brackets—but three-quarters of
Americans in the lowest 20 percent move up to the highest
40 percent over time. Yet those who are obsessed with
classes treat people in different brackets as if they were
classes permanently stuck in those brackets.
The New York Times series even makes a big deal about
disparities in income and lifestyle between the rich and the
super-rich. But it is hard to get worked up over the fact that
some poor devil has to make do ﬂying his old propeller-
driven plane, while someone further up the income scale
ﬂies around a mile or two higher in his twin-engine luxury
jet.
Only if you have overdosed on disparities are you likely
to wax indignant over things like that.

Liberals and Class: Part III
Sometimes it seems as if liberals have a genius for
producing
an
unending
stream
of
ideas
that
are
counterproductive for the poor, whom they claim to be
helping. Few of these notions are more counterproductive
than the idea of “menial work” or “dead-end jobs.”
Think about it: Why do employers pay people to do
“menial” work? Because the work has to be done. What
useful purpose is served by stigmatizing work that someone
is going to have to do anyway?
Is emptying bed pans in a hospital menial work? What
would happen if bed pans didn’t get emptied? Let people
stop emptying bed pans for a month and there would be
bigger problems than if sociologists stopped working for a
year.
Having someone who can come into a home to clean
and cook and do minor chores around the house can be a
godsend to someone who is an invalid or who is suffering
the inﬁrmities of age—and who does not want to be put into
an institution. Someone who can be trusted to take care of
small children is likewise a treasure.
Many people who do these kinds of jobs do not have the
education, skills or experience to do more complex kinds of
work. Yet they can make a real contribution to society while
earning money that keeps them off welfare.
Many low-level jobs are called “dead-end jobs” by liberal
intellectuals because these jobs have no promotions ladder.

286
ever wonder why?
But it is superﬁcial beyond words to say that this means that
people in such jobs have no prospect of rising economically.
Many people at all levels of society, including the richest,
have at some point or other worked at jobs that had no
promotions ladder, so-called “dead-end jobs.” The founder
of the NBC network began work as a teenager hawking
newspapers on the streets. Billionaire Ross Perot began with
a paper route.
You don’t get promoted from such jobs. You use the
experience, initiative, and discipline that you develop in
such work to move on to something else that may be wholly
different. People who start out ﬂipping hamburgers at
McDonald’s seldom stay there for a full year, much less for
life.
Dead-end jobs are the kinds of jobs I have had all my
life. But, even though I started out delivering groceries in
Harlem, I don’t deliver groceries there any more. I moved
on
to
other
jobs—most
of
which
have
not
had
any
promotions ladders.
My only ofﬁcial promotion in more than half a century
of working was from associate professor to full professor at
UCLA. But that was really just a pay increase, rather than a
real
promotion,
because
associate
professors
and
full
professors do the same work.
Notions of menial jobs and dead-end jobs may be just
shallow misconceptions among the intelligentsia but they
are
a
deadly
counterproductive
message
to
the poor.
Refusing to get on the bottom rung of the ladder usually
means losing your chance to move up the ladder.
Welfare can give you money but it cannot give you job
experience that will move you ahead economically. Selling
drugs on the streets can get you more money than welfare
but it cannot give you experience that you can put on a job

287
Social Issues
application. And if you decide to sell drugs all your life, that
life can be very short.
Back around the time of the First World War, a young
black man named Paul Williams studied architecture and
then accepted a job as an ofﬁce boy at an architectural ﬁrm.
He agreed to work for no pay, though after he showed up
the company decided to pay him something, after all.
What they paid him would probably be dismissed today
as “chump change.” But what Paul Williams wanted from
that company was knowledge and experience, more so than
money.
He went on to create his own architectural company,
designing everything from churches and banks to mansions
for movie stars—and contributing to the design of the
theme building at Los Angeles International Airport.
The real chumps are those who refuse to start at the
bottom for “chump change.” Liberals who encourage such
attitudes may think of themselves as friends of the poor but
they do more harm than enemies.

The Autism “Spectrum”
When
Billy’s
mother
sees
her
twelve-year-old
son’s
popularity with teammates on his baseball team, she thinks
back to predictions made when he was a pre-schooler that
he would have so much trouble making friends that, among
other things, he would probably never be able to get
married and have children.
It is a little early for Billy to be getting married, but the
predictions have been off by miles so far. Why were such
dire predictions made in the ﬁrst place?
Billy was late in beginning to talk and was supposed to
have been autistic. Once that label had been put on him,
nothing could change the minds of those who saw him that
way.
Contrary evidence from his emotional attachment to a
little girl in his pre-school was dismissed, even though the
two of them were inseparable on the playground—and even
though an inability to form emotional attachments is at the
heart of autism.
There is another kind of dogmatism from people who
are not going to give up on the “autism” label. That is
redeﬁning the word to include a wide range of children who
are said to be on the autism “spectrum.” Billy’s mother
raised a fundamental question that seems to have eluded
many professionals: Would you say that someone who is
near-sighted is on the “blindness spectrum”?
What would we gain by such manipulations of words?
And what would we lose?

289
Social Issues
Blindness, like autism, is a major tragedy. When some
little toddler doesn’t see quite as well as other kids, and may
need glasses, what would be the point of alarming his
parents by saying that he is on the blindness spectrum?
In the decade that has passed since I organized a
support
group
of
parents
of
late-talking
children
in
September 1993, I have heard from literally hundreds of
parents of such children, many of them re-living the anguish
they went through when their children were diagnosed as
autistic.
With the passage of time, it has become obvious that
many of these children are not autistic, any more than Billy
is autistic. Parents who are grateful that the hasty diagnoses
their children received were wrong are also bitter that such
labels were applied so irresponsibly—often by people who
never
set
foot
in
a
medical
school
or
received
any
comparable training that would qualify them to diagnose
autism. But professionals have been wrong as well.
Instead of trying to reduce mistaken diagnoses that
inﬂict needless trauma on parents and often direct children
into
programs
for
autistic
children
that
are
counterproductive for children who are not autistic, the
expansive new concept of an “autism spectrum” provides
wiggle room for those who were wrong, so that they can
avoid having to admit that they were wrong—and avoid
having to stop being wrong.
It is as if people who told you that your little toddler
would need a seeing-eye dog are able to get off the hook
when the passage of time proved them wrong by saying that,
because he now wears glasses, he is still on the blindness
spectrum.
There is another aspect of this that affects the public in
general and the taxpayers in particular. Time and again over

290
ever wonder why?
the past decade, parents have told me that they have been
urged to allow their late-talking children to be labeled
“autistic” so that they would be eligible to get government
money that can be used for speech therapy or whatever else
the child might need.
Against that background, consider the widely publicized
statistics showing an unbelievable rate of increase in autism
in recent years. Is this a real change in the same thing or a
redeﬁnition of words? Worse yet, is this the corrupting effect
of government money intended for children who are
genuinely autistic?
Apparently no one knows the answer. But what is very
disturbing is that such questions are not even on the
agenda.
Studies of highly intelligent children show them to have
many of the characteristics that can get them labeled autistic
if they happen to be late in beginning to speak. For
example, the book Gifted Children by Ellen Winner shows
that such children “often play alone and enjoy solitude,”
have “almost obsessive interests” and “prodigious memories.”
Such characteristics are an open invitation to false
diagnoses of autism by those who are on the irresponsibility
spectrum.

The High Cost of Busybodies
It was gratifying news when fans around the country
volunteered to donate their kidneys to basketball star
Alonzo Mourning, who would otherwise have to cut short
his career because of life-threatening medical problems with
his own kidneys. However, the head of the New York Organ
Donor Network said that it was a shame “that it takes a
personal tragedy of someone famous like Alonzo to raise
awareness” of a need for organ donations when 17 people
on the waiting list die daily.
What is an even bigger shame is that laws block the
supply of organs to people who may be dying needlessly as
a result.
Take the case of Alonzo Mourning and suppose that not
a living soul was willing to give him a kidney. He was going
to have to either give up a $23 million a year career or risk
death by subjecting his kidneys to the stresses of playing.
Suppose the law allowed him to offer half of that amount to
anyone who would sell him a kidney.
Do you doubt that there would be someone willing to
part with a kidney for that kind of money? There might well
have been even more people willing to part with a kidney
than there were.
I happen to know a lady who was born with three
kidneys—and in poverty. Do you think she would have
minded parting with a spare kidney, in order to have a
better life for herself and her children?
With more than 80,000 people on waiting lists for various

292
ever wonder why?
organs, and many dying while waiting, why prevent such
transactions? One reason is that third parties would be
offended.
You know the words and the music: How terrible that the
rich can buy other people’s body parts—and that the poor
are so desperate as to sell.
If you think that you have a right to forbid other people
from making such voluntary transactions, then you are
saying that your delicate sensibilities are more important
than the poverty or even the deaths of other people.
Banning organ sales does nothing to make the poor less
poor. Nor do those 80,000+ people on waiting lists have to
be rich. Three economists have estimated the cost of buying
an organ in a free market at a price well within most
people’s budgets.
Donors
could
collect
the
money
while
living,
in
exchange for permission to remove the organ after their
death. They could also authorize an organ transplant from
a family member already dead.
The trump card of the left is always “the poor.” But, if
our real concern is the poor, the money to pay for them to
receive organ transplants can be paid by others, whether the
government or philanthropic individuals or organizations.
Here as in numerous other cases, what it would cost to
take care of the poor is a small fraction of what it costs to
ﬁnance huge programs that cover—and restrict—everybody.
It is not just the political left that stands in the way of
allowing more organs to be made available through the free
market to those who are dying. An article in the neo-
conservative quarterly The Public Interest argued that non-
proﬁt organizations alone should be allowed to handle any
ﬁnancial transactions if organ sales are permitted.
The fact that some organizations call the money they

293
Social Issues
make “proﬁts” and others do not seems to impress some
people. But one of the biggest non-proﬁt organizations
dealing in organ donations today spends no more than half
the money it takes in on actual organ donations, according
to
Forbes
magazine.
This
non-proﬁt paragon has even
stonewalled the federal government on what they are
spending the rest of the money for.
Like
other
bureaucracies,
the
organ
donation
bureaucracy produces arbitrary rules. These rules have kept
people from getting organ transplants that were available
because they were not available in the particular regions
where they happened to live.
The fundamental problem is not simply how to ration
the existing shortage of organs. The problem is how to
reduce the shortage by getting more organs by lifting the
ban on sales.
People who think that they should be the arbiters of
other people’s destinies are bad enough when they want to
choose winners and losers in industry and commerce. But
when they want to choose who lives and who dies, that is a
little much.

The High Cost of Busybodies:
Part II
A reader wrote recently about his father, who has been a
farmer, but is now ready to retire. His father ﬁgured on
selling his land to get some money for his golden retirement
years. But he found that he cannot get anywhere near the
land’s market value because busybodies have passed laws
that destroy most of that value by restricting the sale of
farmland.
The rationale for such laws is “preserving farmland.”
Think about it. Two of our biggest problems today are
obesity and agricultural surpluses. The last thing we need to
do is keep farmland from being sold to those who want to
use it to build housing, businesses or other things.
Even if we accept, for the sake of argument, the notion
that farmland needs to be preserved in order to serve some
great national interest, the Constitution of the United States
says
that
private
property
cannot
be
taken
by
the
government without just compensation.
When
the
government
destroys
half
the
value
of
someone’s property, that is the same thing economically as
taking half of that property. But, because the farmer is left
owning all his land, judges have let politicians get away with
essentially conﬁscating much of its value without having to
pay any compensation at all.
People who lead crusades to preserve farmland usually
know little about farming and less about economics. Yet they
think that they have a right to prevent other people from

295
Social Issues
making mutually agreeable transactions, when that goes
against the fetishes of third parties.
Busybodies may ﬂatter themselves that they are wiser or
nobler than others—which is perhaps the biggest beneﬁt
from being a busybody—but the Constitution of the United
States says that all citizens are entitled to the equal
protection of the laws.
In other words, people who want to wring their hands
about farmlands or wetlands, or about some obscure toad or
snake, have no more rights than people who don’t care two
cents about such things. It is hard for those who have
presumptions of being the morally anointed to accept that,
but that is what the Constitution says.
Unfortunately, too many judges are ready to fudge or
fake what the Constitution says because they too share the
vision of the anointed. So they downgrade property rights
and let third parties impose their pet notions on others,
using the power of government to violate the rights of those
who do not agree with them.
What makes a lot of the talk about “preserving” or
“saving” farmland or other things as phony as a three-dollar
bill is that the real agenda is often very different—namely,
keeping out people who do not have the income or the
inclination to share the lifestyle of the anointed.
The real reason for preventing farmland from being sold
to those who might build housing on it is that the people
who live in that housing might not be as upscale as those
already living nearby. Developers—heaven forbid—might
build apartments or townhouses in a community where
people live in single-family homes.
In other words, developers might build some of that
“affordable housing” that some people talk so much about
and do so much to prevent.

296
ever wonder why?
The rationale for laws forbidding farmers from selling
their land to whoever wants to buy it is that existing
residents have a right to “preserve the character” of “our
community.” But these lofty words are lying words.
Only sloppy thinking allows sloppy words to pass muster.
There is no such thing as “our community.” Nobody owns
the whole community. Each individual owns his or her own
property—and other individuals have the same right to own
or sell their own property.
If the busybodies want to put their money where their
mouth is, they can buy up the farmland themselves and then
they
can
legitimately
prevent
anybody
from
building
anything on it. But verbal sleight-of-hand is no justiﬁcation
for denying others the same rights that they claim for
themselves.
If there were some way to add up all the costs imposed
by busybodies—on everyone from farmers to people wanting
organ transplants—it would probably be greater than the
national debt.

The High Cost of Busybodies:
Part III
One of the staples of liberal hand-wringing is a need for
“affordable
housing.”
Last
year,
the
standard
liberal
solution—more government spending—was proposed in a
televised speech at the National Press Club in Washington,
in a report billed as a “new vision.”
This year, supply and demand made front-page news in
the New York Times of November 29, 2003: “Apartment Glut
Forces Owners to Cut Rents in Much of U.S.” As apartment
vacancy rates reached an all-time high of 10 percent
nationwide, landlords have been cutting rents, both directly
and by such gimmicks as giving gift certiﬁcates and allowing
so many rent-free months for new tenants.
Buried deep inside the second section of the newspaper
are facts that completely undermine the liberal notion that
high housing costs are a “national crisis” calling for a
“national solution” by the federal government.
Far from being a national crisis of affordable housing,
outrageous rents and astronomical home prices are largely
conﬁned to a relatively few places along the east and west
coasts. Rent per square foot of apartment space in San
Francisco is more than double what it is in Denver, Dallas,
or Kansas City, and nearly three times as high as in
Memphis. Home prices show even greater disparities.
The Times story notes that the difference between
apartment rents in coastal California and those in the rest
of the country is widening. It also refers to cities “where land
is
abundant
but
building
regulations
are
not,” where

298
ever wonder why?
“housing costs were already among the least expensive of
the country’s urban areas.”
Wait a minute. Vacant land is at least as abundant in
coastal California as in places with far lower rents and home
prices. More than half the land in huge San Mateo County,
adjacent to San Francisco, is vacant and is kept that way by
law.
The difference is not in the land but in the politics. The
long-time
dominance
of
liberal
Democrats
from
San
Francisco to Silicon Valley has meant that restrictions on
land
use
have
proliferated and the costs of building
anything have skyrocketed as a result of environmental red
tape, bureaucratic delays, and legal harassment by activists of
various sorts.
The New York Times story refers gingerly to “many cities
on the coasts, where new construction is more difﬁcult” than
in the rest of the country. To put it more bluntly, liberals
have
driven
housing
prices
sky
high
by
forbidding,
restricting, and harassing the building of housing.
In turn, this has meant driving people of modest
incomes out of the communities where they work. Nurses,
teachers and policemen, for example, typically live far away
from places like San Francisco or Silicon Valley, and have to
commute long distances to and from work.
All the while, liberals wring their hands about a lack of
affordable
housing,
about
urban
sprawl,
and
about
congested highways. In their puzzlement about the causes of
all these things, they never think to look in the mirror.
While the Times story noted in passing “the growing gap
between the cost of living in the Northeast and parts of
California and the cost of living almost anywhere else,” it
does not take the next fatal step of connecting the dots.
It is precisely in the places that have been most

299
Social Issues
dominated by liberals for the longest times that housing
costs and other costs of living have been driven up to levels
that force many people out of town and even out of state.
New York and California are losing more of their native-
born populations than any other states and only inﬂuxes of
immigrants help conceal that fact in gross statistics on
population.
It was not always like this. Prior to the 1970s, home
prices in California were comparable to those in the rest of
the country. Today they are more than three times as high.
What happened during the 1970s was the beginning of
the
drastic
restrictions
on
building
pushed
by
liberal
Democrats in general and environmental extremists in
particular.

The High Cost of Busybodies:
Part IV
During the gasoline shortage that began in 1979, motorists
were often waiting in long lines of cars at ﬁlling stations—
sometimes for hours—in hopes of reaching the pump
before the gas ran out. The ways that Ted Kennedy and
Ronald Reagan proposed to deal with this situation speak
volumes about the difference between the left and the right.
Senator Kennedy said: “We must adopt a system of
gasoline rationing without delay,” in “a way that demands a
fair sacriﬁce from all Americans.”
Ronald Reagan said that we must get rid of price
controls on petroleum, so that there won’t be a shortage in
the ﬁrst place. One of his ﬁrst acts after becoming president
was to end federal price controls. Lines at ﬁlling stations
disappeared.
Despite angry outcries from liberals that gas prices would
skyrocket as Big Oil “gouged” the public, in reality prices
came down within months and continued falling for years.
More taxes were piled onto gasoline by the government but
the real cost of the gas itself hit a new low by 1993.
“Fairness” is one of the great mantras of the left. Since
everyone has his own deﬁnition of fairness, that word is a
blank check for the expansion of government power. What
“fairness”
means
in
practice
is
that
third
parties—
busybodies—can prevent mutual accommodations by others.
Busybodies not only prevent farmers from selling their
land to people who would build housing on it, they prevent
people on waiting lists for organ transplants from paying

301
Social Issues
someone to donate a kidney or a liver that can be the
difference between life and death.
Like Ted Kennedy, the organ donation bureaucracy is
preoccupied with imposing their notions of fairness on
people who are on waiting lists. And, like Senator Kennedy,
they have no interest in freeing people to reduce or
eliminate
the
shortage, which could make fairness in
rationing a moot issue.
Such thinking—or lack of thinking—is not new. Back in
the 18th century, Adam Smith wrote of politicians who
devote “a most unnecessary attention” to things that would
work themselves out better in a free market.
What is conventionally called “the free market” is in
reality
free
people
making
their
own
mutual
accommodations with other free people. It is one of the
many tactical mistakes of conservatives to use an impersonal
phrase to describe very personal choices and actions by
people when they are not hamstrung by third parties.
When the issue is posed as “the free market” versus
“compassion for the poor,” which do you think is likely to
win out? Our bloated and ever-growing welfare state—from
which the poor get a very small share, by the way—answers
that question.
The fatal attraction of government is that it allows
busybodies to impose decisions on others without paying any
price themselves. That enables them to act as if there were
no price, even when there are ruinous prices—paid by
others.
Millions of people’s lives are made worse in innumerable
ways, in order that a relative handful of busybodies can feel
important and superior. Artiﬁcially high land prices in those
places where busybodies reign politically, based on land use

302
ever wonder why?
restrictions, make housing costs a crushing burden on
people of average incomes.
Some of the busybodies imagine that they are preventing
“over-crowding” or “trafﬁc congestion.” But what they are
really doing is moving the crowding somewhere else, since
people have to live somewhere, regardless.
As for trafﬁc congestion, that is made needlessly worse
because of long-distance commuting by those people whose
incomes will not permit them to live in the artiﬁcially more
expensive
communities
where
they
work.
It
is
not
uncommon in liberal California communities for many
commuters to spend 3 or 4 hours a day in their cars,
ﬁghting trafﬁc—all for the greater glory of those with the
mantra of “open space.”
Because
of
the
innumerable
problems
caused
by
busybodies who devote “a most unnecessary attention” to
things that would be better without them, the rest of us
should devote
some
very necessary
attention to these
busybodies and their sloppy arguments.

“Partial Truth” Abortion
Now that a federal judge has ruled that the law banning
“partial birth abortion” is unconstitutional, there is certain
to be much media coverage of the issue as it makes its way
up the appellate chain to the Supreme Court of the United
States. How that will turn out legally is anybody’s guess but
the process will reveal at least as much about the media as it
does about the law.
Many in the media resent any suggestion that they are
either politically biased or that journalists’ personal views
stop them from doing a good professional job of accurately
reporting the news. The way the issue of partial birth
abortion has been reported—or not reported—gives the lie
to such protests.
Whether you or they are for or against abortion in
general or this speciﬁc procedure in particular, if the much
proclaimed “public’s right to know” means anything, it
should mean that the readers and viewers should be told
what a partial birth abortion is. Much of the liberal media
fails that simple test completely.
Some in the media use only the opaque expression “late-
term abortion,” while others refer to the fact that some
people call it a late-term abortion and others call it a partial
birth abortion. But all this reporting about semantics is not
telling the public just what it is that is being discussed in the
ﬁrst place.
Neither the defenders nor the critics are talking about
semantics. They are talking about what is actually done—

304
ever wonder why?
and that is what a major part of the mainstream media
refuses to tell us.
Even a quality news program like The News Hour with Jim
Lehrer featured a debate earlier this year, with both sides
represented—at the end of which the viewer still had no way
to learn just what is a partial birth abortion or a “late-term
abortion,” as the liberals prefer to call it.
What happens is that a baby who is in the process of
being born, with part of his body outside his mother’s body
and part still inside, is deliberately killed. One of the
methods of doing this is to have his brains sucked out of his
head by a device.
Although this is called an abortion, the late Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan said that it seemed too much like
infanticide to him. What keeps it from being murder, as far
as the law is concerned, is that part of the baby’s body is still
inside the mother, so that this procedure can be classiﬁed
as an abortion.
The American Medical Association some years ago said
that there is no medical necessity for such an unusual
procedure. Its purpose is not medical but legal: to keep the
doctor and the mother from being indicted for killing a
newborn baby.
Whether you are for or against this, you ought to know
what you are for or against. But there are newspapers, TV
programs, and whole networks that you could watch for
years without ever ﬁnding out.
They have decided what you can be allowed to know.
That is the real problem of media bias. If they report the
news straight and let you make up your own mind, then
what the journalists themselves do in the voting booth on
election day is their own business.
The partial birth abortion issue is just one of those issues

305
Social Issues
in which major parts of the media ﬁlter out facts that might
lead you to take a position different from the one the
journalists have.
When a white racist commits an atrocity against some
black person, that is headline news across the country. But
when a black racist does exactly the same thing to some
white person, that is not likely to get the same publicity, if it
is reported at all.
The liberal view that white racism is a major problem
and a major explanation for other social problems is not
allowed to be undermined by news which might suggest that
racism is a curse of the whole human species. You cannot
even assess where this racism is worse when only one kind
of it is reported by much of the media.
Similarly, atrocities committed against homosexuals are
big
news
but
atrocities
committed
by
homosexuals,
including atrocities against children, are unlikely to see the
light of day in much of the media. Neither is any statistical
information on how homosexuals differ from the general
population in life span, diseases or costs to the taxpayers for
dealing with their diseases.
Filtering and spinning are not reporting. The public has
a right to know that, but that right is too often aborted.

Lying about Yosemite
Yosemite National Park is one of the beauties of nature
that has brought me back every year for more than 20
consecutive years. But, in recent years especially, there seem
to be two Yosemites—the one discussed in the media and
the one I see with my own eyes.
On the ﬁrst day of my visit this year—June 6, 2004—
there appeared one of the standard propaganda pieces on
Yosemite in the San Francisco Chronicle, illustrated with the
standard propaganda photographs.
They say the camera doesn’t lie but it can do some
serious misleading. A standard lie of the environmental
extremists is that Yosemite is “over-crowded” and choked
with bumper-to-bumper trafﬁc. True to form, the San
Francisco Chronicle shows a line of cars and a couple of
pedestrians scooting between them.
The pedestrians ought to give a clue as to what is wrong
with this picture. The cars are not moving along a street or
highway. They are stopped and lining up. Cars get stopped
at the entrance to the park to pay a fee to get in and they
get stopped by road construction delays inside the park.
My wife and I were among those stopped for about 15
minutes at a road repair site. When trafﬁc is stopped dead
in its tracks for 15 minutes, you can collect quite a backup
almost
anywhere.
In
Yosemite,
you
can
also
collect
misleading photographs to be used to advance the political
agendas of environmental extremists.
Once past the construction site, the trafﬁc in Yosemite

307
Social Issues
ﬂowed far more smoothly than it does in San Francisco and
parking spaces were far easier to ﬁnd. For three days in a
row, we had lunch at the popular Ahwahnee Hotel in
Yosemite Valley and each time we had our choice of parking
spaces in the main parking lot.
If anything, the trafﬁc was somewhat lighter than it has
been in some past years. We also had no trouble ﬁnding
parking spaces at Glacier Point, Curry Village or any other
place in the park where we decided to stop.
Why then the campaign of lies?
Groups like the Sierra Club and other environmental
zealots have for years been trying to reduce the number of
people visiting our national parks. They seem to think that
our national parks are their own private property, and that
it would be best if the unwashed masses are kept out as
much as possible, leaving the backpackers to enjoy these
parks in seclusion.
Like other special interest groups, the environmental
extremists have a disproportionate inﬂuence on government
ofﬁcials, including in this case those who run the National
Park Service. One of their coups has been to get the gas
station in Yosemite Valley removed. The next nearest gas
station is 13 miles outside the park and it charges more than
$3 a gallon.
Was the gas station in Yosemite Valley spoiling some
natural scenery? Far from it. It was part of a built-up area
that included motel buildings, restaurants, and a gigantic
parking lot. That parking lot remains, with something like a
hundred cars on it and next to it is a very unattractive tent
city.
Esthetics had nothing to do with removing the gas
station.
The
environmental
zealots
know
that
the
automobile is the key to ordinary people having access to

308
ever wonder why?
the national parks. The more hassles are created for people
driving automobiles, the more people will be discouraged
from coming, advancing the goal of reserving the national
parks for environmentalists and for those who live the
lifestyle that the environmentalists approve of.
The essence of bigotry is denying other people the same
free choices you have. Many of those who call themselves
environmentalists could more accurately be called green
bigots.
The automobile allows people to see Yosemite in their
own ways and at their own pace, which is especially
important for the elderly and for families with small
children. But the park bureaucrats and the green bigots
want to force people out of their cars and regiment them
into
buses,
to
be
taken
when,
where
and
how
the
bureaucrats decide.
The
restrictionists
love
to
talk
about
the
“fragile”
environment and “saving” it for “future generations.” No
deﬁnition of “fragile” is offered. What this amounts to is
saying that future generations of green bigots can keep out
future generations of ordinary citizens and taxpayers.

Growing Old
Random thoughts about growing old:
Despite the problems that come with aging, I would not
be a teenager again for $1,000 a day plus expenses.
I never really felt old until my younger brother retired.
This is the period of life that Disraeli referred to as
“anecdotage.”
Nothing is more ridiculous than discounts for senior
citizens, when people in their sixties have far more wealth
than people in their thirties.
These are my declining years. I decline all sorts of
invitations and opportunities.
People who talk about “earlier and simpler times” are
usually too young to remember those times—and how
complicated they were.
An old body is like an old automobile, where the brakes
need repairing today, the steering wheel next month and
the transmission after that.
Looking at old photographs makes it hard for me to
believe
that
I
was
ever
that
thin
physically.
And
remembering some of the things I did in those days makes
it hard to believe that I was ever that thin mentally.
You would think that young people, with decades of life
ahead of them, would look further ahead and plan for the
future more so than older people. But it is just the opposite.
The young tend to be oriented to right now, while old
timers
think
about
the
future
of
their
children
and

310
ever wonder why?
grandchildren, and worry about where the country is
heading in the years ahead.
They say you can’t teach an old dog new tricks. But
maybe the old dog already knows about tricks that only
seem new to the young—and doesn’t think much of those
tricks.
When I was young, age forty seemed so ancient that I
couldn’t imagine what it would be like to be forty. Now I
can barely remember what it was like to be forty.
Age gives you an excuse for not being very good at
things that you were not very good at when you were young.
An old saying is that we are once a man and twice a
child. The difference is that we more or less automatically
have parents to look after us the ﬁrst time, but whether we
will have someone to show us the same love and care when
we are at the other end of life is another story.
It is amazing—and appalling—how many people who are
walking with the elderly try to pull them along faster than
they want to go, or perhaps faster than they are able to go.
What does this accomplish, except to create needless tension
and stress? And how urgent is it to save a few seconds here
and there?
When someone had to tell me that I was on a topless
beach, I knew I was getting old.
Like so many people who are getting on in years, I am
ﬁne—so long as I remember that I am not ﬁne.
The old are not really smarter than the young. It is just
that we have already made the mistakes that the young are
about to make, so we already know that these are mistakes
and what the consequences are.
Some people age like ﬁne wine and others just turn into
vinegar.
Someone asked a man in his seventies at what age he

311
Social Issues
started to lose interest in women. “I don’t know,” he said.
“But when it happens, I will tell you.”
I urge my fellow old-timers to write their memoirs, just
so that “revisionist” historians will not be able to get away
with lying about the past.
More than once, after I woke up some morning feeling
like I was twenty again, I did something that ended up with
me on crutches or otherwise being reminded emphatically
by my body that I was deﬁnitely not twenty again. Women
may lie about their age to other people but men lie about
their age to themselves.
When old-time Dodger pitching ace Don Newcombe was
near the end of his career, someone asked him if he could
still throw as hard as ever. “Yes, I throw the ball as hard as
ever,” he said. “But it just takes longer to get to the plate.”
Oliver Wendell Holmes said it best: “If I could think that
I had sent a spark to those who come after I should be ready
to say Goodbye.”

April Fools’ Party
“This is your eyewitness news team, reporting from the
big, posh April Fools’ Day party at the Dewdrop Inn out at
Moot Point, overlooking Dyer Straits. Everybody who is
anybody is here.
“There’s the karate expert Marshall Artz, timber heiress
Lotta Wood, famous meteorologist Cole Winter, the British
boxing sensation Battler Hastings, and the gossip columnist
N.U. Endo. There’s insurance magnate Justin Case, the
famous
efﬁciency
expert
Ben
Dunn
Wright,
and
Ivy
University’s dean of students, N. ‘Loco’ Prentiss.
“Let’s talk with one of the guests. Excuse me, sir, what is
your name?”
“Chester Mann.”
“Are you related to that famous social justice advocate?”
“N.V. Mann? Yes.”
“What kind of work do you do?”
“I run an automobile junk yard.”
“What’s the name of it? You might as well give it a free
plug.”
“Oedipus Wrecks.”
“How are you enjoying the party?”
“Frankly, I am here only because my wife dragged me
here.”
“You don’t like the party?”
“As Robinson Crusoe said, ‘I don’t like this atoll.’”
“As Napoleon said, ‘What’s your beef, Wellington?’”
“Oh, just the food, the drinks, and the people.”

313
Social Issues
“Well, let me move along. Here’s the famous author
I. Wright, whose latest best-seller is a steamy novel about
India titled Whose Sari Now? Incidentally, you look great in
those long, ﬂowing robes. Were you born in India?”
“No, Brooklyn.”
“But I’ll bet you did a lot of research in India?”
“Yes, mostly in the Punjab.”
“What is it like to live in a country completely different
from the Western world?”
“Actually Indians are not cut off from the Western world.
For example, a friend of mine in the Punjab is obsessed with
Western classical music.”
“Likes his Beethoven and Bach, does he?”
“He’s really obsessed with Haydn. He’s a Haydn Sikh.”
“Thank you. Let’s go on to talk with some more guests.
Here’s the famous psychiatrist N.D. Nile, that sweet-looking
actress Candy Barr and her sister Minnie who, I believe, is
involved in hotels.”
“Yes, I am. I have also had some hostel takeovers.”
“Not everyone has been successful, of course. Over there
is the well-known architect whose ﬁrm just went bankrupt—
Frank Lloyd Wrong. Let’s go over and see what he has to
say.
“Sir, this is your eyewitness news team, checking up on
how you are doing.”
“Terrible! I am suffering from hardening of the arteries,
curvature of the spine, cirrhosis of the liver. . .”
“Rumpole of the Bailey?”
“Absolutely.”
“I understand that you are also an artist.”
“Well, architecture is itself an art, as well as a science.
But I also paint pictures, if that is what you mean.”

314
ever wonder why?
“Yes, I remember a famous painting of yours showing a
Rolex sitting on a half-eaten piece of watermelon.”
“Yes, I called it ‘Watch on the Rind.’”
“You are really on the cutting edge. Are all the people in
your set like that?”
“No, actually. My uncle’s wife, for example, is the most
conservative person I know.”
“Really?”
“Yes, I call her my status quo auntie.”
“How conservative is she?”
“Once I asked her if she believed in gun control and she
said: ‘Yes! You’ve got to control those things or else the shot
will go wild and miss the guy you are trying to blast!’”
“Over here is the famous weatherman, Cole Winter. He’s
usually pretty well informed, since he is on the same
program as the news. Cole, what’s the latest news?”
“A leopard was spotted in midtown Manhattan today!”
“That’s not news. Leopards are spotted everywhere.
Anyhow, it is time to return you to the studio. Happy April
Fools’ Day!”

PART VI
EDUCATION ISSUES


Choosing a College
When a student at New York University committed suicide
recently, it was the 6th suicide at that same institution this
year. The suicide of someone in the prime of life, and
getting an education that promises a bright future, should
be much rarer than it is. But NYU is not unique by any
means.
Back when I taught at UCLA, one morning on my way
to my ofﬁce I saw an attractive and well-dressed young
woman lying quietly in the bushes next to the building,
apparently asleep. But the presence of police nearby alerted
me to the fact that something was wrong. She had jumped
from the roof of the building to her death.
When I taught at Cornell, it averaged a suicide a year.
Selecting a college for a young man or young woman to
attend is more than a matter of looking up the rankings and
seeing where the chances of admission look good. How the
atmosphere of the college matches the personality of the
individual can mean far more than anything in the college
catalogue or the pretty brochures.
Some young people are not yet ready for coed living
arrangements and the pressures and dangers that can lead
to. Some are at risk on a campus with widespread drug
usage. Some students can get very lonely when they just
don’t ﬁt in.
Sometimes there is no one to turn to and sometimes the
adults
they
turn
to
on
campus
have
nothing
but
psychobabble to offer.

318
ever wonder why?
Late adolescence and early adulthood are among the
most dangerous times in people’s lives, when one foolish
decision can destroy everything for which parents and
children have invested time and efforts and hopes for years.
Too many know-it-alls in the high schools and colleges
urge or warn parents to get out of the picture and let the
child decide where to go and what to do. A high school
counselor once told me that I would be “kept informed” of
the decisions that she and my daughter were making as to
which colleges to apply to.
Apparently there are enough sheep-like parents these
days to let “experts” take control of their children at a
critical juncture in their lives. But these “experts” suffer no
consequences if their bright ideas lead some young person
into disaster. It is the parents who will be left to pick up the
pieces.
Too often parents are pushed to the sideline in the
name of the child’s need for freedom and autonomy. But
what is presented to parents as a need to set their children
free as young adults is too often in fact abandoning those
children to the control of others. The stakes are too high to
let that happen.
From the moment a student sets foot on a college
campus, a whole apparatus of indoctrination can go into
motion, in the name of “orientation,” so as to mold each
young mind to politically correct attitudes on everything
from sex to “social justice.”
Colleges used to say that their job was to teach the
student how to think, not what to think. Today, most
colleges are in the business of teaching the student what to
think or “feel.”
Many colleges—even many of the most prestigious—lack
any real curriculum, but they seldom lack an ideological

319
Education Issues
agenda. Too often they use students as guinea pigs for
fashionable notions about how to live their own lives.
As for education, students can go through many colleges
selecting courses cafeteria-style, and graduate in complete
ignorance of history, science, economics, and many other
subjects, even while clutching a costly diploma with a big
name on it.
Students who make more astute choices from the
cafeteria of courses can still get a good education at the
same colleges where their classmates get mush. But seldom
is there any curriculum that ensures a good education, even
at prestigious colleges.
Parents need to stay involved in the process of choosing
a college. They need to visit college campuses before
making application decisions—and remember to take their
skepticism with them. They also need to ask blunt questions
and not take smooth generalities for an answer.
An indispensable guide to the atmosphere on various
college campuses, and the presence or absence of a real
curriculum, is a 971-page book titled Choosing the Right
College. It is head-and-shoulders above all the other college
guides.
Among other things, it tells you which colleges have a
real curriculum, rather than a cafeteria of courses, as well as
the kind of atmosphere each campus has. The latter is
always important and sometimes can even be a matter of life
and death.

The Idiocy of “Relevance”
One of the many fashionable idiocies that cause American
schools to produce results inferior to those in other
countries is the notion that education must be “relevant” to
the students—and especially to minority students with a
different subculture.
It is absurd to imagine that students can determine in
advance what will turn out to be relevant to their progress
as adults. Relevance is not something you can predict. It is
something you discover after the fact—and after you have
left school and are out in the real world.
When I was in high school, I was puzzled when a girl I
knew told me that she was studying economics, because I
had no idea what that was. It never occurred to me to take
economics, so it was certainly not something that seemed
relevant to me at the time.
Had someone told me then that I would someday spend
more than 20 years as an economist at a think tank, I
wouldn’t have known what they were talking about, because
I had no idea what a think tank was either.
When students are going through medical school, they
may not see the relevance of all the things they are taught
there. But someday they may have a patient at death’s door,
whose life may depend on how well the doctor remembers
something he was taught in medical school—and whose
relevance may not have been all that clear to him at the
time.
People who have already been out in the real world,

321
Education Issues
practicing for years whatever their particular specialty might
be, have some basis for determining which things are
relevant enough to go into a curriculum to teach those who
follow. The idea that students can determine relevance in
advance is one of the many counterproductive notions to
come out of the 1960s.
The
fetish
of
“relevance”
has
been
particularly
destructive in the education of minority students at all levels.
If the students do not see immediately how what they are
studying applies to their lives in the ghetto, then it is
supposed to be irrelevant.
How are these students ever going to get out of the
poverty of the ghetto unless they learn to function in ways
that are more economically productive? Even if they spend
all their lives in the ghetto, if they are to spend them in such
roles as doctors or engineers, then they are going to have to
study things that are not peculiar (“relevant”) to the ghetto.
Worst of all, those teachers who teach minority students
things like math and science, whose relevance the students
do not see, may encounter resistance and resentment, while
those teachers who pander to minority students by turning
their courses into rap sessions and ethnic navel-gazing
exercises capture their interest and allegiance.
Some educators embrace relevance out of expediency,
rather than conviction or confusion. It is the path of least
resistance, though that path seldom leads upward. By the
time minority students get out into the real world and
discover
the
uselessness
of
what
they
were
taught in
“relevant” courses, it is too late for them—but they are no
longer the teachers’ responsibility.
Even as a graduate student in economics, I did not see
the relevance of a little article by Friedrich Hayek, titled
“The Use of Knowledge in Society,” that was assigned

322
ever wonder why?
reading in Milton Friedman’s course at the University of
Chicago. A few years later, however, I was beginning my own
teaching career and had to teach a course on the Soviet
economy—about which I knew nothing.
As I read through many studies of the Soviet economy in
preparation for teaching my course, and was puzzled by all
the strange and counterproductive economic practices in
the Soviet Union, it then began to dawn on me that what
Hayek had said applied to these otherwise inexplicable
Soviet actions. For the ﬁrst time, years later, I saw the
relevance of what he had written.
Fast forward another 15 years. I was now writing a book
that would be a landmark in my career. It was titled
Knowledge and Decisions—a 400-page book building on what
Hayek had said in a little essay.
Just a few years ago, I was stopped on the streets of San
Francisco by a young black man who shook my hand and
told me that reading Knowledge and Decisions had changed
his life. He had seen the relevance of these ideas—at a
younger age than I had.

Julian Stanley and
Bright Children
Bright children and their parents have lost a much-needed
friend with the death of Professor Julian Stanley of Johns
Hopkins University. For decades he not only researched and
ran programs for intellectually gifted students, he became
their leading advocate in books and articles.
His efforts were very much needed. Unusually bright
children are too often treated like stepchildren by the
American educational system.
While all sorts of special classes and special schools are
created for various categories of students, there is resistance
and even hostility to the idea of creating special classes or
schools for intellectually gifted students.
Not only are such elite public schools as New York’s
Stuyvesant High School and the Bronx High School of
Science rare, they are under political pressure to admit
students on other bases besides pure academic achievement.
So is San Francisco’s Lowell High School, where ethnic
“balance” affects admissions decisions.
While it is well known that the average American student
does poorly on international tests, what is not so well known
is that gifted American students lag particularly far behind
their foreign counterparts.
Professor
Julian
Stanley
pointed
out
that
the
performance level of gifted American students “is well below
both the level of their own potential and the achievement
levels of previous U.S. generations.” In other words, our

324
ever wonder why?
brightest kids have been going downhill even faster than our
average kids.
Part of the reason is undoubtedly the general dumbing
down of American education since the 1960s but what has
also
been
happening
since
the
1960s
has
been
a
preoccupation with the “self-esteem” of mediocre students
and a general hostility to anything that might be construed
as intellectual elitism.
Even classes in so-called “gifted and talented” programs
are too often just more of the same level of work as other
students do, or trendy projects, but not work at a greater
intellectual depth.
Sometimes, as Professor Stanley has pointed out, it is just
busy work, in order to keep bright students from being
bored and restless when classes are being taught at a pace
far too slow for very intelligent youngsters.
It is not at all uncommon for the brightest students to
become problem students in their boredom and frustration,
to
develop
negative
attitudes
towards
education
and
society—and to fail to develop their inborn talents.
Julian Stanley did not just criticize existing practices. He
created special programs for unusually bright high school
students on weekends and during the summer at Johns
Hopkins University. The success of these programs has
inspired
similar
programs
at
Purdue
University
and
elsewhere.
Such
programs
have
not
only
produced
academic
beneﬁts,
the
gifted
students
in
such
programs
have
expressed an almost pathetic gratitude for ﬁnally being in a
setting where they are comfortable with their peers and are
viewed positively by their teachers.
In regular public school classrooms, these gifted students
have been too often resented by their classmates and their

325
Education Issues
teachers alike. Some teachers have seemed glad to be able
to catch them in occasional mistakes.
Given the low academic records of most public school
teachers, it is hard to imagine their being enthusiastic about
kids so
obviously brighter than they were—and often
brighter than they are. No small part of the gross neglect of
gifted students in our public schools is the old story of the
dog in the manger.
Julian
Stanley
made
a
unique
contribution to the
development of gifted children, both directly through his
program at Johns Hopkins and indirectly through his
research
and
advocacy.
Fortunately,
he
is
survived by
collaborators in these efforts, such as Professors Camilla
Persson
Benbow
and
David
Lubinski
of
Vanderbilt
University.
The effort must go on, both to stop the great waste of
gifted students, whose talents are much needed in the larger
society, and for the humane purpose of relieving the
frustration and alienation of youngsters whose only crime is
being born with more intellectual potential than most of
those around them.

For What Purpose?
It has been said that, when Ronald Reagan was governor of
California, someone told him that admitting students to the
University of California on individual performance alone
could mean that all the students at Berkeley might be Asian
Americans.
“So what?” was the Gipper’s response.
Like
many
other
Reagan
remarks,
it
cut
through
mountains of nonsense and knocked over numerous houses
of cards that keep the intelligentsia wringing their hands. A
classic example is a recent New York Times story that said:
“Asians gain when afﬁrmative action ends. Other minorities
don’t. What’s fair?”
Let’s go back to square one. Why do universities exist in
the ﬁrst place? Is it to parcel out beneﬁts to different racial
or ethnic groups? If so, why not just give them money? Do
universities exist to be fair—whatever that means? If fair
means equal chances or proportional representation, then
why not make admissions a lottery?
All too many people in college admissions ofﬁces talk
and act as if their job is to hand out goodies to those who
seem most deserving, in terms of how well they used
whatever particular opportunities they happen to have had.
In other words, if student A went to a top-notch high
school and scored 1500 on the SATs, while student B went
to a mediocre high school and scored 1300, then student B
may be admitted and student A denied admission if the little

327
Education Issues
tin gods in the admissions ofﬁce decide that B made better
use of his limited opportunities.
You
couldn’t
make
up
anything
as
silly
as
this.
Educational institutions do not exist to reward people for
their past but to prepare them for the future. The taxpayers
and donors who are supporting these institutions with their
hard-earned money are doing so to beneﬁt the society that
these graduates will be serving, not to allow bureaucrats to
hand out pork barrel beneﬁts to individuals or groups.
In all the swirl of words around the issue of afﬁrmative
action in college and university admissions—including the
endlessly repeated mantra of “diversity”—there is seldom a
single word about serving the public by admitting those who
have the academic skills to put the educational resources to
the best use.
If a disproportionate number of those who can master
the skills that educational institutions provide are Asian
Americans, then as the Gipper said, “So what?”
Do you want to ﬂy in planes ﬂown by the best qualiﬁed
pilots available or in planes ﬂown by quota pilots or by pilots
whose
life
stories
were
most
appealing
to
those
on
admissions committees? If you are going to have heart
surgery, do you want the best surgeon you can get or do you
want a surgeon who had to overcome a lot of handicaps just
to make it through medical school?
Would you be offended to have your life saved by
someone who had easily become the best surgeon around
because he was born in the lap of privilege and always had
the ﬁnest education available, regardless of how much it
cost? Would it bother you if he was Asian American or
even—heaven help us—a WASP?
Institutions and occupations exist for a purpose—and
that purpose is not to provide a statistical picture that is

328
ever wonder why?
pleasing
for
those
people
who
are
preoccupied
with
statistical pictures. Food and shelter, housing and health, life
and death, are among the many things that depend on how
well institutions function and how well people do their jobs.
These things are too important to sacriﬁce so that
busybodies can feel important directing other people’s lives.
Indeed, the freedom of those other people is too important
to be sacriﬁced for the sake of third parties’ vanity.
Anyone who is serious about wanting to help minority
young people must know that the place to start is at
precisely the other end of the educational process. That
means beginning in the earliest grades teaching reading,
math and other mental skills on which their future depends.
But that would mean clashing with the teachers’ unions and
their
own
busybody
agenda
of
propaganda
and
psychological manipulation in the classrooms.
The path of least resistance is to give minority youngsters
a lousy education and then admit them to college by quotas.
With a decent education, they wouldn’t need the quotas.

School Performances
Everyone knows that black students in general do not
perform as well in school as white students, much less Asian
American students. But few realize how painfully large the
gap is. Even fewer know that there are particular black
schools, even in low-income neighborhoods, where students
perform above the national average.
Discussing racial gaps in education is taboo in some
quarters. But this subject is discussed deeply and thoroughly
in a new book titled No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in
Learning by Abigail Thernstrom of the Manhattan Institute
and Stephan Thernstrom of Harvard. They are also the
authors of the best book on race relations—America in Black
and White—so there are high expectations for this new book.
No Excuses lives up to those expectations. If you read just
one book about American education all year, this should be
the book. It not only goes into the causes and cures of racial
disparities in education, in the process it punctures many of
the fads, dogmas, and pious hypocrisies of the education
establishment.
First, the existing gap: Black high school students
graduate an average of four years behind white students in
academic skills. In other words, the high school diplomas
they receive are given—not earned—for a junior high
school education.
The excuses for this range across the spectrum from
poverty to racism and even innate lack of ability. Yet none
of these excuses stands up to the facts.

330
ever wonder why?
As the Thernstroms show, there are some schools where
the students are equally poor and equally black, where test
scores are outstanding. Moreover, such schools seldom get
any more money than the schools that are failing.
Some of the most heavily ﬁnanced schools are doing
miserably. Even spending $17,000 per pupil, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, was still left with a huge gap between the test
scores of its black and white students. In fact, black students
in Cambridge scored lower than other black students in
nearby communities with less than half as much spending
per pupil.
Those who believe that money is the answer are not
going to be stopped by anything so mundane as facts. To
many in politics and in the media—and to everyone in the
teachers’ unions—“improving” the schools means spending
more money on them. But what is called “investing” in
better education could more accurately be called pouring
money down a bottomless pit.
Don’t suburban schools with high levels of spending do
better than other schools with lower levels of spending?
Usually, yes. But olympic-sized swimming pools and tennis
courts do not make you any smarter. Nor do generous-sized
parking lots for afﬂuent students with fancy cars.
No Excuses does not limit its comparisons to blacks and
whites. In some cases, the educational performance of Asian
American students exceeds that of whites by more than the
performance of whites exceeds that of blacks.
There
is
nothing
mysterious
about
any
of
these
differences. Asian students put more time into study and
homework and watch less television. They behave themselves
in class. Their parents don’t tolerate low grades—or even
medium grades.
In those rare black schools where the students follow a

331
Education Issues
pattern
similar
to
that
of
Asian
Americans,
they
get
educational results similar to those of Asian Americans.
What about the role of the schools in all this?
American schools waste an incredible amount of time on
fads, fun and propaganda for political correctness. Those
students who come from homes with highly educated
parents, or parents whose values stress education, get a lot
of what they need outside of school, as well as making the
most of what they get within the school.
It is those children who do not come from these kinds
of homes whose futures are forfeited when class time is
frittered away. Low-income black students are the biggest
losers when educators fail to educate and when courts create
so many legal obstacles to enforcing school discipline that a
handful of classroom clowns or hoodlums can prevent
everyone else from getting a decent education.
More money won’t cure any of this.

School Performances: Part II
My son learned fractions and decimals when he was in the
ﬁrst grade. He learned them from me as I drove him to
school on the Los Angeles freeways, where he became
curious about the signs that said things like “Wilshire
Boulevard 21⁄4 miles.”
At the private school he attended, he never went near a
math class because that was optional and he found the math
they taught too boring. Yet, if test scores for that school were
collected, his would have helped the school look impressive
in math and some might conclude that they did a great job
of teaching the subject.
It is a completely different ball game for some kid in the
ghetto attending a public school. If his teachers don’t do a
decent job of teaching math, chances are that he won’t
know much math.
Among the many misleading statistics on education are
test scores comparing results from afﬂuent suburban schools
and poorer schools in the inner city. The results may well
be valid in the sense that there really is a huge difference in
educational achievement. But they may be very misleading
as to why.
Schools in both places may be wasting vast amounts of
time on non-academic fads and activities. But the children
from homes with educated and afﬂuent parents will learn a
lot before going to school and outside of school. That will
show up on the tests.
The schools in poorer neighborhoods may not be that

333
Education Issues
much worse, in themselves, but they are the only places
where many poor children with poorly educated parents
have any opportunity to get an education. When these
particular schools waste time, they are dooming most of
their students to a life of poverty.
Homes matter—and they matter especially when the
schools are not doing their job of educating the children.
Too many suburban parents may be too easily satisﬁed
that their schools are doing a good job because the students
there score in the top 10 or 20 percent on standardized
tests. Suburban schools may look good compared to inner
city
schools,
but
both
look
bad
compared
to
their
counterparts in other countries.
The fact that schools in high-income areas get better
results than schools in low-income areas has allowed the
education establishment to escape responsibility for their
own failings by saying that it all depends on the economic
and educational levels of the home. It does not.
With all the abysmal results in ghetto schools in general,
there are nevertheless particular schools serving low-income
minority students with test results well above the national
average. What is the difference?
The biggest difference is that successful schools teach in
ways that are directly the opposite from what is fashionable
in the public schools in general. Successful schools spend
their time on the three R’s, they teach reading with phonics,
they memorize multiplication tables, and—above all—they
have discipline, so that a few disruptive students are not able
to prevent all the others from being educated.
Despite the self-serving claim from the teachers’ unions
that successful schools for minorities skim the cream from
the public schools, often these successful charter schools or
other private schools admit students on the basis of a lottery,

334
ever wonder why?
so that those they take in are no better than those they
don’t.
The students they admit are just a lot better after they
have been educated where education is the top priority.
One of the schools I researched years ago that impressed
me the most—in fact, moved me to the verge of tears—was
a ghetto school in a run-down building, located in a
neighborhood that caused a friend to say that I was
“brave”—he probably meant foolhardy—to park a car on the
street there.
The children in that school scored above the national
average on tests. In their classrooms, they spoke the king’s
English, behaved like little ladies and gentlemen, and made
thoughtful answers to the questions they were asked. Yet
these kids came from poor homes, often broken homes, and
many were on welfare.
You can’t buy that quality of education for any amount
of money. It has to be created by people who have their
priorities straight. Don’t tell me it can’t be done when I
have seen it done with my own eyes.

School Performances: Part III
Many of the pronouncements coming from those who run
our public schools range from fallacies to frauds. The new
book No Excuses by Abigail and Stephan Thernstrom exposes
a number of these self-serving lies.
You may have heard how hard it is to ﬁnd enough
teachers—and therefore how necessary it is to raise salaries,
in order to attract more people into this ﬁeld. One example
can demonstrate what is wrong with this picture, though
there are innumerable other examples.
A young man who graduated summa cum laude from elite
Williams College decided that he wanted to be a teacher. He
sent letters and re´sume´s to eight different school districts.
Not one gave him even the courtesy of a reply.
Does that sound like there is a teacher shortage?
Moreover, any number of other highly qualiﬁed people have
had the same experience.
The joker in the deal is that, no matter how highly
qualiﬁed you are, your desire to become a teacher is not
likely to get off the ground unless you have jumped through
the bureaucratic hoops that keep people out of this ﬁeld—
thereby protecting the jobs of unionized incompetents who
are already in our schools.
The
most
important
of
these
hoops
is
taking
unbelievably dreary and stupid courses in education. Using
these costly and time-consuming courses as a barrier, those
in the education establishment “maintain low standards and

336
ever wonder why?
high barriers at the same time,” as Secretary of Education
Rod Paige has aptly put it.
Factual studies show no correlation between taking these
courses and successful teaching. Private schools are able to
get good teachers by hiring people who never took any such
courses. That is where our Williams graduate ﬁnally found a
job.
The very people in the education establishment who
maintain
barriers
to
keep
out
teachers
are
the
ones
constantly telling us what a shortage of teachers there is—
and how more money is needed. This is a scam that has
worked for years and will probably work for more years to
come.
Then there are the “studies prove” scams. According to
the education establishment, studies prove that Head Start
helps poor children’s educational performance, small classes
lead to higher test scores, and busing black children to
white
schools
produces
educational
beneﬁts
due
to
“diversity.”
The quality of many of these studies is as unbelievably
bad as the quality of courses in education.
Here is a common pattern: If you do 20 studies
comparing the effect that A has on B, you may ﬁnd that in
18 of those studies there is no correlation between A and B.
In one of the other two, you may ﬁnd that more A is
followed by more B. And in the other, more A is followed
by less B. Overall, still no correlation.
Depending on what the education establishment wants,
they can seize upon the one study out of 20 that showed
more A leading to more B and burst into the media with it.
If the conclusion of that one study ﬁts in with the media
vision of the world, then it may be trumpeted across the
land as “proof.”

337
Education Issues
The Head Start program is a classic example. Anyone
who expresses any skepticism about claims that Head Start is
a great success will be denounced as someone who doesn’t
“care” about the low-income and minority children that this
program supposedly helps. One of the great propaganda
tricks is to change questions of fact into questions of
motives.
The Thernstroms show what feeble facts there are
behind the Head Start program that has cost billions of
dollars. Look for them to be denounced for being heartless,
if not racist. But don’t expect advocates of Head Start to
engage in a serious discussion of facts.
It is much the same story when it comes to claims that
“studies prove” that small classes lead to better education.
The Thernstroms show cases where class sizes as small as 12
led to no better results when the students were tested.
Ordering students bussed from their own neighborhoods
for the sake of racial balance has similarly failed to produce
the much-trumpeted educational beneﬁts.
The time is long overdue to start looking at facts instead
of listening to rhetoric. Reading No Excuses is a good place
to start.

College Admissions Voodoo
Every year about this time, high school students get letters
of
admission—or
rejection—from
colleges
around
the
country. The saddest part of this process is not their
rejections but the assumption by some students that they
were rejected because they just didn’t measure up to the
high standards of Ivy U. or their ﬂagship state university.
The cold fact is that objective admissions standards are
seldom decisive at most colleges. The admissions process is
so shot through with fads and unsubstantiated assumptions
that it is more like voodoo than anything else.
A student who did not get admitted to Ivy U. may be a
better student than some—or even most—of those who did.
Admissions ofﬁcials love to believe that they can spot all
sorts of intangibles that outweigh test scores and grade-point
averages.
Such notions are hardly surprising in people who pay no
price for being wrong. All sorts of self-indulgences are
possible when people are unaccountable, whether they be
college
admissions
ofﬁcials,
parole
boards,
planning
commissions or copy-editors.
What is amazing is that nobody puts the notions and
fetishes of college admissions ofﬁces to a test. Nothing
would be easier than to admit half of a college’s entering
class on the basis of objective standards, such as test scores,
and
the
other
half
according
to
the
voodoo
of
the
admissions ofﬁce. Then, four years later, you could compare
how the two halves of the class did.

339
Education Issues
But apparently this would not be politic.
Among the many reasons given for rejecting objective
admissions standards is that they are “unfair.” Much is made
of the fact that high test scores are correlated with high
family income.
Very little is made of the statistical principle that
correlation is not causation. Practically nothing is made of
the fact that, however a student got to where he is
academically, that is in fact where he is—and that is usually
a better predictor of where he is going to go than is the
psychobabble of admissions committees.
The denigration of objective standards allows admissions
committees to play little tin gods, who think that their job is
to
reward
students
who
are
deserving,
sociologically
speaking, rather than to select students who can produce
the most bang for the buck from the money contributed by
donors and taxpayers for the purpose of turning out the
best quality graduates possible.
Typical of the mindset that rejects the selection of
students in the order of objective performances was a recent
article in The Chronicle of Higher Education which said that
colleges should “select randomly” from a pool of applicants
who are “good enough.” Nowhere in the real world, where
people must face the consequences of their decisions, would
such a principle be taken seriously.
Lots of pitchers are “good enough” to be in the major
leagues but would you just as soon send one of those
pitchers to the mound to pitch the deciding game of the
World Series as you would send Randy Johnson or Roger
Clemens out there with the world championship on the
line?
Lots of military ofﬁcers were considered to be “good
enough” to be generals in World War II but troops who

340
ever wonder why?
served
under
General
Douglas
MacArthur
or
General
George Patton had more victories and fewer casualties. How
many more lives would you be prepared to sacriﬁce as the
price of selecting randomly among generals considered to
be “good enough”?
If you or your child had to have a major operation for a
life-threatening condition, would you be just as content to
have the surgery done by anyone who was “good enough” to
be a surgeon, as compared to someone who was a top
surgeon in the relevant specialty?
The difference between ﬁrst-rate and second-rate people
is
enormous
in
many
ﬁelds.
In
a
college
classroom,
marginally
qualiﬁed
students
can
affect
the
whole
atmosphere and hold back the whole class.
In some professions, a large part of the time of ﬁrst-rate
people is spent countering the half-baked ideas of second-
rate people and trying to salvage something from the
wreckage of the disasters they create. “Good enough” is
seldom good enough.

Summer De-Programming
Parents
who
are
worried
because
their
children are
receiving a steady diet of politically correct propaganda in
the schools and colleges often ask for suggestions of things
they should get for their children to read, in hopes of de-
programming them.
The summer is a good time to let young people know
that what they have been told in class is not the only side of
the story or the only way to look at the world.
If all that today’s students seem to know about American
history are its negative aspects—which is what our society
shares with human societies in general—then they may
think that we are a truly awful country, without asking the
question, “Compared to what?”
It speaks volumes about our schools and colleges that
far-left radical Howard Zinn’s pretentiously titled book, A
People’s History of the United States, is widely used across the
country. It is one indictment, complaint, and distortion after
another.
Anyone who relies on this twisted version of American
history would have no idea why millions of people from
around the world are trying, sometimes desperately, to move
to this country. The one virtue of Zinn’s book is that it helps
you identify unmistakably which teachers are using their
classrooms as propaganda centers.
There are still some honest history books around. Best-
selling
British
historian
Paul
Johnson
has
written
an
outstanding book titled A History of the American People and

342
ever wonder why?
another excellent book on recent world history titled Modern
Times.
If you want a thorough, accurate, and no-spin history of
race relations in the United States, the best history on that
subject is America in Black and White by Abigail and Stephan
Thernstrom. For a history of American ethnic groups in
general, there is my own Ethnic America. I cannot be
unbiased about it, of course, but the fact that it has been
translated into six other languages suggests that other
people liked it too.
If you would like to know the fundamental basis for the
Constitution of the United States under which we all live,
there is no book more important to read than The Federalist
or The Federalist Papers, as it is sometimes called. It is a series
of popular essays written by those who helped create the
Constitution, explaining to their fellow Americans why they
did what they did and what they hoped to achieve—and
prevent.
It is as readable today as it was two centuries ago—and
just as much needed. The Federalist should be at or near the
top of any summer reading list.
Sometimes the way to understand your own society is to
ﬁnd out about other societies and other economic and
political systems, so that you can get some idea of the nature
and magnitude of the differences. Two Soviet economists’
accounts of that country’s economy makes the difference
between
a
market
economy
and
a
centrally
planned
economy stand out in sharp relief. That book is titled The
Turning Point by Nikolai Shmelev and Vladimir Popov. India
Unbound by Gurcharan Das tells the story of India’s turning
toward a market economy—and the beneﬁts that followed.
The best book about the Third World in general is Equality,

343
Education Issues
the Third World, and Economic Delusion by the late Peter Bauer
of the London School of Economics.
The appeal of socialism—the beauties of it in theory and
its painful consequences in practice—are discussed in a very
readable book titled Heaven on Earth by Joshua Muravchik.
The young need not be embarrassed by ﬁnding socialism
attractive. Many who were old enough to know better also
fell for it.
Economic illiteracy is almost as dangerous as slanted
political propaganda. A painless way to get some sense of
economic realities would be by reading a popular, topical,
and often humorous treatment of economic issues in John
Stossel’s book titled, Give Me A Break.
The
current
issue
of
the
Cato
Journal
strongly
recommends “two remarkable books” on economics as a way
for voters to understand economic issues in this election
year. The books are Basic Economics and Applied Economics.
The former takes the reader “on an exhilarating tour” of
economics,
the
Cato
Journal
says,
and
the
latter
is
characterized by “cogent reasoning.” I could not use such
glowing terms myself, since I am the author of both books.
Happy de-programming this summer.

Fat in California’s Budget
Whenever
there
is
a
budget
deﬁcit,
politicians
automatically
want
taxes
raised.
In
our
private
lives,
whenever we ﬁnd ourselves running out of money, most of
us think about cutting back on our spending. Not so in
government.
Despite California’s record budget deﬁcit there is still a
lot of fat left that has not yet been cut—and may never be
cut. Every pound of fat has a constituency ready to proclaim
that the world will end if that spending is toned down, much
less eliminated.
Typical of such political spin is a “news” story about
California in a recent issue of The Chronicle of Higher
Education, the trade publication of the academic world. The
headline says: “Preparatory programs at universities help
low-performing pupils excel, but budget cuts imperil the
efforts.”
Wait a minute. I thought 12 years of taxpayer-provided
education were supposed to prepare students for college.
Now we have to have courses in college to prepare students
for college?
The long, rambling story in The Chronicle of Higher
Education, complete with photographs, at no point offers any
hard evidence that these programs actually work any better
than the public schools, which have obviously failed if you
need such remedial programs in college.
Instead,
the
Mathematics
Engineering
Science
Achievement program (MESA) is praised because it helps

345
Education Issues
students
become
“excited”
about
math
and
science.
“Exciting” is one of the big fad words in educational circles,
as if getting your emotions worked up is the same as
mastering skills.
In keeping with the excitement theme, students in this
program are pictured making balloon-powered rockets and
one of them is quoted as saying that this program “inspires”
him to go to school.
One of the teachers in this program calls it “crazy” to cut
the
program—“as
he watches another balloon-powered
rocket ﬂy across the room.” But just what is this actually
accomplishing?
The teacher says, “Look at this: It gets a bunch of diverse
cultures into one room to build things. You always feel like
a family here. It’s just a good place.”
But actual bottom-line results in terms of math and
science? According to The Chronicle of Higher Education: “State
leaders are often foggy on what exactly the various programs
do, and it takes many years for supporters of the programs
to gather tangible evidence of their long-term impact.”
Apparently the state legislators have not been too foggy
to spend $85 million of the taxpayers’ money to bankroll
this program that apparently cannot show hard evidence of
serious improvement in math and science, as a result of
balloons ﬂying across the room in this “good place.”
As for needing “many years” to document their success,
that is a strange claim. I once ran a six-week summer
program in economics for black students and documented
its results simply by giving the students an economics exam
at the beginning and at the end—both exams being sent
away to be graded by others at the Educational Testing
Service in Princeton.
Why would it take “many years” to show any tangible

346
ever wonder why?
improvement in math and science by the students in
California’s $85 million program? Or is this just a way of
postponing accountability—indeﬁnitely?
Even if we take it on faith that it really does require
“many years” to produce results, the cold fact is that this
program has been going on since 1970. That’s more than 30
years. Is that not yet “many years”?
Because this is a program for low-income and minority
students, lower expectations may be tolerated by many in
the educational establishment. But the real irony is that
Jaime
Escalante
produced
hard
evidence
of
high
achievement in math by low-income Mexican American
students years ago. And he didn’t take 34 years to do it or
require an $85 million budget.
At one time, one-fourth of all the Mexican American
students who passed advanced placement calculus—in the
entire
country—came
from
the
school
where
Jaime
Escalante taught.
Incidentally, Mr. Escalante is still around. They could
always ask him how he did it, if they really wanted to know.
But they already know how to get millions of taxpayer
dollars, which apparently is what it is all about.

A Scary Report
Most discussions of the problems of American education
have an air of utter unreality because they avoid addressing
the most fundamental and intractable problem of our public
schools—the low quality of our teachers. There is no point
expecting teachers to teach things that they themselves do
not know or understand.
That becomes painfully obvious from a recently released
report from the U. S. Department of Education. This report
has an innocuous title on the cover—“Meeting the Highly
Qualiﬁed Teachers Challenge”—and devastating facts inside.
According to this report, in 28 of the 29 states that use
the same standardized test for teachers, it is not even
necessary
to
come
up
to
the
national
average
in
mathematics to become a teacher. In none of these states is
it necessary to come up to the national average in reading.
In some states, you can score in the bottom quarter in either
math or reading (or both) and still meet the requirements
to become a teacher.
This report is only the latest in a long series of studies of
teachers, going back more than half a century, showing
again and again the low standards for teaching. Those who
go into teaching have consistently had test scores at or near
the bottom among college students in a wide variety of
ﬁelds.
Despite the title of this report, the issue is not highly
qualiﬁed teachers. The problem is getting teachers who are
even decently competent. It is a farce and a fraud when

348
ever wonder why?
teachers’ unions talk about a need for “certiﬁed” teachers,
when certiﬁcation has such low requirements and when
uncertiﬁed teachers often have higher qualiﬁcations.
Secretary of Education Rod Paige put his ﬁnger on the
crucial problem when he said that, in selecting teachers,
states “maintain low standards and high barriers at the same
time.” You don’t have to know much, but you do have to
jump through all kinds of hoops, in order to become
certiﬁed to teach in the public schools.
The biggest obstacles are the education courses which
can take up years of your time and thousands of dollars of
your money, but which have no demonstrated beneﬁt on
future
teaching.
Research
shows
that
teachers’
actual
knowledge of the subject matter is what beneﬁts students.
Emphasis on something that does not affect educational
quality reﬂects the priorities of the teachers’ union in
restricting competition, not the requirements for educating
children. It would be hard for anyone who has not looked
into education courses to believe just how bad they are. I
wouldn’t believe it myself if I hadn’t seen the data, the
professors and the students.
People go to these institutions in order to get certiﬁed,
not because they expect to ﬁnd anything either interesting
or useful. Education courses repel many intelligent people,
who are just the sort of people needed in our schools. As
Secretary of Education Rod Paige puts it, “schools of
education fail to attract the best students.” That is an
understatement. They repel the best students.
Although
many
states
provide
alternative routes to
teacher certiﬁcation, these alternative routes are usually
made burdensome enough to protect existing schools of
education
from
losing
their
students.
Indeed,
these
alternative routes often include many hours of education

349
Education Issues
courses. The net result is that only 6 percent of certiﬁed
teachers received their certiﬁcate via alternative routes.
Many
such
programs,
according
to
the
report,
“are
‘alternative routes’ in name only, allowing states to boast of
reform while maintaining artiﬁcial restrictions on the supply
of new teachers.”
These artiﬁcially created shortages are then used by
teachers’ unions to argue for higher pay. Secretary Paige
does not buy the teachers’ union argument that teacher
shortages are due to inadequate pay. He points out that
“compensation in most private schools is lower than in
public schools.”
Yet private schools are able to get better qualiﬁed
people, partly because most private schools do not let
education
course
requirements
screen
out
intelligent
people. Some private schools even refuse to hire people who
have been through that drivel.
It is refreshing to see a Secretary of Education who says
what
is
wrong
in
plain
English,
instead
of
being
a
mouthpiece for the status quo in general and the teachers’
unions in particular.

“Teaching to the Test”
Florida’s school year has already started early, so that its
students
will have
more
preparation before the state-
mandated tests that will be administered to them later in the
school year. Meanwhile, there is much wringing of hands
and gnashing of teeth because so much classroom time is
spent “teaching to the test” as our “educators” put it.
Unfortunately, most of the people who call themselves
educators have not been doing much educating over the
past few decades, as shown by American students repeatedly
coming in at or near the bottom on international tests. That
is why some states are trying to force teachers to teach
academic material by testing their students on such material,
instead of relying on the inﬂated grades and high “self-
esteem” that our schools have been producing, instead of
producing knowledge and skills.
While our students spend about as much time in school
as students in Europe or Asia, a higher percentage of other
students’ time is spent learning academic subjects, while our
students’ time is spent on all sorts of non-academic projects
and activities.
Those who want to keep on indulging in popular
educational fads that are failing to produce academic
competence ﬁght bitterly against having to “teach to the
test.” It will stiﬂe “creativity,” they complain. The author of
a recent feature article in the New York Times Magazine
declares that “genuinely great teaching—the sort of thing
that Socrates and his spiritual descendants have delivered”

351
Education Issues
will be discouraged by having to “stuff our charges with
information” in order to pass tests.
If
there
has
actually
been
such
“genuinely
great
teaching,” then why has there been no speck of evidence of
it during all these years of low test scores and employer
complaints about semi-literate young people applying for
jobs? Why do American students learn so much less math
between the 4th and the 8th grades than do students in
other countries? Could it be because so much more time
has been wasted in American schools during those four
years?
Evidence is the one thing that our so-called educators
want no part of. They want to be able to simply declare that
there is genuinely great teaching, “creative” learning, or
“critical thinking,” without having to prove anything to
anybody.
In states where tests have been mandated by law, the ﬁrst
order of business of the teachers’ unions has been to
introduce as much mushy subjective material as possible into
these tests, in order to prevent anyone from ﬁnding out how
much—or
rather,
how
little—academic
skills
they
are
actually providing their students.
The
more
fundamental
question
is
whether
our
educational establishment has even been trying to impart
academic skills as a high priority goal. Over the past
hundred years, American educators have been resisting the
idea that schools exist to pass on to the next generation the
basic mental skills that our culture has developed. They have
said so in books, articles, speeches—and by their actions in
the schools.
Since the rise of teachers’ unions in the early 1960s—
which coincided with the decline of student test scores—the
education establishment has increasingly succeeded in de-

352
ever wonder why?
emphasizing academic skills. In that sense, our schools have
not failed, they have succeeded in changing the goals and
priorities of education.
Despite all-out efforts by the education establishment to
blame the declining educational standards in our schools on
everything imaginable except the people who teach there—
on parents, students, television, or society—the cold fact is
that today’s students are often simply not taught enough
academic material in the ﬁrst place. Even if there were
ﬂawless parents, perfect students, no television, and no
problems in society, students could still not be expected to
learn what they were never taught.
In fact, it is a lot to expect the teachers themselves to
teach what they do not know or understand. Tests have
repeatedly shown, for decades on end, that college students
who go into teaching score at or near the bottom among
students in a wide variety of ﬁelds. No wonder they dislike
tests! And no wonder that they ﬁnd innumerable fads more
attractive than teaching solid skills, which they themselves
may not have mastered.

“Teaching to the Test”:
Part II
One of the objections by the educational establishment to
state-mandated tests for students is that this forces the
teachers to teach directly the material that is going to be
tested, instead of letting the students “discover” what they
need to know through their own trial and error, under the
guidance
of
teachers
acting
as
“facilitators”
from
the
sidelines.
In other words, the students should not simply be taught
the
ready-made
rules
of
mathematics
or
science,
but
discover them for themselves. The fact that this approach
has failed, time and again, to produce students who can
hold their own in international tests with students from
other
countries
only
turns
the
American
education
establishment against tests.
“Discovery learning” is just one of the many fads in
education
circles
today.
Only
someone
with
no
real
knowledge or understanding of the history of ideas could
take such a fad seriously.
It took more than a century of dedicated work by highly
intelligent economists to arrive at the analysis of supply and
demand that is routinely taught in the ﬁrst week of
Economics
One.
How
long
are
novices
in
economics
supposed to ﬂounder around trying to “discover” these same
principles?
Nobody believes that the way to train pilots is to let them
“discover” the principles of ﬂight that the Wright brothers
arrived at—after years of effort, trial and error. Would

354
ever wonder why?
anyone even try to teach people how to drive an automobile
by taking them out on a highway and letting them “discover”
how it is done?
The issue is not what sounds plausible but what actually
works. But judging one method of teaching against another
by the end results that each produces is the last thing that
our fad-ridden educators want. That is at the heart of their
objections to having to “teach to the test” instead of
engaging in “creative” teaching and “discovery learning” by
students—as they arbitrarily deﬁne these terms.
The education establishment’s bitter opposition to the
testing
of
students
by
independent
outsiders
with
standardized tests is perfectly understandable for people
who do not want to have to put up or shut up. For decades,
the ultimate test of any teaching method has been whether
it was fashionable among educators.
Educational philosophies that have been put to the test
in other countries—Russia in the 1920s and China in the
1960s, for example—and which have failed miserably there,
as they are now failing here, continue in vogue because
there are no consequences for failure here. Not so long as
teachers have iron-clad tenure and get paid by seniority
rather than results.
At the heart of the problem of educational failure is the
low academic quality of the people who become teachers
and
principals.
This
low
academic
quality
has
been
documented by empirical research so many times, over so
many years, that it is incredible how this crucial fact gets
overlooked again and again in discussions of the problems
of our schools.
So long as teacher training courses in education schools
are Mickey Mouse, they are going to repel many intelligent
people who would like to teach, and we are going to be left

355
Education Issues
with the dregs of the college students. When the resulting
pool of “certiﬁed” teachers consists disproportionately of
these dregs, do not expect them to be even intellectually
oriented, much less intellectually competent.
It is impossible to understand what is happening in our
schools without understanding the kind of people who run
them. But, once you see the poor academic quality of those
people, you can easily understand why textbooks have been
dumbed down and why there is such bitter opposition by
educators to letting exceptionally bright children be taught
in separate classes with more advanced material. Do not
expect intellectual losers to look favorably on intellectual
winners.
Such teachers are the natural prey of education gurus
pushing non-intellectual fads with glittering names. If you
got rid of every single counterproductive fad in our schools
today, but left the same people in place, this would lead only
to a new infusion of different counterproductive fads
tomorrow.
And there would still be the same bitter opposition to
“teaching to the test,” which spoils their self-indulgences.

“Teaching to the Test”:
Part III
While we ought to learn from our own experiences, it is
even better to learn from other people’s experiences, saving
ourselves the painful costs of the lessons. In the case of the
dominant educational fads of our times, many have been
tried out before in other countries. Their failures there
should have warned us that they were likely to fail here as
well.
Our education establishment’s objections to “teaching to
the test” are echoes of what was said and done in China
during the 1950s and 1960s, when examinations were de-
emphasized
and
non-academic
criteria
and
social
“relevance” were given more weight. In 1967, examinations
were abolished.
This was an even bigger step in China than it would be
in
the
United
States,
for
China
had
had
extensive
examinations for more than a thousand years. Not only were
there academic examinations, for centuries most Chinese
civil servants were also selected by examinations.
A decade after academic examinations were abolished in
China, the Ministry of Education announced that college
entrance examinations “will be restored and admittance
based on their results.” Why? Because “the quality of
education
has
declined
sharply”
in
the
absence
of
examinations and this had “retarded the development of a
whole generation of young people.”
Mao’s successor, Deng Xiaoping, complained about “the
deterioration of academic standards” and said, “schools have

357
Education Issues
not paid attention to educational standards and instead
overemphasized
practical
work;
students’ knowledge of
theory and basic skills in their area of specialization have
been disregarded.”
None of these failing educational fads was unique to
China. They went back to the teachings of John Dewey,
whose “progressive” ideas shaped developments in American
schools—and especially American schools of education,
where future teachers were trained. Moreover, Dewey’s ideas
were tried out on a large scale in the Soviet Union in the
1920s, before they had achieved similar inﬂuence in the
United States.
During a visit to the Soviet Union in 1928, Dewey
reported
“the
marvelous
development
of
progressive
educational ideas and practice under the fostering care of
the Bolshevik government.” He noted that the Soviets had
broken down the barriers between school and society, which
he had urged others to do, and said “I can only pay my
tribute to the liberating effect of active participation in
social life upon the attitude of the students.”
Here we see the early genesis of the current idea in
today’s American schools that the children there should be
promoting causes, writing public ﬁgures and otherwise
“participating” in the arena of social and political issues.
Another progressive educator, W. H. Kilpatrick, was likewise
exhilarated to ﬁnd that his books were being used in Soviet
teacher training programs.
Kilpatrick was also delighted to learn that the three R’s
were not being taught directly but were being learned
“incidentally from tasks at hand.” Here was the basic
principle behind today’s “discovery learning.”
Even as visiting progressive educators from America were
gushing over the use of their ideas in Soviet schools, the bad

358
ever wonder why?
educational
consequences
were
turning
the
Soviet
government leadership against these fads. The commissar
who had imposed progressive education on Soviet schools
was removed shortly after John Dewey’s visit.
When the romantic notions of progressive education
didn’t work, the Soviet and Chinese governments were able
to get rid of them because they were not hamstrung by
teachers’ unions. They were able to restore “teaching to the
test”—which was not very romantic, but it worked.
The “barriers between school and society,” which Dewey
lamented, existed for a reason. Schools are not a microcosm
of society, any more than an eye is a microcosm of the body.
The eye is a specialized organ which does something that no
other part of the body does. That is its whole signiﬁcance.
You don’t use your eyes to listen to music. Specialized
organs have important things to do in their own specialties.
So do schools, which need to stick to their special work as
well, not become social or political gadﬂies.

Smart “Problems”
During my ﬁrst semester of teaching, many years ago, I was
surprised to encounter the philosophy that the brightest
students did not need much help from the teacher because
“they can get it anyway” and that my efforts should be
directed toward the slower or low-performing students.
This advice came from my department chairman, who
said that if the brighter or more serious students “get
restless” while I was directing my efforts toward the slower
students, then I should “give them some extra work to do to
keep them quiet.”
I didn’t believe that the real difference between the A
students and the C students was in inborn intelligence, but
thought it was usually due to differences in attitudes and
priorities. In any event, my reply was that what the chairman
proposed “would be treating those who came here for an
education as a special problem!”
A few days later, I handed in my resignation. It turned
out to be only the ﬁrst in a series of my resignations from
academic institutions over the years.
Unfortunately, the idea of treating the brighter or more
serious students as a problem to be dealt with by keeping
them busy is not uncommon, and is absolutely pervasive in
the public schools. One fashionable solution for such
“problem” students is to assign them to help the less able or
less conscientious students who are having trouble keeping
up.
In other words, make them unpaid teacher’s aides!

360
ever wonder why?
High potential will remain only potential unless it is
developed. But the very thought that high potential should
be developed more fully never seems to occur to many of
our educators—and some are absolutely hostile to the idea.
It violates their notions of equality or “social justice” and
it threatens the “self-esteem” of other students. As a result,
too often a student with the potential to become a future
scientist, inventor, or a discoverer of a cure for cancer will
instead have his time tied up doing busy work for the
teacher.
Even so-called “gifted and talented” programs often turn
out to be simply a bigger load of the same level of work that
other students are doing—keeping the brighter students
busy in a separate room.
My old department chairman’s notion that the better
students “can pretty much get it without our help” assumes
that there is some “it”—some minimum competence—which
is all that matters.
People like this would apparently be satisﬁed if Einstein
had remained a competent clerk in the Swiss patent ofﬁce
and if Jonas Salk, instead of discovering a cure for polio,
had spent his career puttering around in a laboratory and
turning out an occasional research paper of moderate
interest to his academic colleagues.
If developing the high potential of some students
wounds the “self-esteem” of other students, one obvious
answer is for them to go their separate ways in different
classrooms or different schools.
There was a time when students of different ability levels
or performance levels were routinely assigned to different
classes in the same grade or to different schools—and no
one else collapsed like a house of cards because of wounded
self-esteem.

361
Education Issues
Let’s face it: Most of the teachers in our public schools
do not have what it takes to develop high intellectual
potential in students. They cannot give students what they
don’t have themselves.
Test scores going back more than half a century have
repeatedly shown people who are studying to be teachers to
be at or near the bottom among college students studying
in various ﬁelds. It is amazing how often this plain reality
gets ignored in discussions of what to do about our public
schools.
Lack of competence is only part of the problem. Too
often there is not only a lack of appreciation of outstanding
intellectual
development
but
a
hostility
towards
it
by
teachers who are preoccupied with the “self-esteem” of
mediocre students, who may remind them of what they were
once like as students.
Maybe the advancement of science, of the economy, and
ﬁnding a cure for cancer can wait, while we take care of self-
esteem.

Vouchers Vindicated
The court cases that get the most media attention are not
necessarily the cases that will have the most impact on the
society. Despite all the controversy surrounding the 9th
Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision outlawing “under God”
from the pledge of allegiance or the Supreme Court’s
decision outlawing executions of murderers with low test
scores,
the
decision
with
the
greatest
potential
for
beneﬁtting
American
society
is
the
Supreme
Court’s
decision declaring vouchers constitutional, even if most of
these vouchers end up being used at religious schools.
One of the main phony arguments against vouchers is
now dead. Vouchers are no more a violation of the
Constitution than the G.I. Bill that paid for the education of
military veterans at Notre Dame, Holy Cross, and other
religious colleges.
Opponents of vouchers have other phony arguments to
fall back on, however. One is that vouchers will drain money
away from the public schools, making it harder for them to
provide a good education to the students remaining.
That argument is just bad arithmetic, perhaps brought
on by fuzzy math. Vouchers almost invariably pay much less
money than the average cost of educating students in the
public schools. When students who cost $8,000 a year to
educate in the public schools transfer to a private school
with a $4,000 voucher, the total cost of educating all the
students does not go up. It goes down.
Far from reducing per capita spending in the public

363
Education Issues
schools, the departure of voucher students leaves more
money per pupil for those left behind. It is of course true
that the total sum of money in the public school may
decline, but if half the students depart, should the school
continue to get the same money it had when there were
twice as many students?
This emphasis on money is a tragic farce, in view of all
the research that shows virtually no correlation between
spending per pupil and educational outcomes. Districts with
some of the highest per pupil expenditures have some of
the lowest test results, and vice versa. Students in countries
that spend less than half as much per pupil as we do
outperform American students on international tests, year
after year.
One
of
the
most
hypocritical
objections
made
by
opponents of vouchers is that the vouchers pay so little that
they can only be used in religious schools. If that is the
critics’ real concern, why don’t they advocate raising the
amount of money per voucher?
In reality, those who are up in arms about disparities in
per pupil expenditure from one public school district to
another almost never advocate equalizing expenditures
between voucher recipients and students in the public
schools.
The truly ugly aspect of the case against vouchers is the
objection that vouchers will allow private schools to “skim
off” the best students from the public schools. Students are
not inert objects being skimmed off by others. These
students and their parents choose what they want to do—for
the ﬁrst time, as a result of vouchers setting them free from
the public school monopoly.
When these voucher critics send their own children off
to upscale private schools, do they say that Phillips Academy

364
ever wonder why?
or Sidwell Friends School are “skimming” the best students
out of the public schools? Afﬂuent parents are simply doing
what any responsible parents would do—choosing the best
education they can get for their children.
Only when low-income parents are now able to do the
same thing is it suddenly a question of these students being
“skimmed” by other institutions. But whenever any group
rises from poverty to prosperity, whether by education or
otherwise, some do so before others. Why should low-
income families be told that either all of them rise at the
same time or none of them can rise?
If there has actually been harm done to the public
schools by vouchers, there ought to be evidence of it by
now. But voucher critics have none, after all these years, and
rely on scary but unsubstantiated theories instead.
What we are really talking about are the teachers’ unions
wanting to keep a captive audience, for the sake of their
members’ jobs, and social engineers wanting to control low-
income children and their parents, as they themselves would
never want to be controlled.

Artiﬁcial Stupidity
A recent news story about a teacher who assigned her
students to write anti-war letters may have seemed like just
an isolated episode but teachers using students for their own
little ego trips is by no means uncommon. Perhaps the worst
recent example was a teacher who unleashed her venom on
the children of military personnel who had gone off to ﬁght
in Iraq.
Just last week I received a bundle of letters from students
who have apparently been given an assignment to write to
me by a teacher in an English class in Flat Rock High School
in Flat Rock, Michigan. This was occasioned by a column of
mine that said some things that were not politically correct.
The ﬁrst of these letters was from a girl who informed
me, from her vast store of teenage wisdom, of things that I
knew 30 years ago, and closed by telling me that I needed
to ﬁnd out about poverty. Since I spent more years in
poverty than she has spent in the world, this would be funny
if it were not so sad.
With American students consistently scoring at or near
the bottom on international tests, you would think that our
schools would have better things to do than tell kids to write
letters to strangers, spouting off about things they know little
or nothing about.
Flat Rock High School’s envelopes, in which the students
wrote
their
assigned
letters,
has
the
motto:
“Where
Tomorrow’s Leaders Learn!” Sadly, they are learning not to
be
leaders
but
to
be
sheep-like
followers,
repeating

366
ever wonder why?
politically correct notions and reacting with snotty remarks
to anyone who contradicts them.
It is bad enough when someone takes the position that
he has made up his mind and doesn’t want to be confused
by the facts. It is worse when someone else makes up his
mind for him and then he dismisses any facts to the contrary
by attributing bad motives to those who present those facts.
Creating mindless followers is one of the most dangerous
things that our public schools are doing. Young people who
know only how to vent their emotions, and not how to weigh
opposing arguments through logic and evidence, are sitting
ducks for the next talented demagogue who comes along in
some cult or movement, including movements like those
that put the Nazis in power in Germany.
At one time, the educator’s creed was: “We are here to
teach you how to think, not what to think.” Today, schools
across the country are teaching students what to think—
whether about the environment, the war, social policy, or
whatever.
Even if what they teach were true, that would be of little
use to these young people in later life. Issues and conditions
change so much over time that even the truth about today’s
issues becomes irrelevant when confronted with the future’s
new challenges.
If students haven’t been taught to think, then they are at
the mercy of events, as well as being at the mercy of those
who know how to take advantage of their ignorance and
their emotions.
Classroom brainwashing is not new. I wrote about it a
decade ago in my book Inside American Education. Hearings
at the Department of Education brought out the same
things a decade before that.
When will the voting public get the message? Where are

367
Education Issues
the parents of these children? Do parents in Flat Rock,
Michigan, want their children’s time in school wasted on
their teachers’ ideological hobby horses, instead of being
used to prepare an intellectual foundation for their further
education?
In the long run, the greatest weapon of mass destruction
is stupidity. In an age of artiﬁcial intelligence, too many of
our schools are producing artiﬁcial stupidity, in the sense of
ideas and attitudes far more foolish than young people
would have arrived at on their own. I doubt whether the
youngsters in Flat Rock, Michigan, were brought up by their
parents to say and do the silly things their teachers have
assigned them to do.
Weapons of mass destruction in the hands of an avowed
enemy can destroy many Americans, but they cannot destroy
America, because we are too strong and too capable of
counterattack. Only Americans can destroy America. But too
many
of
our
schools
have
for
years
been
quietly
undermining the values and abilities that are needed to
preserve any society—and especially a free society.

“Good” Teachers
The
next
time
someone
receives
an
award
as
an
outstanding teacher, take a close look at the reasons given
for selecting that particular person. Seldom is it because his
or her students did higher quality work in math or spoke
better English or in fact had any tangible accomplishments
that were better than those of other students of teachers
who did not get an award.
A “good” teacher is not deﬁned as a teacher whose
students learn more. A “good” teacher is someone who
exempliﬁes
the
prevailing
dogmas
of
the
educational
establishment. The general public probably thinks of good
teachers as people like Marva Collins or Jaime Escalante,
whose
minority
students
met
and
exceeded
national
standards. But such bottom line criteria have long since
disappeared from most public schools.
If your criterion for judging teachers is how much their
students learn, then you can end up with a wholly different
list of who are the best teachers. Some of the most
unimpressive-looking teachers have consistently turned out
students who know their subject far better than teachers
who cut a more dashing ﬁgure in the classroom and receive
more lavish praise from their students or attention from the
media.
My own teaching career began at Douglass College, a
small women’s college in New Jersey, replacing a retiring
professor of economics who was so revered that I made it a
point never to say that I was “replacing” him, which would

369
Education Issues
have been considered sacrilege. But it turned out that his
worshipful students were a mass of confusion when it came
to economics.
It was much the same story at my next teaching post,
Howard University in Washington. One of the men in our
department was so popular with students that the big
problem every semester was to ﬁnd a room big enough to
hold all the students who wanted to enroll in his classes.
Meanwhile, another economist in that department was so
unpopular that the very mention of his name caused
students to roll their eyes or even have an outburst of
hostility.
Yet when I compared the grades that students in my
upper level economics class were making, I discovered that
none of the students who had taken introductory economics
under Mr. Popularity had gotten as high as a B in my class,
while virtually all the students who had studied under Mr.
Pariah were doing at least B work. “By their fruits ye shall
know them.”
My own experience as an undergraduate student at
Harvard was completely consistent with what I later learned
as
a
teacher.
One
of
my
teachers—Professor
Arthur
Smithies—was a highly respected scholar but was widely
regarded as a terrible teacher. Yet what he taught me has
stayed with me for more than 40 years and his class
determined the course of my future career.
Nobody observing Professor Smithies in class was likely
to be impressed by his performance. He sort of drifted into
the room, almost as if he had arrived there by accident.
During talks—lectures would be too strong a word—he
often paused to look out the window and seemingly became
fascinated by the trafﬁc in Harvard Square.
But Smithies not only taught us particular things. He got

370
ever wonder why?
us to think—often by questioning us in a way that forced us
to follow out the logic of what we were saying to its ultimate
conclusion. Often some policy that sounded wonderful, if
you looked only at the immediate results, would turn out to
be counterproductive if you followed your own logic beyond
stage one.
In later years, I would realize that many disastrous
policies had been created by thinking no further than stage
one. Getting students to think systematically beyond stage
one was a lifetime contribution to their understanding.
Another lifetime contribution was a reading list that
introduced us to the writings of top-notch minds. It takes
one to know one and Smithies had a top-notch mind
himself.
One
of
the
articles
on
that
reading list—by
Professor George Stigler of Columbia University—was so
impressive that I went to graduate school at Columbia
expressly to study under him. After discovering, upon
arrival, that Stigler had just left for the University of
Chicago, I decided to go to the University of Chicago the
next year and study under him there.
Arthur Smithies would never get a teaching award by the
standards of the education establishment today. But he rates
a top award by a much older standard: By their fruits ye
shall know them.

A Sign of the Times
They say a picture is worth a thousand words. That was
certainly true of a recent photo of a little seven-year-old boy
holding a sign demanding more money for the schools and
holding his ﬁst in the air.
He was part of a demonstration organized by his
teachers, and including parents and other students, all of
whom were transported to California’s state capital in
Sacramento to protest budget constraints brought on by the
state’s huge deﬁcit.
There was a time when taking children out of classes to
ﬁght
the
political
battles
of
adults
would
have
been
considered a shameless neglect of duty. But that was long
ago.
The little boy with the sign and his ﬁst raised in the air
is just one of the millions of victims of a shameless
education establishment. It is not just that he is not in class
learning the things he will need for his own mental
development. He is out in the streets learning dangerous
lessons for the future.
The most dangerous lesson of all is that he doesn’t need
to know what he is talking about, that what matters is
venting his feelings and being an activist.
He is also learning to let himself be manipulated by
others, setting him up for all sorts of pied pipers he is likely
to encounter in later years, who may lead him into anything
from personal degeneracy to movements like the Taliban or
the cult that Jim Jones led to their doom at Jonestown.

372
ever wonder why?
What can a seven-year-old boy know about the issues that
he is carrying a sign for or shaking his ﬁst about? Has he
even heard—much less understood—any other side of the
issue he is being used for?
Can he have read any of the many empirical studies
which show that there is very little correlation between the
amount of money that schools spend and the quality of the
education that the children receive? Per pupil spending in
Washington, D.C. schools is among the highest in the nation
but test results there are among the lowest.
American school children have more money spent on
them than the children in countries that regularly ﬁnish
higher on international tests than we do.
When
confronted
with
the
undeniable
fact
that
American high school students repeatedly ﬁnish at or near
the bottom on international tests, there is a standard
teachers’ union party line. Supposedly only the elite ﬁnish
high school in other countries, the spin goes, so it is unfair
to compare other countries’ elite students with our average
students.
If there was ever any validity to this argument, it is long
past. Countries with a higher percentage of their youngsters
ﬁnishing high school still have their students outperform
American students.
Sometimes the education establishment tries to use the
fact that American students don’t do badly in the lower
grades. That is true: Our children are not stupid. It is just
that the longer they stay in our school system, the further
they fall behind the rest of the world.
This is not accidental. Far too many public schools have
far too many other agendas than providing children with
intellectual skills. Political propaganda is just one. Using the
children as guinea pigs for fashionable notions is another.

373
Education Issues
And, at the top of the agenda is protecting the jobs of
teachers, even those who are grossly incompetent.
Those who engineered this educational disaster have lots
of glib excuses. One of the most popular is that students
and parents are ﬂawed. The great non sequitur seems to be
that, if there is anything wrong with parents or students,
there can’t be anything wrong with the schools.
But, if the current crop of “educators” had better
students, better parents, and more money, all that it would
amount to would be smaller classes in nicer surroundings
having their time wasted on the fads and fetishes that take
the place of education in our classrooms.
We would have more expensive incompetence. And we
would have more children being prepared to be led by pied
pipers, like the little boy with his sign and his ﬁst in the air.

Suspicious Stats
One of the latest in the seemingly endless rounds of
alarming statistics is that one out of 12 American children
has some form of disability. With all the things that are
supposedly getting worse, you have to wonder how our life
expectancy keeps increasing. A cynic might even wonder if
the increasing availability of money from the government
has
anything
to
do
with
the
increasing
number
of
“problems”
that
need
to
be
“solved”
by
government
programs.
One way of telling whether a given statistic is a fact or an
artifact is to ask whether the deﬁnition used ﬁts the thing
that is being deﬁned. Buried in the news story about the
children with disabilities is the fact that the deﬁnition of
“disability” has been expanding over the years.
A child who is likely to be diagnosed as autistic today
might not have been some years ago. Yet that is seldom
mentioned
in
alarming
statistics
about
the
escalating
number of cases of autism. As the author of a couple of
books about late-talking children, I hear regularly from
parents who tell me that they are being asked to allow their
children to be labeled “autistic,” in order to get either the
government or their insurance company to pay for speech
therapy.
It is amazing that, with something as serious—indeed,
catastrophic—as autism, statistics are thrown around without
mentioning the variation in what is being diagnosed as
autism. In something much less serious, such as sales

375
Education Issues
receipts at Wal-Mart, a comparison of how much money was
taken in this year, compared to last year, will almost
certainly make a distinction between sales receipts at the
same stores as last year versus sales receipts that include new
stores opened since last year.
In other words, they notify you of changing deﬁnitions
behind the numbers. Otherwise, the statistics could mean
almost anything. If it is important enough to do this for Wal-
Mart sales, it certainly ought to be important enough to do
it for autism.
Regardless of whether the old or the new criterion for
autism is better, they are different criteria. Statistics should
tell us whether or by how much autism has risen by any
consistent standard. Moreover, those who diagnose autism
range from highly trained specialists to people who never set
foot in a medical school or had any comparable training
elsewhere.
Another set of statistics whose deﬁnition is at least
questionable are statistics about the incomes of high school
dropouts versus those who have more education. Since most
high school dropouts resume their education at some later
time, are these statistics really counting all—or even most—
dropouts? Or just the minority of dropouts who never enter
a classroom again?
Although I dropped out of high school more than half a
century ago, and still do not have a high school diploma, I
do have a couple of postgraduate degrees. Is my income
counted when they add up the incomes of dropouts? Not
bloody likely.
This is not just a ﬁne point. All sorts of efforts are being
made to prevent kids from dropping out of high school, as
if dropping out means the end of their education. Since it
usually means only an interruption, leading eventually to a

376
ever wonder why?
resumption of their education after some experience in the
real
world,
the
urgency
of
preventing
them
from
encountering the real world is by no means obvious. They
may become more serious students afterwards.
One of the most brazen uses of statistics which do not ﬁt
the deﬁnition was in a much-praised book that attempted to
show
that
black
students
admitted
to
colleges
under
afﬁrmative action do just ﬁne. The book was titled The Shape
of the River, written by William Bowen and Derek Bok,
former presidents of Princeton and Harvard, respectively.
Although this book is crammed full of statistics, not one
of those statistics is about black students admitted under
afﬁrmative action. Black students admitted under the same
standards as white students are lumped together with black
students admitted under lower standards. Yet, from this the
authors conclude that afﬁrmative action is a good thing—to
the applause of those who apparently wanted to see that
conclusion more than they wanted to see meaningful
statistics.
Advocates of campaign ﬁnance reform often speak of the
corrupting inﬂuence of money. But they seldom include the
corrupting inﬂuence of the government’s money on what
statistical “facts” are fed to the public.

Peers and Pied Pipers
Some years ago, while walking across the campus of
Stanford University, I happened to encounter the late Glen
Campbell, then head of the Hoover Institution, where I
work. Glen was also a regent of the University of California
and the regents had just made some horrible decision that
had me upset.
After I explained to Glen why I thought the regents’
decision was so terrible, he said with a wry smile, “They
know all that, Tom.” That stopped me in my tracks.
“Why did they do it, then?” I asked.
“They want to be liked,” he replied. “If they voted the
way you wanted them to vote, they wouldn’t be liked.” Glen
could never be accused of courting popularity and he had
voted the other way.
Cynics say that every man has his price, but it is amazing
how low some people’s price is. Being a regent is not a
career or even a stepping stone to a career.
Many
of
the
regents
were
already
independently
wealthy—or
rather,
they
were
wealthy
enough
to
be
independent, if they were not concerned about their
popularity.
Popularity may not be the right word, if it means being
liked by the public at large. Many things are done—by
regents, by judges, and by the intelligentsia—that are very
unpopular with the public. But these things enhance their
status with their peers.
The very fact that the public doesn’t like what they do

378
ever wonder why?
may only solidify their sense of being one of the special
people who are wiser, nobler or more daring. Some things
are believed, without evidence, because such beliefs are a
mark of belonging.
Once I asked a federal judge why some of his fellow
judges made some of the incredibly bad rulings that they
had made. His answer was not very different from that of
Glen Campbell—except that he speciﬁed that it was the
opinions of the liberal media and the elite law school
professors that was the gallery to whom these judges were
playing.
“You mean they care what Linda Greenhouse of the New
York Times writes about them?” I asked, incredulous.
“Yes,” he replied.
That certainly gave new meaning to the term “the
Greenhouse effect.”
It was even more bafﬂing to hear, within the past year,
professors at two of the top law schools in the country tell
me that (1) they found the arguments used to justify
afﬁrmative action were just a crock and (2) they supported
afﬁrmative action anyway. One said he didn’t want to offend
donors to his law school.
We usually think of peer pressure as something that kids
succumb to. But not only is such pressure effective with
people who have long since passed childhood, not all the
peer pressure on children is spontaneous.
Schools across the country promote using peers as
guides. There are even “trust-building” exercises designed to
get students to rely on their classmates. At the same time,
these same schools try to put distance between students and
their parents.
“Many parents wonder why they lose their children to a
whole new value system,” a parent once said plaintively. It is

379
Education Issues
not accidental. There are not only individual pied pipers in
the schools but whole nationwide educational efforts to
detach children from their parents, as a way of promoting
“social change.”
It is not just parents, but the whole moral structure of
society that must be undermined through such misnamed
programs as “values clariﬁcation” and its sequels—if the
fashionable brand of “change” is to be imposed.
That the pathetically under-educated people who staff
our public schools should take upon themselves the task of
shaping a whole society is staggering. What is even more
staggering is that the rest of us let them get away with it—
for the most part, because so few even know that it is
happening.
There is no way to quantify just how much we are all
paying so that a relative handful of people can feel
important as part of some elite peer group. But we are
paying, not only economically, but in everything from social
disintegration to violent crime. Whole societies have come
apart when the things that hold them together have been
dissolved.


PART VII
RACIAL ISSUES


Older Budweiser
Back in the days of the Hapsburg Empire, there was a town
in Bohemia called Budweis. The people in that town were
called Budweisers and the town had a brewery which
produced beer with the same name—but different from the
American Budweiser.
Like many communities in Bohemia during that era,
Budweis had people of both Czech and German ancestries,
speaking
different
languages,
though
many
were
also
bilingual. They got along pretty well and most people there
thought of themselves as Budweisers, rather than as Czechs
or Germans. But that would later change—for the worse—
not only in Budweis, but throughout Bohemia.
The mayor of Budweis spoke both Czech and German
but refused to be classiﬁed as a member of either group. His
point was that we are all Budweisers.
As with virtually all groups in virtually all countries and
in virtually all eras, there were differences between the
Germans and the Czechs in Budweis. Germans were more
educated,
more
prosperous,
and
more
prominent
in
business and the professions.
The German language at that point had a much wider
and richer literature, the Slavic languages having acquired
written versions centuries later than the languages of
Western Europe. Educated Bohemians of whatever ethnicity
were usually educated in German.
Those
Czechs
who
wished
to
rise
into
the upper
echelons,
whether
in
business,
the
military,
or
the

384
ever wonder why?
professions, had to master the German language and
culture, in order to ﬁt in with those already at the higher
levels.
People on both sides learned to live with this situation
and Czechs were welcomed into the German cultural
enclaves in Bohemia when they mastered that culture. In
Budweis, they could all be Budweisers.
As in so many other countries and in so many other
times, the rise of a newly educated intellectual class in the
19th century polarized the society with ethnic identity
politics. All over Bohemia, the new Czech intelligentsia
urged
Czechs
to
think
of
themselves
as
Czechs,
not
Bohemians or Budweisers or anything else that would
transcend their ethnic identity.
Demands were made that street signs in Prague, which
had been in both Czech and German before, now be
exclusively in Czech. Quotas were demanded for a certain
percentage of Czech music to be played by the Budweiser
orchestra.
If such demands seem petty, their consequences were
not
small.
People
of
German
ancestry resisted ethnic
classiﬁcations but the Czech intelligentsia insisted and Czech
politicians went along with the trend on many issues, large
and small.
Eventually, Germans as well began in self-defense to
think of themselves as Germans, rather than as Bohemians
or Budweisers, and to defend their interests as Germans.
This ethnic polarization in the 19th century was a fateful
step
whose
full
consequences
have
not
yet
ended
completely, even in the 21st century.
A crucial turning point was the creation of the new
nation of Czechoslovakia when the Hapsburg Empire was
broken up after the First World War. Czech leaders declared

385
Racial Issues
the new nation’s mission to include a correction of “social
injustice” so as to “put right the historic wrongs of the
seventeenth century.”
What were those wrongs? Czech nobles who revolted
against the Hapsburg Empire back in the 17th century were
defeated and had their lands conﬁscated and turned over to
Germans. Presumably no one from the 17th century was still
alive when Czechoslovakia was created in the 20th century,
but Czech nationalists kept the grievance alive—as ethnic
identity ideologues have done in countries around the
world.
Government policies designed to undo history with
preferential treatment for Czechs polarized the existing
generation of Germans and Czechs. Bitter German reactions
led eventually to demands that the part of the country
where they lived be united with neighboring Germany. From
this came the Munich crisis of 1938 that dismembered
Czechoslovakia on the eve of World War II.
When the Nazis conquered the whole country, the
Germans now lorded it over the Czechs. After the war, the
Czech reaction led to mass expulsions of Germans under
brutal conditions that cost many lives. Today refugees in
Germany are still demanding restitution.
If only the grievances of past centuries had been left in
the past! If only they had all remained Budweisers or
Bohemians.

Rosa Parks and History
The death of Rosa Parks has reminded us of her place in
history, as the black woman whose refusal to give up her seat
on a bus to a white man, in accordance with the Jim Crow
laws of Alabama, became the spark that ignited the civil
rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
Most people do not know the rest of the story, however.
Why
was
there
racially
segregated
seating
on
public
transportation in the ﬁrst place? “Racism” some will say—
and there was certainly plenty of racism in the South, going
back
for
centuries.
But racially segregated seating on
streetcars and buses in the South did not go back for
centuries.
Far from existing from time immemorial, as many have
assumed, racially segregated seating in public transportation
began in the South in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Those who see government as the solution to social
problems may be surprised to learn that it was government
which created this problem. Many, if not most, municipal
transit systems were privately owned in the 19th century and
the private owners of these systems had no incentive to
segregate the races.
These owners may have been racists themselves but they
were in business to make a proﬁt—and you don’t make a
proﬁt by alienating a lot of your customers. There was not
enough market demand for Jim Crow seating on municipal
transit to bring it about.
It was politics that segregated the races because the

387
Racial Issues
incentives of the political process are different from the
incentives of the economic process. Both blacks and whites
spent
money
to
ride
the
buses
but,
after
the
disenfranchisement of black voters in the late 19th and early
20th century, only whites counted in the political process.
It was not necessary for an overwhelming majority of the
white voters to demand racial segregation. If some did and
the others didn’t care, that was sufﬁcient politically, because
what blacks wanted did not count politically after they lost
the vote.
The
incentives
of
the
economic
system
and
the
incentives of the political system were not only different,
they clashed.
Private owners of streetcar, bus, and railroad companies
in the South lobbied against the Jim Crow laws while these
laws were being written, challenged them in the courts after
the laws were passed, and then dragged their feet in
enforcing those laws after they were upheld by the courts.
These tactics delayed the enforcement of Jim Crow
seating laws for years in some places. Then company
employees began to be arrested for not enforcing such laws
and at least one president of a streetcar company was
threatened with jail if he didn’t comply.
None of this resistance was based on a desire for civil
rights for blacks. It was based on a fear of losing money if
racial segregation caused black customers to use public
transportation less often than they would have in the
absence of this affront.
Just as it was not necessary for an overwhelming majority
of whites to demand racial segregation through the political
system to bring it about, so it was not necessary for an
overwhelming
majority
of
blacks
to
stop
riding
the
streetcars, buses and trains in order to provide incentives for

388
ever wonder why?
the owners of these transportation systems to feel the loss of
money if some blacks used public transportation less than
they would have otherwise.
People who decry the fact that businesses are in business
“just to make money” seldom understand the implications of
what they are saying. You make money by doing what other
people want, not what you want.
Black people’s money was just as good as white people’s
money, even though that was not the case when it came to
votes.
Initially, segregation meant that whites could not sit in
the black section of a bus any more than blacks could sit in
the white section. But whites who were forced to stand when
there were still empty seats in the black section objected.
That’s when the rule was imposed that blacks had to give up
their seats to whites.
Legal
sophistries
by
judges
“interpreted”
the
14th
Amendment’s
requirement
of
equal
treatment
out
of
existence. Judicial activism can go in any direction.
That’s when Rosa Parks came in, after more than half a
century of political chicanery and judicial fraud.
Those who think that politicians and judges are the
answer to our racial problems, and who regard free markets
or a strict construction of the Constitution as antithetical to
progress, have profoundly misunderstood both history and
the country they live in today.
A free market was antithetical to Jim Crow seating and a
strict construction of the 14th Amendment would never
have permitted laws that asked black women to give up their
seats to white men.

“Friends” of Blacks
Who was it who said, “if the Negro cannot stand on his
own legs, let him fall”?
Ronald Reagan? Newt Gingrich? Charles Murray?
Not even close. It was Frederick Douglass!
This was part of a speech in which Douglass also said:
“Everybody has asked the question, . . . ‘What shall we do
with the Negro?’ I have had but one answer from the
beginning. Do nothing with us! Your doing with us has
already played the mischief with us. Do nothing with us!”
Frederick
Douglass
had
achieved
a
deeper
understanding in the 19th century than any of the black
“leaders” of today. Those whites who feel a need to do
something with blacks and for blacks have been some of the
most dangerous “friends” of blacks.
Academia is the home of many such “friends,” which is
why there are not only double standards of admissions to
colleges but also in some places double standards in
grading. The late David Riesman called it “afﬁrmative
grading.”
A professor at one of California’s state universities where
black students are allowed to graduate on the basis of easier
standards put it bluntly: “We are just lying to these black
students when we give them degrees.” That lie is particularly
deadly when the degree is a medical degree, authorizing
someone to treat sick people or perform surgery on
children.
For years, Dr. Patrick Chavis was held up as a shining

390
ever wonder why?
example of the success of afﬁrmative action, for he was
admitted
to
medical
school
as
a
result
of
minority
preferences and went back to the black community to
practice medicine. In fact, he was publicly praised by the
Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights—just two weeks before
his license was suspended, after his patients died under
conditions that brought the matter to the attention of the
Medical Board of California.
An administrative law judge referred to Chavis’ “inability
to perform some of the most basic duties required of a
physician.” A year later, after a fuller investigation, his
license was revoked.
Those who had for years been using Chavis as a shining
example of the success of afﬁrmative action suddenly
changed tactics and claimed that an isolated example of
failure proved nothing. Sadly, Chavis was not an isolated
example.
When
a
professor
at
the
Harvard
Medical
School
declared publicly, back in the 1970s, that black students
were being allowed to graduate from that institution without
meeting the same standards as others, he was denounced as
a “racist” for saying that it was cruel to “allow trusting
patients to pay for our irresponsibility”—trusting black
patients, in many cases.
Why do supposedly responsible people create such
dangerous double standards? Some imagine that they are
being friends to blacks by lowering the standards for them.
Some don’t think that blacks have what it takes to meet real
standards, and that colleges and universities will lose their
“diversity”—and perhaps federal money with it—if they
don’t lower the standards, in order to get an acceptable
racial body count.
My own experience as a teacher was that black students

391
Racial Issues
would meet higher standards if you refused to lower the
standards
for
them.
This
was
not
the
royal
road
to
popularity, either with the students themselves or with the
“friends” of blacks on the faculty and in the administration.
But, when the dust ﬁnally settled, the students met the
standards.
We have gotten so used to abysmal performances from
black students, beginning in failing ghetto schools, that it is
hard for some to believe that black students once did a lot
better than they do today, at least in places and times with
good schools. As far back as the First World War, black
soldiers from New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Ohio
scored higher on mental tests than white soldiers from
Georgia, Arkansas, Kentucky, and Mississippi.
During the 1940s, black students in Harlem schools had
test scores very similar to those of white working class
students on the lower east side of New York. Sometimes the
Harlem scores were a little higher or a little lower, but they
were never miles behind, the way they are today in many
ghetto schools.
If blacks could do better back when their opportunities
were worse, why can’t today’s ghetto students do better?
Perhaps blacks have too many “friends” today.

“Friends” of Blacks: Part II
In a commercial that ran during the Christmas-New Year’s
holidays a few years ago, the husband was trying to keep an
old car patched up, while the wife wanted him to get a new
one. At the end, the wife asked: “Should old acquaintance
be forgot?” And she answered emphatically: “Yes!”
No group is more in need of forgetting old political ties
and making some new ones than blacks. The black vote has
been almost an automatic monopoly of the Democratic
Party
for
years.
Yet
the
dominant
forces
among
the
Democrats have agendas that are directly contrary to the
interests of blacks.
This is not due to racism but to the fact that single-issue
zealots have more clout within the Democratic Party than
blacks do. These single-issue groups will vote for whoever
serves their purposes, so the Democrats have to earn their
votes, while blacks vote for Democrats automatically.
Nothing is more important to the future advancement of
blacks than the quality of their children’s education. But any
attempt to give black parents real options as to where they
can send their children to school runs into a brick wall
because the teachers’ unions are the 800-pound gorillas of
the Democratic Party.
Controlling millions of votes and millions of dollars in
campaign
contributions,
the
teachers’ unions’ interests
prevail, even when that sacriﬁces the future of a whole
generation of young blacks. But, despite polls which show
that blacks favor vouchers more than any other group, black

393
Racial Issues
votes continue to go to Democrats who sacriﬁce their
children on the altar to the teachers’ unions.
Black 4th graders scored higher on tests in Texas than
in any other state. But 92 percent of black votes went against
the Republican governor of Texas in the 2000 presidential
election. Democrats had rhetoric, symbolism, and inertia
going for them.
Housing is another key area where the interests of blacks
get trumped by the interests of another crucial constituency
of the Democratic Party—the environmentalist cult. Most
blacks cannot afford the exorbitant costs of homes and
apartments in those places where the environmentalists are
politically dominant.
Name
a
place
where
liberal
Democrats
and
environmentalists have been in control for many years and
you are almost certain to ﬁnd a place where housing costs
are far higher than housing costs in the rest of the country.
That is because sky-high prices for housing are due to sky-
high prices for land. These extravagant land prices are in
turn
due
to
“open
space”
laws
and
other
land
use
restrictions which the environmentalists push, heedless of
the cost to others.
But here, as in education, symbolism trumps reality, and
black votes go overwhelmingly to support politicians whose
policies
drive
up
housing
prices
by
catering
to
the
environmental movement.
Another great problem for blacks is crime. Liberal
Democrats have long resisted efforts to crack down on
criminals. Instead, the great liberal dogma is that we need
to
seek
out
the
“root
causes”
of
crime
and
set
up
government
social
programs
to
solve
the
problem
by
“prevention” of crime.
Beginning in the 1960s, massive and ever-expanding

394
ever wonder why?
welfare state programs co-existed for decades with ever-
increasing crime rates, while liberal judges kept ﬁnding new
reasons
to
turn
criminals
loose.
Eventually,
however,
tougher new laws in the 1980s began to put more criminals
behind bars for longer times.
Liberal
Democrats
loudly
protested
this
increased
locking up of criminals. Then, when the crime rate began
to fall for the ﬁrst time in decades, the liberals were bafﬂed
as to why this was happening.
Since a higher percentage of blacks than whites are
victims of criminals, blacks have far more at stake than
others when it comes to controlling crime. But Democrats
have been working against the interests of law-abiding blacks
because
Democrats
are
more
responsive
to
liberal
ideologues like the American Civil Liberties Union.
The issues on which Democrats cater to blacks are
largely symbolic issues, such as naming streets for Martin
Luther King or throwing money at the pet projects of
various community “leaders.” So long as Democrats can get
the votes of blacks by promoting symbolism, and the support
of other groups by substantive policies, they are in good
shape
on
election
day.
But
blacks
are
not,
because
symbolism does nothing about education, housing or crime.

Recycled “Racism”
One of the things that happens when you get old is that
what seems like news to others can look like a re-run of
something you have already seen before. It is like watching
an old movie for the ﬁfth or sixth time.
A headline in the September 14, 2005 issue of the New
York Times says: “Blacks Hit Hardest By Costlier Mortgages.”
Thirteen years earlier, virtually the identical story appeared
in the Wall Street Journal under the title, “Federal Reserve
Details Pervasive Racial Gap in Mortgage Lending.”
Both stories were based on statistical studies by the
Federal
Reserve
showing
that
blacks
and
whites
have
different experiences when applying for mortgage loans—
and both stories imply that racial discrimination is the
reason.
The earlier study showed that blacks were turned down
for mortgage loans a higher percentage of the time than
whites were and the later story shows that blacks resorted to
high-priced “subprime” loans more often than whites when
they ﬁnanced the purchase of a home.
Both amount to the same thing—less credit being
extended to blacks on the same terms as credit extended to
whites.
Both studies also say that this is true even when black
and white loan applicants have the same income. The ﬁrst
time around, back in 1992, this seemed like a pretty good
case
for
those
who
blamed the
differences on racial
discrimination.

396
ever wonder why?
However, both research and old age tend to produce
skepticism about things that look plausible on the surface.
Just scratching the surface a little often makes a plausible
case collapse like a house of cards.
For example, neither study took credit histories into
account. People with lower credit ratings tend to get turned
down for loans more often than people with higher credit
ratings, or else they have to go where loans have higher
interest rates. This is not rocket science. It is Economics 1.
Blacks in the earlier study turned out to have poor credit
histories more often than whites. But the more recent news
story did not even look into that.
Anyone who has ever taken out a mortgage loan knows
that the lenders not only want to know what your current
income is, they also want to know what your net worth is.
Census data show that blacks with the same income as whites
average less net worth.
That is not rocket science either. Not many blacks have
afﬂuent parents or rich uncles from whom they could
inherit wealth.
The earlier study showed that whites were turned down
for mortgage loans more frequently than Asian Americans
and the more recent study shows that Asian Americans are
less likely than whites to take out high-cost “subprime” loans
to buy a house.
Does that mean that whites were being discriminated
against? Or are statistics taken seriously only when they back
up some preconception that is politically correct?
These are what could be called “Aha!” statistics. If you
start out with a preconception and ﬁnd numbers that ﬁt that
preconception, you say, “Aha!” But when the numbers don’t
ﬁt any preconception—when no one believes that banks are

397
Racial Issues
discriminating
against
whites
and
in
favor
of
Asian
Americans—then there is no “Aha!”
Both this year’s study and the one 13 years ago provoked
an outburst of accusations of racism from people who are in
the business of making such accusations. Moreover, where
there is a “problem” proclaimed in the media there will
almost invariably be a “solution” proposed in politics.
Often the solution is worse than the problem.
The older study showed that most blacks and most whites
who applied for mortgage loans got them—72 percent of
blacks and 89 percent of whites. So it is not as if most blacks
can’t get loans.
Apparently the gap has narrowed since then, for the New
York Times reports that lenders have developed “high-cost
subprime mortgages for people who would have been simply
rejected outright in the past on the basis of poor credit or
insufﬁcient income.”
Of course, the government can always step in and put a
stop to these high-cost loans, which will probably mean that
people with lower credit ratings can’t buy a home at all.

Dangerous Democracy?
One of the cornerstones of the war on terrorism is the
premise that promoting democracy is a long-run goal for
creating a better world, one which will not breed so many
terrorists. But a new book, World on Fire by Professor Amy
Chua of the Yale law school, argues persuasively that
democracy can be positively dangerous for some non-
Western countries, especially when combined with a free
market economy.
While
democracy
and
free
markets
have
been
an
extremely productive combination for many European and
European offshoot societies, such as the United States and
Australia, Professor Chua sees these two things as being like
an explosive mixture in certain non-Western nations. More
speciﬁcally, this combination is seen as dangerous in those
countries where some ethnic minority is dominant in a free
market economy, while the majority population dominates
politics through their votes.
If this thesis sounds strange, try to make a list of
countries
that
are
non-Western
and
which
enjoy
the
freedoms we speak of as democracy, as well as having a free
market in which some minority group is dominant.
Merely making a list of countries that are both non-
Western and democratic is enough of a challenge, and
adding a free market proviso shrinks that already short list.
Now
add
the
key
proviso
that
some
ethnic
minority
dominates the economy.
The Chinese minority is dominant in the economies of

399
Racial Issues
Indonesia and Malaysia, the Indian minority is dominant in
Fiji, the Lebanese have been dominant in West Africa, and
other groups in other places around the world. But these
have seldom been democratic countries.
Perhaps Malaysia might be considered a democracy,
since it has an elected government, but the glaring absence
of free speech on racial issues in Malaysia keeps it from
being a free society, which is what most people mean by
democracy, even though that is not the original meaning of
the word. It is doubtful whether Malaysia could survive if
racial demagogues were free to stir up the Malay majority
against the Chinese minority that is still a dominant force in
that economy.
The absence of free speech on racial matters in Malaysia
means that there can be no careers like those of Jesse
Jackson or Al Sharpton in the United States. Maybe the U.S.
is secure enough to be able to afford to let irresponsible
rabble-rousers
run
loose—or
maybe
someday
we
will
discover that we are not—but Malaysia certainly is not.
Sri Lanka started coming apart within a decade of
receiving its independence as a free, democratic nation in
1948. The Tamil minority was not as dominant in its
economy as the Chinese minority in Malaysia and other
Southeast
Asian
countries,
but
still
Tamils
were
over-
represented at the top in business, in the professions, and
in education. That was enough to allow the Sinhalese
majority
to
be
mobilized
politically
against
them
by
ambitious politicians.
Even though there had never been a single race riot
between the Sinhalese majority and the Tamil minority
during the ﬁrst half of the 20th century, there were many in
the second half, punctuated by unspeakable atrocities.
Eventually Sri Lanka descended into outright civil war, in

400
ever wonder why?
which this small island nation has suffered more deaths than
the United States suffered during the Vietnam war.
Similarly, according to Professor Chua, an authority on
ethnic conﬂicts around the world, there were no major
outbreaks of violence between the Hutu and Tutsi in
Rwanda in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century. Then majority
rule brought ethnic polarization and horrifying massacres.
What about counter-examples of free, democratic, free-
market, non-Western societies where an ethnic minority is
blatantly more successful in the economy than the majority
population, but where the people live at peace with one
another? You supply those examples. I can’t think of any.
Professor Chua’s thesis is especially important in an era
when American foreign policy sometimes seems to be
pressing our allies and others to become democracies with
free
markets—whether
or
not
each
country’s
social
conditions or cultural traditions provide the prerequisites
for letting that particular combination be a blessing rather
than a curse.

Are Cops Racist?
In much of the liberal media, large-scale confrontations
between police and people who are breaking the law are
usually reported in one of two ways. Either the police used
“excessive force” or they “let the situation get out of hand.”
Any force sufﬁcient to prevent the situation from getting
out of hand will be called “excessive.” And if the police
arrive in large enough numbers to squelch disorder without
the need for using any force at all, then sending in so many
cops will be called “over-reacting.” After all, with so little
resistance to the police, why were so many cops necessary?
Such is the mindset of the media.
Add the volatile factor of race and the media will have a
ﬁeld day. If an incident involves a white cop and a black
criminal, you don’t need to know the speciﬁc facts to know
how liberals in the media will react. You can predict the
words and the music.
Heather Mac Donald of the Manhattan Institute does
have the facts, however, in her new book, Are Cops Racist?
Unfortunately, those who most need to read this book are
the least likely to do so. They have made up their minds and
don’t want to be confused by facts.
For the rest of us, this is a very enlightening and very
readable little book. Ms. Mac Donald ﬁrst tackles the issue
of “racial proﬁling” by the police and shows what shoddy
and even silly statistical methods were used to gin up
hysteria. Then she moves on to police shootings and other
law-enforcement issues.

402
ever wonder why?
Suppose I were to tell you that, despite the fact that
blacks are just 11 percent of the American population, more
than half the men ﬁned for misconduct while playing
professional basketball are black—and concluded that this
shows the NBA to be racist. What would your reaction be?
“Wait a minute!” you might say. “More than half the
players in the NBA are black. So that 11 percent statistic is
irrelevant.”
That is exactly what is wrong with “racial proﬁling”
statistics. It is based on blacks as a percentage of the
population, rather than blacks as a percentage of the people
who do the kinds of things that cause police to stop people
and question them.
A professor of statistics who pointed this out was—all too
predictably—denounced as a “racist.” Other statisticians kept
quiet for fear of being smeared the same way. We have now
reached the dangerous point where ignorance can silence
knowledge and where facts get squelched by beliefs.
Heather Mac Donald also goes into facts involving police
shootings, especially when the cops are white and the
suspect is black. Here again, an education awaits those who
are willing to be educated.
People in the media are forever expressing surprise at
how many bullets were ﬁred in some of these police
shootings. As someone who once taught pistol shooting in
the Marine Corps, I am not the least bit surprised.
What surprises me is how many people whose ignorance
of shooting is obvious do not let their ignorance stand in
the way of reaching sweeping conclusions about situations
that they have never faced. To some, it is just a question of
taking sides. If it is a white cop and a black suspect, then
that is all they feel a need to know.
The greatest contribution of this book is in making

403
Racial Issues
painfully clear the actual consequences of cop-bashing in
the media and in politics. The police respond to incentives,
like everyone else.
If carrying out their duties in the way that gets the job
done best is going to bring down on their heads a chorus of
media outrage that can threaten their whole careers, many
cops tend to back off. And who pays the price of their
backing off? Mainly those blacks who are victims of the
criminals in their midst.
Drug dealers and other violent criminals have been the
beneﬁciaries of reduced police activity and of liberal judges
throwing out their convictions because of “racial proﬁling.”
These criminals go back to the black community—not the
afﬂuent, suburban and often gated communities where
journalists, judges, and politicians live.
The subtitle of Are Cops Racist? is: “How the War Against
the Police Harms Black Americans.”

Rattling the Chains
The
president
of
Brown
University has
appointed a
committee to look into the history of the connections of
that institution to the slave trade. This is to be no academic
exercise of scholarly research. There is obviously supposed
to be a pot of gold at the end of this rainbow.
Brown University president Ruth J. Simmons was coy on
the one hand but clear on the other. According to the New
York Times, “Dr. Simmons said she would not reveal her
opinion
on
reparations
so
as
not
to
inﬂuence
the
committee.”
“Here’s the one thing I’ll say,” she stated. “If the
committee comes back and says, ‘Oh it’s been lovely and
we’ve learned a lot,’ but there’s nothing in particular that
they
think
Brown
can
or
should
do,
I
will
be
very
disappointed.”
How is that for not inﬂuencing the committee? If there
is anything worse than race hustling, it is being coy about
race hustling. At least Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson are up
front.
Dr.
Simmons
said
that
the
idea
of
appointing
a
committee to look into Brown University’s past came to her
because she is a descendant of slaves and the building in
which
she
works
was
built
with
the
help
of
slaves.
Unfortunately, there are descendants of slaves all over the
world, and they are every color of the rainbow.
Slavery was an ugly, dirty business but people of virtually
every race, color, and creed engaged in it on every inhabited

405
Racial Issues
continent. And the people they enslaved were also of
virtually every race, color, and creed.
A recently published book titled Christian Slaves, Muslim
Masters by Robert Davis shows that a million Europeans were
enslaved by North Africans between 1500 and 1800. Nor
were they the only Europeans enslaved.
Europeans
enslaved
other
Europeans
for
centuries
before the drying up of that supply led them to turn to
Africa as a source of slaves for the Western Hemisphere.
Julius Caesar marched in triumph through Rome in a
procession that included British slaves he had captured.
There were white slaves still being sold in Egypt two decades
after blacks were freed in the United States.
It was the same story in Asia, Africa, and among the
Polynesians and the indigenous peoples of the Western
Hemisphere. No race, country, or civilization had clean
hands.
What makes the current reparations movement a fraud,
whether at Brown University or in the country at large, is the
attempt to depict slavery as something uniquely done to
blacks by whites. Reparations advocates are doing this for
the same reason that Willie Sutton robbed banks: That’s
where the money is.
No one expects Kaddaﬁto pay reparations to the
descendants of Europeans whom his ancestors captured on
the Mediterranean coast or Western Europeans to pay
reparations to Slavs who were enslaved on such a scale that
the very word slave derived from their name.
Still less does anyone expect Africans to pay reparations
to black Americans whose ancestors they sold to white men
who took them across the Atlantic. Only in America can
guilt be turned into cash.
Who is supposed to beneﬁt from all this?

406
ever wonder why?
Are young blacks, who have a lot of educational lags to
make up, supposed to be helped by this distraction or to
become more employable with a chip on their shoulders?
Are they to be helped by being led to believe that the way
to get ahead is to hustle white people?
White guilt is too much of a declining asset to depend
on. More and more white people are feeling less and less
guilty. Ruth Simmons may squeeze a few bucks out of Brown
University but it is doubtful whether whatever good that
does will balance the resentments and polarization it creates.
The only clear winners in the reparations movement,
whether at Brown or elsewhere, are the people who engage
in it. At a minimum, they get publicity and ego gratiﬁcation.
Dr. Simmons’ standing has no doubt risen in politically
correct circles, which would include not only the academic
world but the foundation world and the world of liberal
politics. If she ever wants to make a career move in any of
these directions, she is now well set.
But at what price?

Roasting Walter Williams
At George Mason University, they are giving a “roast”—that
peculiarly American combination of praise and ridicule—to
Walter Williams, professor of economics and columnist
extraordinaire.
Although
I
cannot
be
there,
let
me
participate vicariously with a few observations about Walter.
I ﬁrst met Walter Williams back in 1969, when I was
teaching summer school at UCLA and he was a student
working toward his Ph.D. in economics there. Contrary to
some accounts in the media, Walter was never a student of
mine. Nor did he get his ideas from me.
The very reason Walter Williams dropped by my ofﬁce
that summer was that someone had told him that there was
another black man who was expressing the same kinds of
ideas that he had been expressing before I got there. To
both our surprise, we discovered that we had in fact reached
similar conclusions on a wide range of issues, especially
those involving race.
In the years ahead these ideas would be called “black
conservatism” in the media, though it is hard to imagine two
less conservative guys. In the military, each of us was
indicted for a court martial—Walter in the Army and I in
the Marine Corps—because we did not conform. It should
not be surprising that we did not conform to the racial
orthodoxy of the 1960s.
Because
Walter
was
tied
up
writing
his
doctoral
dissertation, I was the ﬁrst to go into print with ideas that
we both had. One of Walter’s earliest writings was an article

408
ever wonder why?
explaining why “the poor pay more” in stores in low-income
neighborhoods.
Some sociologists had written a book with that title but
their explanations overlooked the economic factors behind
high prices in ghettos and barrios. After Walter explained
the economics behind these high prices, those who were
now
deprived
of
their
all-purpose
explanation—racial
discrimination—reacted bitterly by denouncing Walter as a
“white racist.”
After Walter went on television, liberals had to come up
with some new derogatory labels—and they did. But these
labels were like water off a duck’s back to Walter Williams.
Walter was as undaunted by apartheid in South Africa as
he was by lockstep racial rhetoric in the United States. Many
economists have said that how much discrimination there
will be depends on how much it costs to discriminate in the
marketplace. But Walter was the only one to put it to a test
by living in a neighborhood that the apartheid government
had designated as “white only.”
Not very conservative.
Out of this experience came a book titled South Africa’s
War Against Capitalism. Over the years, I have used examples
from that book in my own writings. This is as good a time
as any to acknowledge my debt—especially since our ﬂawed
legal system will not enable Walter to collect.
Another very enlightening book by Walter Williams is
The State Against Blacks. This goes into the many American
government policies and practices which have had a major
negative economic impact on blacks.
These
include
minimum
wage
laws,
occupational
licensing laws, and regulation of railroads and trucking.
None of these is explicitly racial in intent but their actual
consequences have included restrictions of employment

409
Racial Issues
opportunities for blacks, as Walter demonstrates with hard
facts and ﬁgures.
Both these books are written in plain English, by the way,
a rarity among the writings of economists. The ability to
speak this rare dialect has also helped Walter during his
appearances on TV programs and as an occasional ﬁll-in
host for Rush Limbaugh.
Walter Williams is the only debater to leave Jesse Jackson
speechless. On another occasion, he ﬂabbergasted Ted
Koppel when a woman on welfare said that she didn’t have
enough money to take care of all her children and Walter
replied: “Did you ever consider that you might have had too
many children for the money?”
Although Walter often comes across as hard-boiled on
social issues—he once said that the government has no right
to take a dime of his money to spend on someone else—the
fact is that he has been very generous using his own money
and his own time to help others. He just doesn’t want
politicians doing it and messing things up.
This is a long overdue tribute to a great guy.

“Diversity” in India
If facts carried some weight with those who are politically
correct, the recent outbreak of savage and lethal violence in
India’s state of Gujarat might cause some reassessments of
both India and “diversity.”
This is only the latest round in a cycle of violence and
revenge between the Hindus and the Muslims in that
country. The death toll has reached 489 people in a few
days. That includes the Hindu activists who were ﬁrebombed
while on a train returning from the site of a razed mosque,
where they planned to build a Hindu temple, and many
Muslims then slaughtered by Indian mobs in retaliation.
These mobs have burned Muslim women and children
alive in their homes. Nor is such savagery new in India or
limited to clashes between Hindus and Muslims. At other
times and places, it has been one caste against another,
locals versus outsiders, or the storm trooper organization
Shiv Sena against anybody who gets in their way. In some
places, thugs resentful of Western inﬂuence attack shops
that sell Valentine cards.
None of this ﬁts the pious picture of peaceful and
spiritual India that so captivates many Americans. India has
served
as
one
of
the
foreign
Edens
to
which
those
Americans turn, in order to show their disdain for the
United States.
At one time, the Soviet Union played that role, then
China, then Cuba, and for some, India. What happens in
the real India doesn’t matter. It is the symbolic India of

411
Racial Issues
their dreams to which they impute all the virtues they
declare to be lacking in the USA.
It is not India’s fault that we have some fatuous
Americans who want to put Indians up on a pedestal, in
order to score points against their fellow Americans. But we
need to be aware of the truth as well.
Those who are constantly gushing about the supposed
beneﬁts of “diversity” never want to put their beliefs to the
test of looking at the facts about countries where people are
divided by language, culture, religion, and in other ways,
such as caste in India. Such countries are all too often
riddled with strife and violence.
India is one of the most diverse nations on earth. No
more than one-third of its people speak any given language
and the population is divided innumerable ways by caste,
ethnicity, religion and numerous localisms. Lethal riots have
marked its history from the beginning.
When India gained its independence in 1947, the
number of Hindus and Muslims who killed each other in
one year exceeded the total number of blacks lynched in
the entire history of the United States. Yet we are told that
we should be like those gentle people, as if India were a
nation of Gandhis. In reality, Gandhi was assassinated for
trying to stop internecine strife in India.
If
there
is
no
need
to
impute
wholly
unrealistic
sainthood to India, there is also no need to single it out for
demonization. Many other countries with the much-touted
“diversity” have likewise been racked by internal slaughters
and atrocities.
Only about 20 miles away from India, the island nation
of Sri Lanka has suffered more deaths among its majority
and minority populations, as a result of internal strife and
civil war, than the much larger United States suffered during

412
ever wonder why?
the Vietnam war. Other such “diverse” countries as Rwanda
and those in the Balkans have a similar catalogue of horrors.
“Diversity” is not just a matter of demographics. It is also
a matter of “identity” and identity politics. Sri Lanka was one
of the most peaceful nations on earth before demagogues
began hyping identity and demanding group preferences
and quotas back in the 1950s.
Demographically, the United States has always been
diverse, having received immigrants from all over the world.
However, until recent times, it was understood by all that
they came here to become Americans—not to remain
foreign. By the second generation, most were speaking
English, and by the third generation they were speaking
only English.
Today, however, our citizen-of-the-world types are doing
all they can to keep foreigners foreign and domestic
minorities riled up over grievances, past and present, real
and imaginary. Above all, they want group identity and
group preferences and quotas.
In short, they want all the things that have brought on
the kinds of disasters from which India and other such
“diverse” countries have suffered grievously.

Race and IQ
Years ago, while doing research on education and IQ, I
happened to be in the principal’s ofﬁce at a black school in
Cincinnati, as he was preparing to open a large brown
envelope containing the results of IQ tests that his students
had taken. Before he opened the envelope, I offered to bet
him that a large majority of the students with IQs over 110
would be girls.
He was too smart to take the bet. Studies had shown that
females predominated among high-IQ blacks. One study of
blacks whose IQs were 140 and up found that there were
more than ﬁve times as many females as males at these
levels.
This
is
hard
to
explain
by
either
heredity
or
environment, as those terms are usually deﬁned, since black
males and black females have the same ancestors and grow
up in the same homes. Meanwhile, white males and white
females have the same average IQs, with slightly more males
at both the highest and lowest IQs.
This is just one of many unsolved mysteries that is likely
to remain unsolved, because doing research on race and IQ
has become taboo in many places. My own research was
ﬁnanced in part by a grant from a foundation that told me
to remove any mention of IQ research from the activities
listed in my project’s application.
They didn’t care if I used their money for that purpose
but they did not want it on the record that they had
ﬁnanced research into race and intelligence. Many schools

414
ever wonder why?
and boards of education also did not want it on the record
that they had cooperated by supplying data for any such
research. Only when assured of complete anonymity would
they let me into their records.
A well-known black “social scientist” urged me not to do
any such research. His stated reason was that it would
“dignify” Professor Arthur Jensen’s thesis of a genetic basis
for black-white differences in IQ scores. But my own
suspicion was that he was afraid that the research would
prove Jensen right.
As it turned out, the research showed that the average
IQ difference between black and white Americans—15
points—was nothing unusual. Similar IQ differences could
be
found
between
various
culturally
isolated
white
communities and the general society, both in the United
States and in Britain. Among various groups in India, mental
test differences were slightly greater than those between
blacks and whites in the United States.
In recent years, research by Professor James R. Flynn, an
American expatriate living in New Zealand, has shaken up
the whole IQ controversy by discovering what has been
called “the Flynn effect.” In various countries around the
world, people have been answering signiﬁcantly more IQ
test questions correctly than in the past.
This important fact has been inadvertently concealed by
the practice of changing the norms on IQ tests, so that the
average number of correctly answered questions remains by
deﬁnition an IQ of 100. Only by painstakingly going back
and recalculating IQs, based on the initial norms, was
Professor Flynn able to discover that whole nations had, in
effect, had their IQs rising over the decades by about 20
points.
Since the black-white difference in IQ is 15 points, this

415
Racial Issues
means that an even larger IQ difference has existed between
different generations of the same race, making it no longer
necessary to attribute IQ differences of this magnitude to
genetics. In the half century between 1945 and 1995, black
Americans’ raw test scores rose by the equivalent of 16 IQ
points.
In other words, black Americans’ test score results in
1995 would have given them an average IQ just over 100 in
1945. Only the repeated renorming of IQ tests upward
created the illusion that blacks had made no progress, but
were stuck at an IQ of 85. But we would never have known
this if some researchers had not deﬁed the taboo on
studying race and IQ imposed by black “leaders” and white
“friends.”
Incidentally, Professor Jensen pointed out back in 1969
that black children’s IQ scores rose by 8 to 10 points after
he met with them informally in a play room and then tested
them again after they were more relaxed around him. He
did this because “I felt these children were really brighter
than their IQ would indicate.” What a shame that others
seem to have less conﬁdence in black children than
Professor Jensen has had.

Race and IQ: Part II
Professor John McWhorter, a black faculty member at the
University of California at Berkeley, has made a suggestion
that is explosive in itself and directly the opposite of what is
being said by those who are seeking to promote lower
college admissions standards for blacks through afﬁrmative
action.
One of the reasons given for wanting more black
students on a given campus, even if that means lowering
admissions standards, is the claim that a certain number of
blacks—a “critical mass”—on campus is necessary, in order
for these students to feel comfortable enough to relax and
do their best work. It sounds plausible, but lots of things
have sounded plausible.
Professor McWhorter says just the opposite in his book
Losing the Race. According to McWhorter, anti-intellectualism
in the black culture keeps many black youngsters from
doing their best. If he is right, then creating a critical mass
is creating a bigger handicap for black students.
There have been many media stories about hard-working
black school children being ostracized, or even threatened
with or subjected to violence, for “acting white” by trying to
succeed academically. Creating a critical mass with that
attitude is unlikely to help anyone.
More direct factual evidence is available, however. A
study of the effect of an increased proportion of black
students in a racially integrated school found little effect of
this on the academic performances of most other students—

417
Racial Issues
except for high-ability black students, whose performances
declined.
Another study, about the effects of ability-grouping,
found that high-ability students performed better when put
into classes with other high-ability students—and that this
was especially so with high-ability minority students. In other
words, a critical mass of students sorted by high ability did
more for bright minority students than a critical mass of
students sorted by race.
If Professor McWhorter is right, then his thesis might
also help explain another puzzling phenomenon. A study of
black orphans adopted by white families found their test
scores to be higher than those of black youngsters raised by
their own biological families. However, this initial ﬁnding
eroded away when these same students were tested again in
later years.
One of the things that can change as black kids grow
older is that they become more conscious of race as they go
into adolescence—and more responsive to peer pressure. If
Professor McWhorter is right, then an anti-intellectual
culture would be more likely to handicap them in the later
period.
In an earlier era, when there were seldom enough blacks
on most elite white college campuses to form a “critical
mass,” did those students not do as well as in the post-
afﬁrmative action era, when blacks became more numerous
on such campuses?
It is signiﬁcant that no such evidence has been sought by
those promoting the critical mass theory. However, students
who graduated from an academically outstanding black high
school in Washington between 1892 and 1954 left an
impressive academic record at Amherst College during that

418
ever wonder why?
era, even though there were seldom more than a handful of
black students on that campus at that time.
About three-quarters of these black students graduated
from Amherst and more than one-ﬁfth of these graduates
were Phi Beta Kappas. This was long before the era of grade
inﬂation or afﬁrmative action.
None of this is deﬁnitive proof. But those with the
critical mass theory offer no evidence at all and none is
asked. Their views prevail by default—and dogmatism.
The time is long overdue to judge beliefs and the
policies based on them by what actually works, not by what
sounds good or what makes people feel good.
Having opposed the racial inferiority thesis in various
writings over the years, I have in my own teaching held black
students to the same standards as white students, though not
all black students appreciated this kind of equality. Many of
those who promote double standards for blacks seem
convinced that blacks cannot achieve what whites have
achieved. That is part of the ugly secret behind afﬁrmative
action.

Race and IQ: Part III
I happened to run into Charles Murray in Dulles Airport
while he and Richard Herrnstein were writing The Bell Curve.
When I asked him what he was working on and he
summarized what he was writing, he could tell that I was
concerned about him, so I told him why: “Charles, no
matter what you say, people will hear what they want to
hear.”
That is one prediction that I wish had not come true, but
it has. There are people who have never read a single word
of The Bell Curve but who are convinced that they not only
know what it says but also know what the motivation was for
saying it.
Partly this is because there are increasing numbers of
people for whom indignation is a way of life. But that is not
the sole reason. Historically, blacks have been among the
many peoples accused of being innately inferior, especially
in intelligence.
Back in the days of the Roman Empire, Cicero warned
his fellow Romans not to buy British slaves, because he
found them hard to teach anything. A 10th century Muslim
scholar noted that Europeans grew more pale the farther
north they were and that the “farther they are to the north
the more stupid, gross, and brutish they are.”
With our love of labels today, we might dismiss both
these statements as “racism.” In reality, both statements were
probably true, as of the time they were made. At the very

420
ever wonder why?
least, the people who said these things were eyewitnesses,
which we cannot possibly be.
Britain was a primitive, illiterate, tribal land at a time
when the Roman Empire was in its glory as one of the most
advanced civilizations on earth. A Briton transplanted to
Rome in captivity must have found this complex civilization
completely bafﬂing and was probably none too quick to
understand instructions on what to do and how to do it in
such a wholly unfamiliar setting.
As of the 10th century, the Islamic world was more
advanced than Europe in general and far more advanced
than the northern regions of Europe, which had for
centuries lagged behind Mediterranean Europe. The relative
development of these different regions of Europe, especially
in economic terms, would be reversed in later centuries, but
what the Muslim scholar said in the 10th century was
probably still true then.
The point here is that there have always been gaps
between the development of one people and another, even
if
their
relative
positions
did
not
remain
the
same
permanently, and even if their genes had nothing to do with
it. In the case of blacks in the United States, there was a
special reason for particularly negative pronouncements.
Although slavery existed all over the world for thousands
of years, among people of every race, it was considered a
“peculiar institution” in the United States because it was in
complete contradiction to the principles on which the
country was founded. Slavery was controversial among
Americans when it was still accepted as just another fact of
life in other countries.
Nowhere else in the world was such a literature of
justiﬁcation of slavery produced as in the antebellum South,
because nowhere else was slavery under such sustained

421
Racial Issues
attack. An especially virulent racism arose to try to justify
slavery, and this racism lasted long after slavery itself was
gone.
That
history
and
its
painful
consequences
are
undeniable. But, in a world where whole nations have in
effect raised their IQs by 20 points in one generation, it is
time for black “leaders” and white “friends” to stop trying to
discredit the tests and get on with the job of improving the
skills that the tests measure.
A number of black schools, even in rundown ghettos,
have already reached or exceeded national norms on tests,
so there is no question that it can be done. The question is
whether it will in fact be done, on a large enough scale to
change
the
abysmal
educational
results
in
too
many
predominantly black schools.
So
long
as
demagogues
are
concentrating
on
demonizing anyone who points out the problem, do not
expect the kind of general improvement that is needed.
This demonization has made The Bell Curve one of the most
misrepresented books of our time. But such demagoguery
has not helped one black child to get a better education.

An Old War and a New One
Back in 1939, when Senator Daniel Inouye was a teenager,
he attended a Japanese language school in Hawaii. He was
appalled to discover that it was also a center for political
propaganda, urging young Japanese Americans like himself
to remember that they were Japanese ﬁrst and owed an
overriding loyalty to Japan—in peace or in war. They also
ridiculed Christianity.
When young Daniel Inouye objected, he was thrown
bodily out of the school. Later, during World War II, he
proved his loyalty to America as a soldier in battle, where he
lost an arm.
Inouye was one of many Japanese Americans who proved
themselves in battle, many winning combat medals for valor.
It
is
also
true
that
there
were
some
other
Japanese
Americans who went to Japan and joined their military
forces to ﬁght against America.
In short, there were both loyal Japanese Americans and
disloyal Japanese Americans, including among the latter
some
who
cooperated
with
Japan’s
espionage
and
subversion networks within the United States before and
during the war. This was recognized at the time, even within
the Japanese American community.
They could hardly have failed to recognize the disloyal
among them, for some loyal Japanese Americans were
bullied or beaten by those who were loyal to Japan.
The passage of time has, however, caused much of this
to fade into the background. Thus steps taken during the

423
Racial Issues
war to deal with the dangers of espionage and subversion
have later been widely attributed to sheer racism, an ever-
popular explanation in some quarters.
A new book by Michelle Malkin, titled In Defense of
Internment, challenges the widespread condemnation of the
relocation of Japanese Americans away from the militarily
vulnerable west coast. She brings out many facts and
arguments that have long been ignored by those who prefer
simpler
explanations
that
enable
them
to
condemn
America.
As if inconvenient facts were not enough to guarantee
that she would be viciously attacked and demonized, Ms.
Malkin argues that what is called “racial proﬁling” was valid
then, with the country in grave danger, and is valid again
today when it comes to people from the Middle East living
in the United States.
Michelle Malkin does not say that all Arabs or Muslims
in America today should be rounded up and interned. Nor
does she claim that all or most Japanese Americans were
disloyal during World War II. Her argument is much more
sober and thoughtful than that, and a brief summary here
cannot do it justice.
Ms. Malkin’s book begins with the essential task of trying
to
re-create
for
today’s
generation
of
Americans
the
circumstances and dangers faced by the United States in
early 1942, when the relocation of Japanese Americans
began.
The term “relocation” is more accurate than the term
“internment” that has become more popular. Japanese
American citizens in the west coast military zone were
allowed to move anywhere else in the country without going
into internment camps, and thousands did.
Relocation was the policy but internment became the

424
ever wonder why?
reality for most, because at that time many were still citizens
of Japan and thus enemy aliens in wartime. Internment on
the mainland was an alternative to putting the whole west
coast population—of whatever race or citizenship—under
martial law, as happened in Hawaii.
The times were grim and the choices stark, even if later
second-guessers would grandly dismiss as “hysteria” the
weighty
concerns
of
that
time.
Japan
launched many
stunning attacks in the wake of its bombing of Pearl Harbor,
including the sinking of American ships off the California
coast and the shelling of that coast itself. No one knew
where Japan would strike next.
In Defense of Internment is a carefully researched and
carefully analyzed history but it is also a warning for our own
times. Too many American lives are at risk today from
people already inside this country to be paralyzed by the
politically
correct
rhetoric
of
those
who
decry
“racial
proﬁling.”
“It is entirely appropriate to take into account nationality
when deciding which foreigners present the highest risks,”
Michelle Malkin says. Agree or disagree with her book, it
makes us think—and political correctness is no substitute for
thought.

Silly Letters
Most of the letters and e-mails I receive are a pleasure to
read and my only regret is that I cannot answer even one-
tenth of them. However, there are certain e-mails and letters
that repeat the same fallacies again and again. Let me try to
answer one of those fallacies now, once and for all.
One of the silly things that gets said repeatedly is that I
should not be against afﬁrmative action because I have
myself beneﬁtted from it.
Think about it: I am more than 70 years old. There was
no afﬁrmative action when I went to college—or to graduate
school, for that matter. There wasn’t even a Civil Rights Act
of 1964 when I began my academic career in 1962.
Moreover, there is nothing that I have accomplished in
my education or my career that wasn’t accomplished by
other
blacks
before
me—and
therefore
long
before
afﬁrmative action.
Getting a degree from Harvard? The ﬁrst black man
graduated from Harvard in 1870.
Becoming
a
black
economist?
There
was
a
black
economist teaching at the University of Chicago when I ﬁrst
arrived there as a graduate student in 1959.
Writing a newspaper column? George Schuyler wrote
newspaper columns, magazine articles, and books before I
was born.
A recent silly e-mail declared that I wouldn’t even be
able to vote in this year’s California election if there hadn’t

426
ever wonder why?
been a Voting Rights Act of 1965. I have been voting ever
since I was 21 years old—in 1951.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act
of 1965 were necessary for some people in some places. But
making these things the cause of the rise of most blacks only
betrays an ignorance of history.
The most dramatic rise of blacks out of poverty occurred
before the civil rights movement of the 1960s. That’s right—
before. But politicians, activists and the intelligentsia have
spread so much propaganda that many Americans, black
and white, are unaware of the facts.
There is a lot of political mileage to be gotten by
convincing
blacks
that
they
owe
everything
to
the
government and could not make it in this world otherwise.
Dependency plus paranoia equals votes. But blacks made it
in
this
world
before
the
government
paid
them
any
attention.
Nor has the economic rise of blacks been speeded up by
civil rights legislation. More blacks rose into professional
ranks in the years immediately preceding the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 than in the years right after its passage.
What moved blacks up was a rapid increase in education.
There was certainly discrimination but, in many ﬁelds that
demanded higher levels of education, there were not that
many blacks to discriminate against in the ﬁrst place.
Moreover, even if certain laws and policies may once
have served a purpose, that does not mean that these laws
and policies should last forever, in total disregard of their
counterproductive effects today. For a California election in
2003 to be held up by the federal government because of
what happened in Mississippi decades ago is ludicrous.
Finally, the argument that anyone who has beneﬁtted
from afﬁrmative action should never oppose it is as illogical

427
Racial Issues
as it is ignorant of the facts. I certainly beneﬁtted from the
Korean war, which led to my being in the military and
therefore getting the G.I. Bill that enabled me to go to
college.
Does that mean that I should never be against any war?
Was it wrong of me to be against the Vietnam war after I
had personally beneﬁtted from the Korean war? Are the
duties of a citizen, not to mention the duty to be honest and
truthful, to be overridden by what happened to beneﬁt me
personally?
Some of the things I advocate would ruin me personally
if my recommendations were followed. For example, I am
totally opposed to the environmentalist extremism that has
made it an ordeal to try to build any kind of housing—much
less “affordable housing”—on the San Francisco peninsula.
But if such restrictive policies were repealed, the inﬂated
value of my home would be cut at least in half when more
housing began to be built in the area.
Is myopic selﬁshness supposed to be a moral obligation?

Black History Month
What is called Black History Month might more accurately
be called “the sins of white people” month. The sins of any
branch of the human race are virtually inexhaustible, but
the history of blacks in America includes a lot more than the
sins of white people, which are put front and center each
February.
Obviously, there is current political mileage to be gotten
from historic grievances. At a minimum, politicians and
activists get the media attention that is the lifeblood of their
careers. Then there are racial quotas, money for special
minority programs and hopes for reparations for slavery. If
nothing else, some people get excuses for their own
shortcomings—and excuses are very important.
One of the many penetrating insights of the late Eric
Hoffer was that, for many people, an excuse is better than
an achievement. That is because an achievement, no matter
how great, leaves you having to prove yourself again in the
future. But an excuse can last for life.
Those black achievements which did not involve ﬁghting
the sins of white people get little attention during Black
History
Month.
Indeed,
many
of
those
achievements
undermine the blanket excuse that white sins are what
prevent blacks from accomplishing more. How many people
have heard of Paul Williams, who became a prominent black
architect long before the civil rights revolution, or about
successful black writers in the 19th century?
There was also an outstanding black high school in

429
Racial Issues
Washington, D. C., which had remarkable achievements
from 1870 to 1955. For example, most of its graduates
during that period went on to college, even though most
white high school graduates did not make it to college
during that era. As far back as 1899, this school’s students
scored higher on standardized tests than two of the three
white academic high schools in the District of Columbia.
Given the terrible educational performances of so many
ghetto schools, you might think that there would be great
interest in how this particular school succeeded when so
many others failed. But you would be wrong. Where there
was any reaction at all from the black establishment to an
article I wrote about the history of this school, that reaction
was hostility.
Dunbar
High
School
was
an
achievement
but
it
destroyed a thousand excuses. The prevailing dogma is that
all the failures of black schools were due to the sins of white
people,
including
inadequate
funding
and
racial
segregation. But Dunbar was inadequately funded—its class
sizes were sometimes 40 or more—and it was racially
segregated for more than 80 years. Its history of success was
therefore not welcomed by black “leaders.”
Another big problem with Black History Month is its
narrowness. You cannot understand even your own history if
that is the only history you know. Some explanations of what
has happened in your history might sound plausible within
the framework of just one people’s history, but these
explanations can collapse like a house of cards if you look
at the same factors in the histories of other groups, other
countries, and other eras.
Shelby Steele has pointed out that whites are desperate
to
escape
guilt
and
blacks
are
desperate
to
escape
implications
of
inferiority.
But,
viewed
against
the

430
ever wonder why?
background of world history, neither group of Americans is
unique. Nor are the differences between them. Both their
anxieties are overblown.
Black-white
differences
in
income,
IQ,
lifestyle
or
anything else you care to name are exceeded by differences
between innumerable other groups around the world today
and throughout history—even when none of the factors that
we blame for the differences in America were present.
For example, when the Romans invaded Britain, they
came from an empire with magniﬁcent art, architecture,
literature, political organization and military might. But the
Britons were an illiterate tribal people. There was not a
building on the island and no Briton’s name had ever been
recorded in the pages of history.
The Britons didn’t build London. The Romans built
London. And when the Romans left, four centuries later,
the country fragmented into tribal domains again, the
economy collapsed, and buildings and roads decayed. No
one would have dreamed at that point that someday there
would be a British Empire to exceed anything the Romans
had ever achieved.
Maybe we need a British History Month.

Bravo for Bill Cosby
Bill Cosby has provided a lot of laughs for millions of
Americans over the years but black “leaders” were not
laughing after he lashed out at those black parents who buy
their children expensive sneakers instead of something
educational. He also denounced both those children and
those adults in the black community who refuse to speak the
king’s English.
“Everybody knows it’s important to speak English except
these knuckleheads,” Cosby said. “You can’t be a doctor with
that kind of crap coming out of your mouth.” He also
mocked
those
who
referred
to
“the
incarcerated”
as
“political prisoners.”
At this gathering on the 50th anniversary of Brown v.
Board of Education, some in the audience laughed and
applauded
but
the
pillars
of
the
black
“leadership”
establishment—the head of the NAACP, the head of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and the president of Howard
University—were “stone-faced,” according to the Washington
Post.
Theodore Shaw of the Legal Defense Fund then “told
the crowd that most people on welfare are not African
Americans, and many of the problems his organization has
addressed in the black community were not self-inﬂicted.”
Other groups are not perfect—but is that an excuse for
doing self-destructive things?
Bill Cosby and the black “leadership” represent two long-
standing differences about how to deal with the problems of

432
ever wonder why?
the black community. The “leaders” are concerned with
protecting the image of blacks, while Cosby is trying to
protect the future of blacks, especially those of the younger
generation.
Far from just bashing blacks, Cosby has given generously
to promote black education. But he is still old-fashioned
enough to think that others need to take some responsibility
for using the opportunities that were gained for them by
“people who marched and were hit in the face with rocks to
get an education.”
Now,
in
too
many
black
communities,
dedicating
yourself to getting an education is called “acting white.”
These are painful realities and they do not become any
less real or any less painful by hushing them up. Nobody
enjoys being made to look bad in public. But too many in
the black community are preoccupied with how things will
look to white people, with what in private life would be
concern about “what will the neighbors think?”
When your children are dying, you don’t worry about
what the neighbors think. When the whole future of a race
is
jeopardized
by
self-destructive
fads,
you
put
public
relations on the back burner.
There are still whites out there who think that blacks are
innately incapable of achievement—and some of them
support afﬁrmative action for that reason. But there is
plenty of evidence that innate ability, or even developed
mental skills, are not the big problem.
Not only blacks with low test scores, but even blacks with
high test scores, do not do as well academically as whites
with the same test scores. Among Asian Americans, it is just
the opposite. They do better than whites with the same test
scores, whether in educational institutions or in economic
activities.

433
Racial Issues
Years ago, Cosby urged a group of young blacks to put
more effort into their studies, the way Asian students do.
“Do you know why they are called Asians?” he asked.
“Because they always get A’s.”
The differences among all these groups are in one four-
letter word that you are still not supposed to say: work.
Anyone who has taught black, white, and Asian students
will know that they do not work equally. Studies show it but
you don’t need studies. Just go into a university library on a
Saturday night and see who is there and who is not there.
In some places, you might think it was an all-Asian
university, judging by the students in the library on Saturday
night.
How surprised should you be when you go into a
classroom on Monday morning and ﬁnd out who is on top
of the work and who is struggling to keep up?
What Bill Cosby said was no laughing matter. It is closer
to being something to cry about.

Quota “Logic”
Old-timers may remember a radio program about a
crime-ﬁghting hero called The Shadow, who had “the power
to cloud men’s minds, so that they cannot see him.”
Afﬁrmative action has that same power today. Some of the
murkiest thinking of our times has come from those
defending group preferences and quotas.
Professor James M. McPherson of Princeton University
has launched a recent defense of afﬁrmative action that is
classic. For example, afﬁrmative action is redeﬁned to
include such things as the fact that he and other white
males of his generation “received a great deal of support
from faculty and families to aspire to a career” and to hope
to reach the top, while minorities and women did not.
This was, Professor McPherson says, “a more powerful
form of afﬁrmative action than anything we have more
recently experienced in the opposite direction.” Moreover,
he
was
ﬁrst
hired
to
teach
at
Princeton
on
the
recommendation of his faculty adviser at Johns Hopkins,
part of “the infamous ‘old-boy network,’ surely the most
powerful instrument of afﬁrmative action ever devised.”
As if this were not enough special privilege, James
McPherson was also part of a generation born “during the
trough of the Depression-era birth rate,” so that he entered
the job market just when the baby boom generation was
being educated, at a time when there were relatively few
people from the previous generation around to educate

435
Racial Issues
them. Therefore he was spared the exhausting job searches
of today.
“The jobs sought us, not vice versa,” he says. This too
constituted—you guessed it—afﬁrmative action. Professor
McPherson calls it “a sort of demographic afﬁrmative
action.”
Even
if
we
accept
all
of
Professor
McPherson’s
arguments and redeﬁnitions, what is the conclusion that he
reaches? Is he going to resign his professorship at Princeton
and his presidency of the American Historical Association as
undeserved windfalls? Not on your life!
Instead, McPherson is prepared to sacriﬁce other people
to his vision of undeserved good fortune. “Having beneﬁtted
in so many ways from these older forms of afﬁrmative action
that favored white males,” he says, he cannot condemn the
newer
version
that
“seems
to
disadvantage
this
same
category.”
In short, older white males of Professor McPherson’s
generation beneﬁtted unfairly, so reparations are owed to
minorities and women—not from those who beneﬁtted, but
from white males of this generation, including those too
young to have had anything to do with the advantages and
disadvantages he describes.
And we thought The Shadow could cloud men’s minds!
This is classic academic self-indulgence in the name of
noblesse oblige. Professor McPherson can get credit for
noblesse and force someone else to pay the cost of oblige.
This argument is also classic academic thinking in
another sense—talking about people in the abstract, as
members of “the same category.” As Professor McPherson
knows
full
well
from
his
scholarly
work,
the
14th
Amendment mandates equal treatment for ﬂesh-and-blood
individuals, not for abstract categories.

436
ever wonder why?
One of the many differences between abstract people
and ﬂesh-and-blood human beings is that real people are
born, live and die—taking their sins and their sufferings to
the grave with them. Only by focusing on abstract categories
that live on can redressing the wrongs of history be made to
seem even plausible.
Professor McPherson’s argument also confuses gratitude
and guilt. He should indeed be grateful for the support and
encouragement that he received from family and mentors.
But neither he nor they should feel guilty because others
did not receive similar support and encouragement.
Anyone who is serious about extending the same beneﬁts
to others must become serious about developing the same
abilities in others—that is, raising them up to the same
standards, not bringing the standards down to them.
Finally, the notion that demographic trends constitute
social injustices to be lamented shows the unreality of this
jerry-built argument. But confusing the vagaries of fate with
the sins of man is also part of the argument for afﬁrmative
action—and betrays how lacking it is in real arguments.

Quota “Logic”: Part II
Princeton
professor
James
M.
McPherson’s
recent
arguments for afﬁrmative action, in a newsletter to members
of the American Historical Association, make many sweeping
assertions and implicit assumptions that need not even be
challenged
to
show
the
shakiness
of
his
arguments.
However, since we both belong to an organization devoted
to history, let me make a few corrections of the history that
Professor McPherson offers.
First of all, he mentions that his academic career began
in 1962 at Princeton, as a result of what he now calls “the
infamous ‘old boy network,’” which he characterizes as
afﬁrmative action for white males. Despite being black, my
own academic career also began that very same year, 1962,
just a few miles up the road from where McPherson’s career
began, at Douglass College, Rutgers University.
I too received my appointment via the old boy network,
being recommended by my mentors at the University of
Chicago, just as McPherson was recommended by his
mentor at Johns Hopkins. Women were hired the same way,
out of the same “old boy network,” which was also an old
girls’ network.
I was hired despite the fact that Douglass College was a
college for young women and almost all these women were
white. I was even hired despite having challenged and
antagonized one of the senior members of the department
during the job interview.
Incidentally, during my ﬁrst semester of teaching, I

438
ever wonder why?
received an unexpected offer of another appointment, at
the University of California at La Jolla. A signed contract
arrived in the mail, requiring only my signature to make it
ofﬁcial.
So
the
idea
that
there
were
no
academic
opportunities for blacks in 1962 is not easy to sell to
someone who was there. Save that one for guilty whites.
McPherson makes much of the fact that “virtually none”
of his fellow students in graduate school were minorities or
women. That was my experience as well, but Professor
McPherson
leaves
the
impression
that
absence
means
exclusion. Otherwise, why is
that fact relevant to his
discussion of afﬁrmative action?
We need not rely on personal anecdotes, either his or
mine. My research, using data from the American Council
on Education, showed that black faculty members with the
same degrees and publications as white faculty members
were receiving higher pay than their white counterparts, as
far back as 1969.
The real problem was that there were not nearly enough
black faculty members with the same qualiﬁcations. There
are still not enough. In some years, the total number of
blacks
in
the
entire
country
who
receive
Ph.D.s
in
mathematics is in single digits.
With women, the problem was different: Women became
mothers and that was by no means the same as men
becoming fathers, no matter what politically correct parallels
we create today with words, such as “an expectant couple.”
Those academic women who never married—which,
back in those days, had some relationship to becoming a
mother—had higher incomes than academic men who
never married. Apparently Professor McPherson’s “infamous
‘old boy network’” was either not as powerful or not as
sinister as he depicts.

439
Racial Issues
The
fact
that
recommendations
from
established
scholars in a ﬁeld carry weight when hiring an unknown
graduate student to become a faculty member has been
made to seem like some exclusionary plot, if you believe
defenders of afﬁrmative action. Indeed, any reliance on any
criterion of quality—test scores, publications, whatever—can
be depicted as an exclusionary bias by those who want
quotas.
White guilt may be fashionable in some quarters but the
only people it helps are those whites who want to become
saints on the cheap and those blacks who have learned to
hustle guilty whites. What most blacks need is—ﬁrst of all—
the kind and quality of education that they do not get in
most ghetto schools. Least of all do they get this education
from those teachers who spend precious class time dredging
up the past instead of preparing students for the future.
Professor McPherson’s defense of afﬁrmative action to
members of the American Historical Association invited
comments via e-mail (jmcphers@princeton.edu). He did not
say whether that included comments from people in the real
world beyond the ivied walls.


PART VIII
RANDOM THOUGHTS


Random Thoughts
Random thoughts on the passing scene:
One of the sad signs of our times is that we have demonized
those who produce, subsidized those who refuse to produce,
and canonized those who complain.
Everything is relative. In much of coastal California, Ted
Kennedy would be politically middle of the road—and, in
San Francisco, right of center.
My computer operating system is so out of date that people
don’t even write viruses for it any more.
Politics is the art of making your selﬁsh desires seem like the
national interest.
If navel-gazing, hand-wringing or self-dramatization helped
with racial issues, we would have achieved Utopia long ago.
People who cannot be bothered to learn both sides of the
issues should not bother to vote.
Impractical
men
especially
need
to
get
married.
The
problem is that practical women may have better sense than
to marry them.
The old adage about giving a man a ﬁsh versus teaching him
how to ﬁsh has been updated by a reader: Give a man a ﬁsh
and he will ask for tartar sauce and French fries! Moreover,

444
ever wonder why?
some politician who wants his vote will declare all these
things to be among his “basic rights.”
There are people who can neither ﬁnd happiness in their
own lives nor permit those around them to be happy. The
best you can do is get such people out of your life.
What is called an educated person is often someone who has
had a dangerously superﬁcial exposure to a wide spectrum
of subjects.
If the battle for civilization comes down to the wimps versus
the barbarians, the barbarians are going to win.
I am going to stop procrastinating—one of these days.
Thanksgiving
may
be
our
most
old-fashioned
holiday.
Gratitude itself seems out of date at a time when so many
people feel “entitled” to whatever they get—and indignant
that they didn’t get more.
When this column predicted that a discredited study would
continue to be cited by gun control advocates, I had no idea
that it would happen the next week in the 9th Circuit Court
of Appeals.
It is a little much when people come to this country
preaching hatred against others and demanding tolerance
for themselves.
It may be expecting too much to expect most intellectuals
to have common sense, when their whole life is based on
their being uncommon—that is, saying things that are
different from what everyone else is saying. There is only so
much genuine originality in anyone. After that, being

445
Random Thoughts
uncommon means indulging in pointless eccentricities or
clever attempts to mock or shock.
As I try to clear out the paper jungle in my ofﬁce, my wife
has suggested using dynamite. But I am saving that as Plan
B.
Those who want to take our money and gain power over us
have discovered the magic formula: Get us envious or angry
at others and we will surrender, in installments, not only our
money but our freedom. The most successful dictators of
the 20th century—Hitler, Lenin, Stalin, Mao—all used this
formula and now class warfare politicians here are doing the
same.
Everyone is for “due process” in our courts. But the very
concept of due process implies that there can be such a
thing as undue process. Unfortunately, undue process is also
found in our courts—perhaps more often than due process.
As a black man, I am offended when white people take the
likes of Al Sharpton seriously—or pretend to.
The scariest thing about politics today is not any particular
policy or leaders, but the utter gullibility with which the
public accepts notions for which there is not a speck of
evidence, such as the beneﬁts of “diversity,” the dangers of
“overpopulation,”
and
innumerable
other
fashionable
dogmas.
People who are very aware that they have more knowledge
than the average person are often very unaware that they do
not have one-tenth of the knowledge of all of the average
persons put together.

446
ever wonder why?
Immigration has become one of a growing number of issues
that can no longer be discussed rationally, but must be
discussed only in pious shibboleths.
Watching CNN after watching Fox News Network is like
drinking skim milk after you have gotten used to egg nog.
A lot of what is called “public service” consists of making
hoops for other people to jump through. It is a great career
for those who cannot feel fulﬁlled unless they are telling
other people what to do.
The Empire State Building was built in less time than has
already been spent debating what to build on the site of the
World Trade Center.
One of these days the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals may
declare the Constitution unconstitutional.
Everything depends on what you are used to. There is a
story about a man from Los Angeles who went up to a
mountaintop, took a deep breath of the clear fresh air and
said: “What’s that funny smell?”
The end of the Cold War now reveals that many on the far
left who were thought of as pro-Communist were in fact
anti-American—as they have remained, even as our enemies
have changed.
I hate to think that someday Americans will be looking at
the radioactive ruins of their cities and saying that this
happened because their leaders were afraid of the word
“unilateral.”
There is no excuse for sending grossly abused children back

447
Random Thoughts
to their abusive parents, when there are plenty of people
who want to adopt a child—and who are being put through
the wringer by the same social workers who want to give
terrible parents second, third, and fourth chances.
People who enjoy meetings should not be in charge of
anything.
My favorite New Year’s resolution was to stop trying to
reason with unreasonable people. This has reduced both my
correspondence and my blood pressure.
E-mail from the mother of a late-talking child: “We didn’t
know Ryan could read letters and numbers until one day
when he was two-and-a-half years old and I held up a
number 9 and asked him what it was. He turned his back to
me, bent over, looked between his legs and said, ‘6.’ Then
he stood up, faced me and said, ‘9’!”
Activism is a way for useless people to feel important, even
if the consequences of their activism are counterproductive
for those they claim to be helping and damaging to the
fabric of society as a whole.
It is amazing that people who think we cannot afford to pay
for doctors, hospitals, and medications somehow think that
we can afford to pay for doctors, hospitals, medications and
a government bureaucracy to administer “universal health
care.”
No matter how much people on the left talk about
compassion, they have no compassion for the taxpayers.
Intellectuals may like to think of themselves as people who

448
ever wonder why?
“speak truth to power” but too often they are people who
speak lies to gain power.
Why
do
actors—people
whose
main
talent
is
faking
emotions—think that their opinions should be directing the
course of political events in the real world? Yet it is a mistake
that they have been making as far back as John Wilkes
Booth.
Although rank-and-ﬁle terrorists are sent out on suicide
missions, many of the leaders who send them out have been
captured alive. I wonder if this will cause some second
thoughts—or perhaps ﬁrst thoughts—among their followers.
Much of what is promoted as “critical thinking” in our
public schools is in fact uncritical negativism towards the
history and institutions of America and an uncritical praise
of the cultures of foreign countries and domestic minorities.
Too many critics of missile defense start the argument in the
middle, with enemy missiles already in the air. But, if a
missile defense system simply creates enough serious doubt
in an enemy’s mind as to whether his missiles will get
through, then it has done its job.
People who send me letters or e-mails containing belligerent
personal attacks probably have no idea how reassuring their
messages are, for they show that critics seldom have any
rational arguments to offer.
France has never gotten over the fact that it was once a great
power and is now just a great nuisance.
Sometimes life seems like Italian opera music—beautiful but
heart-breaking.

449
Random Thoughts
Considering how often throughout history even intelligent
people have been proved to be wrong, it is amazing that
there are still people who are convinced that the only reason
anyone could possibly say something different from what
they believe is stupidity or dishonesty.
While it is true that you learn with age, the down side is that
what you learn is often what a damn fool you were before.
Ask anyone who is suffering the agonies of some terrible
disease whether he believes that there is such a thing as
reality, or whether he thinks it is all just a matter of
“perceptions.” The pompous but silly notion that it is all a
matter of how you choose to look at things is an indulgence
for
those
who
are
insulated
from
suffering,
from
accountability, and from reality.
A reader has suggested that elections be held on April
16th—the day after we pay our income taxes. That is one of
the few things that might discourage politicians from being
big spenders.
A reader writes: “I want to live in the country I grew up in.
Where is it?”
If you talk to yourself, at least carry a cell phone, so that
people won’t think you are crazy.
Judges should ask themselves: Are we turning the law into a
trap for honest people and a bonanza for charlatans?
When youngsters say that “everybody” does this or that, it
probably
never
occurs
to
them
that
what
they
call
“everybody” is probably less than one percent of the human
race.

450
ever wonder why?
Some full professors could more accurately be described as
empty professors.
Why is there so much hand-wringing about how to keep
track of violent sex offenders after they have been released
from prison? If it is so dangerous to release them, then why
are they being released, when laws can be rewritten to keep
them behind bars?
Both the Sicilian maﬁa and the criminal tongs in China
began as movements to defend the oppressed, so perhaps
we should not be so painfully surprised that venerable
American
civil
rights
organizations
have
begun
to
degenerate into extortion rackets.
The next time you hear an alarming speech about “global
warming” on Earth Day, just remember that the ﬁrst Earth
Day featured alarms about the danger of a new ice age.
Too often what are called “educated” people are simply
people who have been sheltered from reality for years in ivy-
covered buildings. Those whose whole careers have been
spent in ivy-covered buildings, insulated by tenure, can
remain adolescents on into their golden retirement years.
Some ideas sound so plausible that they can fail nine times
in a row and still be believed the tenth time. Other ideas
sound so implausible that they can succeed nine times in a
row and still not be believed the tenth time. Government
controls in the economy are among the ﬁrst kinds of ideas
and the operations of a free market are among the second
kind.
It is amazing how many people seem to think that the
government exists to turn their prejudices into laws.

451
Random Thoughts
One of the sad signs of our times are the twisted metal
“sculptures” put in front of public buildings at the taxpayers’
expense—obviously never intended to please the public, and
in fact constituting a thumbing of the artist’s nose at the
public.
“Tell all” autobiographies sometimes tell more than all.
Would you prefer to have a “compulsory” health care system
imposed on you and your doctor or to have “universal”
health care? Or do you realize that they are the same thing
in different words?
You can fail to achieve any of the things you planned and
still live a happy and fulﬁlled life, because of opportunities
that come along that you never planned for. But these
opportunities can be missed if you stick doggedly to your
preconceived blueprint.
Being
slick
is
what
keeps
some
people
from
being
intelligent.
People have a right to their own cultures—even Americans.
Those who come here and say that they cannot follow some
of our laws that conﬂict with their culture are free to leave.
Much of what are called “social problems” consists of the
fact that intellectuals have theories that do not ﬁt the real
world. From this they conclude that it is the real world
which is wrong and needs changing.
Some of the questions on the California High School Exit
Exam are the kinds of questions whose answers you would
have been expected to know before you got into high school
in past generations.

452
ever wonder why?
Although my wife and I live a modest life, I am amazed at
the bills that come in each month—and I can’t help
wondering how people who live it up manage to make ends
meet.
Tony Snow of Fox News seems to be the only one in the
media who has pointed out what a farce it is for people to
be talking about a tax cut in terms of so many billions of
dollars. Government can only change the tax rates. How
much
the
tax
revenue
will
change—and
in
which
direction—will be known only after the fact.
Thank heaven human beings are born with an ability to
laugh at absurdity. Otherwise, we might go stark raving mad
from all the absurd things we encounter in life.
The best thing about buying a house is that it puts an end
to the exhausting process of house-hunting.
Although Ronald Reagan was the only actor to become
President, he was one of the few politicians who was not
acting.
A recently reprinted memoir by Frederick Douglass has
footnotes explaining what words like “arraigned,” “curried”
and “exculpate” meant, and explaining who Job was. In
other words, this man who was born a slave and never went
to school educated himself to the point where his words now
have to be explained to today’s expensively under-educated
generation.
Too many in the media act as if decency is a violation of the
First Amendment.
People sometimes ask if I have tried to convince black

453
Random Thoughts
“leaders” to take a different view on racial issues. Of course
not. I wouldn’t spend my time trying to persuade the maﬁa
to give up crime. Why should I spend time trying to
convince race hustlers to give up victimhood? It’s their
bread and butter.
Egalitarians create the most dangerous inequality of all—
inequality of power. Allowing politicians to determine what
all other human beings will be allowed to earn is one of the
most reckless gambles imaginable. Like the income tax, it
may start off being applied only to the rich but it will
inevitably reach us all.
To
too
many
teachers,
social
workers
and
others
in
occupations with pretensions of being “professional,” what
being a professional means is not having to listen to
common sense from ordinary people, much less develop any
of their own.
Great Predictions Department: “I do not mind saying I think
they are taking a gamble.” That was Red Sox owner Harry
Frazee after selling Babe Ruth to the Yankees.
Those who are preoccupied with “making a statement”
usually don’t have any statements worth making.
A magician was asked what had happened to the lady he
used to saw in half in his act. “Oh, she’s retired,” he said.
“Now she lives in Chicago—and Denver.”
Despite the rhetoric of the “haves” and the “have-nots” that
is so dear to the heart of the political left, a more accurate
description of most Americans today would be the “have-
lots” and the “have-lots-more.”

454
ever wonder why?
The people I feel sorry for are those who do 90 percent of
what it takes to succeed.
Trust is one of those things that is much easier to maintain
than it is to repair.
It is self-destructive for any society to create a situation
where a baby who is born into the world today automatically
has pre-existing grievances against another baby born at the
same time, because of what their ancestors did centuries
ago. It is hard enough to solve our own problems, without
trying to solve our ancestors’ problems.
Don’t you love it when the intelligentsia condemn the
United States for responding “unilaterally” after we are
attacked,
instead
of
waiting
for
the
approval
of
that
confusion of voices known as “world opinion”?
Have you ever heard a single hard fact to back up all the
sweeping claims for the beneﬁts of “diversity”?
Ask ten people what “fairness” means and you can get
eleven
different
deﬁnitions.
Expecting
government
to
promote “fairness” is just giving politicians more arbitrary
power.
We seem to be getting closer and closer to a situation where
nobody is responsible for what they did but we are all
responsible for what somebody else did.
As long as human beings are imperfect, there will always be
arguments for extending the power of government to deal
with these imperfections. The only logical stopping place is
totalitarianism—unless
we
realize
that
tolerating
imperfections is the price of freedom.

455
Random Thoughts
The people I feel sorry for are those who insist on
continuing to do what they have always done but want the
results to be different from what they have always been.
Alaska
is
much
larger
than
France
and
Germany—
combined. Yet its population is less than one-tenth that of
New York City. Keep that in mind the next time you hear
some
environmentalist
hysteria
about
the
danger
of
“spoiling” Alaska by drilling for oil in an area smaller than
Dulles Airport.
Of all ignorance, the ignorance of the educated is the most
dangerous. Not only are educated people likely to have
more inﬂuence, they are the last people to suspect that they
don’t know what they are talking about when they go
outside their narrow ﬁelds.
One of the many problems with envy is that you have no
real way of knowing that someone is more fortunate than
you until you are both at the end of your lives—and then it
is too late to matter.
Bad credit affects many things, including your chances of
getting a job that requires responsibility. On the other hand,
if your credit is too good, you get inundated with junk mail.
The harm that divorce does to children is not limited to the
children of parents who get divorced. Children whose
parents never divorce nevertheless see their friends’ and
classmates’ parents getting divorced and have something to
worry
about
whenever
their
own
parents
have
a
disagreement.
People used to say, “Ignorance is no excuse.” Today,
ignorance is no problem. Our schools promote so much

456
ever wonder why?
self-esteem that people conﬁdently spout off about all sorts
of things that they know nothing about.
I am so old that I can remember when other people’s
achievements were considered to be an inspiration, rather
than a grievance.
Imagine that a genie magically appeared and offered to
grant you one wish—and, being a decent sort, you wished
that everyone’s income would be doubled. That could bring
down on you the wrath of the political left, because it would
mean that the gap between the rich and the poor had
widened. That is basically their complaint against the
American economy.
What “multiculturalism” boils down to is that you can praise
any culture in the world except Western culture—and you
cannot blame any culture in the world except Western
culture.
One of the sure signs of full employment is bad service.
You know you have a lot of junk when there is not enough
room to park one car in a three-car garage.
Some bad policies are just good policies that have been
carried too far.
It always seems to come as a big surprise to the media when
the stock market goes up and down—even though stocks
have been going up and down for centuries.
If you have a right to respect, that means other people don’t
have a right to their own opinions.
Liberals seem to believe that blacks should be represented

457
Random Thoughts
proportionally
everywhere—except
in
conservative
organizations.
If there is anything worse than outliving your money, it is
outliving all your loved ones.
Considering that we all enter the world the same way and
leave in the same condition, we spend an awful lot of time
in between trying to show that we are so different from
other people.
No matter how old I get or how sophisticated I think I have
become, I still ﬁnd it hard to deal with betrayal.
What are bond issues on the ballot except taxes on future
taxpayers who cannot vote yet? It is taxation without
representation.
The spectacular success of some people with no college
degree, such as Bill Gates and Rush Limbaugh, may give
college education a bad name—justiﬁably, in many cases.
Every time you watch Congress on C-SPAN, you are seeing
millions of dollars worth of free advertising for incumbents,
while those same incumbents vote restrictions on their
potential rivals’ ability to raise money to pay for advertising,
using the pretty phrase “campaign ﬁnance reform.”
The ﬁrst time I ﬂew into London, I was stirred by the
thought that, in these skies during World War II, a thousand
men of the Royal Air Force saved Western civilization.
Today, I wonder how many of our young people have any
idea what that was all about, given how little time our
schools devote to history, except as a source of grievances,
whining, and excuses.

458
ever wonder why?
The phrase “glass ceiling” is an insult to our intelligence.
What does glass mean, except that we cannot see it? In other
words, in the absence of evidence, we are expected to go
along with what is said because it is said in accusatory and
self-righteous tones and we will be denounced if we don’t
accept it.
A careful deﬁnition of words would destroy half the agenda
of the political left and scrutinizing evidence would destroy
the other half.
Can one person make a difference? I hate to think where
we would be if James Q. Wilson had not written about crime
or if Milton Friedman had not written about markets, much
less where we would be if Winston Churchill had not been
prime minister when Britain faced seemingly hopeless odds
against the Nazis.
How anyone can argue in favor of being non-judgmental is
beyond me. To say that being non-judgmental is better than
being judgmental is itself a judgment, and therefore a
violation of the principle.
As
a rule of thumb, Congressional legislation that is
bipartisan is usually twice as bad as legislation that is
partisan.
At one time, I could tear a Washington phone book in half.
Not only was I a lot younger, the Washington phone book
was a lot smaller.
How many other species’ members kill each other to the
same extent as human beings?
Time and again, over the centuries, price controls have

459
Random Thoughts
produced three things: shortages, quality deterioration and
black markets. Why would anyone want any of those things
with pharmaceutical drugs?
Don’t you get tired of seeing so many “non-conformists”
with the same non-conformist look?
Everyone is presumed to be innocent until proven guilty—
in a court of law. But we cannot just mindlessly repeat words
outside the context in which they apply. If you discovered
that your spouse had been secretly checking into motels
with someone else, would you presume innocence until
proven guilty?
Automobiles are getting to look so much alike that it is hard
to tell some cars apart, even when they are made by
different manufacturers or even made in different countries.
Recently, I was embarrassed to realize that I was trying to get
into someone else’s German-made car on a parking lot,
thinking it was my own Japanese-made car.
Nolan Ryan’s baseball career was so long that he struck out
seven guys whose fathers he had also struck out. (Barry
Bonds and Bobby Bonds, for example.)
Why do some people use a fancy mathematical term like
“parameters” when all that they really mean is boundaries?
Flattery makes the most effective chains. Hitler told the
Germans that they were a master race—and came very close
to making them slaves.
One of the dumbest things you can do is have taxpayers
supporting idle adolescents who have nothing but time on

460
ever wonder why?
their hands to get into trouble. The money it costs is the
least of the problems.
Neither the depth of despondency nor the height of
euphoria tells you how long either will last.
Sign on a monument to people who served in the military:
“All gave some. Some gave all.”

