
Evocative Objects 


Evocative Objects 
Things We Think With
edited by Sherry Turkle
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2007 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in 
any form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photo-
copying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without 
permission in writing from the publisher.
MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts 
for business or sales promotional use. For information, please 
Email <special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu> or write to Special Sales
Department, The MIT Press, 55 Hayward Street, Cambridge, MA
02142.
This book was set in Bookman Old Style, ITC Bookman, and Stymie
by Graphic Composition, Inc., Athens, Georgia. 
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Evocative objects : things we think with / [edited by] Sherry Turkle ; 
theoretical essay and bibliographical essay by Sherry Turkle.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-262-20168-1 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Transitional objects (Psychology) I. Turkle, Sherry.
BF175.5.T73E96 2007
155.91—dc22
2006027966
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

To Charles Zimmerman

Acknowledgments
Sherry Turkle | Introduction: The Things That Matter
OBJECTS OF DESIGN AND PLAY
Tod Machover | My Cello
Carol Strohecker | Knots
Susan Yee | The Archive
Mitchel Resnick | Stars
Howard Gardner | Keyboards
OBJECTS OF DISCIPLINE AND DESIRE
Eden Medina | Ballet Slippers
Joseph Cevetello | The Elite Glucometer
Matthew Belmonte | The Yellow Raincoat
Michelle Hlubinka | The Datebook
Annalee Newitz | My Laptop
Gail Wight | Blue Cheer
OBJECTS OF HISTORY AND EXCHANGE
Julian Beinart | The Radio
Irene Castle McLaughlin | The Bracelet
David Mitten | The Axe Head
Susan Spilecki | Dit Da Jow: Bruise Wine
Nathan Greenslit | The Vacuum Cleaner
OBJECTS OF TRANSITION AND PASSAGE
William J. Mitchell | The Melbourne Train
Judith Donath | 1964 Ford Falcon
Trevor Pinch | The Synthesizer
Tracy Gleason | Murray: The Stuffed Bunny
David Mann | The World Book
Susan Rubin Suleiman | The Silver Pin
viii
3
12
22
30
38
46
54
62
70
76
86
92
102
110
118
126
136
144
152
162
170
178
184
Contents

OBJECTS OF MOURNING AND MEMORY
Henry Jenkins | Death-Defying Superheroes
Stefan Helmreich | The SX-70 Instant Camera
Glorianna Davenport | Salvaged Photographs
Susan Pollak | The Rolling Pin
Caroline A. Jones | The Painting in the Attic
Olivia Dasté | The Suitcase
OBJECTS OF MEDITATION AND NEW VISION
Nancy Rosenblum | Chinese Scholars’ Rocks
Susannah Mandel | Apples
Jeffrey Mifﬂin | The Mummy
Michael M. J. Fischer | The Geoid
Robert P. Crease | Foucault’s Pendulum
Evelyn Fox Keller | Slime Mold
Sherry Turkle | What Makes an Object Evocative?
Notes
Selected Bibliography
Epigraph Sources
Illustration Credits
Index
194
208
216
224
232
244
252
260
270
278
286
296
307
328
344
364
370
374

This book began with a seminar series at the MIT Ini-
tiative on Technology and Self and became a way to cap-
ture the intellectual enthusiasms of that enterprise. I
thank the Mitchell Kapor Foundation for its support of
the Initiative as well as all participants in the Evocative
Objects Seminar in the STS program over many years.
My research assistants Anita Chan, Olivia Dasté,
and Kelly Gray worked closely with me on all aspects of
making this volume a reality. Deborah Cantor-Adams’s
labors ensured consistency and clarity. I am grateful 
for Erin Hasley’s combination of tenacity and perfect
pitch in the design work for this volume. Lisa Liu’s excel-
lent transcription and editing of Initiative presentations
helped many of the authors recall unscripted moments
that improved the quality of their ﬁnal essays.
Thanks are also due to Valerie Geary, Mark Kramer,
Robert Prior, and Susan Silbey for their helpful comments
on my introduction and concluding essay. Comments on
the introduction by Michael Fischer, Howard Gardner,
and Susan Suleiman are gratefully acknowledged.
Funding from the Intel Corporation to pursue work on
the complex qualities of objects and conversations with
my research partner at Intel, Margaret Morris, have
deepened my thinking.
This book has been a labor of love; I have lived with
it for many years. I thank my daughter Rebecca for light-
ing up my life as I worked. Tellingly, she has resisted my
recent suggestions that she tidy up her room by in-
forming me that the stuff I want her to throw out are her
Acknowledgments

evocative objects. I’m taking this as a good sign that the
phrase is apt to catch on with others.
Sherry Turkle
Boston, Massachusetts
January 2007
Acknowledgments
ix


Evocative Objects 


INTRODUCTION: THE THINGS
THAT MATTER
Sherry Turkle
I grew up hoping that objects would connect me to the
world. As a child, I spent many weekends at my grand-
parents’ apartment in Brooklyn. Space there was lim-
ited, and all of the family keepsakes—including my aunt’s
and my mother’s books, trinkets, souvenirs, and photo-
graphs—were stored in a kitchen closet, set high, just
below the ceiling. I could reach this cache only by stand-
ing on the kitchen table that I moved in front of the
closet. This I had been given permission to do, and this
is what I did, from age six to age thirteen or fourteen,
over and over, weekend after weekend. I would climb
onto the table in the kitchen and take down every book,
every box. The rules were that I was allowed to look at
anything in the closet, but I was always to put it back.
The closet seemed to me of inﬁnite dimensions, inﬁnite
depth.
Each object I found in the closet—every keychain,
postcard, unpaired earring, high school textbook with
its marginalia, some of it my mother’s, some of it my
aunt’s—signaled a new understanding of who they were
and what they might be interested in; every photograph
of my mother on a date or at a dance became a clue to
my possible identity. My biological father had been an
absent ﬁgure since I was two. My mother had left him.
We never spoke about him. It was taboo to raise the sub-
ject. I did not feel permitted to even think about the
subject.
My aunt shared the small apartment with my
grandmother and grandfather, and sometimes one of
them would come into the kitchen to watch me at my in-
vestigations. At the time I didn’t know what I was look-
ing for. I think they did. I was looking, without awareness,

for the one who was missing. I was looking for a trace of
my father. But they had been there before me and got-
ten rid of any bits and pieces he might have left—an
address book, a business card, a random note. Once I
found a photograph of a man standing on a boardwalk
with his face cut out of the picture. I never asked whose
face it was; I knew. And I knew enough never to mention
the photograph, for fear that it too would disappear. It
was precious to me. The image had been attacked, but
it contained so many missing puzzle pieces. What his
hands looked like. That he wore lace-up shoes. That his
pants were tweed.
If being attentive to the details of people’s lives
might be considered a vocation, mine was born in the
smell and feel of the memory closet and its objects.
That is where I found the musty books, photographs,
corsages, and gloves that made me feel connected. That
is where I determined that I would solve mysteries and
that I would use objects as my clues.
Years from then, in the late 1960s, I studied in
Paris, immersed in the intellectual world of French struc-
turalism. While I was away, my grandparents moved out
of their apartment, where the contents of the memory
closet had been so safely contained. Much of the closet’s
contents were dispersed, sent to an organization that col-
lected books to be read to the blind. Far away from home,
I was distressed at the loss of the objects but somewhat
comforted to realize that I now had a set of ideas for
thinking about them. In Paris, I read the work of the an-
thropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, who described brico-
lage as a way of combining and recombining a closed set
of materials to come up with new ideas.1 Material things,
for Lévi-Strauss, were goods-to-think-with and, following
the pun in French, they were good-to-think-with as well.
While in France, I realized that during my many hours
with the memory closet I had done more than daydream
ideas into old photographs. When I ﬁrst met the notion of
bricolage, it already seemed like a childhood friend.
4
Sherry Turkle

Ideas about bricolage were presented to me in the
cool, cognitive light of French intellectual life. But the ob-
jects I tried to combine and recombine as a child had been
clues for tracing my lost father, an experience of brico-
lage with a high emotional intensity. So, from my ﬁrst
introduction to the idea in the late 1960s, I began to con-
sider bricolage as a passionate practice.
We ﬁnd it familiar to consider objects as useful or aes-
thetic, as necessities or vain indulgences. We are on less
familiar ground when we consider objects as companions
to our emotional lives or as provocations to thought. The
notion of evocative objects brings together these two less
familiar ideas, underscoring the inseparability of thought
and feeling in our relationship to things. We think with
the objects we love; we love the objects we think with.
In this collection of autobiographical essays, sci-
entists, humanists, artists, and designers trace the
power of objects in their lives, objects that connect them
to ideas and to people. Some of the objects described in
this book are natural: an apple. Some are artifacts: a
train. Some were made by the author: a knot. Others
were presented ready-made: The World Book Encyclope-
dia. Certain authors reﬂect on an object’s role in a sig-
niﬁcant life transition—an object serves as a marker of
relationship and emotional connection. In other essays,
the balance shifts to how an object tied the author to in-
tellectual life—to building theory, discovering science or
art, choosing a vocation. In every case, the object brings
together intellect and emotion. In every case, the au-
thor’s focus is not on the object’s instrumental power—
how fast the train travels or how fast the computer
calculates—but on the object as a companion in life ex-
perience: how the train connects emotional worlds, how
the mental space between computer keyboard and
screen creates a sense of erotic possibility.
The Things That Matter
5

This collection begins with essays on the theme of
discovery and learning, and then, following the arc of
the life cycle, the essays discuss the opportunities and
challenges of adulthood—the navigation of love and
loss—and ﬁnally, the confrontation with transcendent
issues such as spirituality and the sublime. Life, of
course, is not lived in discrete stages, nor are the rela-
tionships with objects that accompany its journey. Ob-
jects have life roles that are multiple and ﬂuid.
We live our lives in the middle of things. Material
culture carries emotions and ideas of startling intensity.
Yet only recently have objects begun to receive the at-
tention they deserve.
The acknowledgment of the power of objects has not
come easy. Behind the reticence to examine objects as
centerpieces of emotional life was perhaps the sense that
one was studying materialism, disparaged as excess, or
collecting, disparaged as hobbyism, or fetishism, dispar-
aged as perversion. Behind the reticence to examine ob-
jects as centerpieces of thought was the value placed, 
at least within the Western tradition, on formal, proposi-
tional ways of knowing. In thinking about science, cer-
tainly, abstract reasoning was traditionally recognized as
a standard, canonical style; many have taken it to be syn-
onymous with knowledge altogether.
Indeed, so highly valued was canonical abstract
thinking, that even when concrete approaches were rec-
ognized, they were often relegated to the status of infe-
rior ways of knowing, or as steps on the road to abstract
thinking. It is poignant that Claude Lévi-Strauss and
the psychologist Jean Piaget, who each in their way con-
tributed to a fundamental revaluation of the concrete in
the mid-twentieth century, also undermined the con-
crete thinking they promoted.2 Piaget recognized that
young children use a style of concrete reasoning that
was too efﬁcacious to be simply classiﬁed as “wrong.”
His response was to cast children’s “close-to-the-object”
approach as a stage in a progression to a formal think-
6
Sherry Turkle

ing style.3 Lévi-Strauss recognized the primitive’s brico-
lage as a science of the concrete that had much in com-
mon with the practice of modern-day engineers. He said
he preferred to call it “prior” rather than “premature”;
yet it was not fully equal.4
Beginning in the 1980s, concrete ways of thinking
were increasingly recognized in contexts that were not
easily dismissed as inferior, even and perhaps especially
in the world of science, the very place where the abstract
style had been canonized. Scientiﬁc laboratories were
shown to be places where discoveries are made in a con-
crete, ad hoc fashion, and only later recast into canoni-
cally accepted formalisms; Nobel laureates testiﬁed that
they related to their scientiﬁc materials in a tactile and
playful manner.5 To this testimony from science studies
was added the work of feminist scholars who docu-
mented the power of concrete, contextual reasoning in a
wide range of domains.6 Indeed, there has been an in-
creasing commitment to the study of the concrete in a
range of scholarly communities.7 To this conversation,
Evocative Objects contributes a detailed examination of
particular objects with rich connections to daily life as
well as intellectual practice. Each author has been asked
to choose an object and follow its associations: where
does it take you; what do you feel; what are you able to
understand?
A jeweled pin, simple, European, clearly of the old
country, ties a daughter to her mother and her mixed
feelings about their immigrant status. An immersion in
the comic books of youth teaches a man how to read the
lessons of superheroes in midlife. A lonely graduate stu-
dent is comforted by her Ford Falcon. The car feels like
her “clothing” in the world of the street, a signal of her
taste and style. When she becomes a mother, it’s time
for a trade-in and a BMW station wagon.
Some objects are experienced as part of the self,
and for that have a special status: a young child believes
her stuffed bunny rabbit can read her mind; a diabetic
The Things That Matter
7

is at one with his glucometer. Other objects remind us
of people we have lost.8 An artist dies, his collection of
Chinese scholars’ rocks is left behind. A rock of medita-
tion, “The Honorable Old Man” becomes a presence in
the life of his widow, who describes it as she would her
artist-husband—“obsession, looking, openness to being
surprised and moved, dignity.”
Most objects exert their holding power because of
the particular moment and circumstance in which they
come into the author’s life. Some, however, seem intrin-
sically evocative—for example, those with a quality we
might call uncanny. Freud said we experience as un-
canny those things that are “known of old yet unfamil-
iar.”9 The uncanny is not what is most frightening and
strange. It is what seems close, but “off,” distorted
enough to be creepy. It marks a complex boundary that
both draws us in and repels, as when, in this collection,
a museum mummy becomes an author’s uncanny
“double.” Other objects are naturally evocative because
they remind us of the blurry childhood line between self
and other—think of the stuffed bunny whose owner be-
lieves it can read her mind10—or because they are as-
sociated with times of transition. Transitional times
(called “liminal,” or threshold, periods by the anthropol-
ogist Victor Turner) are rich with creative possibility.11
In this collection, we follow a young man from the Aus-
tralian outback as he boards the Melbourne train, ﬁ-
nally a passenger on a long-imagined journey. On the
train, poised between states of being, everything solid
and known can becalled into question
Evocative objects bring philosophy down to earth.
When we focus on objects, physicians and philosophers,
psychologists and designers, artists and engineers are
able to ﬁnd common ground in everyday experience.
Each narrative in this collection is paired with a
short excerpt drawn from philosophy, history, litera-
ture, or social theory. The authors of these excerpts
8
Sherry Turkle

range from Lewis Thomas to Umberto Eco, from
William James to Susan Sontag. These texts begin to
describe the kinds of connections that help us investi-
gate the richness of objects as thought companions, as
life companions.
The excerpted theorists engage the essays across
a wide range of ideas. I have already noted some. There
is the power of boundary objects and the general prin-
ciple that objects are active life presences. Lévi-Strauss
speaks of tinkering; Jean Piaget, of the child as scien-
tist. With different metaphors, each describes a dy-
namic relationship between things and thinking. We tie
a knot and ﬁnd ourselves in partnership with string in
our exploration of space. Objects are able to catalyze
self-creation. When Igor Kopytoff writes about the “biog-
raphy of things,” he deepens our understanding of how a
new car becomes a new skin, of how a change of jewelry
can become its own voyage to a new world. Objects bring
together thought and feeling. In particular, objects of
science are objects of passion. Essayists who raise this
issue are paired with writings from philosophy (Im-
manuel Kant and Edmund Burke, on nature’s sublime)
and also from anthropology (Mary Douglas, on the pas-
sion behind our need to classify).
I have also touched on the idea that we often feel
at one with our objects. The diabetic feels at one with 
his glucometer, as increasingly we feel at one with the
glowing screens of our laptops, our iPods, and our
BlackBerries. Theorists as diverse as Jean Baudrillard,
Jacques Derrida, Donna Haraway, Karl Marx, and D. W.
Winnicott invite us to better understand these object in-
timacies.
Indeed, in the psychoanalytic tradition, both per-
sons and things are tellingly called “objects” and suggest
that we deal with their loss in a similar way. For Freud,
when we lose a beloved person or object, we begin a pro-
cess that, if successful, ends in our ﬁnding them again,
The Things That Matter
9

within us. It is, in fact, how we grow and develop as
people. When objects are lost, subjects are found. Freud’s
language is poetic: “the shadow of the object fell upon
the ego.” The psychodynamic tradition—in its narrative
of how we make objects part of ourselves—offers a lan-
guage for interpreting the intensity of our connections
to the world of things, and for discovering the similari-
ties in how we relate to the animate and inanimate. In
each case, we confront the other and shape the self.
For me, working with these ideas, editing this
book, combining the narratives with literary and theo-
retical texts, and seeing them refracted through differ-
ent prisms, became its own object discipline, my own
practice of bricolage. In this sense, Evocative Objects:
Things We Think With became for me an evocative object.
Its elements were new, but the activity of working on it
was familiar, as familiar as carefully handling the ob-
jects in the memory closet I knew as a child.
Walt Whitman said: “A child went forth everyday/
and the ﬁrst object he look’d upon, that object he be-
came.” With generosity of intellect and spirit, the au-
thors in this collection engage with the objects of their
lives. For every object they have spun a world. They show
us what they looked upon and what became the things
that mattered.
10
Sherry Turkle

Objects of Design 
and Play

The playing adult steps sideward into another reality; the 
playing child advances forward to new stages of mastery. I 
propose the theory that the child’s play is the infantile form of
the human ability to deal with experience by creating model sit-
uations and to master reality by experiment and planning. It is
in certain phases of his work that the adult projects past expe-
riences into dimensions which seem manageable. In the lab-
oratory, on the stage, and on the drawing board, he relives the
past and thus relives leftover affects; in reconstructing the
model situation, he redeems his failures and strengthens his
hopes. He anticipates the future from the point of view of a cor-
rected and shared past.
No thinker can do more and no playing child less. As
William Blake puts it: “The child’s toys and the old man’s rea-
sons are the fruits of the two seasons.”
—Erik Erikson, Childhood and Society*
*Source notes for all epigraphs begin on p. 364.

MY CELLO
Tod Machover

My mother tells me that I started music training when
I was two. She was my teacher, helping me make music
at the piano and ﬁnd music all over the house. Each
week, we set out on expeditions of her devising, discov-
ering household objects that made interesting sounds,
that could in turn be combined to create new textures,
emotions, and narratives. Then followed the task of mak-
ing a “picture” of our new composition so that we could
recreate it the following week. I learned to invent music
from these ﬁrst principles: sound, structure, score.
As I began to listen to orchestral music (I re-
member Leonard Bernstein’s Young People’s Concerts),
I yearned for an instrument that had the feel of those
natural, malleable objects around the house. I wanted
my instrument to be able to sing, expressing as much
between the notes as on them. The piano, with its spe-
cial precisions, simply didn’t appeal. By the time I was
eight, I had chosen the cello, embracing it before learn-
ing the details.
Cellos, I found, are the perfect size. Violins are too
petite, ﬁngers stepping on ﬁngers; the double bass is a
struggle, hands stretched and muscles ﬂexed. But the
cello is the size of a human body, reaching the ground
as its scroll grazes the top of the head of the seated mu-
sician. The cello range is identical to the human voice—
that is, the male and female voice combined. The lowest
cello note is at the bottom range of a basso profundo,
and although the cello can actually scream higher than
any singer, it has a more normal top range that com-
petes with a diva coloratura.
Seated at the cello, my body assumes a calm, natu-
ral position—my shoulders relaxed, letting gravity help
bow pressure. Yet I can feel the instrument vibrate from
head to foot as I draw my bow across its strings, a throb-
14
Tod Machover

bing through my chest, a buzzing through my legs and
feet, a tingling to my ﬁngertips. Sensitive to an extra-
ordinary range of touch, cellos respond to the almost
motionless gliding of a gentle legato as well as to the he-
man crunch of a raspy sforzato. The cello is big enough
to put up a ﬁght, yet is the largest instrument that you
can comfortably carry, or not so comfortably, as I learned
when I took it trekking in Nepal and on the New York
subway in rush hour.
Unlike the violin that can screech in the hands of
beginners, the cello always has a mellow sound and sel-
dom is truly ugly, yet there is an inﬁnite gradation of
tone quality and therefore inﬁnite scope for improve-
ment. Because the physical position one takes with the
cello is so natural, it is easier to play than the violin and
harder than the bass. Both hands and arms are given
independence, working in synchrony (something that
young players ﬁnd hard to master) while doing com-
pletely different things. The cello is just hard enough,
and for me, this gives cellos the right degree of difﬁculty.
And it makes playing cello the perfect companion to
thinking. Like walking, playing the cello engages just
enough of my mind to suppress internal chatter, leaving
me free to imagine.
A similar balance of not too hard/not too easy ap-
plies to intonation on the cello, where playing in tune is
easier than on the violin (its greater size, quite simply,
leaves you more room to ﬁnd the right note) but still sub-
ject to the subtlest inﬂections. The physicality of the
cello is itself slightly irregular, with strings of different
thicknesses that vibrate with different degrees of effort,
a bridge and ﬁngerboard sloping unevenly under the
four strings, and decreased spacing between notes as
one goes higher on each string. This means that each
My Cello
15

note feels different to play. The piano is designed for
potential perfection that seems to challenge players to
achieve machine-like accuracy. The imprecisions of the
Japanese shakuhachi are designed so that the player
is never certain of exactly how the instrument will re-
spond. The cello stands between these two, pleasurably
controllable, yet with pure perfection always slightly out
of reach. Very early I realized that lifetimes had been
dedicated to exploring and mastering the cello and that
one lifetime could never sufﬁce.
In my own case, under my mother’s tutelage, I be-
gan with the classics and stayed with them—that is,
until the appearance of Sgt. Pepper when I was thirteen.
That album marked my ﬁrst musical struggle with my
mother, who refused to understand how I could like the
Beatles. I moved closer to my father, a pioneer in the
ﬁeld of computer graphics and more comfortable with
popular culture. I tried to turn my cello into an instru-
ment for composing and performing rock music: I threw
away the bow, turned the instrument sideways and
propped it on my lap like a (very big, fat) guitar, clamped
headphones around its belly, plugged it into a guitar
amp and jammed. I tried the same thing with an electric
bass guitar, but it lacked the sonic richness, thick-
stringed resistance, wide range, and lightning action of
my cello. Soon I was improvising and composing, exper-
imenting with tape recorders, multi-track layering, all
with this electriﬁed cello.
I managed to cultivate my classical and rock expe-
riences with the cello separately, safely avoiding their
collision. That changed when I was sixteen and began to
study with a new cello teacher, Richard (Richie) Bock,
who played classical, jazz, and rock. Richie destroyed
my complacency about music making, beginning with
my assumptions about technique. Instead of focusing
on the left hand that played notes and mastered into-
nation, vibrato, and glissandi, Richie put the right hand
and the bow in the foreground. The most important, he
16
Tod Machover

said, was “the part nobody thinks about, the part that
comes easy. The bow is where expression comes from,
like breathing for a singer.” And furthermore, he said
my bowing was lousy, so bad in fact that I had to start
from scratch.
For months, Richie had me play long-drawn bows
over open strings, with no notes played by the left hand
at all. I learned to see nuance in cello playing: the con-
stant adjustment of pressure, speed, and angle de-
pending on thickness of string and section of bow; the
sweet spot of resonance when the instrument is allowed
to vibrate freely; the great beauty that can be found in a
simple, constant sound played fully, evenly, purely. By
going back to basics, I discovered how to listen carefully
and critically, to sense the slightest movement or ten-
sion in ﬁnger, hand, arm, and back. I learned to medi-
tate in sound. I learned how to practice for real.
By the time I was ready to begin conservatory at
Juilliard, I knew I was more interested in composition
than performance. Free from thinking of the cello as a
profession, I felt I could explore repertoire and my own
musical ideas without outside approval. My new teacher,
Mosa Havivi, made me rethink what it means to project
a musical experience outside of oneself, to hear and feel
one’s playing as others do. Mosa taught me that I could—
and had to—make my own decisions about interpreta-
tion and meaning.
As a child musician, the physical intensity of cello
playing (a whole body experience, not just a ﬁnger ac-
tivity) had led me to a dissociation of analysis and ex-
pression. I performed by ear and feel. Theory was pure
abstraction. Now I began to make the conscious con-
nection between thought and touch that had eluded me.
Indeed, there is much in musical education that
encourages the dissociation of thought and touch. At
Juilliard, Beethoven, a deaf composer, was held up as
the ideal composer. Beethoven, the mythology went, was
so great that he imagined all his music in his inner ear,
My Cello
17

not only being unable to hear it in the external world but
also shunning the mundane reality of physical vibra-
tions that would dilute the Platonic ideal of his imagined
sounds. What this meant at Juilliard was that no com-
poser would be caught dead in a practice room, or plink-
ing out his or her music on a piano, lest he or she be
accused of inadequate ear training, of a sterile musical
imagination.
But for me this was impossible: my feeling for com-
position called upon my intimate relationship with the
cello. My musical training has separated sound and
touch, thought and feeling, concrete and abstract. My
relationship with the cello helped me to bring these
things together. While at Juilliard I not only sought ways
to hear and touch my music as I was composing it but
also I began to imagine instruments that could be adapted
to the musical requirements of each new project. So I
started working with digital computers, learning For-
tran (not a popular thing to do at that time, in that en-
vironment) in an attempt to model the sounds I was
hearing in my head. I also took a four-month trip to In-
dia with my cello, traveling extensively, meeting and lis-
tening to some remarkable Indian musicians and
playing solo Bach suites for them. I began to appreciate
the relativity of the cello and of Western classical music;
Bach sounded strange to many people I met, and by the
time I came home, the cello sounded monochromatic in
pitch and timbre to me. I used my new knowledge of
computers to produce sounds and textures that went be-
yond the cello. And I translated my experience with com-
puters and electronics into new playing techniques and
compositional experiments for the cello.
After Juilliard, I went to Paris to work at Pierre
Boulez’s new Institut de Recherche et Coordination
Acoustique/Musique (IRCAM). I arrived at a moment
when some of the world’s ﬁrst digital synthesizers were
being developed. Here, I found my calling—the design of
performance and composition systems that could marry
18
Tod Machover

the precision of programming with the spontaneity of
human gesture. When I came to the MIT Media Lab in
1985, I worked with colleagues to invent instruments (I
called them Hyperinstruments) that could enhance vir-
tuoso performance as well as new systems (such as The
Brain Opera) that could introduce music making to the
general public. I designed toys to introduce children to
music and thought of my mother and our explorations
of sound in our home. In the mix of new instruments
and musical forms—rhythmic Beatbugs, squeezy Music
Shapers, and the sinuous Melody Easel—my inspira-
tion has always remained the cello.
Coming full circle to music and childhood brings
me to my own two daughters—Hana, now 12, and Noa,
now 8. They are studying music—and although they do
like playing Beatbugs and composing with Hyperscore,
musical technologies of my invention, Hana is learning
violin and Noa piano. I practice with each of them every
day, trying to keep what was good about my Mom’s coach-
ing. The violin is just different enough from the cello that
it keeps me on my toes. How do I teach a slide, a note
perfectly in tune, a bow beautifully changed, a phrase
delicately shaped, a musical story deeply felt and mean-
ingfully conveyed? How do I share my love of music with
my daughters when there is so much tough technique
to learn, so much frustration to overcome? How do I rec-
oncile the desire to build computational music toys that
convey immediately the excitement and joy of music mak-
ing with the need for practice and discipline and ex-
perience that can only mature over a lifetime?
My daughters’ ﬁts and starts with music have
helped me to return to the cello with a fresh perspective.
These days I do not perform on it often, but I do use the
cello to try out new ideas. When a period of musical
work is ending and I feel a new one beginning, I like to
let my ideas percolate in my imagination, but I also like
to touch them, and the cello is my tool for that. I try out
new sounds that stimulate my physical memory: when
My Cello
19

I hear melodies or intervals, I can feel what my left hand
ﬁngers would do to create them. When I am imagining—
in the quiet of my study—a full orchestral sonority, my
muscles reproduce the gesture as if I were playing it on
the cello.
And still, perhaps above all, I play the cello to con-
centrate, to meditate, to relax. It remains for me the per-
fect gauge of complexity, of how much an individual
human being can shape or master, follow or compre-
hend. Playing the cello remains the activity that I do best
and that I do only for myself. It is the object that is clos-
est to me that I don’t share with others, the intermedi-
ary I use to reconnect to the forces and feelings that
drew me to music in the ﬁrst place.
Tod Machover, composer, inventor and cellist, is
Professor of Music and Media at the MIT Media Lab.
20
Tod Machover

My Cello
21

The “bricoleur”[’s]. . . universe of instruments is closed and the
rules of his game are always to make do with “whatever is at
hand.” . . . Further, the “bricoleur” also, and indeed princi-
pally, derives his poetry from the fact that he does not conﬁne
himself to accomplishment and execution: he “speaks” not
only with things, as we have already seen, but also through the
medium of things: giving an account of his personality and life
by the choices he makes between the limited possibilities. The
“bricoleur” may not ever complete his purpose but he always
puts something of himself into it.
—Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind

KNOTS
Carol Strohecker

I remember the day I taught my younger brother how
to tie his shoes. I was nine years old and he was three,
and since I often looked after him, I also frequently
found myself tying his shoes. That day, we sat together
on our staircase, our legs bent toward us. Looking down
at our shoes, I remembered how a little mantra had
helped me learn to write a ﬁgure 5: the pencil went
“down, around, hat” and in three strokes reliably pro-
duced the numeral. So I made up a mantra about
shoelaces having something to do with left, right, loops,
and around, which I recited while moving the pieces of
string accordingly—ﬁrst on my foot and then on his.
My brother’s excitement grew as he observed me
and then tried the technique for himself, repeating it
until it worked and resulted in a triumphantly tied pair
of shoes. His excitement reﬂected my own as I marveled
not only at his diligence, but at the power of the simple
mantra. Watching him carefully looping his laces, I saw
myself mirrored in a younger child.
My own knot work developed through my teens as
I generated macramé designs for belts, bracelets, potted
plant hangers, shawls, room decorations, and the like. I
adorned my siblings and friends, my walls and keep-
sakes with knots—in chains, braids and spirals, and
with all manner of string weights, textures, and colors.
I calculated lengths and costs; mastered arm bends,
wrist ﬂicks, hand spans, and ﬁngertip maneuvers; and
learned to see things dimensionally, imagining repeti-
tions, alternations, interspersals, and entwinements. I
didn’t know I was beginning to think like a mathemati-
cian. I was simply having fun. I enjoyed generating the
creations and seeing how people received them.
“Knot Lady” was a name I ﬁrst earned from the
children I worked with at the MIT Media Lab. After en-
24
Carol Strohecker

tering graduate school at MIT, I created a Knot Labora-
tory where I taught children, most of them around ten
years old, to tie knots and talk to me about their experi-
ences. Over a year, we transformed a bleak, urban class-
room into a lively laboratory space devoted to learning
with knots.1
Each day at school, I was greeted with a large sign:
“KNOT LAB.” Constructed by three students who mixed
string knot formations with pictures of a chemist’s ﬂask
and party balloons for its design, the sign reminded me
of the simultaneously playful and serious business that
took place behind those doors.
Inside our “Knot Lab,” children played with string,
tacked knots onto display boards, and worked together on
stories about knots. The products of their experiments—
large, colorful displays of knots in various stages of
formation were drawn on paper, tacked to walls, and
dangled from the ceiling.
Dozens of knot forms found their home in the Knot
Lab. They included simple knots like the Overhand, Fig-
ure 8, and Stopper; square knots like the Stevedore and
Granny and Thief; and movable knots like the Running
Bowline, True Lovers’, and Trumpet. To construct them,
the children considered unknots, tangles, mirror images,
handedness, and knotty spatial relations—over, under,
around, and between. They wrapped, rotated, ﬂipped,
twisted, and shifted scales as they tied. Their thinking
spanned the deliberate and spontaneous, the rational
and affective, the conscious and unconscious. And in-
dividual preferences were apparent: some children dealt
with a knot as an integral entity produced by moving a
single end of the string; others broke the process into
steps, following and creating procedural instructions;
and still others combined pieces—smaller knots as
Knots
25

modules—to build up more complicated knots. These
approaches were each productive, but they were also
very different. The knots demonstrate the diversity
(rather than the standardization) of styles of learning.
They are objects that enable us to explore the inner
states of those who tie them.
One of the most avid knot-tyers was a girl named
Jill. I remember that she tended to be serious in the lab,
that she was neat and polite, and that she liked to sit
close, touch, and talk at length about the knots she
worked on. She liked being reassured about her work,
which was careful and deliberate. What she didn’t like
was to leave something unﬁnished. She stayed with her
projects until they were done and tried to convince oth-
ers to do the same. She didn’t like to skip steps; she
wanted the sense of accuracy that only the careful pro-
gression from one detail to the next could provide.
I noticed early on that more than for any of the
other lab participants, it was important to Jill to desig-
nate clear anchor points for the string as she tied new
knots. On the way to producing a knot, she would often
resort to stapling or taping down parts of the string. It
was important to Jill to articulate and anchor interme-
diary conﬁgurations, in order both to understand a knot
and create a record for later reference.
As the project progressed, Jill told me that her
parents had recently divorced, and that she and her
brother lived half of the week with their mother and half
of the week with their father. She mentioned that there
was tension in her parents’ communication and that it
troubled her. She told stories of situations in which any
reasonable action on her part would have slighted one
of her parents. She seemed to feel herself in a perpetual
“double-bind,” doomed to doing something wrong no
matter what she chose, torn between decisions that her
parents might see as representing the interests of one or
the other of them.
26
Carol Strohecker

Jill was absorbed with knots whose completed
state involved motion. She once spent days creating an
exhibit of such knots, where passers-by could pull the
ends of a True Lovers’ knot she had suspended from a
pipe on the ceiling in order to play with the knot’s back-
and-forth movement. Jill made several iterations of the
knot before the exhibit took its ﬁnal form, modifying the
string to facilitate pulling its ends. To hang her construc-
tion, she anchored a long string to a ceiling pipe with a
Square knot. A Bowline at the end of this string held one
of the two strings composing the True Lovers’ knot,
which supported the second string wrapped around it.
Excited about her construction, she made a “museum
label” highlighting the placement of the three knots:
At the very top [on the black pipe] notice the
“Square knot” to hold it in place. The knot holding
on to the Lovers’ Knot [True Lovers’ knot] is the
“Bowline.” Notice the way the strings are two col-
ors. It is that way so it is easier for you to pull it.
To pull take the two strings with the black
Lego pieces. Pull hard until the two pretzel knots
meet. Then pull hard the two strings without any-
thing on them. Repeat if you wish.
Please pull me.
To me, Jill’s ﬁnal phrase signaled her identiﬁca-
tion with the knot. And it seemed to echo another voice
in her mind that wanted to say: Notice how I am sus-
pended by two knots, one that anchors me and one that
holds me. Notice how I am two knots, waiting to be
pulled this way and that. I understand being pulled; it
is something that I know. Allowing others to pull me is
a purpose that I serve.
Through the course of the project, Jill expressed
her emotions in knots and tried to initiate some emo-
tional repairs as well: frustrated with being pulled by
others led her to devise a step-by-step approach to knot
Knots
27

tying. Others might leave; Jill committed herself in ad-
vance to a plan.
Six years after the Knot Lab had closed, I was able
to ﬁnd Jill and another member of the original project.
They were curious about reconnecting with each other
and with me. Jill remembered me as the “Knot Lady” but
claimed not to remember much about knots. I thought
that in this she was expressing her anxiety about math-
ematics. Although Jill had been one of the most avid
participants in the Knot Lab when she was younger, in
the intervening years she had come to think of herself
as a person who was “not good at math,” a self-image all
too common among young women. Jill was open to dis-
cussing her lab experience and to participating in new
projects involving colorful polyhedra but hesitated when
our explorations involved some numeric quantiﬁcation
of an idea. The gap between what she could do and what
she thought she could do was poignant.
It may be that I am the one for whom the Knot Lab
had the most impact. Knot making showed me how
commonplace objects can help people think purpose-
fully about continuity and separation, combination and
deviation. Through knots I learned that engaging ob-
jects can help people to build intuitions about mathe-
matics. And witnessing one of the female participants
succumb to stereotypical math phobia after such a
strong start as a ﬁfth grader spurred my determination
to encourage the representation of different learning
styles in all pedagogy.
For many, however, I will always be simply the
Knot Lady. My growing collection of knot-oriented gifts
serves as constant reminder of this: a ceramic vase with
a Square knot decoration and braided handles, a clock
with knots in places of numbers, two seared glass spin-
dles entwined to form an elegant bracelet. And new ob-
jects and e-mails continue to come my way from people
whenever they encounter news about knots—whether
it’s an article about the usefulness of knot theory in
28
Carol Strohecker

DNA research, a publication from The Shipping News, or
endearing knot jokes. In truth, I wouldn’t want it any
other way. Much as painters relish a blank canvas, writ-
ers a fresh page, or moviemakers a darkened screen, I
suppose I will always have a penchant for bits of string
and the potentials they suggest.
Recently, I asked my brother if he had any memo-
ries of learning to tie his shoes. He told me he recalled a
moment when he had just completed tying his shoes
and left the house to join his friends. I like to imagine
that this moment occurred after he mastered the strings
and mantra on the stairs, only steps from the front door
of our house.
Carol Strohecker was Principal Investigator of the
Everday Learning Research Group at Media Lab
Europe, and is now director of the Center of Design
Innovation, an institutional partnership of the
University of North Carolina.
Knots
29

[Electronic communication] . . . is on the way to transforming
the entire public and private space of humanity, and ﬁrst of
all the limit between the private, the secret (private or public),
and the public or the phenomenal. It is not only a technique, in
the ordinary and limited sense of the term: at an unprece-
dented rhythm, in a quasi-instantaneous fashion, this instru-
mental possibility of production, of printing, of conservation,
and of destruction of the archive must inevitably be accompa-
nied by juridical and thus political transformations. . . . [Be-
cause of] these radical and interminable turbulances, we must
take stock today of the [archived] classical works. . . . [C]lassi-
cal and extraordinary works move away from us at great speed,
in a continually accelerated fashion. They burrow into the past
at a distance more and more comparable to that which sepa-
rates us from archaeological digs.
—Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever

THE ARCHIVE
Susan Yee

La Fondation Le Corbusier in Paris archives the work
of the world-renowned architect, Le Corbusier. His work
is studied by every student of architecture, and in the
mid-1990s my task was to closely examine his sketches,
drawings, notebooks, models, anything I could ﬁnd that
might help to construct a virtual model of one of his
famed unbuilt projects, the Palace of the Soviets. The
archives were located in Le Corbusier–designed build-
ings, Villa La Roche and Villa Jeanneret; the idea of sift-
ing though the master architect’s original drawings in a
space that was conceived by the master himself thrilled
me. The materials were rich: ﬂuid sketches, detailed
drawings, study models, and notes. I read his letters. I
browsed through his datebook and imagined his days
full of meetings. I examined his hand-scrawled calcula-
tions in the margins of sketches and did the math along
with him. There were newspaper clippings. I remember
ﬁnding one where his design was critiqued. Right on the
clipping he had written “Idiote” in a vigorous and pow-
erful hand. I could trace the precision and force of the
incision into the newsprint. I felt his frustration, his
spirit.
One day, I asked to see the overall plan drawing for
his unbuilt design. I was escorted to a special room
where Le Corbusier’s largest drawings were viewed and
waited for the curator to bring up the large rolled draw-
ing. I waited in silence as the curator opened the scroll.
It was so large that it spilled over the edge of the table. I
had to walk around the drawing in order to see it. I ex-
pected to be given gloves, but I was not. I felt awkward.
I stood there more than timid, almost paralyzed. I didn’t
know if I could or should touch it. And then the curator
touched it, so I went ahead and touched it too with my
32
Susan Yee

bare hands. All I could think about was that this was
Le Corbusier’s original drawing. It was meticulously
hand-drawn, but the drawing was dirty. There were
marks on it, smudges, ﬁngerprints, the marks of other
hands, and now I added mine. I felt close to Le Cor-
busier as I walked around and around the drawing,
looking at the parts that I wanted to replicate to bring
home with me, touching the drawing as I walked. The
paper was very thin.
The next day I came back to the archive and that
same scroll was rolled out again. The ritual began again.
I spent all day walking, touching, looking, thinking.
On other days the ritual would be different. I looked at
Le Corbusier’s personal, handwritten letters. And one
day, and this was the most miraculous of all, I found a
little parchment bag full of paper squares of different
colors and different sizes. I was there with a team of
other MIT architects, and we all gravitated toward these
playful cut-outs. Delighted with the discovery, we all im-
mediately came to the same idea at once: that these were
the elements Le Corbusier used when he was designing
the Palace of the Soviets. These were the little squares
he used to program the large project. He ﬁgured out the
arrangement with little colored papers. One color was for
meeting rooms, another was for public areas. Each
function of the project had a designated color. And I
imagined how he ﬁddled with these little bits of paper
until he found a programmatic conﬁguration that pleased
him; I ﬁddled with them too.
On my last day at the archives, the curator ap-
proached me with pride, “Oh, you’ll love what we’re doing
now. You won’t ever have to come here! You won’t ever
have to look at these drawings anymore! We’re putting
The Archive
33

them all in a digital database!” She brought me to an ad-
jacent room and showed me the exact drawing I had been
looking at, the drawing around which I had been circling
for days. It appeared on her computer as a small icon. 
If you clicked on it, it became larger. If I had accessed
this drawing from home, I would never have grasped its
dimensions, I would never have known that it was 
stored separately, carefully rolled, that it was dirty with
smudges and ﬁngerprints. The scans for the Web 
site gave me nothing to touch. I felt no awe about the
scale of the drawings. Looking at the curator’s scans
made me think respectfully about mass consumption,
about allowing everybody to have access, about the tech-
nical problems of how to use a cursor to move around the
drawing on the screen, and about how differently I un-
derstood the digital image and the designer behind it.
Looking at the scans in the computer room made
me miss the quiet of the physical archive, the ritual of
bringing out the precious original drawings, the long
minutes of unwinding. Sitting at the curator’s computer
in Paris, I followed her instructions and linked once again
to the drawing. A moment later, some bit of business
crossed my mind and I linked to MIT. Feeling like a sad-
dened citizen of the information world, I felt transported
to MIT through the link. I had a moment of shame.
That day with the curator was the ﬁrst time I began
to think about the transition from physical to digital. The
evocative object, the Le Corbusier drawing in both its
physical and digital form, made me wonder how auto-
matic it had been for the curator to put the emotion of the
archive out of mind, how easy it was to trade the value
of touch and physicality for the powers of digitization.
I think of Turkle’s distinction between instrumen-
tal and subjective technology, between what technology
does for us and what it does to us as people.1 The new
Le Corbusier digital database did things for me. It allowed
me to do things that I could not do before. I could search
34
Susan Yee

it, manipulate it, copy it, save it, share it. But what did
it do to me? It made the drawings feel anonymous and it
made me feel anonymous. I felt no connection to the
digital drawings on the screen, no sense of the architect
who drew it.
As I came to terms with my anonymity, my lack of
connection, and the loss of my former rituals in the
physical archive, I felt fortunate to be in a generation 
of designers that straddles both physical and digital
worlds, a generation that creates, values, and under-
stands handmade drawings and models as well as digi-
tal ones.
In my work designing technology-enhanced stu-
dios at MIT, I often think about Le Corbusier’s drawings
and the drawings that designers make today. Today’s
drawings and models are constructed on the computer.
They have never been physical. They are born digital.
They will never be touched. I think about how a new
generation will be trained to favor computational tech-
niques and algorithmic methods of design. Instru-
mentally, these technologies offer opportunities for 
innovation in design development and construction.
Subjectively, however, what will these technologies do to
us? How will they affect the way we feel, see ourselves,
and see design? How will future students of architec-
ture come to experience the designs of a master from the
pre-digital era? And what of the “old masters” of our ﬁrst
digital era? Will future students be satisﬁed to simply
understand the algorithms that generated their de-
signs? Will we still crave some pilgrimage such as the
one I took to Paris? But there will be no place to go; it will
all be on a collection of servers. What will this do to our
emotional understanding of the human process of de-
sign? What rituals might we invent to recover the body’s
intimate involvement with these new traces of human
imagination? Will we be able to feel the human connec-
tion through digital archives? Will we care?
The Archive
35

Susan Yee earned a PhD in architecture from MIT 
and studies the implications of integrating new
technologies into design learning environments.


To express the same idea in still another way, I think that
human knowledge is essentially active. To know is to assimi-
late reality into systems of transformations. To know is to
transform reality in order to understand how a certain state is
brought about. By virtue of this point of view, I ﬁnd myself op-
posed to the view of knowledge as a copy, a passive copy of
reality. In point of fact, this notion is based on a vicious circle:
in order to make a copy we have to know the model that we are
copying, but according to this theory of knowledge the only way
to know the model is by copying it, until we are caught in a
circle, unable ever to know whether our copy of the model is
like the model or not. To my way of thinking, knowing an ob-
ject does not mean copying it—it means acting upon it. It
means constructing systems of transformation that can be car-
ried out on or with this object. Knowing reality means con-
structing systems of transformations that correspond, more or
less adequately, to reality. . . . Knowledge, then, is a system of
transformations that become progressively adequate. . . . But
let us ask what logical and mathematical knowledge is ab-
stracted from. There are two possibilities. The ﬁrst is that,
when we act upon an object, our knowledge is derived from the
object itself. . . . But there is a second possibility: when we are
acting upon an object, we can also take into account the action
itself, or operation if you will, since the transformation can be
carried out mentally. In this hypothesis the abstraction is
drawn not from the object that is acted upon, but from the
action itself.
—Jean Piaget. Genetic Epistemology

STARS
Mitchel Resnick

When I was growing up in a suburb of Philadelphia,
there was a small ﬁeld on the side of our house.1 On
summer evenings, I would go to the “side lot” (as we
called it), lie on my back, and stare into the sky. My eyes
would dance from star to star. But it wasn’t so much the
stars that held my attention. Rather, it was the space be-
tween, around, and beyond them. At an early age (maybe
seven or eight), I had started to wonder about all that
space. Does it go on forever? If not, where does it end?
How does it end?
Every answer that I could think of seemed equally
absurd. I could not imagine the universe going on for-
ever. But how could it end? If there is a wall at the end
of the universe, what is on the other side? These ques-
tions frustrated and fascinated me. Of course, I came
across many other questions that I couldn’t answer. But
for most questions, even if I didn’t know the answer, I
could at least imagine that there was an answer. Ques-
tions about the “end of the universe” took on a special
status for me. These were questions where I couldn’t
even imagine any answer. No answer seemed possible.
As I grew older, I became interested in puzzles and
paradoxes. I spent many hours trying to sort out the
sentence: This sentence is false. If the sentence is true,
then it must be false. But if it is false, it must be true.
Again, a puzzle for which I couldn’t even imagine any
answers.
In school, I was attracted to math and physics, two
ﬁelds ﬁlled with paradoxes and counterintuitive ideas. I
became fascinated by an object that my high-school
physics teacher showed us. The object was remarkably
simple: two wheels and an axle, with a pin hanging down
from the middle of the axle (not quite hitting the ground),
40
Mitchel Resnick

and a string at the end of the pin. The teacher asked:
What happens when you pull on the string? Since the
string is attached to the end of the pin, it seems that the
pin should come toward you. At the same time, it seems
that the wheels should come toward you. Both can’t be
true: if the pin comes toward you, the wheels move
away; if the wheels come toward you, the pin moves
away. Another paradox! But this object was different
from the stars of my childhood: you could hold it in your
hands and test it out. Indeed, I went home, took apart
an old toy truck, and made my own version of the puzzle,
testing pins of different lengths. Even after I “knew” the
answer, I loved tugging on the string and thinking about
the paradox.
In college, majoring in physics, I was determined
to develop a better understanding of what I now thought
of as my Ultimate Paradox—the paradox of a universe
that can’t go on forever but can never end. In physics
courses, I learned how to derive and manipulate the
equations of general relativity, the ﬁeld most directly re-
lated to my paradox. It wasn’t the equations that really
interested me, they were just a foundation, a jumping-
off point, for thinking about the paradox itself. I tried to
approach it through new thinking strategies, through
new intuitions and metaphors: I learned that the uni-
verse might curve back on itself, just as the land on
Earth curves back on itself as you travel all the way
around the globe. But what does that mean? How can
three-dimensional space “curve back on itself”? How
could I envision that? How could I “feel” that?
During college, I had planned to attend graduate
school in physics. But at the end of senior year, I decided
to work as a journalist instead. I worried that physics
Stars
41

graduate school would be ﬁlled with too many equations
and too few qualitative insights. I was still fascinated
with the mysteries and paradoxes of science. I hoped
that as a journalist, specializing in science and technol-
ogy, I would be able to share my fascination with others.
For ﬁve years, I covered universities and high technol-
ogy companies around Boston and then Silicon Valley. I
enjoyed my work, but something was missing. I didn’t
feel the same level of intellectual excitement that I had
felt in college. I had lost contact with my obsession. I be-
gan to recognize the importance of having obsessions.
Then, in 1982, I wrote a cover story for Business
Week magazine about research in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence. I talked with many leading researchers in
the ﬁeld. I became increasingly interested in questions
about the mind. How can a mind emerge from a collec-
tion of mindless parts? It seems clear that no one part
is “in charge” of the mind (or else it too would be a mind).
But how can a mind function so effectively and cre-
atively without anyone (or anything) in charge?
At last, I had a new Ultimate Paradox, a new ob-
session. I wasn’t so much interested in the details of
neuroscience, or even in traditional research in artiﬁcial
intelligence. Rather, I wanted to develop qualitative ways
to think about the idea of emergence. I became inter-
ested not only in minds but also in other systems in
which complex patterns emerge from simple inter-
actions among simple parts. I became particularly in-
terested in natural selection and evolution, hoping to
gain a better understanding of how today’s sophisti-
cated life forms evolved from a few simple chemicals. For
me, there was something intriguing and beautiful about
this self-organized emergence of order from disorder, of
complexity from simplicity. I developed an emotional
investment in this idea. Few things got me more upset
than listening to creationists attacking the idea of evo-
lution, attacking the idea that complexity can arise from
simple pieces.
42
Mitchel Resnick

Around this time, I came to MIT for a year as a
Knight Science Journalism Fellow. During the year, I
studied with Sherry Turkle, who studied the emotional
power of things we think with, and Seymour Papert, who
described how a particular object, gears, had changed
his way of thinking in childhood. Papert had fallen in
love with gears and, in the process, with mathematics.2
Most important during that year was the way I came to
see the computer in a new light. For me, the key insight
was not that the computer itself is an evocative object
(although surely it is for many people), but rather that
the computer can be used to create evocative objects.
And those new evocative objects could be used to help
people learn new things in new ways. In designing the
Logo turtle, for example, Papert had explicitly attempted
to make an evocative object to help students become en-
gaged with mathematical ideas and mathematical think-
ing. Just as the young Papert had fallen in love with
mathematics through gears, children could now fall in
love with mathematics through the turtle.
The idea of creating evocative objects for educa-
tional purposes is not a new idea. When Friedrich Froebel
started the world’s ﬁrst kindergarten in 1837, he care-
fully designed a set of physical objects—blocks, balls,
beads—that became known as Froebel’s gifts.3 As chil-
dren playfully experimented with Froebel’s gifts, they
learned important ideas about number, shape, size,
color. This approach has stood the test of time, and it
continues as the basis for kindergartens around the
world today.
The computer provides an opportunity to expand
Froebel’s approach, making possible a wider and more
diverse range of evocative objects for education. I felt a
new sense of mission: I could use the computer to cre-
ate evocative objects for exploring my new Ultimate
Paradox, the paradox of a complex whole arising from
simple parts. I wanted to create objects that would en-
able me to explore the paradox, but also to help others
Stars
43

explore it as well. I decided to use Papert’s turtle as the
basic building block. But instead of a single turtle, I cre-
ated thousands of turtles. And I developed a new lan-
guage, called StarLogo, that enabled students to program
each of the individual turtles, then observe the patterns
that emerge from all of the interactions.
Students have used StarLogo to explore a diverse
range of phenomena. They have turned turtles into
birds to explore how ﬂocking patterns arise; into cars to
explore how trafﬁc jams form; into ants to explore how
foraging patterns emerge; and into buyers and sellers in
a marketplace to explore how economic patterns form.
It has given me great satisfaction to see students be-
come engaged with my Ultimate Paradox. For some, it
has become an obsession, as it was for me.
Over the past twenty years, my research has con-
tinued to revolve around the creation of evocative objects
for education. Working with the LEGO Company, I’ve
embedded electronics inside LEGO bricks, so that chil-
dren can make their LEGO constructions come alive—
sensing, reacting, and even dancing with one another. I
aspire for these “programmable bricks” to serve as a
Froebel gift for the twenty-ﬁrst century. Just as the
stars of the night sky inspired, intrigued, and provoked
me as a child, my hope is to create new objects that help
others ﬁnd their own obsessions.
Mitchel Resnick is LEGO Papert Professor of
Learning Research and Director of the Lifelong
Kindergarten research group at the MIT Media Lab.
44
Mitchel Resnick

Stars
45

When the stick (hobbyhorse) becomes the pivot for detaching
the meaning of “horse” from a real horse, the child makes one
object inﬂuence another semantically. He cannot detach mean-
ing from an object, or a word from an object, except by ﬁnding
a pivot in something else. Transfer of meanings is facilitated by
the fact that the child accepts a word as the property of a thing:
he sees not the word but the thing it designates. For a child the
word “horse” applied to the stick means “there is a horse” be-
cause mentally he sees the object standing behind the word. A
vital transitional stage toward operating with meaning occurs
when a child ﬁrst acts with meanings as with objects (as when
he acts with the stick as though it were a horse). Later he car-
ries out these acts consciously. . . . In play a child sponta-
neously makes use of his ability to separate meaning from an
object without knowing he is doing it, just as he does not know
he is speaking in prose but talks without paying attention to
the words. Then through play the child achieves a functional
deﬁnition of concepts or objects, and words become parts of
a thing.
—Lev Vygotsky, Mind in Society

KEYBOARDS
Howard Gardner

On July 11, 2003, I turned sixty. In front of the twenty
or so friends and family that were gathered, my four
children gave presentations—a poem, a newly com-
posed piece performed on the piano, and a set of written
reﬂections. I was touched, grateful, and struck by the
fact that all four of my children spoke about keyboards.
Two described the importance of music and the piano in
their (and my) life; two evoked the experience of listen-
ing to me type manuscripts at night as they were nod-
ding off to sleep.
I am not sentimental about objects. I admire beau-
tiful things and like to be around them, but I make no
effort to purchase or keep them. I am happy wearing
clothes of forty years ago; truth to tell, I am happier
wearing such old clothing. I save my feelings for other
human beings and the family dog, Nero. What I do value
are the sounds of music and the ideas in books. If I
could no longer hear music (or play it), I would be dev-
astated. If I could no longer read for study or pleasure
(or write for others or myself), I would not enjoy life. My
preferred access to linguistic and musical objects is via
ﬁngers on keyboards.
I began both piano lessons and the typing of man-
uscripts when I turned seven. I took piano lessons for
almost six years, then began to teach piano sporadi-
cally, and later sat in on lessons and practiced with two
of my children. In all, I have played piano off and on for
ﬁfty-three years. While I never learned to touch type, I
have seen myself as a writer since second or third grade,
and typewriters have been with me ever since. I began
with manual typewriters for home and ofﬁce; over time,
I moved in turn to electric typewriters, ofﬁce PCs, and a
succession of laptop computers, on one of which I am
typing at this moment.
48
Howard Gardner

There are scarcely any days on which I do not move
my ﬁngers across some kind of keyboard, and often I am
at a keyboard, working on music or writing, for as many
hours as I eat or sleep. I am able to write with a pen or
pencil, and sometimes do so, but I much prefer to type.
Some people are students of keyboards; they
sample hundreds of pianos and prefer only a certain
model, one Steinway above all the rest. Others love the
keyboard on their computer because of its touch—they
feel that their hands glide over it with no wasted motion.
But for me, this is not the case. I pay essentially no at-
tention to the quality of my keyboards. All of my atten-
tion is focused on the message, musical or literary.
When I play the piano, I try to use an appropriate touch,
but I am really studying the music, trying to understand
it, hoping to capture that meaning through my meager
technique. When I am typing, my mind is entirely on the
contents that I am trying to convey. Above all else, I am
trying to be clear; secondarily, I am trying to write in a
way that is pleasing to read.
And yet, even with my focus so intently on the
message, the experience of my ﬁngers on keyboards
feels like more than simply a means to a desired end. In
the creation of both music and text, if I could bypass the
keyboard and directly transmit mental signals to an in-
strument or to the computer, I would not want to do so.
When I learned to play the piano, my mother sat
next to me nearly every day. When two of my sons began
to play, I naturally sat next to them as well. I feel an as-
sociation between the piano keyboard and family love. In
the case of writing, the sensations of ﬁngers on keys are
soothing in a way that goes beyond my pleasure in what
I write: when I want to imagine myself happy, I think of
myself in my study or in a comfortable hotel room on the
Keyboards
49

road, or even cramped, as I am now, in the economy
class of American Airlines Flight 1367, from Boston to
Miami, ﬁngers on a keyboard, letting my thoughts pro-
ceed at their pace into a typescript.
Stepping back from my personal experience, I don
for a moment the perspective of the social scientist. As
a scholar, my task is to master the knowledge of the
past and to identify ways in which I can add to it. As a
sometime pianist, my task is to understand the explicit
and implicit instructions of the composer and, ulti-
mately, to introduce my personal interpretation of his or
her composition.
In principle, both of these assignments can be
tackled simply by thinking about the challenge at hand
and arriving at the best possible solution. Indeed, Mozart
is said to have created entire compositions in his head
and simply to have written them down in the manner of
an amanuensis; and various writers have claimed that
the job of writing is simply the transposition to paper of
words and ideas that have come to them in a ﬂash.
I am skeptical of these accounts. Research on cre-
ativity reveals that, even though new ideas appear to come
to one as a ﬂash, there has invariably been tremendous
preparation beforehand—and this preparation can be
documented in the written record. Moreover, thought
does not take place in a vacuum—it takes place in vari-
ous media of expression. By the time one has become an
expert some of these media appear to be largely cere-
bral. But especially during early development, as the
social psychologist Lev Vygotsky has taught us, these
media are invariably tools that have been created by the
wider society—tools ranging from words to pencils, com-
puters, and musical instruments.
Perhaps as an expert writer and a long time jour-
neyman pianist, I could achieve some of my goals without
a keyboard. However, I think that I would be handi-
capped by the absence of an instrument on which to
50
Howard Gardner

work. And I know that affectively I need, enjoy, even love
the opportunity to type or play away, for much of the day.
Howard Gardner is the John H. and Elisabeth A.
Hobbs Professor of Cognition and Education at the
Harvard Graduate School of Education.
Keyboards
51


Objects of Discipline
and Desire

There was a little girl who was so delicate and charming, but in
the summer she always had to go barefoot because she was so
poor. . . . The little girl’s name was Karen. . . .
Karen was . . . to have new shoes. The rich shoemaker in
town measured her little foot. . . . In the midst of all the shoes
stood a pair of red ones just like the ones the princess had
worn. How beautiful they were! . . . [Karen] . . . put them on. . . .
And Karen couldn’t help herself, she had to take a few dance
steps. As soon as she started, her feet kept on dancing. It was
as if the shoes had taken control. She danced around the cor-
ner of the church, she couldn’t stop herself. . . . At home the
shoes were put in a cupboard, but Karen couldn’t help looking
at them. . . . She put on the red shoes. Why shouldn’t she? And
then she went to the ball and began to dance.
But when she wanted to turn right, the shoes danced to
the left, and when she wanted to move up the ﬂoor, the shoes
danced down the ﬂoor, down the stairs, along the street, and
out the town gate. Dance she did, and dance she must, right
out into the dark forest.
—Hans Christian Andersen, “The Red Shoes”

BALLET SLIPPERS
Eden Medina

As a child, I lived to dance. My early ballet lessons still
stay with me, a long series of carpools from one musty
studio to another. I began my training at age four after
my parents presented me with my ﬁrst pair of ballet
slippers and drove me to the local studio. Dressed in
baggy leotards and pink cotton tights, my fellow four-
year-olds and I learned to rotate our hips unnaturally
outward into “ﬁrst position,” stand rigidly with our
shoulders back and our stomachs sucked in, and even-
tually associate meaning with French words such as
tendu and plié.
There are many objects associated with ballet,
most of which contribute to a culture of continuous self-
appraisal (the barre, the elastic band around the waist,
the mirrored room). Among these, the shoe is by far the
most signiﬁcant. It acts as an object of identiﬁcation,
drawing a line between the various styles of dance. To a
surprising degree, its constraints and affordances de-
ﬁne the movement of the ballerina.
History illustrates how the evolution of ballet par-
alleled the development of the dancer’s shoes. Prior to
the eighteenth century, this ﬂedgling art celebrated male
athleticism and relegated female dancers, clad in heavy
skirts, wigs, and heeled slippers, to peripheral roles.
French dancer Marie Ann Cupis de Camargo was one of
the ﬁrst women to cross the gender barrier when she re-
moved the heels from her slippers and began perform-
ing the same ﬂashy steps as her male counterparts.
In 1832, dancer Marie Taglioni forever altered ballet
technique by dancing en pointe the full-length ballet La
Sylphide. The resulting performance—ethereal and
light—embodied the spirit of the Romantic Age. Women
who seemed to possess supernatural beauty and purity
captured the hearts of ordinary, earthbound men. Tag-
56
Eden Medina

lioni’s portrayal of a weightless, idealized femininity made
her an international favorite. It was reported that some
overly zealous fans ate her discarded slippers with
sauce. In the nineteenth century, choreographers con-
tinued to showcase the technique of the female balle-
rina, who had since displaced the male dancer as the
central ﬁgure in ballet. The invention of harder, more
durable slippers increased the ballerina’s potential for
athleticism and broadened the range of movement she
was expected to perform.
Beyond these technical and aesthetic expecta-
tions, ballet shoes carry symbolic power. In the early
twentieth century, Isadora Duncan rejected the rigidity
of nineteenth-century ballet by donning loose Grecian
robes instead of corsets and embracing the naturalness
of the bare foot instead of the artiﬁciality of the ballet
slipper. Modern dance pioneer Doris Humphrey later
based her style of fall and recovery on the movement of
the unsoled human footfall.
By the age of eleven, before I had even reached the
age of going en pointe, I had already disﬁgured my feet.
The restrictive nature of the shoe, combined with the
demanding movement required of my feet within them,
resulted in numerous trips to the doctor for ingrown toe-
nails as well as the initial signs of bunions. My legs de-
veloped the hyper-musculature characteristic of dancers
forced to raise their bodies up on their toes. I still bear
the marks of my early years in ballet.
Yet such inconvenience seemed minor in compari-
son to my dream that my body might recreate the move-
ments of controlled beauty characteristic of the dance.
My ballet slippers enabled me to move in ways I never
dreamed possible. I could mimic the ethereal weightless-
ness of Giselle or throw myself into a series of athletic
Ballet Slippers
57

jumps and turns that left me happily gasping for air. For
a time, I felt my body would respond to any demand I
could impose on it.
In ballet, shoes shape physical artistry and also
mark the dancer’s progression within the ranks of the
discipline. When I was four, my parents purchased my
ballet slippers in a mall. They were inexpensive, cut from
coarse leather, and were sold with the elastic strap fully
attached to the sides of the shoe. My next pair came
from a store specializing in dance apparel. Apart from
their origins, the most noticeable difference was the
piece of unattached elastic my mom had to sew on the
slipper, specially positioned to accommodate the di-
mensions of my foot within this particular shoe. As I im-
proved, I became more demanding of my increasingly
sophisticated equipment. I remember my pride when I
could ﬁnally attach a pair of ribbons to my slippers in
addition to the requisite elastic.
A dancer receives her ﬁrst pair of pointe shoes, toe
shoes, at age twelve, roughly corresponding to the age
she enters puberty. Progress continues to be marked
though a progression of shoes, now all shoes for danc-
ing en pointe. The new hierarchy is even more complex,
marked by technical terms such as “shank stiffness”
and “box size.” These new shoes also come with an ar-
ray of accessories, such as ﬁrst-aide tape and lamb’s
wool to ease the inevitable pain of blisters, bunions, and
bleeding.
My own journey through the hierarchy of shoes
signiﬁed an increase in my skill and helped me identify
with the image of the professional ballerina that I upheld
as my physical ideal. For a time, both my movements
and appearance progressed along what I imagined to be
a natural trajectory toward this goal. However, as I con-
tinued my studies, there was an increasing gap between
the reality of my body and the perfected body imagined
in my mind. My shoes endowed my body with the theo-
58
Eden Medina

retical capability to balance and extend my limbs, but
my legs were not as long, my torso not as limber, and my
neck not as graceful as the one owned by my imagined
self, my rival.
Eventually each movement I executed before the
mirror forced me to stare at my own limitations. Just as
the ballet slippers of my youth helped me become a
member of a community driven to transform the body
into art, the toe shoes of my young adulthood high-
lighted both my technical progression and the elusive
nature of my ideal physique. As I became closer to my
ideal in the realm of technical movement, I was left with
a profound sense of my physical shortcomings. My body
would never be beautiful in the exact way I longed for
it to be.
I quit ballet shortly after this realization. I felt that
my body had failed me. I put my toe shoes in a box and
there they collected dust for the next ten years. As I en-
tered adulthood, the library replaced the ballet studio as
my favorite haunt; the computer became my preferred
tool of self-expression; and the academic community of-
fered a new mirror for self-appraisal.
Despite my prolonged absence from the dance stu-
dio, the movements of my youth remained engraved in
my body. Several years ago, I felt an urge to revisit them.
My father was able to locate my old pair of ballet slip-
pers, which he promptly shipped to me via FedEx. As I
sat in the studio on my ﬁrst day of class and began to
put on my warm-up clothes, I doubted my decision to
return: How would the mirror evaluate my older, less
ﬂexible body? Yet, as I looked around the studio, I no-
ticed that none of my classmates resembled the ideal
that had driven me from the discipline I once loved.
Slowly I slipped my feet into my shoes and began to
stretch, feeling my hips rotate almost imperceptibly out-
ward as they recalled a stance once second nature. I
sensed that whatever the shortcomings of the body, I
Ballet Slippers
59

was now in a position to see the beauty of the dance. As
a child, I lived to dance. As an adult, I could accept the
fact that I loved to dance. When I felt warm, I walked
across the studio and joined my classmates at the barre.
Eden Medina is Assistant Professor of Social
Informatics at Indiana University.
60
Eden Medina

Ballet Slippers
61

[Today] any objects or persons can be reasonably thought of in
terms of disassembly and reassembly; no “natural” architec-
tures constrain system design. . . . “Integrity” or “sincerity” of
the Western self gives way to decision procedures and expert
systems. . . . Human beings, like any other component or sub-
system, must be localized in a system architecture whose basic
modes of operation are probabilistic, statistical. No objects,
spaces, or bodies are sacred in themselves; any component can
be interfaced with any other if the proper standard, the proper
code, can be constructed for processing signals in a common
language. . . . The privileged pathology affecting all kinds of
components in this universe is stress—communications
breakdown. . . . The cyborg is a kind of disassembled and re-
assembled, postmodern collective and personal self.
—Donna J. Haraway, “The Cyborg Manifesto”

THE ELITE GLUCOMETER
Joseph Cevetello

Every morning the ﬁrst thing I do is search my apart-
ment for my blue case. In it is my Elite Glucometer,
lancet, syringes, and other blood glucose testing para-
phernalia. Carefully I open a test strip packet, insert it
into my glucometer, load my lancet device with a sharp,
new needle, search the tips of my ﬁngers for a choice
spot, and prick myself. I squeeze my ﬁnger until a tiny
droplet of blood forms and hold the glucometer close
until the vacuum pulls in the correct amount of blood.
The counter on my glucometer begins to count
down time. It becomes my body’s meter. I live by its met-
ric. I might use the next sixty seconds to walk to the re-
frigerator to retrieve my insulin, or begin to make some
coffee, or put my head down and think about going back
to sleep. After sixty seconds, the meter displays my blood
glucose level in milligrams per tenth of a liter of blood.
It is only recently that I have thought about how my
meter, the ﬁrst object I see every morning, has become
me. Our interactions deﬁne my sense of who I am. My
glucometer is credit card size—three inches times two
inches, and is about one half-inch thick. It weighs about
three ounces. The meter has no buttons or switches; it
turns on only at the insertion of a test strip, which is
about one inch long and one-quarter inch wide. At one
end of the strip, an opening pulls blood into the testing
plate. On its front is a small LCD display.
I have always been happy knowing that my meter
is one of the most accurate on the market. I have been
uninterested in how the meter determines my glucose
level. The output is the event. I accept what my meter
tells me.
Diabetes is all about control: control of blood sug-
ars, control of what one eats and when one eats it,
scheduled exercise, and regulation of insulin intake to
64
Joseph Cevetello

food. However, there is no guarantee that even if you
keep your disease “under control” its many side effects
will not materialize. Despite a regimented life, you could
still lose a limb or a kidney, become blind or impotent.
I was diagnosed with Insulin Dependent Diabetes
in 1995. IDD is caused when the body attacks and kills
off the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. In-
sulin injections are required for all who have IDD. IDD
increases the probability of heart disease fourfold, is
the leading cause of kidney disease, limb amputations,
blindness, and can lead to impotency. Left untreated,
IDD would lead to death in about two years. When I was
diagnosed I was fortunate to be living in Boston, the
home of the Joslin Diabetes Center. It was at Joslin that
I learned to care for myself and to be humble about my
illness. While at the Joslin Clinic, I saw patients in wheel
chairs who had lost a foot, others walking with IVs, and
others with eye patches over one, sometimes two, eyes.
I understood that diabetes was not something to be
fooled with.
At the Joslin Clinic, I was introduced to the idea of
“tight control.” Tight control is the attempt to keep dia-
betic glucose levels as close to those of nondiabetics as
possible. To stay on tight control I test my blood at least
four times a day: in the morning, before lunch, before
dinner, and before bedtime. On days when I exercise, I
may test two times before vigorous activity to ensure my
blood sugar is high enough and one time after I exercise
to ensure that I have not gone too low. If I feel strange
sometime during the day, I will test again.
What do I do with all this data? I write the data in
my log book, in which I keep a tally of my glucose levels.
The meter also stores my last thirty readings and can
supply me with an average of these last thirty scores. As
The Elite Glucometer
65

I record the number in my log book, I project where I
want to be throughout the remainder of the day, whether
I can eat, how much I can eat, how much insulin I should
inject, and whether I can exercise or must wait to get my
sugars higher.
Usually, I come in at around 100 mg/dl (milligrams
per deciliter)—the goal I have set for myself. If I meet this
goal, give or take ten points, I feel a sense of accom-
plishment, a willingness to meet the day. If the read-out
is much above 115 mg/dl, however, my mood changes
abruptly. “A poor beginning,” I say to myself, “What did
I do? What on earth did I eat yesterday?” The next few
minutes are spent reconstructing my last night’s meals
and insulin injections, adjusting my dose for the day,
and thinking about what I can eat for breakfast.
I do not expect to be perfect, and I know there are
times when things get out of control either because I ate
too much or injected too little. Usually such readings do
not bother me. But, “usually” is a big word in the world
of “tight control.”
There have been many times when I have thought
I was low—when I even felt low—and my meter has told
me the opposite and vice versa. Discrepancies of more
than thirty points upset me. Sometimes I will remember
a snack or lack of a snack, and that will explain it. Many
times I can think of no good reason for the discrepancy.
When my mental image of my physical self conﬂicts with
my meter, I have a problem. Do I doubt myself, or do I
doubt my meter? Seeking to maintain my sense of con-
trol, I test again.
My ﬁrst reaction is to doubt the meter rather than
myself even though I know that ﬁrst and second meter
readings usually differ by no more than ﬁve points. One
would think that after all these years I would simply ac-
cept the ﬁrst reading. I do not. I am unwilling to place
absolute trust in my meter. I want to ﬁnd fault in it, al-
though I know it will always come up with two similar
readings. The discrepancy between the reading and my
66
Joseph Cevetello

expectation makes me redouble my efforts to remember
what I could have forgotten, what I might have done
wrong. Only when I remember do I feel in control once
again.
My meter maintains my image of myself as a man
able to take care of himself. It also deﬁnes me as a dis-
eased person, one who needs the aid of objects to sus-
tain my life. The meter concretizes my commitment to
remaining healthy and communicates to others that I
am different, somehow incomplete.
My interactions and dependency on my meter
have made me realize that relationships between people
and medical machinery are evolving. Perhaps, these
new relationships will become so vital to our survival
that, like my glucometer, they will seem intrinsic.
Projecting into the future, I can see two scenarios.
In one, techno-clad humans live with ubiquitous com-
puting, integrated into our homes, clothes, and bodies.
I imagine data glasses receiving information about us
from sensors buried deep within our bodies that could
communicate a constant readout of blood glucose level.
I, as the wearer, closely monitor myself and, at the ap-
propriate time, communicate with my insulin delivery
device to tell it to medicate me. In this scenario, I am
in control of these devices, they do what I tell them to.
In this fantasy, I am still a diseased person caring for
myself.
In a second scenario, I live in a world of ubiqui-
tous, body-based, clothing-based computing, but in this
future, a small implantable device regulates my glucose
levels and insulin needs. It operates autonomously. In
this fantasy, I do not control my disease; my computer
pancreas controls it for me. Manfred Clynes, a NASA sci-
entist writing in the 1960s, deﬁned a cyborg as a syn-
ergy between a machine and a human being that does
not require any conscious thought on the part of the
human.1 In the second scenario, it is difﬁcult for me to
remember that I have diabetes. I have become, in Clynes’s
The Elite Glucometer
67

terms, a cyborg. I wonder how my interactions with my
meter may be a harbinger of the nascent stages of a cy-
borgian relationship.
The Austrian poet, Rainer Maria Rilke, said: “The
future enters into us, in order to be transformed in us
long before it happens.”2 I ﬁnd my blue case and take
out my meter, blood glucose testing strips, lancet de-
vice, syringe. Carefully I open a test strip packet, insert
it into glucometer, load up my lancet device with a
sharp, new needle, search the tips of my ﬁngers for a
choice spot, and prick myself. I squeeze my ﬁnger until
a tiny droplet of blood forms and hold the glucometer
close until the vacuum pulls in the correct amount of
blood. As the meter counts down, I begin to prepare my
shot and wait for my meter to tell me what to do.
Joseph Cevetello received his doctorate from Harvard
University School of Education and is a specialist in 
e-learning design and technology use in adult
learning.
68
Joseph Cevetello

The Elite Glucometer
69

Strange indeed is the encounter with the other. . . . Confronting
the foreigner whom I reject and with whom at the same time I
identify . . . I lose my composure. I feel “lost,” “indistinct,”
“hazy.” . . . [Yet] the foreigner is within us. And when we ﬂee
from or struggle against the foreigner, we are ﬁghting our un-
conscious. . . . Delicately, analytically, . . . [we must be taught]
how to detect foreignness in ourselves. . . .
By recognizing our uncanny strangeness we shall nei-
ther suffer from it nor enjoy it from the outside. The foreigner
is within me, hence we are all foreigners. If I am a foreigner,
there are no foreigners.
—Julia Kristeva, Strangers to Ourselves

THE YELLOW RAINCOAT
Matthew Belmonte

Even in primary school I was preoccupied with the
idea of protection from an unpredictable world. Protec-
tion often came in the form of a glaringly bright, yellow
raincoat that kept me dry on rainy days on my way to
school. A thoroughly synthetic creation made of rub-
berized polyester, it would have been difﬁcult to imagine
anything less natural. It would be difﬁcult to imagine an
artifact that more embodies the tension between myself
and my environment. More than its function of keeping
rain out, however, it represented my fear of letting any-
thing in—people most of all.
People were the most unpredictable elements of
my world; unlike other objects they were more than the
sum of the forces acting on them. The human factor
was a constant irritant for a budding Laplacian like me.
Where a person was involved, one could never be as-
sured of predicting the output, even if all the inputs were
known. My wish back then was that I could be the hu-
man analog of the neutrino I had read about in science
articles: a particle that moved effortlessly through the
world, almost never interacting. On the playground,
while the other three-year-olds competed for the swings
and the slide, I paced along the fence, studying the
ground and identifying minerals in the rocks that I
found. Rocks, unlike people, were safe.
Wrapped around and covering me, the raincoat
represented my mother’s triumph over my own will, and
persistently reminded me of my dependence on her. In
a fundamental way that I didn’t consciously acknowl-
edge, the coat came to represent my mother, and I loved
and resented it as I loved and resented her. A fear of
death, of being smothered and negated, drives us to
separate ourselves from our parents. And a fear of life,
of being responsible for ourselves in an indifferent world,
72
Matthew Belmonte

brings us back to seek their protection. These conﬂict-
ing denials of death and of life were attached to the coat:
it made me impermeable to the assaults of the outside
world, yet it deﬁned me in a way that prevented me from
being myself.
In solitude I slipped between the horns of this
dilemma. When I was alone, there was neither the threat
of attention from other people, nor the demand to sub-
mit to the decisions of my parents. The defeat of my will
that was signaled by the yellow coat could be replayed
as a victory, if I were the one who chose it. Walking alone
through a downpour, I was immersed in the outside
world’s ﬂood yet insulated from it. It was thrilling to feel
the pressure of the rain and to see it roll off me and leave
me dry. It was as if I were marveling at some alien world
and knew that a spacesuit was all that separated me
from its deadly atmosphere. Alone in the rain, I was
master of my own actions and of my surroundings.
I believe that my childhood sensitivity to the bound-
ary between self and external world led me in my adult
life to study people with autism, whose central, daily
challenge is the work of imposing internal narrative ﬂow
on a deluge of external sensory inputs. Ironically, when
I was in primary school I never felt much empathy for my
autistic older brother. Now as I look back I see both
science and autism are compulsions to order, which dif-
fer only in their degrees of abstraction. I now feel that the
same set of genetic biases that gave my brother autism
gave me just enough of a desperation for order to make
me a scientist, and indeed, a student of autism—enough
to be driven by the same sense of impending chaos that
drives my brother, yet I’m not as overwhelmed by it. I
often consider how similar he and I are, and how I so
easily could have been him, or he me.
The Yellow Raincoat
73

So it was this shared desperation for order that
drove me into science, and later into the craft of ﬁction.
Like my old raincoat, science and art enable me to im-
merse myself in nature’s order while they insulate me
from nature’s chaos. As scientists we invent perfect
models in which phenomena are supposed to be math-
ematically tractable; the human construction of science
is full of ideal gases, incompressible ﬂuids, frictionless
surfaces, and blackbody radiators. Similarly, as artists
we ﬁlter the complexities of real life into representative
texts in which distinct characters are involved in coher-
ent plots evincing meaningful themes. Treating life as
theater and inventing purpose and order, I keep chaos,
meaninglessness, and death at bay. My theoretical and
narrative constructions in science and art are the same
sort of protective gear as the impermeable coat that I
once wore to primary school; they hold nature at arm’s
length, close enough so that I can make some sense of
it, but far enough so that I won’t be overwhelmed.
My work has taught me that this notion of pro-
tection goes a long way toward explaining how people
construct theories to gain a sense of control over their
surroundings. Then they behave in ways to reinforce
these theories. People with autism share the “normal”
desire to control their surroundings. What differs for
them is the intensity with which these surroundings im-
pinge. Abnormal neural connections within autistic
brains may lead to abnormal perception, increasing the
salience of individual events but undermining the ability
to connect these pieces of life into more integrated and
abstract representations.
I made understanding the experience of such a
fragmented perceptual world the center of my work. To
proceed, I imagine life as a ﬁlm being screened by an in-
competent projectionist. Perhaps the volume is so high
that none of the dialogue can be heard above the hiss of
noise, or perhaps the aperture setting causes one bright
corner of the picture to drown out all the rest. However,
74
Matthew Belmonte

if I can rewind the ﬁlm and play it again and again, I can
gather a bit more information each time I watch it. My
aspiration is to understand all of it.
The rigid and repetitive behaviors of people with
autism begin to make sense when we consider them as
the normal reaction of a human mind to a very abnor-
mal sensory environment, rather than as direct symp-
toms of an illness. Autistic symptoms are what a person
does in order to force a chaotic world to follow a pre-
dictable script. We are all trying to impose a narrative
order on what may seem a fundamentally chaotic world.
The difference in autism is that there is more chaos to
be controlled. In this regard, the study of autism can tell
us a great deal about humanity in general and how psy-
chological distress can be explained as a rational, if ex-
treme, reaction to a world gone awry.
On a stereotypically rainy English day, I still enjoy
a ramble through the countryside. Trudging through the
rain helps me collect my thoughts about science and life.
As I squelch along footpaths, I consider that each rain-
drop is an observation in itself, and I marvel at the task
of comprehending the storm without drowning in it.
Matthew Belmonte studied the neurobiology of
autism at the University of Cambridge and is now 
at Cornell University in the Department of Human
Development.

For the clock is not merely a means of keeping track of the hours,
but of synchronizing the actions of men. . . . The bells of the clock
tower almost deﬁned urban existence. Time-keeping passed
into time-serving and time-accounting and time-rationing. . . .
The clock, moreover, is a piece of power-machinery whose “prod-
uct” is seconds and minutes: by its essential nature it dissoci-
ated time from human events and helped create the belief in an
independent world of mathematically measurable sequences:
the special world of science. There is relatively little foundation
for this belief in common human experience: throughout the
year the days are of uneven duration, and not merely does the
relation between day and night steadily change. . . . In terms of
the human organism itself, mechanical time is even more for-
eign: while human life has regularities of its own, the beat of
the pulse, the breathing of the lungs, these change from hour
to hour with mood and action, and in the longer span of days,
time is measured not by the calendar but by the events that oc-
cupy it. . . . To become “as regular as clock-work” was the bour-
geois ideal, and to own a watch was for long a deﬁnite symbol
of success. . . . By now Western peoples are so thoroughly reg-
imented by the clock that it is “second nature” and they look
upon its observance as a fact of nature.
—Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization

THE DATEBOOK
Michelle Hlubinka

Benjamin Franklin aspired to be a person of high
moral virtue and used time management technology to
try to become that person. He created a planner and ex-
plained his effort, writing, “I conceiv’d the bold and ar-
duous project of arriving at moral perfection. I wish’d to
live without committing any fault at any time; I would
conquer all that either natural inclination, custom, or
company might lead me into.”1
A page of his planner reads:
THE MORNING.
Question. What good shall I do this day?
5 – 6 – 7
Rise, wash, and address Powerful Goodness!
Contrive day’s business, and take the resolution 
of the day;
prosecute the present study, and breakfast.
8 – 9 – 10 – 11
Work
NOON.
12 – 1
Read, or overlook my accounts, and dine.
2 – 3 – 4 – 5
Work
EVENING.
Question. What good have I done today?
6 – 7 – 8 – 9
Put things in their places. Supper.
Music or diversion, or conversation. Examination 
of the day.
NIGHT.
10 – 11 – 12 – 1 – 2 – 3 – 4
Sleep.
78
Michelle Hlubinka

In childhood, we experience the passage of time
as undifferentiated ﬂow, marked by naptimes, meals,
sunsets, and the familiar jingle of a favorite daily cartoon.
Other people take charge of our schedules. As children we
are inducted into the responsibility of managing our own
time when we are taught to read the face of a watch.
My own induction into adult time took the form
of a wind-up Mickey Mouse watch I received on a family
trip when I was four. Before I owned the watch, I had all
the time in the world. When time was packaged into a
wrist-sized, mechanically driven object that I carried
with me, I could watch time pass. Mickey’s arms ﬂailed
across the hours. Time materialized and evaporated.
Having the watch, I entered a society not just of time-
keepers, but time-managers. And I became good at it,
perhaps too good at it.
And then, one spring, I lost my datebook. I felt
as though I had lost my life.
My memory of all I did and planned to do from Jan-
uary to May 2003 vanished, along with the physical
form that contained it. Within the ratty, dog-eared pages
of my datebook I had inscribed the talks and lectures
that caught my eye, the art-house movies I enjoyed, the
meetings that ﬁlled my days, the friends I met for lunch
and dinner. My datebook and its events had their own
esoteric language. Familiar venues, organizations, and
individuals were noted in tiny writing and abbreviations
that only I could decipher. Sometimes I would scrawl
dozens of coded commitments into rectangles not more
than an inch square. My datebook enabled me to weave
a matrix of possibility: I would often note three concur-
rent events that sounded equally enticing, and at the
last minute my whims would direct me to one of them or
to cross them all off my list.
The Datebook
79

Now that my datebook is gone, I still wonder what
commitments I may not have honored in the weeks after
its disappearance. I think of my lost datebook as an ex-
ternal information organ—a piece of my brain made out
of paper instead of cells. Knowing it was nearby helped
me relax. Like an early computer toy that needed a stor-
age cartridge to expand its capacity, I needed my thickly
layered and coded pages. My sense of self as cyborg
sometimes bothers me. I envy my friend Mieke who does
not own a calendar. She divides her time between week-
days (these begin full with work) and weekends (these
begin empty and ﬁll up with friends or research). Mieke
can carry her life in her head. She ﬁlls her life not her
datebook with events.
The style of my encoded datebook also contrasts
with the transparent aesthetic of my friend Ginger. In
Ginger’s datebook, each double-page spread covers a
week. Ginger’s datebook is color coded, each color cor-
resonding to an aspect of Ginger’s life: personal (red),
work (blue), and nonwork professional interest (green).
Ginger says that her datebook reveals a great deal
about her bulimic past: “It feels irritating when I don’t
have the [right] color pen. . . . I think it relates to my
need for control—which goes back to my eating disor-
der, actually. I need to have a sense of what things are
boxed where. . . . I make the boxes and I put it in order
and I know how much I can ﬁt into one day.” Ginger
inks in her appointments with space around them. She
has a horror of being late (“in my head, it feels like I am
going to end up disappointing somebody”) and protects
herself against being late by never having a time slot
that physically abuts another. One day, an overlapping
pair of rectangles did appear in her datebook. It made
her anxious: “If I can’t do everything then I am going to
end up being rejected. People are not going to like me,
so I’m going to have to ﬁt it all in. The overlap—that’s
anxiety-provoking.” For Ginger, being on time is a way
80
Michelle Hlubinka

to not draw attention to herself. “As an undergraduate,
for instance, when I was going to be ﬁve minutes late
for a class, I would prefer not to go to class at all, even
if it was a three-hour class, because I was so afraid
that if I showed up late people would stare at me and
think I was fat. Like, I’d walk in the door and they’d
think, “Oh there’s that fat girl. She’s so late. What’s
wrong with her? For me, being perfect meant being on
time.”
When she had an eating disorder, Ginger re-
corded her food consumption for each day. Every
evening she would go through the list and highlight the
things that she felt she should not have eaten. Now,
she uses the datebook to keep track of her exercise.
Each workout is marked with a cheerful cartoon
sticker. She says, “When I have jogged and done calis-
thenics I give myself two stickers so I can feel good
about myself. I have a very visual picture so I can re-
ward myself for exercising.” Ginger cares too much
about the image others have of her. But with her cal-
endar, “My audience is myself . . . a lot of these devices
are to make me happy.”
Like Ginger, who used her calendar to track her
goals of punctuality, healthy eating, and frequent ex-
ercise, Benjamin Franklin constructed a system that
required a daily chart of what he would accomplish
and when. A second chart tracked Franklin’s adher-
ence to thirteen core virtues (temperance, silence,
order, resolution, frugality, industry, sincerity, jus-
tice, moderation, cleanliness, tranquility, chastity, and
humility). Franklin placed a check every time he vio-
lated a virtue on the chart. Each week Franklin con-
centrated on a different virtue and sought to have its
row free of checkmarks.
Franklin’s datebook helped him to visualize his
progress toward becoming the person he wanted to be. In
1980, Hyrum Smith read Franklin’s autobiography and
The Datebook
81

took it as a model to invent the most popular planning
diary in America that stressed priorities and daily tasks.
Lars, a computer science graduate student, doesn’t use
the commercial system, but his computerized priority list
is nonetheless a direct descendent of Franklin’s chart:
Twelve years ago I wrote everything on a priority
list. So when I got a computer, I put all those
scraps of paper on it. It is a precise description of
everything I want to do in my life. . . . It is 100 or
200 pages long on my computer. Every day I went
through the whole list and I took the most impor-
tant things out of the list and printed it out. It
would be one or two pages at most.
When Lars was self-employed, he didn’t need a
calendar. His everyday printout of his highest priorities
was enough to keep him on track. Now, in graduate
school, Lars uses an armory of interconnected devices
to map his life. Some keep private time that is concealed
(Microsoft Outlook on his home PC, a paper printout of
the Outlook calendar, a Timex watch that downloads
appointments from Outlook and will beep to remind him
when one is coming up); others mark public time that is
revealed (a UNIX-based calendar that he shares with his
workgroup, a pager and cellular phone that is linked to
this work calendar). Always crucial to Lars is the dis-
tinction between public and private calendars: “My cal-
endar on my PC is my private thing. . . . And actually I
am very reluctant to show this paper [he holds up the
printout] to other people. It’s a very private thing.” I re-
alize that Lars’s private computer calendar is no less an
intimate projection of self than my color-coded date-
book. But whereas I want to keep all the choices I did not
make as a permanent record of paths not taken, Lars
wants his computer calendar to be a pristine reﬂection
of his life as lived:
82
Michelle Hlubinka

If I don’t go to something, on a computer I just
delete it and it is clean. If you do this with a paper
calendar . . . it would perhaps make me feel bad,
because I would see how many things I wanted to
do and did not do. . . . The past is not clean. In a
computer calendar it is easy to forget: you erase, it
is gone. You can clean your past very easily with a
computer calendar, as you cannot with a paper
calendar.
Since losing my datebook, this distinction between
paper and computation has been much on my mind.
When I found myself without a datebook, I began using
iCal, a piece of software that came with my Apple
PowerBook. I needed a place to jot down my commit-
ments, and it was readily available. Instead of carrying
around my schedule with me all the time, I look each
morning and try to remember my appointments. If
someone asks to meet up for tea, they have to wait for
me to check the master iCal schedule when I get back
to my computer. I ﬁnd I make fewer appointments. Mov-
ing my datebook to the computer is an experiment. I
would say that it is not going well. My new system
leaves me destabilized. I still write down all the talks,
lectures, and movies that catch my fancy, but I have not
yet decided what to do with those I don’t attend. If I
leave them in my schedule, I won’t be able to differenti-
ate what I did and did not do. But I’m not like Lars, com-
forted by a pristine record. If I delete the options I did
not take, I mourn that I have lost a record of what in-
terested me in a given week; I lose the shape of what
happened in my community. I like to think that anyone
could open up my lost paper datebook and see what
kind of person I am. I imagine my runaway, tattered
paper pages wandering around Cambridge, Massachu-
setts, being picked up by strangers who try to decipher
who I might be, perhaps attending some of the events I
The Datebook
83

had noted for April and May and looking around for me,
the curious owner.
Michelle Hlubinka, M.S., Ed.M, an educator,
designer, illustrator, and storyteller, is education
manager at Zeum, an arts and technology 
museum in San Francisco.
84
Michelle Hlubinka

The Datebook
85

Ultimately, computers demonstrate that we cannot only pro-
ject and win back this one universe, but that we can do the
same with as many as we want. In short: our epistemological
problem, and therefore our existential problem, is whether
everything, including ourselves, may have to be understood as
a digital apparition. . . .
[But] it is not enough to acknowledge that the “self” is a
node of criss-crossing virtualities, an iceberg swimming in the
sea of the unconscious, or a computation that leaps across
neuro-synapses: we also have to act accordingly. The alternative
worlds emerging from the computers are a transformation of
this understanding into agency. . . .
[Computers] thus realize . . . alternative worlds and
thereby themselves. . . . [They] are apparatuses for the realiza-
tion of inner-human, inter-human, and trans-human possi-
bilities, thanks to exact calculatory thought. . . . We are no
longer the objects of a given objective world, but projects of al-
ternative worlds. . . . We grow up. We know that dream.
—Vilém Flusser, “Digital Apparition”

MY LAPTOP
Annalee Newitz

My laptop computer is irreplaceable, and not just for
all the usual reasons. It’s practically a brain prosthesis.
Sometimes I ﬁnd myself unable to complete a thought
without cracking it open and accessing a ﬁle of old notes,
or hopping online and Googling a fact or two.
Besides, I love it. I would recognize the feel of its
keyboard under my ﬁngers in a darkened room. I have
worn two shiny spots on it where the palms of my hands
rest when I’m not typing. I carried it on my back all over
England, Cuba, Canada, and the United States. When I
use it in bed, I remember to keep the blankets from cov-
ering its vents so it doesn’t overheat. I’ve taken it com-
pletely apart, upgraded its RAM, and replaced its original
operating system with Linux. It doesn’t just belong to
me; I also belong to it.
I’m hardly alone in my infatuation. When I was ﬁf-
teen, my friends and I would often stay up late into the
night, chatting online over a multiuser chat system
called WizNet. Using online aliases, we spent hours talk-
ing about science ﬁction, movies, computers, and sex.
My alias was Shockwave Rider, a reference to a science
ﬁction novel about some guy who hacked phone sys-
tems. I was the only girl in the group, although you
wouldn’t have known it. Like everybody else, I was just
a command line full of glowing green letters.
Some of the WizNet denizens knew who I was “in
real life.” Eagle was my best friend. Punk Tofu had met
me at AppleFest, a convention where Steve Jobs un-
veiled the ﬁrst Macintosh. Sauron, Splat, and Ectoplasm
went to my high school. When we weren’t studying al-
gebra or tenth grade English, we were scarﬁng down
donuts and playing video games together at Eagle’s or
Sauron’s house. It was during one of those sugar-fueled
sessions that I ﬁrst heard the name Gonif. He was a cul-
88
Annalee Newitz

ture hero on WizNet, a cracker who’d broken the copy
protection on MacPaint and dozens of other programs
for the Apple, thus liberating the programs and allowing
all of us to use them for free.
Gonif had also supposedly been the victim of a
cruel prank. Someone had sent him an e-mail pretend-
ing to be a girl who wanted to go out with him. When
Gonif showed up for the “date,” he found a bunch of
guys laughing. Supposedly he only showed his face on
WizNet now under an assumed name.
A few days later, I met someone on WizNet who
called himself Josh. He was a better writer than anyone
I’d ever met on WizNet, and for the next few weeks, we’d
occasionally meet on the electronic bulletin boards late
at night to talk about books and our teenage life philoso-
phies. We’d go into a private chat area, where nobody else
could read our words. It seemed like I had no thought
that he couldn’t understand.
One night, after a long discussion about ethics
with him, I told him via type, “I love your mind.” Josh re-
vealed to me soon after that he was Gonif. He was the
elusive cracker I’d been hearing about, the guy who was
ﬁendish enough to crack MacPaint and yet still so ro-
mantic that he’d fallen for the fake e-mail trick. At that
moment, when I learned his true name, I fell passion-
ately in love with him.
His body was a green light on a Kaypro screen and
the feel of slightly concave keys nestled in a brushed
stainless steel tray. His breath was the sound of a fan
cooling the CPU. I heard his voice in the sound of my
modem; I saw the most beautiful parts of him in the
shape of his sentences as they emerged out of the ether
and entered my mind whole. I loved him for what he
could do with language and computers.
My Laptop
89

The whole affair lasted only one summer, but those
late nights with him and my computer remain in my
memory forever. Almost ﬁfteen years later, I managed to
track him down again and we exchanged some e-mails.
He was still the same thoughtful romantic. Seeing his
words on my monitor reminded me forcefully of what
had originally drawn me to him. It had nothing to do with
physical prowess or money. It was his mind and the
things he created with it.
Of course my affection for Gonif determined my
relationship with my computer. How could it not? To this
day, every time I boot up my machine, I see a shadow of
him ﬂicker past.
Harvard professor of clinical psychiatry John Ratey
says that because our brains link ideas together in mem-
ory, we are particularly well-suited to the act of suffus-
ing an object with emotional value.1 If someone I love
gives me a portable wireless device, it’s likely the device
will remind me of that person. It’s easy to see how this
would work in a purely personal context: I have my own
unique sets of associations, and therefore one could
write off my peculiar passion for computers as a simple
trick of fate. It just so happened that I had early roman-
tic experiences with machines, and so computers make
me think of love.
But how do you explain all the other people who
adore their computers? Several hundred thousand people
visit the infamous “news for nerds” computer-lover Web
site <http://slashdot.org> every day. How does an en-
tire subset of a society learn to associate feelings of plea-
sure with the same kind of object?
I think back to a soulful conversation I once had
with Richard Stallman, an MIT computer science re-
searcher and activist who began a largely geek-centered
movement known as the free software movement.
Through this movement, he advocates that people build
software that they openly share. This doesn’t mean they
should give it away for no money, although often they do.
90
Annalee Newitz

For Stallman, creating free software gives you the liberty
to modify it as you choose, and to use it however you
like. For Stallman, free software ﬂows from community
to community in bonds of sharing.
Stallman spends nearly all his waking hours on
the computer, building software and communicating
with fellow activists in the Free Software Foundation.
When he was a young man in the early 1970s, he in-
vented a powerful tool called GNU/Emacs for building
software. It was quite an accomplishment and earned
Stallman a permanent position at MIT as well as count-
less awards. Linus Torvalds, inventor of the popular
Linux operating system, was so inspired by Stallman’s
work that he used GNU to build the kernel of software
at the heart of Linux.
To me, Stallman is a romantic. He told me he
dreams that one day the free software idea will affect all
society. In that world, he said, he would ﬁnd his perfect
love. She would share herself with him the way he has
shared his ideas and tools with so many people. And her
love would not be jealous or selﬁsh: she would give to
him in a perfect relationship of reciprocity. Stallman
loves his computers because in them he sees a web of
altruistic social relationships. He doesn’t spend all his
time at the keyboard to avoid other people. He does it be-
cause one day, he wants to fall in love again.
Annalee Newitz publishes regularly on technology in
national magazines and newspapers.
My Laptop
91

In the classical period, it is futile to try to distinguish physical
therapeutics from psychological medications, for the simple
reason that psychology did not exist. When the consumption of
bitters was prescribed, for example, it was not a question of
physical treatment, since it was the soul as well as the body
that was to be scoured; when the simple life of a laborer was
prescribed for a melancholic, when the comedy of his delirium
was acted out before him, this was not a psychological inter-
vention, since the movement of the spirits in the nerves, the
density of the humors were principally involved. But in the ﬁrst
case, we are dealing with an art of the transformation of quali-
ties, a technique in which the essence of madness is taken as
nature, and as disease; in the second, we are dealing with an
art of discourse, and of the restitution of truth, in which mad-
ness is signiﬁcant as unreason.
—Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization

BLUE CHEER
Gail Wight

At the back of my top dresser drawer is a black calfskin
wallet with a plaid interior, its ﬁne stitching torn where
the leather itself started to tear. Finally too worn to be
used, the wallet holds something more important, my
last tab of Ludiomil.
A tab of Ludiomil is not something one saves for
a rainy day. It wouldn’t do anything on its own, like a
faded hit of acid might, or a bit of shriveled mushroom,
or a nip bottle rescued from some uncertain vacation. It
needs at least thirteen others of its kind to be effective—
doled out steadily, one per day—until two weeks later,
swallowing the fourteenth tab, one might feel something
a little different. More likely, one would sense the absence
of a familiar feeling.
This tiny hard oval of robin’s egg blue is a place-
holder, a minuscule iconic bombshell. Just looking at
it brings a whole world home to roost. With more than
4,000 legitimate variations and an untold number of un-
derground permutations, the ability of pharmaceuticals
to provoke a steamer trunk-full of associations, opin-
ions, and emotions, is new only in its industrial and tech-
nicolor nature.
Drugs have been around. These new drugs, though,
bring a cartoonish sheen to the shriveled earthtones of
innumerable entheogenic plants and animals. Their
images spice up magazine covers, pop music CDs, and
movie posters. Like the glowing virgin’s halo in medieval
iconography, the evocative power of pharmaceuticals is
bound up in their appearance. With growing regularity,
the image of pills inhabit everyday marketing, but I es-
pecially love to ﬁnd them in the aerial landscape of con-
temporary art: the pill-popping geisha of Ridley Scott’s
sky-high illuminated and animated billboards; Fred
Tomaselli’s pill paintings, hovering somewhere between
94
Gail Wight

wallpaper and psychedelic string theory; Laura Splan’s
giant cozy capsules of Prozac, Zoloft, and Thorazine re-
visioned as huge needlepoint pillows for a weary head.
Their ubiquitous presence provokes a rash of reactions
from those who will never need them, as well as those
who will, and those already acting on their need.
From an aesthetic point of view, one could be nos-
talgic about these tiny icons. What happened to the sil-
ver and cloisonné inlay of an antique opium pipe, or the
elaborate artwork on a thumbnail-sized canvas of LSD?
I feel old when I think about drugs delivering themselves
from an implanted digital pump, or the bland and murky
translucence of a skin patch. The institutionalized pre-
scription of Brave New World’s “soma” is part of our cul-
turally shared fear of the future. I like my drugs colorful,
aesthetically inspiring, exhilarating the imagination
through the sheer force of their physical beauty—and I
know that I’m not alone in this. There’s a reason the
American landscape is littered with glowing neon signs
that say simply: DRUGS. These signs are visually se-
ductive gateways; it follows that drugs should present
themselves in vibrant and tantalizing packages. I de-
plore the timid pastel plastics of birth control blister
packs, for instance. I want to see a visual onomatopoeia,
a symbolic poetic linkage of image and impact. Still,
digital timers, patches, and implants have their appeal:
comedian Betsy Salkind says, “I’ve never smoked, but I
sure do love the patch.”
But my lone little Ludiomil is beautiful, a pale blue
speck of sky. It’s sweet and tiny and powder pastel, not
so devoid of aesthetic pleasures after all. It reminds
me that the pink and blue of infant codiﬁcation was
reversed in Victorian times, pink being for boys and
blue for girls. This gives me a ﬁerce feeling of ownership
Blue Cheer
95

for my blue dot, a feminist protectorate. It helped me es-
cape from whatever might have spawned my depres-
sion: a hereditary noose, an intractable post-partum
guest, a late capitalist malaise in a post-punk dress
code.
While that depression was likely a collaborative ef-
fort, borrowing something from each of the above, I’m
most comfortable blaming my ancestors for that neuro-
logical genetic ambush, and contemporary medical theory
encourages me to do so. With promotional brochures in
hand, I headed to the pharmacist to stock up against
further attacks from my relatives. To be sure that one’s
relatives are the root cause one needs evidence, of course.
This can be awkward or impossible and pointless in a
family where mental health is a nontopic. But once my
sleuthing had revealed a ghost or two, or three, every
relative living and dead began to look a little guilty to me.
But this was all good news: protocol dictated that pro-
ducing such a relative for the doctor would be key to an
instant prescription.
And there was my Uncle Bob. Uncle Bob was easy
to beat at Monopoly, but I chalked this up to adult
benevolence. He would play for hours, until my mother
intervened, and I adored this about him. He drove a car,
and I loved the way he did this as well. He never went
over ﬁfteen miles per hour and traveled mainly on the
shoulder, so cars would screech around us, honking. A
trip to the next town to get a piece of sheet music meant
hours away from my home, meandering through Con-
necticut farmland. I don’t remember that he played any
instruments, but he loved sheet music and would bring
favorite pieces to my mother as gifts. He would bring her
other gifts as well, appliances wrapped in their store
boxes like new, but always used and often still dirty from
use, like a greasy electric griddle he gave her one year
for her birthday. He was adorable and odd, and some-
times he laughed “too hard.” As a child, I assumed these
96
Gail Wight

quirks were just part of the adult condition, until I was
older and had an adult condition of my own. Suddenly,
I wanted to know more about Uncle Bob.
Along with a distressingly large percentage of the
population, I’d been raised with a deep distrust of
therapy. Wasn’t that where they changed who you actu-
ally are? Did I really want my true self to be changed?
Well, yes. I had reached the point where my self had be-
come an anchor, one that would drag me to the bottom
of the Charles River if I didn’t transform it somehow. I
had become fond of my depression (though I didn’t have
that name for it yet), but it was essential to attempt to
shake it, just the same. I was in art school at the time,
and in the course of free therapy offered at my school, I
was asked to examine the past for clues to my desire to
die young.
And so I looked back; it didn’t seem that interest-
ing. In grade school, my ﬁrst favorite pop song—the one
that separated me from the inﬂuences of my older
brother and sisters—was Alice Cooper’s “Dead Babies.” I
wore a lot of black, preferably original items from the late
1800s, and was convinced that I could see my skeleton,
whenever I looked in a mirror. If there had been Goth,
I would have been Goth—made up carefully, daily, to
resemble the newly deceased. My high school drawings
were landscapes of New England cemeteries, grave-
stones, funereal ﬂower arrangements, and dead roses. If
I were a teenager today, with this same proﬁle, I would
probably be expelled as a potential shooter. But it was the
1970s, and suicidal tendencies were a normalized part of
youthful rock and roll. So none of this typical teenage
angst added up to much of an offering for a therapist.
After two years of conversation focused on good
living strategies, my depression remained, entrenched
and intact. At some point, my relatives, my family pro-
ﬁle, the guilty ghosts, made their appearance; my ther-
apist suggested medication. I thought at the time that
Blue Cheer
97

she had ﬁnally become bored with me, and maybe she
was, but she was also saving my life.
The ﬁrst drug I tried, Meritol, took an interminable
two weeks to hit me, as the tiny tabs added up their
punch. And then quickly, I became intolerable. Happy
all the time, I laughed “too hard” at anything, especially
the tragic. But I was happy. I was ecstatic, really, full of
energy and able to focus. I assumed that what I was feel-
ing inside was what I saw from the outside, when I met
“normal” people, and I began to see depressed people
everywhere. This was good technology.
One night, just after midnight, the phone woke me
up. It was the doctor who was feeding me my experimen-
tal antidepressants. He wanted to know if I’d taken my
medication that day and if I had much left before the next
reﬁll. His voice was urgent. He ordered me to discard
any Meritol I had left and stop taking any other meds im-
mediately, and then he suggested I call in the morning
for an appointment. People were having heart attacks.
Two people had died. Meritol was ﬂawed technology.
I don’t remember much about my second medica-
tion. In fact, I don’t remember much about the many
weeks that I took it, because I was asleep most of the
time, dreamless, lethargic, and deeply depressed. I man-
aged to drag myself to work and to a few classes, but
was never awake long enough beyond that to make any
phone calls. My husband intervened on my behalf.
Next came Ludiomil. A happy middle ground. I
didn’t want to die and I didn’t laugh too hard. Happy was
again the word, but this time I didn’t feel drugged. In fact,
I rarely thought about the fact that I was medicated and
began to live a life where I was comfortable in my skin for
the ﬁrst time, conﬁdent enough to just be. I took Ludiomil
for three years, and then, when I started to feel med-
icated for the ﬁrst time, I tapered off without consulting
my doctor. Two years later, with the nation deep into
Prozac culture, it was much easier to get a prescription.
98
Gail Wight

We are all subject to the concepts that drive the
world during our time here. My uncle survived many
changes in cultural conceptions of health, medicine,
and madness. He escaped a lifetime of institutionaliza-
tion, survived electroshock therapy and a lobotomy, and
managed a large degree of independence. He avoided
other technologies—some still in use in the 1940s, oth-
ers long consigned to the dustbin of medical history:
forced sterilization, ice baths, and insulin shock treat-
ments, all still popular then. Just a century or so earlier,
doctors might have sentenced him to chains, the Bed-
lam Crib, or the bleeding and purging of Benjamin
Rush’s “tranquilizer chair.” I suppose I feel fortunate to
live in an age of heavy reliance on drugs, but I’m also
aware that no one can really tell me if there’s still some
price to be paid for my days of medication.
If genetics are in fact a key player in the severe
mood swings that plague my family (I have little doubt of
this, given the grocery list of familial suicides and self-
medicators), then I’m a guilty link in the chain. I worry
about the mental health of possible grandchildren in my
future. I wonder about shifts in medical technologies
and cultural ideologies. Maybe the future will be free of
Prozac, and something new and considerably less bar-
baric in its own right will take its place, or eradicate its
perceived need forever. Maybe, in the future, tableting
machines will send chills down people’s spines.
Last week I went through my dresser, ﬁlling a few
paper shopping bags with clothes from another lifetime,
sweaters and T-shirts and a few old skirts that would
ﬁnd their way to Goodwill. I held the black wallet, so soft
and emaciated. It still smelled a little of leather, mixed
with indiscernible and ghostly perfumes. It was useless,
a few holes along the edges, the zipper for the change
compartment completely ravaged. But it had a bigger
task. It was home to the lone Ludiomil, my own cur-
rency, my old ticket stub to happiness, my golden trea-
sure, my blue cheer.
Blue Cheer
99

Gail Wight is Associate Professor of Experimental
Media Art at Stanford University.
100
Gail Wight

Objects of History 
and Exchange

Functional perfection exercises a cold seduction, the func-
tional satisfaction of a demonstration and an algebra. It has
nothing to do with pleasure, with beauty (or horror), whose na-
ture is conversely to rescue us from the demands of rationality
and to plunge us once more into an absolute childhood (not
into an ideal transparency, but into the illegible ambivalence of
desire). . . .
All possible valences of an object, all its ambivalence,
which cannot be reduced to any model, are reduced by design
to two rational components, two general models—utility and
the aesthetic—which design isolates and artiﬁcially opposes to
one another. . . . But this artiﬁcial separation then permits
evoking their reuniﬁcation as an ideal scheme. Utility is sepa-
rated from the aesthetic, they are named separately (for neither
has any reality other than being named separately), then they
are ideally reunited and all contradictions are resolved by this
magical operation. Now, the two equally arbitrary agencies ex-
ist only to mislead.
—Jean Baudrillard, “Design and Environment or How
Political Economy Escalates into Cyberblitz”

THE RADIO
Julian Beinart

The waterless coastline stretches thousands of miles,
from just north of Cape Town all the way to Angola. 
I grew up in a small town at the southern tip of this des-
ert and was a child when German submarines torpe-
doed Allied convoys and left survivors to waste away 
on this Skeleton Coast. My town was a hot and dull cen-
ter for wheat farmers. The tallest building was the
Dutch Reformed Church, an Afrikaner Gothic steeple,
to which white dressed-up farmers’ kids would march
on Sunday mornings. My family belonged to the syna-
gogue across the mud of a river, in an out-of-the-way
place where its low, quasi-Ottoman façade faced no one.
Colored people cleaned our house, drove my father’s
trucks, got drunk on Saturday mornings, and lived
somewhere I did not know.
Later, when I was a sophomore in architecture
school, I tried to do a measured drawing of the church
for a class assignment. It was the only building in the
town that seemed to merit my work. But I never was able
to ﬁnish the drawing. The church was too big to mea-
sure, and somehow it stood outside me. It was a totally
isolated and commanding thing, never to be messed
with, never to be modiﬁed, never to change, and never
to be entered by the likes of me, or, as I later understood,
by all those colored Christians.
In many ways the Church ﬁtted much of the dogma
of the architecture I was taught. We never questioned
client power or community access or social meaning in
buildings. Our designed objects were to be seen on their
own in space and to remain unaltered over time. We had
the benighted obligation to innovate culture, a culture
produced by Western heroes working for people like
themselves. Our ideal was to have Palladio’s clients,
104
Julian Beinart

princes with whom we could act out our professional
narcissism.
Years later I was in South Africa again, now with
graduate degrees from American universities and a sense
of obligation to spread their wisdom. But to whom?
The universities were segregated; increasingly uneasy,
I taught basic design to freshmen, based on what I
had learned at MIT from Gyorgy Kepes, who in turn had
brought his version of the famous Bauhaus Vorkurs from
Europe. The exercises of this fundamental course were
meant to reduce students’ reliance on past visual knowl-
edge and to force them to deal with a formal language of
vision completely new to them. The new language was ab-
stract and universal, implying that it could be as inter-
national, yet as removed from local culture as Esperanto.
In what Baudrillard refers to as this universal semanti-
zation of the environment, visibility was controlled.1
Soon after, in the early 1960s, I remember how
shocked I was when I saw something I had not noticed
before. Walking down a street in the middle of Durban,
South Africa’s most racially mixed city, I passed a boy
carrying a wooden transistor radio. It was about six
inches long and two inches wide, with a wooden handle
and a hinged wooden dowel antenna about two feet long
tapered to a small knob at its end. On the top of its body,
one of three square wooden buttons was pressed down.
A slit of broken glass covered a rectangular dial behind
which was a piece of an old paper calendar numbered
one to twelve. A red pointer was stuck on three; it could
never move. Although it looked like a Braun transistor
radio, this object never produced sound. I asked the boy
about it and he said: “It can’t play music, but I sing when
I carry it. One day I’ll have a real one.”
The Radio
105

From that time, quite suddenly, I began to see ob-
jects that had been invisible to me before. There were all
kinds of wire bicycles, some of twisted soft metal, oth-
ers shaped out of thin steel with yellow frames, red
beaded tires, blue handles, and pedals. A friend sent me
a three-by-two-foot black bicycle from Zambia, which
had a movable front wheel. It had, so he said, been made
by a boy to get himself a job in a bicycle repair shop.
Everywhere there were objects of emulation and
imagination. Often they were copies of sophisticated
machines now made by hand out of recycled, thrown
away material: Honda motorcycles made from panels of
sheet tin taken from Castle beer cans; a dark green
Isuzu Trooper 4 × 4 made out of a single piece of wood;
wire Volkswagen Beetles with engine covers that lifted
up; a snout-pointed ﬁghter plane with a South African
ﬂag on its rudder; a large helicopter made of wire with a
working AM radio in its belly. In the mute transistor ra-
dio family, there were silent wooden Sony cell phones
useful only for dreamed conversations.
Cheaply available, highly visible, and linguistically
subtle, material from products carrying popular brand
names and out-of-context messages (Coca-Cola, Sprite,
and Fanta, among others) adorned tin lunch pails, cloth
jockey caps, miniature delivery trucks, and almost every-
thing else. Recently I bought a three-foot-long pantech-
nicon in New York. Made in Abidjan of Nestle coffee can
metal, it repeatedly says:
Nescafé est un pur café soluble, fabriqué avec des
grains de Robusta de Cote d’Ivoire, soigneusement
selectionnés puis traité pour votre plus grand
plaisir.
And on an elegant racing bicycle from Cameroon there
are small-type messages about “milk for baby’s growth”
and “just add water.”
106
Julian Beinart

I have puzzled over these objects for a long time. In
South Africa, I decided they were design responses to a
technology that could not be purchased by poor people,
whereas what I was teaching in the university derived
from a German design pedagogy that eagerly embraced
available modern technology. So I made a new version of
my academic program and over a period of about six years
taught it to local people at seven short-term summer
schools in ﬁve African countries. We used anything that
was available, often thrown-away rubbish. Passers-by
dropped in off the streets and became students. Almost
everyone responded to the exercises quickly and di-
rectly, often humorously. They seemed able to deal with
issues of form with the same intensity and forthright-
ness of the boy in Durban.
Late one night I took some jazz musicians home
to their black township on the southwestern side of
Johannesburg. I had never been to Western Native Town-
ship before; whites did not go to such places. But I re-
turned many times after to study the people and their
houses, particularly the way they had plastered and
painted the small boxes, which they had been renting
from the municipality since the inﬂuenza epidemic of
1917. Over a few years a team of students and I docu-
mented the fronts of all 2,000 houses. The facades were
patterns of rectangles, circles, and half-moons, a re-
stricted palette of shapes from which a communal lan-
guage had been assembled. So, instead of painting a
hammer-and-sickle on his wall, the ﬁrst local chairmen
of the African National Congress chose an open circle
with a serrated edge from the community’s menu of
forms, which he then read as an industrial rotor hub, a
symbol of Russian progress. A woman who ran an ille-
gal Fah-Fee (a popular Chinese-based betting game) sa-
loon painted her lucky symbol, a horse, on her wall but
made the horse of common triangles and half-moons.
From these bare houses with seven people per room came
an astounding decorated urbanism.
The Radio
107

No designer on his or her own could have invented
the decorative language of the Western Native Township
community, nor could any designer have chosen the
personal example each house displayed on its facade.
Designers have tried their hand at animating dull hous-
ing and produced only abstract stereotypes. But many
designers have learned the difference between profes-
sional and popular knowledge. They no longer see build-
ings as disassociated from their context; they try hard
to revel in environments of complexity and difference;
they design permanent monuments badly and ephem-
eral events much better; they treasure the every-day in
open societies; and they know when to invite others un-
like themselves in and when to stand aside.
We will never know whether we have lost the naive
genius of the little boy in Durban. We work in the hope
that such ability will be available not only to those who
are poor, excluded, and have to dream about the pos-
sessions of those a class above them. Some believe that
new technologies may help us nourish the full universe
of our abilities. We have yet to see this in action, espe-
cially for people for whom our technology remains chi-
merical. But, above all, we need a social environment in
which we see the value of others and do not consign
them and their objects to invisibility. And if this hap-
pens, we may not have to choose between Afrikaner
steeples and Zulu radios.
Julian Beinart is a Professor of Architecture and 
a Director of the Joint Program in City Design and
Development at MIT.
108
Julian Beinart

The Radio
109
Question 3: What does your design 
make you think of ?
I think of dignity.—M. Myaluza
It makes me think of a butterﬂy. I am 
fond of them.—P. Butelezi
I think of my brother-in-law who did 
it to signify his success in his divorce
case.—Phillip Letatola
It makes me appreciate the beauty of
art.—Rhoda Nkile
It reminds me of two things: cypress 
trees and the insignia of a diamond
card.—Phoofolo
I think of the Queen’s crown.
—Joyce Swartbooi
I think of the freedom of movement I 
had in WNT.—Johannes Maseke
It reminds me of the money I had spent 
on it.—Ruth
I think of wealth in the form of a 
diamond.—A. Mkhize
I think of nothing.—Joel Ngubane
I think of Chinese and Japanese 
ﬂags.—S. Ramaphosa
It makes me think of tombstones 
and graveyards. It is a memorial 
now because WNT is dead.—Phiri
I think of a horse. I am a fah-fee 
woman; a horse is my lucky number.
—Martha Sidzatana
I think of a razor which together with 
the black colour signiﬁes “danger.”
—Ishmail Setlodi
It makes me think of my late mother.
—M. Malunga
It reminds me of my brother I have not
seen for three years now.—Mashaba

What imposes obligation in the present received and exchanged,
is the fact that the thing received is not inactive. Even when it
has been abandoned by the giver, it still possesses something
of him. . . . In all this [giving and receiving] there is a succes-
sion of rights and duties to consume and reciprocate, corre-
sponding to rights and duties to offer and accept. Yet this
intricate mingling of symmetrical and contrary rights and du-
ties ceases to appear contradictory if, above all, one grasps that
mixture of spiritual ties between things that to some degree ap-
pertain to the soul, and individuals, and groups that to some
extent treat one another as things.
All these institutions express one fact alone, one social
system, one precise state of mind: everything—food, women,
children, property, talismans, land, labour services, priestly
functions, and ranks—is there for passing on, for balancing ac-
counts. Everything passes to and fro as if there were a constant
exchange of a spiritual matter, including things and men, be-
tween clans and individuals, distributed between social ranks,
the sexes, and the generations.
—Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange
in Archaic Societies

THE BRACELET
Irene Castle McLaughlin

Silver, gold, shell, stone: my jewelry basket is orga-
nized according to these objective, formal properties,
these visual markers and guides for ready access. Like
any collection, my jewelry could just as easily be sorted
by age, value, place of origin, or even by color. There is
another underlying narrative that is known only to me.
In the context of that story—my life story—these objects
are heirlooms, gifts, invocations.
I reach for an old Navajo cuff bracelet when I want
to invoke the spirits of my female ancestors and allies.
The cuff is an object of power in its own right, a massive
weight of heavy ingot silver that recalls medieval armor,
or the wristband of a super hero. It was forged during
the 1930s or 1940s, when southwestern silversmiths
worked outside, or by the light of kerosene lamps, using
only a few rudimentary tools.
During the formative years of Navajo silverwork,
roughly 1880 to 1930, many men experimented with the
alchemy of ﬁre and metal. A certain self-reliant bravado
was necessary for the elemental work of melting silver
slugs over pinion coals, pounding out ingot bars with a
hammer, and heating them with a home-made blowpipe
or torch. When possible, silversmiths often made ex-
travagant use of materials in those decades before Na-
vajo jewelry became transformed into a form of ﬁne art
by innovators such as Kenneth Begay. My big bracelet
is somewhat crudely made, but the design is unique
and bold.
The imposing size and attitude of the bracelet is
exaggerated by the fact that it was made to ﬁt a tiny
wrist. And as if to emphasize its inﬂexibility, it can be
worn in only one orientation. The structure is an ex-
panding spiral that doubles in width as it arcs from the
inner to the outer wrist. The thick central band has been
112
Irene Castle McLaughlin

darkened to a smoky, matte black; the mark of a resid-
ual ﬁre coat or its simulation. The contrast of dark and
light enhances the exaggerated dimensionality of the
design. Heavy triangular wires rim the sides of the band,
which is laterally subdivided into four sections by lengths
of wire punctuated at either end with big, globular, sil-
ver “raindrops.” In the center of each section, huge
turquoise stones are set into high silver bezels with ir-
regular saw-toothed edges. Starting at the inner wrist,
the size of the stones increases as the bracelet widens
out. All of them are thick, domed, pieces of natural tur-
quoise, left in free-form shapes. The ﬁrst three stones
look as though an unsteady hand splashed ethereal blue
porcelain across the surface of rocks, leaving the grainy
brown stones partially exposed.
These ﬁrst three stones come from the historic Bis-
bee mine in Arizona, famous for having produced tur-
quoise of great character. But it is the fourth and ﬁnal
stone, invisible to the wearer, that is the zinger, the mas-
terstroke of the design. It is a huge, battered oblong of
soft emerald green, delicately tinged with chartreuse
and the blue of spring skies. This stone is a fabled vari-
ety known as Battle Mountain, a green phase of Blue
Gem, which is considered by many to represent the
apogee of American turquoise. And after the green orb,
the ﬁnale: a row of six oversized “raindrops.” There is no
stamp identifying the maker; it is an anonymous monu-
ment to his mind and to the elements of ﬁre, water,
earth, and sky.
My bracelet is a weathered and venerable monu-
ment. Bracelets like this one were made primarily for an
Indian audience and for Indian consumers, not for the
tourists who disembarked from crowded railroad cars at
the Grand Canyon and returned east with lightweight
The Bracelet
113

jewelry as signs of their travel. Among the Navajo, silver
jewelry became a form of patrimony, a cultural aesthetic,
an ethnic marker, an economic resource, a currency,
and a standard of value. On the isolated reservations,
both men and women wore profuse quantities of jewelry
on special occasions—wagon trips to the trading post,
dances and ceremonies, visits to relatives. Because they
were creative acts, making and exchanging jewelry be-
came deeply embedded in Navajo social life; it was be-
lieved that these practices helped to keep the universe
in balance and in constant motion; they made things
happen. Jewelry was loved and worn, given to relatives
and friends, traded to Indians and non-Indians for cof-
fee and sheep, turquoise stones and woven garments;
converted to cash to pay for ceremonies and gasoline.
My bracelet evokes that world of wood smoke, lambs,
and matrilineal clans.
This bracelet, however, was destined to travel. At
some point the Navajo who owned it pawned the brace-
let at a trading post in exchange for cash or supplies and
never redeemed it. At that point it brieﬂy became a com-
modity in the high-end sector of the Indian arts market,
in which pawn items enjoy a distinct cachet associated
with their perceived authenticity. On a sunny Sunday
during the early 1960s, a petite redhead named Irma
Bailey purchased it at a trading post near Farmington,
New Mexico, while driving with her husband Wayne. As
she recalls, “He [the trader] had a collection of old pawn
jewelry he was keeping in a train case or travel case. I
dug around and bought several pieces out of that case
and that was one of them.”
Irma and Wayne were also traders, a lifestyle dic-
tated by Irma’s passion for Indian art and her afﬁnity for
Indian culture. As choreographed by Irma, Indian trad-
ing is as much a form of ﬁctive kinship as it is a busi-
ness. Like Polynesian chiefs, she is a genius at making
relationships and keeping them in play, weaving them
into an ever-expanding network of artists, clients, and
114
Irene Castle McLaughlin

friends bound by obligations and affections. This re-
quires developing mutually interdependent relation-
ships with native artists and nurturing them through a
continuous series of exchanges: gifts and counter-gifts,
debts and payments, trades of material, assistance and
advice, purchases and commissions. It also requires
cultivating a clientele of long-term customers and col-
lectors who will fuel the system with cash, social capi-
tal, and other currencies. Irma is now in her ninetieth
year. Conducted over the course of decades and across
generations, these relations have become so layered, so
seamless and embedded, that it is impossible for an out-
sider to differentiate between the social and the eco-
nomic, to unravel the accounting.
Irma herself, however, knows just how everyone’s
ledgers are balanced; she has the eye of a connoisseur
and a head for business. But it is her heart that drives
the system, synthesizing it all into a seamless, ﬂuid
whole. She radiates a vitality that draws people into her
orbit and compels them to respond in kind: few of her
debts go unpaid. She conducts most of her business out
of her Albuquerque home, which is alive with people
from all walks of life. Here the artists have become her
extended family, with all related responsibilities, joys,
and sorrows. She feeds them at her table, shares Christ-
mas with them, mediates disputes, buries their dead
when necessary. In return, they bring her their best
work and their friends, sometimes even name their
daughters after her. Here, too, they gather other friends,
some of whom might be called clients.
But again, this distinction rapidly dissolves in
Irma’s presence, which seems to implicate everyone in a
larger system of meaning. Serious collectors are drawn
here by the allure of rare pots, rugs, or jewelry. They buy
things not only for their artistic value and cultural ref-
erents but also to capture an imprint of Irma’s passage,
her choices and experience. And so the balances are
maintained, the cycle continues, the network grows.
The Bracelet
115

Irma is seldom alone and rarely asleep. Her phone rings
day and night; cars line the curb in front of her house.
Indian ladies keep her cupboards ﬁlled with freshly
baked bread, tamales, melons, and pies; customers
send designer handbags, invitations, and introduc-
tions. Irma herself is often up cooking before dawn.
Each day she starts the ﬁre that fuels her universe.
Irma didn’t sell the big pawn bracelet. It ﬁt her
diminutive wrist and she fell in love with its rugged
charm, so she “wore it and wore it,” through thirty-ﬁve
years of Pueblo Feast days, a divorce and re-marriage,
and as she traveled across the United States each spring
to sell the things her artists brought her. A couple of
years ago, she traded the bracelet to me in exchange for
an equally imposing gold cuff that was made for Irene
Castle, a famous dancer and stylist in the early twenti-
eth century. Irene was my grandmother: I carry her
name and inherited from her the ﬁne bones that we
share with Irma.
This bracelet exchange was not motivated by
desire for ﬁne jewelry; it was an expression of allegiance,
a way of giving shape and substance to the intersection
of three kindred women. My bracelet grounds me in an
invisible social ﬁrmament, where Irene and Irma are
stars in the constellations of descent and afﬁnity. I feel
their reassuring presence when the weight of the brace-
let is on my wrist and I understand what it means to
wear your wealth.
Irene Castle McLaughlin is an anthropologist and
Associate Curator of North American Ethnography at
the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University.
116
Irene Castle McLaughlin

The Bracelet
117

But how can we retrace our steps? Isn’t the modern world
marked by the arrow of time? Doesn’t it consume the past?
Doesn’t it break deﬁnitively with the past? . . . Hasn’t history
already ended? By seeking to harbor quasi-objects at the same
time as their Constitution, we are obliged to consider the tem-
poral framework of the moderns. Since we refuse to pass “after”
the [postmodern], we cannot propose to return to a nonmodern
world that we have never left, without a modiﬁcation in the pas-
sage of time itself.
—Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern

THE AXE HEAD
David Mitten

I ﬁrst saw it at my maternal grandfather’s house on his
home farm, named Shannondale Farm, in Berlin Town-
ship, Holmes County, Ohio, more than sixty years ago.
My personal talisman of the past, this stone axe head
was made and used by native Americans around 5,000
years ago, in what was much later to become north-
central Ohio. Its history stretches far back into remote
time, thousands of years before European settlers came
to this area of North America. Almost all my life, I have
kept and treasured this axe head and the story it has to
tell, one that can be read from its form, its surfaces, and
the marks visible upon it.
Its material is a hard gray limestone that was orig-
inally part of a layer of calcareous sediment deposited
on the bottom of a sea somewhere in what later became
northern North America, many millions of years ago.
Much later, these sediments were compacted, lifted, 
and squeezed over other millions of years until they
hardened into a dense gray limestone. Still later, earth
movements uplifted the layers of limestone onto dry
land, where gradually a layer of limestone was exposed
through erosion. Soon, chunks began to break off an
outcrop of this limestone. One of these chunks was the
mother of the axe head.
Many thousands of years ago, a huge, mile-thick
continental ice sheet formed and grew until it covered
much of North America. This massive glacier ground its
way slowly southward, carrying with it millions of tons of
soil and rocks, including this chunk of limestone. The end
of the ice sheet stopped about sixty miles south of what
is now Lake Erie. Churning streams of water, running
under the ice sheet as it began to melt and retreat, rolled
our chunk of limestone over and over countless times,
abrading its surface, rounding off its jagged edges and
120
David Mitten

corners, and ﬁnally smoothing it into what must have
looked like an elongated, slightly ﬂattened oval cobble.
As the glacier retreated north, it left rich moraines,
deposits of earth, gravel, cobbles, and boulders on a
gently rolling landscape. Vegetation, ﬁrst tundra-like
grasses, then bushes and dwarf trees, and ﬁnally dense
deciduous forests of oak, maple, ash, and tulip poplar
grew on the hills and valleys, as rivers and their tribu-
tary streams cut through the glacial deposits. One of
these streams probably exposed our oval, rounded rock.
How long it lay on the surface or in a stream bed, we
have no way of knowing.
Now people had come into this country. They fol-
lowed the ﬁrst pioneering hunters who had crossed from
Asia onto the North American land mass at least some
12,000 to 15,000 years ago, pursuing the big mammals—
mastodons, bison, horses—that were their principal prey.
The later native people hunted, ﬁshed, and gathered
seasonal fruits, nuts, and berries. They settled camps
and villages in the river bottoms, where they grew crops:
maize, squash, and beans. For their tools and weapons,
they constantly sought suitable ﬂint and chert from the
rich outcrops in this area, for ﬂaking into spear and ar-
row points, knives and scrapers. They also looked for
hard, dense stones included in the moraine deposits,
stones that had been carried by the ice sheet from hun-
dreds of miles to the north: granites, quartzes, volcanic
rocks, and limestones.
A man sorting through these stones ﬁnds our
cobble. He was searching for a stone suitable for fash-
ioning into an axe head that would help him fell trees,
split logs, and dig charcoal out of the timbers that would
become dugout canoes. Our cobble ﬁt the bill perfectly.
He picked it up and took it back to his camp. Then he
The Axe Head
121

(and perhaps others, taking turns) began the slow, la-
borious job of imposing functional form on the stone. He
must have already had a visual image of what the ﬁn-
ished axe head would look like, as well as other similar
axe heads that his people had already made and used.
Seemingly endless pecking, pounding, chipping and
grinding took place, probably over several years, much
of it probably during the winters, when there was enough
leisure to devote to such time-consuming work.
My father, a teacher in the Cuyahoga Falls High
School, once assigned a project to his students: to make
a ground stone axe. The students thought that this would
be easy, but after a week they had barely pecked or
ground a single mark on the granite cobbles that they
had been given. A major part of this sculpturing process
was pecking, abrading, and polishing a deep, rounded
groove three-quarters of the way around the axe head.
At the same time, the blade of the axe head was pecked
and ground down, so as to leave a slight raised edge on
the side of the groove toward the blade. One-quarter of
the axe head was smoothed along its entire length.
Further grinding and polishing added a subdued luster
to the curving edge of the axe head and the two adjacent
surfaces. It didn’t matter if large areas of pecking marks
were left on the ﬂat edge and on the oval, rounded butt,
opposite the cutting edge.
Finally, the maker was satisﬁed. He had chipped
and pecked and ground away much of the cobble that
he had found, transforming it, freeing it (almost in the
sense that Michelangelo so many centuries later longed
to free the forms hidden, imprisoned in his blocks of
marble), into a well-crafted object, highly suitable for
cutting and chopping and a work of beauty as well.
In the maker’s time, function and aesthetic sensi-
bility were inseparable. In our own time, we have come
to appreciate keenly how much our aesthetic apprecia-
tion and understanding of an object, or a work of art,
can be enhanced by learning how it was made, how the
122
David Mitten

mind, eye, and hand of the creator had imposed his de-
sired form on the raw material.1
The maker fashioned a stout handle of some tough
yet ﬂexible wood, perhaps from the branch of an ash
tree. He split one end, which he softened in water and
gradually bent around the axe head, ﬁtting the two
halves into the groove. He then tied the split ends with
wet rawhide thongs and wrapped these thongs around
the shaft. He also inserted a wooden wedge, perhaps also
of ash or oak, under the rawhide bindings along the ﬂat
side of the axe head. When the rawhide dried, it shrank,
binding itself ﬁrmly onto the stone in a solid grip that
would withstand the constant, hard blows to which the
axe head would be subjected. Finally, the maker may
have performed some ceremony over the ﬁnished axe
furnished with its handle, perhaps to insure that it
would cut well and last for many years.
The marks on the surface of the axe head are mute
reminders of countless blows that were inﬂicted on it—
chopping down trees, splitting logs into ﬁrewood, hol-
lowing out tree trunks into dugout canoes. On one side
of the butt are breaks where spalls of the limestone
broke off and fell away; that the axe continued to be used
is shown by the smoothing on these scars. Beveling on
the cutting edge suggests at least one episode of re-
sharpening. Although a diagonal crack appeared curv-
ing across one face of the axe head, it did not lead to a
major break. At the same time, the appearance of this
crack may have led to the discarding of the axe head, or
at least to using it for less strenuous cutting tasks.
The surface of the axe head is covered with tiny
scratches and incised lines. Examination under a mi-
croscope would surely yield much information about
how this axe head was used and against what kinds of
materials. One mark remains mysterious: a pecked or
incised line within the binding groove. Was this added
by another owner, who began to alter the shape of the
The Axe Head
123

axe head, or could it have been damage inﬂicted by a
nineteenth- or early twentieth-century plowshare?
The span of use of this axe head could have cov-
ered decades or perhaps several generations of these
people’s lives. It may have been handed down from
father to son, or nephew, or even to a grandson. It may
have been used by women as well, and indeed it could
well have been a woman who made it in the ﬁrst place.
A treasured possession, it may also have signiﬁed rank,
status, or prestige. We cannot know.
Somehow, at some time, the axe head was dis-
carded or lost. For many centuries, it remained on or
under the soil of the hill slopes leading down to Martin’s
Creek while, across the world, Mesopotamians built
cities and alphabets, and, in the Nile Valley, the great
pyramids were rising. One day, early in the twentieth
century, maybe eighty to one hundred years ago, a man
found it.
Now the Europeans had come and had settled here,
cutting down the forests and turning much of the land
into pastures and cultivated ﬁelds. One part of this land
had become a farm, owned by the Boyd family. The
owner, Umfrey H. Boyd, found the axe head, perhaps
while plowing behind his team of horses, perhaps just
while walking the bounds of his land. He recognized it
as something that had been fashioned by human hands.
Picking it up and wiping off the brown soil that covered
it, he brought it back to his farmhouse and washed it.
Probably his wife and the children—three daughters
and a son—admired it, and perhaps begged their father
to tell them a story about the axe head and Indians who
had used and lost it. Then it was placed in a corrugated
cardboard carton to join other “Indian relics”: arrow-
heads, spear points, scrapers, and parts of two tubular
tobacco pipes made out of gray and black slate.
One of the daughters, my mother, Helen Louise
Boyd, married a tall, handsome schoolteacher from the
other side of the county, Joe Atlee Mitten. In due course,
124
David Mitten

as a little boy, I visited my grandfather’s farmhouse and
remember spending many hours playing with the stone
objects collected in the carton, kept in a cool, fragrant
back room. I especially remember holding the axe head,
feeling its smooth weight, its polished, pecked surfaces,
and musing on the long-ago, long-dead people who had
walked these same hills and creeks and had left such an
evocative, silent witness to their vanished presence. I
wondered about all their patient, persistent effort that
had succeeded in shaping the beautiful and functional
abstract form that they desired upon such dense and
intractable stone.
I owe it a great deal, for it serves as a special talis-
man, perhaps even a guide, that led me to my lifelong
path as a teacher and archaeologist of those ancient
cities and alphabets and peoples of the Mediterranean
world. The axe head still rests atop the mantel of my ﬁre-
place and will until I too recede, no longer telling but told
into its long story by my daughters, who will I hope re-
member its deeper provenance in their own way, in their
own time.
David Mitten, whose lifelong research is on classical
bronze statues and vessels, is James Loeb Professor of
Classical Art and Archaeology at Harvard University
and George M. A. Hanfmann Curator of Ancient and
Byzantine Art, Emeritus, of the Harvard University Art
Museums.
The Axe Head
125

The whole universe of concrete objects, as we know them,
swims . . . for all of us, in a wider and higher universe of ab-
stract ideas, that lend it its signiﬁcance. As time, space, and the
ether soak through all things . . . good, strong, signiﬁcant, and
just. Such ideas, and others equally abstract, form the back-
ground for all our facts, the fountain-head of all the possibili-
ties we conceive of. They give its “nature,” as we call it, to every
special thing. Everything we know is “what” it is by sharing in
the nature of one of these abstractions. We can never look di-
rectly at them, for they are bodiless and featureless and foot-
less, but we grasp all other things by their means, and in
handling the real world we should be stricken with helpless-
ness in just so far forth as we might lose these mental objects,
these adjectives and adverbs and predicates and heads of clas-
siﬁcation and conception.
This absolute determinability of our mind by abstrac-
tions is one of the cardinal facts in our human constitution. Po-
larizing and magnetizing us as they do, we turn towards them
and from them, we seek them, hold them, hate them, bless
them, just as if they were so many concrete beings. And beings
they are, beings as real in the realm which they inhabit as the
changing things of sense are in the realm of space.
—William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience

DIT DA JOW: BRUISE WINE
Susan Spilecki

On my desk stand two small plastic bottles. On the la-
bel of the ﬁrst are the words Dit Da Jow, Wing Lam Se-
cret Kung Fu Liniment. Wing Lam is a teacher of kung
fu in Sunnyvale, California, by way of Canton and Hong
Kong. The bottle label sports an antique photo of an
older Chinese man, shirtless, beating his open palm
against a stack of bricks. Behind this photo is the out-
lined picture of a tiger ﬁghting a dragon. Twisting off the
white cap, I can smell the liniment (dit da—bruise or
strike; jow—wine or tincture). It smells like a mix of soy
sauce, unrecognizable herbs, and a little alcohol. It looks
brown, but if I pour a few drops into my palm and rub
them over my sore wrist, they do not stain my skin.
The liquid in the other bottle is darker and more
pungent, the scent more like a mix of ninety-proof
whisky and myrrh. The bottle is also larger, but it has no
Chinese characters. In fact, the bright green label claims
that the bottle contains Poland Spring Natural Spring
Water. This is a lie. It contains my teacher’s dit da jow.
The recipe is the one he got from his teacher, Tang Kwok
Wah, who got it decades ago from his teacher, Lam Sai
Wing, who got it from his teacher, Wong Fei Hung. If
Americans have heard of any of these men, it would be
Wong Fei Hung, about whom Jet Li and Jackie Chan
have made several movies, portraying the greatest of the
martial arts champions of southern China as a kung fu
master of the old style, a man who could both kill and
heal. Those killing and healing arts came down from
the Shaolin Temple, from the seventeenth century and
further back in time, before the Ching Dynasty burned
it down and killed all the kung fu masters but the ﬁve
who managed to ﬂee.
“The kung fu you can see isn’t the real kung fu,”
my teacher says as we sit in the coffee shop after class
128
Susan Spilecki

one evening. “Those karate guys with their big muscles
and stiff punches? That’s all crap.”
On my left sits Sean, a burly Boston Irishman who
studied White Crane kung fu before he came to Sifu. On
my right sits Andy, a laconic man in glasses, given to
questioning everything Sifu says. Sifu, my teacher, is an
unprepossessing Chinese man of average height and
build, with grey hair, although he is only in his early
ﬁfties. You’d never think he could send a much bigger,
muscle-bound ﬁghter across a room with a single punch,
although his students know that he has done it more
than once.
He holds out his hands for our inspection. There
are no calluses. He grins.
“Smooth as silk. When I’m eighty, I’ll still be able
to kill those guys, but they’ll have arthritis. Because they
only saw part of the technique. They didn’t see the jow.”
Looking up dit da jow on the Internet, I ﬁnd that
there are three main types of herbs used in making it:
anti-rheumatic herbs, herbs that stop bleeding, and
blood-circulating herbs. The anti-rheumatic herbs
have “pain-relieving (analgesic), anti-inﬂammatory, and
circulation-promoting” properties.1 In the simplest terms,
getting more oxygen into the blood, and getting the blood
circulating more freely around injuries, speeds healing.
Sifu, selling his jow only to us, his students, can keep
his recipe secret. The kung fu master Wing Lam who
sells his product on the Web, doesn’t have that option;
the law requires him to list his ﬁfteen ingredients in de-
creasing order of importance. Even so, he manages to
make it difﬁcult for those who might steal his secret:
he lists the herbs in Latin. I look them all up on the In-
ternet and can decipher only six: ginseng, caesalpinia
sappan, safﬂower, mastic, myrrh, and dragon’s blood.
Dit Da Jow
129

These are respectively an anti-inﬂammatory, an astrin-
gent, a diaphoretic, a stimulant, an antiseptic, and an-
other astringent. Whatever you call them, when they’re
put together properly, they work.
It is my second class with Sifu and the guys. I am
punching Andy barehanded. His chest protector resists,
and I end up with a blood blister between my ﬁngers. I
shake out my hand to relieve the pain.
Sifu says, “Who’s got jow?”
Patrick, our immunologist, pulls out a Poland
Spring bottle ﬁlled with brown liquid. Sifu takes it and
applies the liquid to my hand, rubbing it in thoroughly.
The next day, I can see no sign of the injury.
I bruise easily. I always have. So from the begin-
ning, I am impressed, if surprised by the jow. My mind
opens a crack. Weeks pass. Every Wednesday and Fri-
day evening, under Sifu’s supervision, we practice forms,
attack each other, and point out ﬂaws in each others’
defenses. Occasionally, I get injured from the normal
connection of arms and legs that martial arts study en-
tails—a bruise here, stiffness there. The jow speeds my
healing, and I am beginning to see the light.
The old Chinese masters had two kinds of stu-
dents: outer-door and inner-door. The outer-door stu-
dents were like us, regular students who learned the
basics and went home. The inner-door students each
got a little time behind closed doors with the master. He
gave each of them a bit extra, but he didn’t give any of
them a whole lot, not enough to mess with him, anyway.
The issues of secrecy and caution pervade the his-
tory of kung fu. The Ching government justiﬁed burn-
ing down the Shaolin Temple in 1722 by claiming that
the Buddhist ﬁghting monks who lived there were Ming
sympathizers, working to build a rebel army to restore the
Ming emperor and kick out the Mandarin Ching rulers.
If this was not true before the Ching burned down the
temple, it certainly was afterward. The surviving rem-
nant, tradition says, began the Hung Society, hung being
130
Susan Spilecki

a word that could refer to the Ming Dynasty’s founder
and to the hung soan, the red houseboats that were used
as homes, transportation, and training space for the
opera troupes that traveled the waterways of Canton
Province. Hiding among the opera troupes, which rou-
tinely used martial arts and acrobatics in their traveling
shows, the Hung rebels could keep moving, proselytize,
and train other potential rebels. And they practiced 
the deadly arts that would (they hoped) guarantee their
vengeance. The style was well suited to practice on boats,
with its compact stances and short-range hand tech-
niques. Tradition claims that the years aﬂoat modiﬁed it
further. To this day, Hung Gar kung fu relies on few kicks
compared to other martial arts, such as Japanese karate,
Korean tae kwon do, Indonesian pensilat, Thai kickbox-
ing, and even kung fu styles from northern China.
The Ching Dynasty continued until 1911. The
next few decades of nationalism were not a golden age
for kung fu practitioners, but they were better than
when Mao rose to power in the 1950s. He hunted down
kung fu masters and killed them as a matter of policy,
knowing that they were men who thought for them-
selves and could, with their bare hands, kill anyone who
didn’t like it.
Thus began the second kung fu diaspora. The sur-
viving masters ﬂed to Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the Philip-
pines. A few went further, to Europe and North America,
but they remained understandably cautious.
This long tradition of secrecy helps explain my
teacher’s disdain for just about every other ﬁghting style
on earth except his teacher’s. For Sifu, any style that
didn’t come down from his teachers, and cannot show a
direct connection in its lineage with the Shaolin Temple,
has no validity.
“The old masters,” Sifu says, “You think they teach
this out to just anybody?” He shakes his head at our ig-
norance. “It’s not about the money. They don’t care
about money! It’s about danger. If I’m an old master and
Dit Da Jow
131

I teach you my technique, you can kill me. So I only
teach a little bit. A bit to you, another bit to you, and
you.” He points to us each in turn. “So I’m safe.”
“Nobody has the whole thing?” asks Sean.
“Exactly! Once they teach it out, they can’t take it
back. So they’re careful what they teach. And who they
teach.”
“But you teach us all the same,” I say.
He shrugs. “Things are different now. In the old
days, students lived with the teacher. They did kung fu
twenty-four hours a day. Nowadays, nobody’s got time.
You guys do punching practice for an hour a day at
best.” He rolls his eyes again.
He is right of course. He is in no danger from us.
And while, on the one hand, I don’t think I’d want to eat,
sleep, and breathe kung fu day and night for the rest of
my life, I do understand what I’m losing—what we are
all losing, Sifu included—by living “normal” twenty-ﬁrst
century lives. We each work forty to ﬁfty hours a week:
driving a bus or a train; teaching Latin to high school
kids, writing and literature to college kids, exercise to
the elderly; answering customer service calls; research-
ing AIDS. We spend an hour or two a day stretching,
doing forms, punching the bag, practicing with the sword
and/or staff, maybe some sparring, maybe not. It’s
never enough, not if what we’re after is mastery of com-
bat techniques.
But I’m not sure that’s what we’re after.
For us, I think it’s more about getting exercise,
participating in history, having friends—a family—who
also care about this obscure, dying art, this long, proud
lineage. But that is probably why our teacher gets so
frustrated with us.
Back in late November, I hurt my wrist, probably
not even in kung fu class. Every night, I rubbed Wing
Lam’s jow on it, because I had already worked my way
through half of that bottle and didn’t want to start the
new bottle I had bought from Sifu until I had ﬁnished
132
Susan Spilecki

the other. But my wrist got no better, so ﬁnally I decided
that I had to ask Sifu for help. I considered bringing
Wing Lam’s jow, but at the last minute packed Sifu’s
unopened bottle instead. Thank heavens.
“Sifu, my wrist still isn’t better.”
“Let’s see.”
I held out my hand and he manipulated it, felt for
swelling, dislocations and God knows what else.
“It feels all right,” he said. “You probably just pulled
something. You have jow?”
“Right here.” I handed him the bottle.
“What’s this? You haven’t even opened it!”
“I was using the bottle I got on the Web—”
“You say, ‘Oh, Sifu, my wrist hurts!’ and ‘Oh, Sifu,
can you ﬁx it?’ but you don’t do what I tell you!”
“But I thought I should—”
“I don’t want you to think! You have to use my jow.
It looks like the others, but it’s different. It’s like our
kung fu: it looks the same, but it’s not!”
He rubbed his jow into my wrist ﬁercely, and I tried
hard to look penitent and contain my winces. I wanted
to say, “Sifu, my father grew up during the Depression.
I’m genetically unable to waste anything.” But I knew it
wouldn’t do any good. Instead, I promised to use his jow.
Is it my imagination that Sifu’s jow works better
than Wing Lam’s? Certainly Sifu’s jow is fresher, com-
ing to us within days of his making it. And it deﬁnitely
smells stronger. So maybe it’s the value of the personal
interaction, which is also part of the tradition. Wong Fei
Hung’s students got their jow from him, not from some
teacher in Beijing who packed it on a donkey and sent it
south. Maybe it’s just a better recipe. Or maybe it’s the
strange love and ﬁerceness Sifu seems to have for us,
his hapless, modern American students, that gets trans-
mitted into the chemistry.
Whatever. I use Sifu’s jow because Sifu tells me to.
And in the end, that’s part of the tradition, too.
Dit Da Jow
133

Susan Spilecki teaches writing and literature at
Emerson College and Northeastern University.
134
Susan Spilecki

Dit Da Jow
135

A commodity appears at ﬁrst sight an extremely obvious, triv-
ial thing. But its analysis brings out that it is a very strange
thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological
niceties. So far as it is a use-value, there is nothing mysterious
about it, whether we consider it from the point of view that by
its properties it satisﬁes human needs, or that it ﬁrst takes on
these properties as the product of human labour. It is abso-
lutely clear that, by his activity, man changes the forms of the
materials of nature in such a way as to make them useful to
him. The form of wood, for instance, is altered if a table is made
out of it. Nevertheless the table continues to be wood, an ordi-
nary, sensuous thing. But as soon as it emerges as a commod-
ity, it changes into a thing which transcends sensuousness. It
not only stands with its feet on the ground, but in relation to all
other commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of its
wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than if it
were to begin dancing of its own free will.
—Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy

THE VACUUM CLEANER
Nathan Greenslit

When she was about two years old, my daughter Emma
was afraid of our rather loud vacuum cleaner. When chil-
dren get scared, adults try to comfort them by represent-
ing their fears as irrational. Adults say: “It’s okay, but
see, there’s nothing to be scared of.” In this negotiation,
children don’t buy this adult story for a second; they
come up with their own plans to manage their feelings.
In Emma’s case, she talked to our vacuum, telling it that
“it’s okay that you scare me.” Emma’s strategy was to
help the vacuum deny its own identity as a frightening
object. Indeed, part of what was so scary to Emma about
the vacuum’s loudness was that it evoked not so much
the question of what this thing was, but rather who this
thing might be. For Emma, the vacuum was something
that needed to be dealt with like a person. And as a par-
ent, I sometimes felt like a reluctant Sancho Panza to my
child’s quixotic adventures in self-discovery.
Once the belt drive broke in the vacuum, and I
showed Emma how it worked. But when I asked Emma
if she wanted to help me replace the belt, she refused.
She did not want to touch the insides of the vacuum, as
if it might start up without warning, as if it were just
pretending to be broken. (Like when I would pretend to
be sleeping and tickle her when she tried to sneak by.)
She didn’t trust that the vacuum couldn’t animate itself
without electricity from the wall. Children teach us
everyday forms of what philosophers discuss in seminar
rooms: Aristotle devised a system of motions that char-
acterized self-locomotion as belonging to the category of
the highest forms. But I couldn’t convince Emma that
the vacuum was not this kind of animal. Emma’s con-
cern that the vacuum might spring to life combined her
Aristotelian intuitions and an element of the original
concept of stress—that it is not harm per se, but rather
138
Nathan Greenslit

the unpredictableness of a potentially harmful envi-
ronment that strains the nervous system. Indeed, the
term stress was introduced in animal research during
the 1950s, research that demonstrated the effects of
randomly shocking monkeys. The random shocks pro-
duced greater effects than shocking the monkeys with
regularity.1
Our popular use of the word stress is relatively
recent. Stress as a scientiﬁc term was introduced in the
1950s to name the bodily effects of new demands: a fre-
netic and socially competitive lifestyle and a household
rich in ambient noise. In scientiﬁc circles, stress was
commonly described in terms of modern anxieties.
Thus, the scientiﬁc understanding of the nervous
system provided social commentary on industrializa-
tion. Biology was not seen as timeless, but as a way to
understand our relationship to a particular social and
cultural world. Here, the vacuum cleaner is an actor—
loud and stressful. In Capital, Karl Marx makes it clear
that when objects become commodities they become
nearly animate.2 The French philosopher and sociolo-
gist Jean Baudrillard takes the activity of consumer
objects and puts them in a larger context. Taken indi-
vidually, consumer objects have no meaning—that comes
from their participation in a system of objects.3 In this
framework we don’t consume individual objects; we con-
sume the social order that they belong to. We buy the
vacuum; we consume assumptions about gender, house-
holds, families, and social status.
In response to Emma’s fears, my wife, Heather,
asked Emma to help her decorate the vacuum with but-
terﬂy stickers and encouraged Emma to dress up the
vacuum in goofy outﬁts, including long scarves and an
old fedora hat. Also, Heather would give Emma some of
The Vacuum Cleaner
139

our vacuum’s cleaning attachments to play with. I re-
member one time Emma walked around with the exten-
sion hose draped over her shoulders as a stole, with
another attachment as a cane, and said she was “bor-
rowing” these accessories from the vacuum. For her, the
vacuum “had” parts—it possessed parts—and could
share them with a playmate.
About six months later, Emma’s behavior toward
the vacuum cleaner changed. She began leading her
younger sister, Ellie, into a frenetic dance whenever we
vacuumed the ﬂoors. Ellie herself was never scared of
the vacuum, but now her sister was teaching her how to
not be afraid of it all the same. To this day, when Ellie is
by herself, she seems indifferent to the vacuum, but
when Emma is around, Ellie lets her sister minister to
her as Emma leads her sister in a ritual of laughter,
shouts, and dance.
When Emma began this dancing rite, I asked her
why. She answered, “Because we’re dancing, Dad!” Ex-
actly. This is what two-year-olds do. The explanation they
provide for some action is the action itself. They don’t
rationalize their experiences, they narrate them as we
adults end up teaching children that behaviors have
meanings and motives and that we might not know why
we behave the way we do. When Emma got scared of the
vacuum, she never asked, “What’s wrong with me?” She
wondered, “What’s wrong with this thing?”
Toy vacuum cleaners are friendly, colorful, and
make “fun” sounds. They are marketed as ways to help
children deal with their fears of “real” vacuum cleaners.
(“See, vacuum cleaners aren’t really that scary, are
they?”) The toy makers say to us: This is what your chil-
dren want—this is what they want vacuum cleaners to
be. Once I asked Emma if she wanted one of these toy
vacuums. She refused when she found out it wasn’t a
“real” vacuum, that it was “only” a toy. Of course, wasn’t
it the reality of our vacuum that scared Emma so? But
here was this new object, designed like a real vacuum
140
Nathan Greenslit

minus the terror, and Emma wanted nothing to do with
it. She didn’t want objects to be ﬁgured out for her. She
wanted to be able to ﬁgure objects out for herself.
I’m interested in those moments when we momen-
tarily see the child within us. When grownups are startled
by something—a machine turns on without warning—we
react by rationalizing, “Oh, it was just the blender,” or
“Phew, it was just a car.” For a moment, we have experi-
enced the world as truly animate and have a genuine con-
nection with our usually invisible histories with objects.
Our psyche reveals its structure when the every-
day wobbles, when what we’ve always taken for granted
slips out of place and suddenly appears strange. For
me, this has been the most profound part of being a par-
ent. There are moments when I see myself in my chil-
dren. At one point, the crazy Don Quixote turns to
Sancho Panza and says, to paraphrase, “Consider what
you are and try to know yourself, which is the most dif-
ﬁcult study in the world.”
Slowly, Emma is becoming less interested in the
vacuum. Now, it largely annoys her. For instance, she
might be watching Blue’s Clues and ask us to wait until
the program is over to ﬁnish vacuuming the living room.
Emma is now three and a half. A couple of days ago, I
asked her about the vacuum cleaner. “What do you
think about the vacuum? Do you remember when it
used to scare you?” Emma said, “Yeah. It’s still loud. I
like quiet things better. I think everybody likes quiet
things better.” For me, that vacuum cleaner is all the
more evocative precisely because it has ceased to be
special to Emma. It has disappeared into her psyche as
just another object in a mundane world that she can
start to take for granted. Emma is growing up.
I have a different relationship with our vacuum
after having watched Emma ﬁgure it out for herself. Its
noises mean something different to me. I wonder who is
around to listen to them. Of course, I’m around to listen
to them. And I ﬁnd myself wondering who I am, such
The Vacuum Cleaner
141

that my own psychic history with the vacuum—the time
when it was animate—has gone invisible. So, it turns
out that the real evocative object here is my daughter
Emma, in whom I see myself, despite myself. This is one
version of Freud’s uncanny—things known of old yet
somehow unfamiliar—that we as persons, who spend a
lifetime trying to fantasize our way out of being children,
can’t help but see ourselves in our own children. We say
it is cute that children have “unreal” relationships with
objects. But just past this, is what’s evocative: by at-
tending to the experiences of children we gain much in-
sight into why we so need to categorize the world. Every
great once in a while, the vacuum cleaner startles me too.
Nathan Greenslit earned his doctorate in the
Program in Science, Technology, and Society at MIT.
142
Nathan Greenslit

Objects of Transition
and Passage

Dreaming makes everything in me which is not strange, foreign,
speak: the dream is an uncivil anecdote made up of very civi-
lized sentiments. . . .
What is signiﬁcance? It is meaning, insofar as it is sen-
sually produced. . . . Then perhaps the subject returns, not as
illusion but as ﬁction. A certain pleasure is derived from a way
of imagining oneself as individual, of inventing a ﬁnal, rarest
ﬁction: the ﬁctive identity. . . . I write myself as a subject at
present out of place, arriving too soon or too late. . . .
If it were possible to imagine an aesthetic of textual plea-
sure, it would have to include writing aloud. Writing aloud is
carried . . . by the grain of the voice, which is an erotic mixture
of timbre and language and can therefore also be, along with
diction, the substance of an art. . . . Its aim is not the clarity of
messages. . . . What it searches for are the pulsional incidents,
the language lined with ﬂesh, a text where we can hear the
grain of the throat, the patina of consonants, the voluptuous-
ness of vowels, a whole carnal stereophony.
—Roland Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text

THE MELBOURNE TRAIN
William J. Mitchell

I was born in a lonely ﬂyspeck on the absurdly empty
map of the Australian interior. When I eventually took
an interest in such things, I discovered that Mark Twain
had once passed through there, and had written in Fol-
lowing the Equator: “Horsham sits in a plain which is
as level as the ﬂoor—one of those famous dead levels
which Australian books describe so often; gray, bare,
somber, melancholy, baked, cracked, in the tedious long
droughts, but a horizonless ocean of vivid green grass
the day after a rain. A country town, peaceful, reposeful,
inviting, full of snug houses, with garden plots, and
plenty of shrubbery and ﬂowers.”1
We moved away when I was very small, but I still
remember the river—arched over with red gums, and
loud with the sound of magpies, kookaburras, and the
occasional screech of a cockatoo. You could stand on
the bridge and drop stones to plonk into the muddy water.
There was a broad main street, with shop verandas and
angle parking for the few cars. The baker, the milkman,
and the iceman delivered from horse-drawn carts. Across
the Natimuk Road were dry, grassy paddocks, and my
dad always carried a big stick for the snakes when we
walked there. Old Baldy Anderson (though nobody called
him that to his face) ran the pub.
Every evening, the express train from Melbourne
came thundering into town—passing through, and barely
pausing, on its way to Adelaide. You could hear the
whistle blowing—with urgently increasing intensity, then
a mournful, gorgeous Doppler shift—from miles away
across the starlit plains. The locomotive was a magniﬁ-
cent smoking, hissing, clacking monster sporting a glow-
ing ﬁrebox, a tender heaped with ﬁlthy coal, and huge,
shiny wheels. It was my earliest intimation of the tech-
nological sublime.
146
William J. Mitchell

Throughout my bush childhood, the trains served
as mobile metonyms for a wider world. In the slang of
the day, the sprawling coastal cities were “the big smoke,”
and the steam engines were the ﬂeeting local bearers of
that emblematic attribute. They puffed great clouds of it
up into the otherwise perfect hemisphere of clear blue
sky, and left long plumes trailing across the ﬂat hori-
zon—matched, occasionally, by the dust plumes from
cars speeding along dirt roads. When you entered a tun-
nel on the train, you had to leap up to close all the win-
dows; otherwise, your compartment ﬁlled instantly with
choking soot.
Each warmly lit carriage interior was a synec-
doche of urbanity—an encapsulated, displaced frag-
ment of the mysterious life that was lived at the end of
the line. The passengers dressed differently from the lo-
cals, and they talked of unfamiliar things. They carried
with them the Melbourne newspapers—the sober and
serious broadsheet the Age, the racy Sun and Argus, the
evening Herald, the Sporting Globe (printed, for some rea-
son, on pink paper), and the utterly scandalous tabloid
Truth. News was scarce in the bush, in the days before
portable radios and casual long-distance calls, so fresh
papers were eagerly awaited; passengers would some-
times toss them out to the railway workers who stood
leaning on their shovels as a train groaned slowly by,
much as they might offer a smoke to a stranger, or slip
some ﬂour and tea to a swagman at the door.
The passenger compartments were beautifully
crafted in polished wood, overstuffed leather, screwed
brass and chrome ﬁttings, frosted glass with railway in-
signia, heavy sliding doors that closed with a satisfying
thump, and little enamel notices enumerating prohibi-
tions—spitting, smoking in the wrong places, frivolously
The Melbourne Train
147

pulling the emergency brake chain, and ﬂushing the toi-
let while the train was stopped at a station. They were
meticulously equipped with hooks for the broad-brimmed
hats that all the men wore, ashtrays for the heaped rem-
nants of cigarettes (some old-timers, I observed with
amazement, could casually roll their next smokes with
one hand while stubbing out the last with the other),
overhead racks for suitcases, and chemical foot warm-
ers that you would take out from under the seats and
shake to activate. And there were wondrous cabinets of
curiosities, with friezes of large, sepia photographs over
the seats—each one depicting a ferny gully, a gravel
track lined by huge eucalyptus trees, a mountain look-
out, a wild patch of coast, or some other picturesque
scene from the extensive territory served by the Victo-
rian Railways. When I was a little older, and my family
had picked up and moved to the shores of the Southern
Ocean, the Jubilee Train came to town—a celebration of
the ﬁftieth anniversary of the federation of the former
colonies and formation of the Australian nation. The
Jubilee train overﬂowed with the vast, varied, and un-
ruly world distilled into a collection of mementos and
souvenirs. I saw famous gold nuggets, the bullet-dented
armor of the outlaw Ned Kelly, creepy remnants of the
cruel convict era, stuffed birds and animals, diving hel-
mets, feathery coral, miscellaneous minerals, and giant
clams from faraway Queensland.
It was on a train, long before I was reluctantly
dragged off to school, that I ﬁrst realized I could read.
With my nose up against the window, I began to deci-
pher the signs advertising Bushell’s Tea, the mileage
markers that crept by, and the names of the stations
where we creaked to successive stops—words in mem-
orable sequence, the beginnings of narrative. I quickly
found that the made-up narratives of books vanquished
the boring hours as we crept across the plains. It wasn’t
long before I ran through the meager supply of kids’
books, and moved on to the volumes of Henry Lawson
148
William J. Mitchell

that I had discovered at home. Lawson, to my gratiﬁed
astonishment, wrote not of the Old Country and the
Empire, nor of exotic American adventure, but of the
people and places I knew. He was the bard of the bush.
I loved the deadpan desolation of his great stories “The
Drover’s Wife” and “The Union Buries Its Dead.” I could
readily have believed that his famous character Mitchell
the bushman, arriving with battered swag and old cattle-
dog at Sydney’s Redfern railway station, was a long-lost
uncle. I was stirred by his angry anthem of the under-
dog, “Faces in the Street.” And sometimes it seemed that
he was sitting beside me, gazing out into the shimmer-
ing distance:
By homestead, hut, and shearing-shed,
By railroad, coach, and track—
By lonely graves of our brave dead,
Up-Country, and Out-Back:
To where ’neath glorious clustered stars
The dreamy plains expand—
My home lies wide, a thousand miles
In the Never-Never Land.2
It didn’t matter that he had some patch of Western
Queensland in mind when he wrote those lines. It didn’t
matter that he had died, drunk and penniless on the
streets of Sydney, decades ago. I knew exactly what he
meant. The power of his words, magically locking on to
the landscape before me, made him vividly present.
When I was learning to write schoolboy essays of
my own, perched at a wooden desk with porcelain ink-
well and steel-nibbed pen, I often thought of sentences
as trains. You could shunt the words around, like rolling
stock on a siding, until you got them in exactly the right
order. Like empty boxcars, they could carry the freight
of simile and metaphor. And verbs, surely, were loco-
motives. Put them up front for snappy imperatives. Mul-
tiply, mass, and combine them for extra power. Keep it
The Melbourne Train
149

150
William J. Mitchell
short. On the other hand, if the mood took you, and you
wanted to construct a long, slow, freight-train of a sen-
tence, with reﬂective asides in the manner of writers like
Joseph Furphy, you could just let a few scattered verbs
help it along from somewhere in the middle. Or, for a dif-
ferent effect, they might follow, pushing. When I memo-
rized and recited poetry from the School Reader—mostly
jingling ballads, like “The Wreck of the Hesperus” and
“The Man from Snowy River”—the rhythms of the rails
were always on my mind. Eventually, I got to read Pope
on poetry, and realized he was right: the sound must
seem an echo to the sense.3
As the years went by, and I made myself into an
architect and urbanist, I began to understand that ob-
jects, narratives, memories, and space are woven into a
complex, expanding web—each fragment of which gives
meaning to all the others. For me, it was a web that grew
from a quiet, isolated place on the banks of the Wim-
mera River.
It is more than half a century, now, since I left that
little town. A decade after leaving, when I had the chance
to attend Melbourne University, I ﬂed the bush forever
and have since lived my life among the world’s great
cities. But the sight of an express train still evokes the
other end of the line. Now it recovers the memory of a
spreading, aromatic peppercorn tree, a corrugated iron
roof that was too hot to touch when you climbed up to
retrieve a ball, the sudden smell of raindrops in the
dust, and a small, curious child—walking with his im-
possibly young and beautiful parents along a silent,
sunburned street.
William J. Mitchell is Alexander W. Dreyfoos, Jr.,
Professor of Architecture and Media Arts and 
Sciences at MIT.

The Melbourne Train
151

In doing the biography of a thing, one would ask questions
similar to those one asks about people: . . . Where does the
thing come from and who made it? What has been its career so
far, and what do people consider to be an ideal career for such
things? What are the recognized “ages” or periods in the thing’s
“life,” and what are the cultural markers for them? How does
the thing’s use change with its age and what happens to it when
it reaches the end of its usefulness? . . .
The biography of a car, [for instance], would reveal a
wealth of cultural data: where it was acquired, how and from
whom the money was assembled to pay for it, the relationship
of the seller to the buyer, the uses to which the car is regularly
put, the identity of its most frequent passengers, and of those
who borrow it, the frequency of borrowing, the garages to which
it is taken and the owner’s relation to the mechanics, the move-
ment of the car from hand to hand over the years, and in the
end, when the car ﬁnally collapses, the ﬁnal disposition of its
remains. All of these details would reveal an entirely different
biography from that of [any other] car . . . . We accept that every
person has many biographies . . . each of which selects some
aspect of the life history and discards others. Biographies of
things cannot but be similarly partial.
—Igor Kopytoff, “The Cultural Biography of Things:
Commoditization as Process”

1964 FORD FALCON
Judith Donath

In 1964, when I was two, my mother bought a baby
blue Ford Falcon. She drove this car for several years
while I sat in the back, asking if we were there yet. Then
we moved to Long Island, home of the endless trafﬁc jam.
The Falcon’s response to the slow stop-and-go crawl
was to overheat, its red emergency light insisting on a
stop by the side of the road, hood open, radiator steam-
ing. My mother bought a more reliable car and my father
decided to store the Falcon in the garage, in anticipation
of the day when he would obtain his American driver’s
license. Ten years later, I got my license and the car be-
came mine. It was the late 1970s of Jimmy Carter and
the oil crisis, with lines for gasoline stretching for blocks.
It was a time when locking gas-caps were sold to prevent
one’s hard-earned tank of expensive gas from being si-
phoned away in the night. I was seventeen, a teenager
in working-class Long Island; the Falcon was ﬁfteen,
already looking rather quaint. We cruised around in the
company of other early ’60s’ cars, GTOs and Mustangs
and Camaros, the Falcon being the lightweight, little-
engined sister to these dual-carbed, neutral-dropping,
drag-racing muscle cars.
Our Falcon was well cared for, but cars age quickly,
cosmetically more than mechanically. My mother, ever
sensible, has no great affection for objects and would
have happily traded it in, but my father, who had arrived
in America from Hungary in 1957, with terrible memo-
ries of the Holocaust and more recent recollections of
the violent bleakness of communist Europe, insisted on
keeping it. Ostensibly, he was going to get his driver’s li-
cense and the car would then be his. And, he invested
objects with deeper meaning. This was the ﬁrst car he
had bought here in America—a part of the American
Dream.
154
Judith Donath

So the car wasn’t traded in; it came with me to col-
lege, and then on to graduate school. It spent a year with
me in the East Village, back when this now-gentriﬁed
neighborhood was a grafﬁti-covered district of crack
houses and storefront galleries. My then-boyfriend, smit-
ten by the retro coolness of listening to baseball games
on an authentic AM radio, volunteered to make the daily
search for alternate side of the street parking.
Together, the Falcon and I moved up to Boston. By
then there were far fewer cars with shiny chrome and
big round taillights. Everyone wanted to go for a ride in
the Falcon, even though it had no air-conditioning in the
summer, iffy heat in the winter, and the sort of doubtful
brakes and steering that kept it in the right-hand slow
trafﬁc lane. The blue paint was faded, the fenders were
rusty, but the car had style. No matter how dully mun-
dane I felt, in the Falcon I was the Driver of that Cool
Car. The Falcon was the car we drove away in when I got
married. We had a newer car, faster, more reliable, but
the Falcon was the festive, special occasion car.
A couple of years later our ﬁrst baby was born. We
bought books on baby prooﬁng, put safety plugs in the
outlets, lowered the water temperature below scalding.
We looked at the Falcon and saw a metal steering wheel,
hard dashboard, dubious brakes, and no shoulder belts.
We found a new owner for the Falcon, someone who’d
take care of it and keep it running, a nice guy with his
own acetylene torch.
We gave the Falcon away to him in the end. Not be-
cause we could not sell it, but because the money would
not be what it seemed worth to us. In its condition, it
would sell, optimistically, for about $1500 or less. This
seemed like an indignity to so personal a vehicle. Without
1964 Ford Falcon
155

money, the transaction seemed an adoption rather than
a sale.
As a hammer extends the strength of the arm, a car
is often seen as an extension of the legs. Yet a car is also
an extension of the skin. As we inhabit our skin we in-
habit our cars, surrounded by a rubber, glass and metal
automotive skin that is both protective and expressive.
Blemished with dents, rust marks, and scratches, it is an
interface between the outside world and the inner self.
As we drive, our car changes our sense of personal
space. Much of the process of becoming a driver is
learning to be one with the car, to shift your perception
of your own perimeter to the space around your vehicle.
To know how wide you are, to judge what spaces you can
squeeze into, to maintain the right distance between
you and the car in front.
The car is a great equalizer; it makes every driver
powerful and dangerous, yet it also signals individual
diversity. We read car choice the same way we read
clothing choice. A car can signal taste, money, or their
lack. The Volvo wagon signals eastern liberal intellec-
tual; its dented beat-up diesel disguises a love of all
things organic and generations of Ivy League wealth.
The Porsche driver in wrap-around sunglasses allows
himself to be admired as he revs his car at the stoplight;
some see him enmeshed in an aura of wealth and ani-
mal magnetism, others see him as the embodiment of
the midlife crisis.
Driving, too, is expressive. The car revving impa-
tiently at the stop sign has its aggressive driver, quick to
take offense and with a chronic need to be ﬁrst. The car
that ﬂinches at oncoming trafﬁc, even though everyone
is well within their proper lane, reveals the nervous re-
ﬂexes of its frayed and jumpy driver.
When a car works perfectly, doing exactly what it’s
supposed to do, we experience it as pure machine. But
when it acts imperfectly, choosing to do some things
and not others, it becomes an almost autonomous agent,
156
Judith Donath

a seemingly sentient creature with emotions, desires and
intentions of its own.
I negotiated with the Falcon when it exhibited its
own preferences for speed, for direction. It required
work to anticipate its likely reaction to my wishes. If I
wanted to go faster I could not just depress the accelera-
tor, because it would likely react by stalling. Instead, I
needed to slowly add pressure to the gas pedal, letting
up when it felt resistant and listening for a shifting of
gears, then slowly, carefully, pressing down some more.
Do I smell gas? Is there a hole in the gas line? Is the
whole thing about to explode?
The Falcon stalled in the rain, and as it grew older,
it stalled on any damp, low-pressure day, teaching me
to become, like the pilot of a small plane, attuned to the
meteorology of frontal systems. As I walked to work in
the pouring rain I could think about the irony inherent
in having a car that did not like to go out in bad weather.
Moving from New York to Boston I felt lonely and
missed the casual interchanges of New York street chat.
Yet, in the Falcon, I was in a friendlier Boston. People
waved and smiled, and at stop lights they’d lean out of
their windows to say something like, “How old is that
car?” or “We had a car like that when I was a kid,” or
“Hey, I like your car!” With the Falcon, the city became
an urban village of friendly strangers.
In 1994 I began a Web site for the Falcon. The Web
was new, and I was studying its possible futures. When
the Web arrived, people started making home pages,
publishing their vacation photos and lists of their fa-
vorite movies and the details of their children’s births. I
read these pages avidly: What image of themselves were
people trying to present on these pages? Who did they
imagine as their audience? What motivated them to
write these private stories in a public domain? As for
writing anything about myself, I was torn between want-
ing to participate in this new medium and feeling too re-
served to write anything personal. Creating a home page
1964 Ford Falcon
157

for the Falcon allowed me to participate in the personal
and informal side of the web, while remaining at least
partially hidden behind the persona of my car.
The Falcon’s home page included commentary
about its life as a car and links to information that a car
would ﬁnd interesting—other Falcons, car repair shops,
articles about Boston drivers. Anticipating today’s Web
journals, it featured a frequently updated diary. Some of
the entries depicted a “day in the life” of the Falcon:
Aug. 4, 1994 
Today I sat by the curb.
Aug. 12, 1994 
Still sitting at the curb. Hope we go for a ride later.
The Web journal also provided links for readers to send
messages to the Falcon.
Dec. 19, 1994 
Thank you to everyone who wrote expressing concern for
my health. I’m feeling much better now. I have a new ig-
nition switch and my heater has been refurbished.
Sometimes the Falcon departed from the mundane to
wax philosophical:
Oct. 23, 1994 
Went to see Pulp Fiction last night. Found it disturbing—
the image of all those eviscerated cars serving as VIP seat-
ing in a trendy LA club continues to haunt me. The ethical
questions are so complex. I know I’ve been very lucky,
and that most cars my age have long since been junked.
But the long slow rust of the junkyard is natural—and
something about the sight of those polished, empty bod-
ies bothers me. I know I won’t run forever. Would I accept
the strange immortality of the theme cafe? I don’t know.
158
Judith Donath

The Falcon’s homepage played with questions of
online identity. The Falcon had a clear personality: it
was old, a little cranky, and insecure about its appeal,
vacillating between feeling like a proud antique and a
rusting junker.
Today I drive a BMW, a little 3-series station wagon.
I have car seats for kids in the back; there are juice
boxes stashed in the trunk, along with leftover beach
shovels and odd pieces of toys. I like it in spite of its
Germanic austerity. Unlike Japanese cars, which, like
tiny Japanese apartments, have innumerable clever little
places to stash things, the BMW has been carefully de-
signed to store almost nothing. There is nowhere to put
CDs or your handbag. One little pocket in the door has
room for a couple of maps, and there is a little shelf in
the dashboard to store one pair of sunglasses, and that
is it. You are supposed to be focused on the road, on
your role as the driver, and on your synergy with this
ﬁne machine.
Yet the BMW is not mute. It speaks of being a soc-
cer mom’s car, a car that says these kids in the back seat
are to go to college, and that the grocery bags in the
trunk are ﬁlled with colorful organic produce and im-
ported olive oils, and that no coupons were clipped to
buy them. This is an unremarkable message in our
neighborhood of Saabs and Volvos, of ski racks and
private-beach parking stickers. I am no longer married,
so the front passenger seat is usually unoccupied, and
I stow everything there. It runs and handles beautifully.
It is, as they say, “the ultimate driving machine.” It does
what I say. I feel no need to negotiate with it; I do not feel
that it has a will of its own. No one stops to comment.
New, it is a commodity with nothing to distinguish it
from the many other BMWs in this city. Its biography is
yet to be written.
I don’t know where life has taken the Falcon. Until
several years ago, I used to see it around town. Maybe it
1964 Ford Falcon
159

has once again changed hands. Or maybe the guy who
adopted it went back home to New Hampshire.
Judith Donath is Director of the Sociable Media Group
at the MIT Media Lab.
160
Judith Donath

1964 Ford Falcon
161

The subject of passage ritual is, in the liminal period, struc-
turally, if not physically, “invisible.” . . . The transitional-being
or “liminal persona” is deﬁned by a name and by a set of sym-
bols. The same name is very frequently employed to designate
those who are being initiated into very different states of
life. . . . We are not dealing with structural contradictions when
we discuss liminality, but with the essentially unstructured
(which is at once destructured and prestructured) and often
the people themselves see this in terms of bringing neophytes
into close connection with deity or with superhuman power,
and what is, in fact, often regarded as the unbounded, the in-
ﬁnite, the limitless. Since neophytes are not only structurally
“invisible” (though physically visible) and ritually polluting,
they are very commonly secluded, partially or completely, from
the realm of culturally deﬁned and ordered states and sta-
tuses. Often the indigenous term for the liminal period is, as
among Ndembu, the locative form of a noun meaning “seclu-
sion site” (kun-kunka, kung’ula). The neophytes are sometimes
said to “be in another place.” They have physical but not social
“reality,” hence they have to be hidden, since it is a paradox, a
scandal, to see what ought not to be there!
—Victor Turner, The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu
Ritual

THE SYNTHESIZER
Trevor Pinch

It was the sound that ﬁrst drew me in. What was a po-
lice siren doing in a university common room during the
annual “Freshers Fair”? The various university clubs
had set up their stalls and we, the “freshers” (the British
name for freshmen or ﬁrst-year students), were prowl-
ing around looking to join the clubs of our choice. It was
1970—the tail-end of student radicalism. I made a bee-
line for the “Soc Soc” (the Socialist Society) stall. But I
followed my ears to the source of the siren.
On a nearby table, surrounded by a small group of
what we would today call “geeks,” was a space-age ma-
chine. It was a contoured wooden box covered in arrays
of colored knobs, controlled by a matrix panel of little
pins. Sticking out from the box was a small joystick not
unlike a radio-control for a model airplane. The sounds
came from the box and seemed to be correlated with the
movements of the joystick, which a young woman was
manipulating with great skill. “Welcome to the Imperial
College Electronic Music Society” proudly proclaimed a
banner. I later learned that the woman was called Lind-
say and that the box was a VCS-3 electronic music syn-
thesizer. It was one of the ﬁrst commercially produced
synthesizers, made in London by the EMS company. It
was a cheap version of its much more famous American
cousin, the Moog synthesizer. Unlike the Moog it had no
keyboard and no wires—different sounds were set up by
connecting the different modules such as oscillators,
ampliﬁers, and ﬁlters via the matrix pins.
The geeks were happy for me to play with the box,
twiddle some knobs, and experiment by putting the ma-
trix pins in different places. I asked, “What do you do in
the electronic music society?” “We meet once a week and
sit around and listen to electronic music,” I was told. That
164
Trevor Pinch

sounded boring, almost as bad as the Marxist Study
Group. But what the heck? I signed up.
The sitting around part did turn out to be termi-
nally boring. The music, with its repetitive electronic
timbres, was often mesmerizing, but the atmosphere was
all wrong—geeks, loudspeakers, and a fancy tape re-
corder all in reverent silence. The worst was that there
was no sign of Lindsay and her synthesizer. The next
year, coincidence changed that. Lindsay moved into
my communal house with its druggy music scene. We
played guitars, bongos, alarm clocks, whatever, and
tripped out. We commandeered Lindsay’s synthesizer
and played our guitars through it. We made jungle
sounds, war sounds, a Vietnam psychedelic rhapsody.
Lindsay was unhappy. She had a very personal re-
lationship with her synthesizer, which even had a name,
Vickers. She spent nearly all her time playing with Vick-
ers, making weird sounds into the early hours of morn-
ing. It was personal exploration for her—person and
machine somehow evolving together into a new identity.
When we borrowed her synth she felt Vickers was being
abused. We were spoiling that delicate relationship she
strove for, in tune with the idiosyncrasies of her instru-
ment—never for her a machine—and its own peculiar
sounds. One night we kidnapped Vickers: we needed the
synth for a raucous session of music making. The next
day Lindsay was close to tears when she told me she
was moving out. No more loaning of Vickers; she just
couldn’t do it. It wasn’t fair to Vickers.
I had to have my own synth, but even the cheap-
est synth was too expensive. Our communal budget was
ﬁfty pence a week each for food, and the VCS-3 cost over
300 pounds. What to do? The answer was obvious—
build one. As a boy I had built radios. I soon graduated
The Synthesizer
165

from tinkering with the mandatory crystal set to one-
and two-tube shortwave radios. My pride and joy had
been a shortwave radio called an R-1155, which I had
picked up in an army surplus store. It had been stripped
from a World War II Lancaster Bomber and had the
words “Eager Beaver” etched across its giant dial. In my
darkened bedroom I listened to Morse code and imag-
ined I was bombing Berlin. With its huge tuning knob, a
tiny movement of the hand switched you from Voice of
America, to Radio Berne, to Radio Moscow. In between
the stations was ambient radio sound—Morse bleeps
morphing into howls of static amidst the weird booming
of radio beacons trying to jam the stations you weren’t
supposed to listen to. If you sent letters to stations in-
forming them when, where, and on what frequency you
had listened, you were rewarded with postcards known
as QSL cards. Much to my dad’s alarm, I once received
one in the mail from Radio Havana! “That’s communist
propaganda, son,” he warned me.
Part of my radio hobby was the magazines—Wire-
less World, Radio World, Electronics World, and the like.
I browsed them endlessly for new projects. The 1973
January edition of Wireless World had exactly what I was
looking for—the Wireless World Synthesizer. I was soon
ordering components by mail order, searching the cheap
electronics stores on Edgware Road and Tottenham
Court Road for elusive components. The metal work was
all done at night in the physics laboratories of Imperial
College, where I was still a student. My synthesizer had
forty-ﬁve knobs and a joystick. Rather than matrix pins
it used wires and plugs to set up sounds in a poor man’s
version of the Moog patching system. It even had a ru-
dimentary sequencer that allowed me to program six
different sounds in succession which would repeat end-
lessly. The transistors were always burning out—but
repairing it was almost as much fun as playing it. I soon
recognized the smells of different burning transistors
and could almost feel which component was on its way
166
Trevor Pinch

out. I used an old organ keyboard that I had wired up
with resistors to control the sound. The organ keyboard
was impossible to tune so I abandoned tuning altogether
and found that it was more interesting playing in my 
own invented scales or nonscales. I had a two-track tape
recorder—the plan was to make my own electronic
music by laboriously recording one sound at a time.
As time passed our communal living dissolved.
The synthesizer moved with me to my garret apartment.
Some nights I couldn’t get anything interesting out of
the synthesizer and then there were those magical
nights when it seemed every new sound was a source of
inspiration. I pictured the sounds coming out of the
ether, like the radio stations I had listened to. A tiny
movement of a wire or knob could make a huge differ-
ence. Filters were imperfect and the stray capacitance
from my hand changed things. The reverb unit—built
around a real spring—made interesting sounds if I shook
its case. Broken modules were sometimes sources of
frustration, but with experimentation I found they could
produce even more interesting sounds. Wires straddled
my synthesizer as each new botch and ﬁx started to take
on a life of its own. Closer and closer I got to the essence
of electronic sound—no longer interested in making
tapes, I just wanted to experience new sounds, to ﬁnd
the elusive combination of timbres that would enable
transcendence. I escaped into my own world of sound.
Was it music? I no longer cared. At last I started to ex-
perience what Lindsay must have felt—I was living with
a machine and it was becoming part of me.
But as the patches got more complicated and the
smell of solder too strong, it was harder to ﬁnd the
sounds I wanted. I started to hear differently; yester-
day’s sounds would no longer sufﬁce, and even silences
became rich with electronic timbres. I had to stop. It was
too hard, too weird, and too lonely.
I withdrew slowly from the synth and came back
from my isolation. I found new friends; a new career as
The Synthesizer
167

an academic loomed. My time alone with the synth had
served as a rite of passage. Now, the synthesizer became
a mere curiosity for other people to explore. Once in the
1980s, one of my sociology students, who composed
electronic music, discovered my old synth. We played
long into the night, both amazed that in the digital age,
it still had so much to offer. But as my soldering skills
faded and I came to know my synth only from the out-
side—not the inside—I became reluctant to ﬁre it up.
When I moved to the United States and a new job at Cor-
nell University in the 1990s, my synth moved with me.
Now I lived near where Bob Moog (a Cornell grad) had 
invented the ﬁrst synthesizers. I soon had a new pas-
sion—writing about the history and sociology of the
synthesizer. My own synth sits in my basement to this
day: silent and unnamed, but not forgotten.
Trevor Pinch is Professor of Science and Technology
Studies and Professor of Sociology at Cornell
University.
168
Trevor Pinch

The Synthesizer
169

To get to the idea of playing it is helpful to think of the preoc-
cupation that characterizes the playing of a young child. The
content does not matter. What matters is the near-withdrawal
state, akin to the concentration of older children and adults.
The playing child inhabits an area that cannot be easily left, nor
can it easily admit intrusions. This area of playing is not inner
psychic reality. It is outside the individual but it is not the ex-
ternal world. Into this play area that child gathers objects or
phenomena from external reality and uses these in the service
of some sample derived from inner or personal reality. . . .
[Thus] in playing, the child manipulates external phenomena
in the service of the dream and invests chosen external phe-
nomena with dream meaning and feeling. [And] there is a direct
development from transitional phenomena to playing, and
from playing to shared playing, and from this to cultural
experiences.
—D. W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality

MURRAY: THE STUFFED BUNNY
Tracy Gleason

I had just begun my graduate research on imaginary
companions, including children’s animated stuffed toys,
when my little sister, Shayna, was born. Like many little
girls, Shayna received a host of stuffed bunnies in her
ﬁrst two years and quickly became mistress of a bunny
menagerie. A student of scientiﬁc categorization, my
father named each bunny according to its distinguish-
ing characteristics. The smallest was Mini Bunny, and
the two bunnies with clothes were named Big Jacket
Bunny and Little Jacket Bunny. A Mama Bunny came
with Baby Bunnies #1 to 4. A bunny with a soft cotton
collar less than half-an-inch wide was named Collar
Bunny.
Collar Bunny was for many months simply one of
the menagerie. He was long on comfort and short on per-
sonality, just a stuffed bunny about 10 inches high,
with ﬂoppy arms and legs, a big white head, and small-
ish ears that stuck straight up. His fur, sewn in stripes
the shades of lightly decorated Easter eggs, did not 
distinguish him from the rest of the pastel objects of
Shayna’s world. He had a small plastic rattle inside his
body, and when he sat, the stufﬁng in his arms made
them stick out to the sides. He came to be valued for this
ability to rest stably in a sitting position, a characteris-
tic that made him a welcome guest at tea parties.
When Shayna was two, she saw a children’s video
for which her aunt and uncle had written the lyrics and
music. A little girl in the video carried a large stuffed
bunny named Murray with her everywhere. Shayna rou-
tinely acted out portions of the story, singing the songs
and faithfully reproducing the blocking of each of the
scenes. In the course of these activities, she chose Col-
lar Bunny to play the part of Murray. Eventually, her in-
172
Tracy Gleason

terest in the video waned, but the idea that a little girl
could love a bunny never did.
My friends and colleagues, who know of my inter-
est in imaginary, personiﬁed objects, believe that I did
everything in my power to encourage Shayna’s relation-
ship with Murray. Although I did not do so intentionally,
I confess that Murray has been an endless source of fas-
cination for me. He is my research personiﬁed in soft,
velvety fabric. For me, Murray is better than a devel-
opmental psychology textbook. I see through him into
Shayna’s imagination. His ability to comfort, entertain,
and amaze my sister delights me as a manifestation of
our tendency to embody character inside ﬂuff and fab-
ric. When Shayna is upset, I watch as Murray dries her
tears, and I am somewhat taken aback to discover that
I, too, am comforted by his presence.
As a budding preschooler, Shayna grew in person-
ality and power. And so did Murray. He became as im-
portant at playtime as he was at bedtime. Shayna would
throw him up in the air and lift him in long leaps down
the hallway, proud that Murray could push the envelope
of bunny behavior to include ceiling-high jumps. In
Murray I could see Shayna’s pride in all of her new skills,
like dressing herself and hopping on one foot and telling
a silly joke. Soon Shayna could control and distinguish
the words and actions of her real self, the role she took
in play with Murray, Murray’s “real” self, and the role
she gave Murray in play with her.
When Shayna went off to nursery school, pre-
school policy dictated that Murray could not follow.
Consequently, Shayna pretended that Murray was at-
tending a different preschool, and she identiﬁed the
church in which it was housed. Stressed by their sepa-
ration, Shayna gave Murray a host of special powers. He
Murray: The Stuffed Bunny
173

developed Boing-De-Boing Eyes that allowed him to see
through barriers of all kinds, around corners and across
miles. He could see what Shayna was doing no matter
where she was, and he always knew when she was com-
ing for him. His Boing-De-Boing ears allowed him to hear
Shayna speaking no matter how far apart they were. He
could ﬂy, magically transporting himself through space
and time to be by her side—in spirit, if not in body.
When Shayna began kindergarten Murray devel-
oped new competencies. He and Shayna began commu-
nicating in the Bunny language, thus elevating their
discussions beyond the comprehension of our parents.
In order to keep them informed, Shayna gave Bunny lan-
guage lessons, complete with tape recordings of vocab-
ulary and worksheets for grammar. At school Shayna
was a student; at home she was the teacher. As she
learned to read, write, and spell English words, Shayna
taught her mother these same skills in Bunny language.
As Shayna mastered literacy, the lessons in Bunny
waned. The Bunny language still exists, but now it is the
ofﬁcial language of Bunnyland where Murray attends
elementary school. Bunnyland is a utopia of peace and
prosperity, with festivals every Sunday and on alternate
Wednesdays. It has provinces and capitals and a com-
plicated topography, and we depend on Shayna to keep
us apprised of Bunnyland’s current events.
References to Murray’s life both here and in Bun-
nyland provide Shayna with an entrée into adult con-
versation, and Shayna is happy to tell his tales. Murray’s
exploits give Shayna transitional, albeit imaginary, top-
ics for the dinner table. Shayna uses Murray’s experi-
ences to forge a new kind of relationship with adults,
one that is no longer solely based on her need for their
nurturance, but rather is founded on common inter-
ests. When I visit I always ask about Murray’s latest
adventures, because I know they will reﬂect Shayna’s
current hopes, interests, and fears.
174
Tracy Gleason

Murray shows signs of love and age; his jumpsuit
is starting to tear a little over his bum, and his rattle is
visible through worn patches and no longer makes any
sound. A turn in the washing machine with something
red made him decidedly more pink than white. At times
when he is tossed aside—in favor of Barbie, say—at these
moments, as he lies on the ﬂoor with his arms and legs
akimbo, the simplicity of his being becomes apparent.
Yet, when I ﬁnd him on the ﬂoor, I feel compelled to pick
him up and sit him in a more comfortable position, per-
haps placing a book nearby in case he gets bored. I know
his brain is polyester ﬁll and his feelings are not his but
my own, and yet his Boing-De-Boing eyes see through
me and call me on my hypocrisy. I could no more walk
past Murray as he lies in an uncomfortable position
than I could ignore my sister’s pleas to play with her or
the cat’s meows for food. Here, Murray has nothing to do
with intellect and everything to do with love.
The adults in Shayna’s life see Murray according
to their own desires. My father thinks of Murray as a
Puck-ish sage: a bunny with a great sense of humor,
who is wise beyond his years. To him, Murray is the kind
of guy who would have fun watching football but also
has an opinion on Kant. Shayna’s mother sees Murray
as love personiﬁed, a being who would accept and for-
give in the face of any transgression. For my husband,
Murray is a kindred spirit. Each year he ﬁnds in Murray
an oasis of calm in the chaos of Christmas morning
(they are both Jewish).
For me, Murray has many faces. As a sister, I am
grateful to him for bringing me closer to Shayna. I speak
for him (always a high, squeaky voice appropriate for a
small bunny) and can make my sister laugh. I hug him
and treat him as a person, and my sister beams with
pleasure. As a researcher, he has given me a ringside
seat at the performance of Shayna’s imagination, even
as I remind myself that in fact it was she, as his creator,
who bought me the ticket to that seat.
Murray: The Stuffed Bunny
175

Finally, Murray teaches me about myself. When I
think about him I can sense how willingly I blur the edges
of fantasy and reality, and how we all choose imagina-
tion as a forum for practicing our social skills or safely
experiencing powerful emotions. I animate Murray into
giving me what I need, even as I know that he is an as-
sembly of cotton and stitches.
I have two photos on my desk. One is of my hus-
band, and the other is of Murray. In his photo, Murray’s
body almost ﬁlls the frame. He is seated next to Mini
Bunny, and he has his arm around her. His head is
cocked to one side, and he is holding a daisy in his lap.
I know that my sister arranged the picture, but in my
heart I feel it captures his personality to a T.
Tracy Gleason is Associate Professor of Psychology at
Wellesley College.
176
Tracy Gleason

Murray: The Stuffed Bunny
177

It is the world of words that creates the world of things. . . . Man
speaks, then, but it is because the symbol has made him man. . . .
Symbols in fact envelop the life of man in a network so
total that they join together, before he comes into the world,
those who are going to engender him “by ﬂesh and blood”; so
total that they bring to his birth, along with the gifts of the
stars, if not with the gifts of the fairies, the shape of his des-
tiny; so total that they give the words that will make him faith-
ful or renegade, the law of the acts that will follow him right to
the very place where he is not yet and even beyond his death . . .
In order to free the subject’s speech, we introduce him
into the language of his desire, that is to say, into the primary
language in which, beyond what he tells us of himself, he is
already talking to us unknown to himself, and, in the ﬁrst
place, in the symbols of a symptom.
—Jacques Lacan, Écrits

THE WORLD BOOK
David Mann

How they decided, I do not know. Maybe in a moment
of grace they sensed my need and chose to help me.
Maybe they were just “keeping up with the Joneses,” as
one did in those days. Did the neighbors have a Philco,
a Eureka, and a box of books, necessitating ours? I do
not know how it happened, but as improbable as it looks
from the distance of these years, my parents bought for
us the 1952 edition of the World Book Encyclopedia,
and, in doing so, literally gave me a world.
I came from a family of very few words. For us, liv-
ing was a private matter, best tended to in silence.
Speech was less a gift than a liability. In the culture of
our clan, true conversation, opening oneself to another’s
point of view, could never have taken hold. To proclaim,
“Here’s what I think; what about you?” would have
amounted to an act of civil war, a threat to the sover-
eignty of individual experience and an invitation to the
other’s scorn. “Better to be silent and thought a fool,
than to open your mouth and prove it,” warned one of
the few maxims I recall hearing as a child.
It sounds oppressive, but I do not believe my family
intended that we live this way. As best I can tell they had
not shunned the larger culture, nor intentionally ban-
ished it from our camp. They had just arisen outside its
reach, in a time and place and circumstance where little
beyond the King James Bible and the iron skillet had yet
found a fertile niche. The dust bowl of Oklahoma had
spawned my parents, starved their spirits, and forced
them out into the world where they clung to each other,
to memories of simpler times, and to their silence.
My family huddled—yet we traveled, too. We moved
household nearly every year, tethered to my father’s
military service. Travel can sophisticate a family, give
them a chance to learn the meaning of their ways, open
180
David Mann

the world to them and show them their place within it,
teach them humility and grace. Our travels, though,
seemed to isolate us more, to thicken the scar of our
alienation. I remember as a child, my ﬁrst day in En-
gland, watching a television ad for dog food “rich in
doggy vitamins.” We stood in the parlor of a modest
B&B, proper but not prim, as a few guests sipped their
afternoon tea and my parents inquired about a room.
Given the prosaic matter of his sales pitch, the televi-
sion announcer’s tone, so intelligent and poised, struck
me as funny. His way of saying “vitamin” (sounding like
“cinnamon”) rang in my Yankee ear as silly. I laughed
aloud. The room fell silent. A spotlight of shame pinned
me to the creaking ﬂoor. I can still feel my father’s rage,
my mother’s mortiﬁcation, the guests’ indifferent huff,
the TV spaniel’s relief as she sniffed the bowl. I no longer
recall my punishment—most likely a slap to the face and
exile to a distant room. It was always safer to be alone.
My earliest memories bear a feeling of separate-
ness from the human world—and not only among strang-
ers, but within my family as well. Ironically, what saved
me from despair was that they let their silenced off-
spring stray. In my early years we lived mostly in rural
places, where even a small child could drift untended for
long stretches of the day. I climbed in trees, dawdled in
streams, poked at bugs, played with clouds and gravity
and angular momentum, and found comfort in this
world outside human commerce.
My family caricatured the naivete that had bred
them. It was the 1950s, in the USA. Our culture was
young, childish, really. The world beyond our shores was
frightening and dangerous, a terra incognita prone to
dictatorship and war. Other cultures we feared as prim-
itive, hostile, or both. Mau-Maus and Maoists. Other
The World Book
181

governments tortured and lied. Ours was a kindly Father
Who Knows Best. Over There, ideas could madden crowds
and kill. Here, our own ideas seemed to protect us with
their insular magic. A wide-eyed faith in progress drew
us forward despite our mistrust of change. Though legally
free, we cowered in conventionality, mumbling prayers
to science in the callow faith that it would save our
world. In a stolid but uneasy balance of centrifugal hope
and centripetal fear we reeled. This culture leached into
me as a child. I felt it cringing in my bones, commingling
there with other urges that it opposed but could not
neutralize—a playfulness with the familiar and a cu-
riosity about all that lay beyond. What I needed was a
guide, but none appeared. Indeed, my people rather dis-
approved. “Don’t mess with that!” “Be still!” “Shut up!”
“Don’t ask stupid questions,” they admonished.
I do not remember when the box came. I must have
been a toddler still. I do remember how the books looked
in it, because I packed and unpacked them so many
times over the years that followed. They stood at atten-
tion, each crimson spine wore a swath of blue, lined in
the same gold paint in which the letter identifying each
volume had been stamped. Out of their box the volumes
resisted opening (like their owners), but once ajar they
released a scent of glossy paper and halftone ink that to
this day recalls feelings of amazement, challenge, and
comfort. Gentle masters, the books offered their secrets
freely and never shamed me for inquiring. Had they ﬁled
out of their box and marched onto the ceiling I would
have tried to follow them. I carried them with me through-
out whole days of wandering. They became my inter-
preters, my models, and my guides.
At ﬁrst the books showed me only pictures, of other
places, other times, other treaties with the elements: a
water clock, an Archimedean screw, a doll sewn from
a sock, another strung from empty spools, a sandaled
Phoenician inscribing the precursor of our letter “H” in
clay, a Ubangi girl, a spiral galaxy, an igloo, a boy on a
182
David Mann

hillside gleefully racing his homemade kite into the
wind. These were pictures that I could both identify with
and wonder at. They were windows of possibility open-
ing onto a world wider than the one I knew but where I
felt I could belong. Like an index to my mind, these
images still appear to me when I search for words, much
as they taught me words as I pored over them as a child.
The World Book was my Rosetta Stone. Its pictures
came to life in my mind, parsed into nouns and danced
through grammar to the music of verbs. By the time I was
four it had taught me to read. Not through my family but
through these volumes language became a part of me,
the book of the world opened to me and I myself opened
to the world as I might otherwise never have done.
As a physician and psychoanalyst, I have had
many teachers, but the World Book was my ﬁrst, the one
that taught me how to learn. Today I help others through
their own, similar transitions, from alienation to belong-
ing in the world, from chaos to conversance. Often, like
the World Book, my comradeship is silent. And, like the
World Book, I try to be available with images and words
for the experiences that have silenced those who seek
my help. I must work to grasp their feelings; I often fail
(the book of my soul resists opening), but I am grateful
for the chance to try.
David Mann teaches at Harvard Medical School and
practices privately in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

If in our earliest development we have been able to transfer our
interest and love from our mother to other people and other
sources of gratiﬁcation, then, and only then, are we able in
later life to derive enjoyment from other sources. This enables
us to compensate for a failure or a disappointment in connec-
tion with one person by establishing a friendly relationship to
others, and to accept substitutes for things we have been un-
able to obtain or to keep. If frustrated greed, resentment, and
hatred within us do not disturb the relation to the outer world,
there are innumerable ways of taking in beauty, goodness, and
love from without. By doing this we continuously add to our
happy memories and gradually build up a store of values by
which we gain a security that cannot easily be shaken, and
contentment which prevents bitterness of feeling. . . . Then we
are actually capable of accepting love and goodness from oth-
ers and of giving love to others; and again receiving more in re-
turn. In other words, the essential capacity for “give and take”
has been developed in us in a way that ensures our own con-
tentment, and contributes to the pleasure, comfort, or happi-
ness of other people.
In conclusion, a good relation to ourselves is a condition
of love, tolerance, and wisdom towards others. This good rela-
tion to ourselves has, as I have endeavored to show, developed
in part from a friendly, loving, and understanding attitude
towards other people, namely those who meant much to us in
the past, and our relationship to whom has become part of our
minds and personalities. If we have become able, deep in our un-
conscious minds, to clear our feelings to some extent towards
our parents of grievances, and have forgiven them for the frus-
trations we had to bear, then we can be at peace with ourselves
and are able to love others in the true sense of the word.
—Melanie Klein, “Love, Guilt, and Reparation”

THE SILVER PIN
Susan Rubin Suleiman

For a long time, I thought of it as a precious thing: a
ﬂower pin, long and slender, the sculpted leaves spread-
ing on both sides of the stylized petals, with two sym-
metrically placed pearls in the middle. My mother wore
it on the collar of her black dress in the photos we posed
for before we left Hungary. It was in the spring of 1949,
a few months before we crossed the border into Czecho-
slovakia. I still recall the session with the fancy pho-
tographer, who came to our house and had me leaning
against doorposts in casual, girlish poses (I was nine
years old). He also took more formal pictures of my
parents and me, including the one of my mother in her
black dress, sitting at a table with her arms resting on
an open book. Her left hand, very white and smooth,
stands out against the black of her sleeves. Her head is
slightly tilted, and around her mouth there plays a
slight, sweet smile. She looks kind and beautiful, her
eyes shining, her dark hair a halo—an elegant, still
young woman of leisure. One would hardly believe,
looking at her manicured hands, that a few years earlier
she had been working as a maid in Budapest, hiding
from the Nazis with false papers. My father and I had
been there, too.
On the back of the photo, which I now hold in my
hand, its edges slightly frayed, is an inscription in ﬂow-
ing black ink: Sok szeretettel, Lilly—with much love,
Lilly. She had sent this photo to her mother, my grand-
mother Rézi nagymama, who had left Hungary the pre-
vious year with my uncle Lester, her eldest son. They
were allowed to take the train, no need to walk across
the border—that was before the Communist regime in
Hungary cracked down on emigration. Rézi was in New
York City, where we eventually joined her. Her youngest
son, my American uncle Nick, who was doing well in the
186
Susan Rubin Suleiman

shoe business, had set her up in a one-bedroom apart-
ment on York Avenue, not far from the mayor’s mansion,
in a tall brick box that was the latest thing in those
years, with doorman and elevators, and air conditioners
visible in all the windows as you looked up at the blank
facade. It was in her apartment that I was introduced to
the wonders of television—we watched Molly Goldberg
and Milton Berle religiously, and Dragnet, too (“Just
the facts, Ma’am”). How strange America was, and how
green I felt!
Curiously, I have no memory of my mother ever
wearing that pin after we came to the United States. She
held on to it, that’s certain—I have it in front of me right
now, on the desk next to the photo, and keep glancing
at it as I write: the pearls are slightly yellowed, and if I
look closely I see many imperfections on their surface.
The sculpted leaves, too, show signs of decrepitude, dot-
ted with small gaping holes that were once ﬁlled in with
glittery stones—“not diamonds,” the jeweler told me re-
cently when I took it to him for his opinion. The holes
look almost as if they were there on purpose, as if the
designer had wanted to alternate empty spaces with
filled-in ones. It’s an old pin, graceful in shape and
commercially worthless. “Enjoy it, it’s pretty,” the jew-
eler said.
So why didn’t she wear it? Was this modest relic of
postwar Budapest unworthy in her eyes? (I think my
father bought it for her shortly before the photography
session, as a sign of prosperity and survival). Or was it
perhaps associated with a country, and a city, that she
had no desire to remember? She had lost most of her ex-
tended family in 1944, deported with the help of the
Hungarian government—she never spoke about those
uncles and aunts and cousins, and I have no memories
The Silver Pin
187

of them since almost all of them lived in the provinces,
far from Budapest; but when I was writing my book
Budapest Diary, I made a pilgrimage to the city where
she was born, where some of the family had lived. She
spent her summer vacations there as a child. I can’t
even begin to imagine what it felt like for her to learn, at
war’s end, that all those people were dead.
Some immigrants retain their ties to the old coun-
try. I know Hungarian Jews in Boston who still refer to
Budapest as “home,” decades after they just barely es-
caped being shot into the Danube by Hungarian Nazis—
that was quite the sport in the fall of 1944. Some left
the country soon after the war, like us; others waited
until 1956, ﬂeeing when the borders became temporar-
ily crossable after the failed revolution. They all started
going back for visits in the 1960s and 1970s, when
“goulash Communism” made life in Hungary quite pleas-
ant again, especially for Hungarians with American pass-
ports and dollars. My uncle Lester returned to Budapest
every summer for more than twenty years, right up to
his death. Communism or no, the Gerbeaud pastry shop
on Vörösmarty Square still served the best sour cherry
strudels, and you could dine outdoors on chicken pa-
prikash with nockerli at the Duna Corso restaurant on
the bank of the Danube, late into the night. Not to men-
tion music and theater, the best in the world, according
to him.
My mother had no truck with such nostalgia. She
never went back to Budapest and reminisced about her
youth in that great European capital only if I pushed her
hard, with photos spread out before us. “The Gellért
baths, I went there often when I was courting,” or: “Do
you remember our Sunday hikes in Buda, when you
were little? You loved the cog railway.” Generally, she
sought advancement and novelty, not memories. She
had a talent for small talk with strangers, and within a
few weeks after we arrived in New York she had estab-
lished several outposts of acquaintances in the neigh-
188
Susan Rubin Suleiman

borhood. I especially recall the children’s clothing shop
on 86th Street near York Avenue, where she would go to
chat with the owners in a mixture of German, Hungar-
ian, and broken English as she looked for outﬁts for my
baby sister. She didn’t hesitate to ask them for a dis-
count, given our status as new immigrants. Often I felt
embarrassed when I went with her, especially when she
pushed me forward to translate for her or when she
started telling people she had just met about her most
intimate concerns: her worries about money, her anxi-
ety about our future, her doubts about my hair! (“You
must do something about your hair,” the refrain of my
adolescence!). It was around that time that I began to
feel she and I had nothing in common.
It occurs to me that maybe she did wear the pin in
America, and it is I who have blocked it from memory.
Was I ashamed of her for not being American? Was the
pin, which I had thought splendid and precious in Buda-
pest, now merely a reminder of foreignness?
After the ﬁrst two years of struggle in New York, we
moved to Chicago, where I went to high school—another
displacement, another round of feeling like an outsider.
For a short while, I had an intense friendship with a girl
I thought of as the perfect American. She lived in a large
frame house on the North Side, with her parents and a
sister and brother—he was older, already in college, but
came home for the holidays. At Christmas, they put a
big tree in the middle of their living room and went car-
oling in the snow. I don’t remember what her mother
looked like, but I recall wishing my mother were more
like her—she never yelled, never nagged her daughter
about her appearance. She was calm, not excitable, and
embarrassingly familiar with strangers. After a few weeks,
my friend and I drifted apart, or maybe she snubbed me.
Today, I recall only the yearning I felt to be like her, to
have a family like hers.
Looking back on this now, I realize how desperate
I was to be an “insider,” not different, just like other
The Silver Pin
189

Americans. And how ashamed I must have been of my
immigrant mother, who never learned to speak English
properly and never learned to speak calmly. But the
drive for assimilation came from her as well: in a curi-
ous way, I was fulﬁlling her desire by wanting to have
little to do with her. Success in school was my escape,
my chance to leave her and foreignness behind. I was of-
fered a scholarship to Barnard College in New York, and
jumped at it. My mother was happy, too, knowing I was
in a fancy school. Sometimes a new acquaintance would
notice an accent and ask me about it, but most people I
met in college thought of me as a girl from Chicago. I had
a little black dress for parties, and my hair was ﬁnally
in shape.
Back in Chicago, my father gradually made his
way to a job he was proud of, as the executive director
of a Hebrew day school. In the summer before my se-
nior year, ten years after we had left Budapest, he died of
a heart attack at the age of forty-nine. It took me a long
time to mourn for him, but that is another story. We gave
up our apartment in Chicago and sold its meager fur-
nishings. My mother and my little sister, who was nine-
years-old, lived for a year in New York, then moved to
Miami Beach to be near my uncles and aunt. Meanwhile,
I spent a year in Paris after college (generously ﬁnanced
by Uncle Nick), then moved to Cambridge, Massachu-
setts, to start graduate school at Harvard. Another dis-
placement, another promotion.
I visited my mother once or twice a year: she
treated me like a dignitary, parading me to family and
friends. Rarely did a visit end without some outburst on
my part. I had no patience with her; it was clear that we
would never understand each other. I had adored her as
a child in Budapest, but that time was very far away. A
few years later, after I got married and became a mother,
too, there were no more outbursts; the gap between us,
however, persisted.
190
Susan Rubin Suleiman

It makes me feel sad and ashamed—with a differ-
ent shame, not the shame I felt as a teenager—to real-
ize how little I valued her. But there is anger there, too.
If I was incapable of feeling love for her—or of express-
ing love, which in a sense is the same thing—was it not
her fault as well as mine? I tell myself that she was tact-
less, that she spoke too loudly, that she was interested
only in the superﬁcial signs of success.
Yet, others did love her. After almost twenty years
of widowhood she married again, and her new hus-
band doted on her. He was a retired dentist, Hungarian-
Romanian, a widower—they got along well together, a
real couple. When she became ill a few years later, he
took care of her; when she died in 1988, aged almost
eighty, he mourned her as if they had been together a
lifetime. After her death, we kept hearing from people
who had known her—she had been the belle of Lincoln
Road, one old lady told us. She was fun to be with; she
had a thousand friends.
My sister and I often talk about her now: she was
impossible, yes, but she was brave and energetic, too,
and she had gone through a lot.
We inherited her photos and her few pieces of jew-
elry. I got the old photos from Hungary, many with in-
scriptions on the back. Among them was the picture of
her wearing the silver pin, so elegant and beautiful. The
pin also came to me, along with a delicate gold orchid
pin she had acquired in America. I put that one in my
jewelry box; the silver pin disappeared into a jumble of
old trinkets in a drawer: an antique belt buckle given to
me by a French friend many years ago, broken or un-
matched earrings, watches that no longer ran. Deval-
ued, like my mother in America? Yes, but not thrown
out—lying dormant.
The gold orchid, when I wear it, often reminds me
of my mother; but it is simply a pretty object, carrying
no strong emotion. The silver pin evokes bruises and
ambivalence, emotional knots difﬁcult to untangle. When
The Silver Pin
191

I dug it out of the drawer, it was nearly black with grime.
I tried dipping it in jewelry cleaner, but it still remained
dull and dark, so I took to it with silver polish and man-
aged to get it to shine. It’s quite pretty, as the jeweler
said. I pinned it on a black jacket I wore a few weeks ago.
I haven’t worn it since then, and don’t know when I will
again. But it has moved to the jewelry box on top of my
dresser—I suppose that’s progress, of a sort.
Susan Rubin Suleiman is C. Douglas Dillon 
Professor of the Civilization of France and Professor of
Comparative Literature at Harvard University.
192
Susan Rubin Suleiman

Objects of Mourning
and Memory

Superman, by deﬁnition the character whom nothing can im-
pede, ﬁnds himself in the worrisome narrative situation of being
a hero without an adversary and therefore without the possibil-
ity of any development. A further difﬁculty arises because his
public, for precise psychological reasons, cannot keep together
the various moments of a narrative process over the space of
several days. Each story concludes within the limits of a few
pages; or rather, every weekly edition is composed of two or
three complete stories in which a particular narrative episode
is presented, developed, and resolved. Aesthetically and com-
mercially deprived of the possibility of narrative development,
Superman gives serious problems to his script writers. . . .
There is nothing left to do except to put Superman to the
test of several obstacles which are intriguing because they are
unforeseen but which are, however, surmountable by the
hero. . . . But this resolves nothing. In fact, the obstacle once
conquered (and within the space allotted by commercial re-
quirements), Superman has still accomplished something. Con-
sequently, the character has made a gesture which is inscribed
in his past and weighs on his future. He has taken a step towards
death, he has gotten older, if only by an hour; his storehouse
of personal experiences has irreversibly enlarged. To act, then,
for Superman, as for any other character (or for each of us),
means to “consume” himself.
—Umberto Eco, “The Myth of Superman”

DEATH-DEFYING SUPERHEROES
Henry Jenkins

I bought the comics on the way to the hospice. They
were selected hastily and even then, I felt guilty about
the time it took. I was looking for something banal, fa-
miliar, and comforting at a time when my world was
turning upside down. I read them intermittently as my
family sat on deathwatch, my experience of the stories
becoming interwoven with our common memories and
the process of letting go of my mother. Retreating from
the emotional drama that surrounded me, I found my-
self staring into the panic-stricken eyes of a young Bruce
Wayne, kneeling over the newly murdered bodies of his
parents. I had visited that moment many times before,
but this time, our common plight touched me deeply.
I am hardly the ﬁrst to draw such connections. In
his essay, “The Myth of Superman,” Umberto Eco de-
scribes the monstrous quality of the superhero who is
not “consumed” by time, never grows older, but always
cycles through the same kinds of experiences, never
moving any closer to death. Eco approaches this ques-
tion formally, describing how the iterative structure of
comics creates its own kind of temporality, which he
contrasts with the always already completed action of
myth or the unique events of the novelistic: “He pos-
sesses the characteristics of timeless myth, but is ac-
cepted only because his activities take place in our
human and everyday world of time.”1 The fan boy in me
wants to point out all of the exceptions and qualiﬁca-
tions to Eco’s claim, starting with the fact that a whole
generation of revisionist writers has sought to reintro-
duce death and aging into the superhero universe. The
images of aging Batman and Superman duking it out in
Frank Miller’s Dark Knight Return come immediately to
mind, but most of these books came after Eco’s essay
was published and they might well have been respond-
196
Henry Jenkins

ing to his argument. Regardless, Eco misunderstands
that for serious comics readers, the same events may
unfold again and again, but there is something distinc-
tive about each issue. Mastering those distinctions is
part of what separates fans from more casual readers.
From time to time, the franchises build up such complex
histories that they need catastrophic events—such as
the Crisis of Inﬁnite Earths—to wipe the slate clean again
and allow a fresh start. Yet, such reservations aside,
Eco’s formal analysis hit on a core psychological truth.
One could understand the reading of comics as
entering into a psychological space that both denies death
and encourages a nostalgic return to origins. Most of
our stereotypes about comics fans start from the idea of
arrested development—that is, the idea that the fans
have somehow sought to pull themselves out of life pro-
cesses and to enjoy the same kind of timeless existence
as the guys and gals in tights. I want to suggest the op-
posite, that in their own way, both as texts and as arti-
facts, comics become reﬂective objects that can help us
think about our own irreversible ﬂow toward death. In
short, this is an essay about what it means to consume
and be consumed by superheroes.
At night, I am frequently so tired that I fall asleep
too fast if I try to read prose. I ﬁnd that I can maintain
consciousness, however blurry my perceptions, long
enough to make it through an issue of a comic. I ﬁnd
something energizing in the shift between text and images
and in the larger-than-life stories so many comics tell.
Comics are the site of enormous diversity, innovation,
and experimentation, but nowhere else in popular cul-
ture can you ﬁnd the same degree of continuity. Super-
man, Batman, Wonder Woman, and Captain America
have been in, more or less, continuous publication since
Death-Defying Superheroes
197

the 1930s or early 1940s—always ﬁghting for truth, jus-
tice, and the American way, despite generations of read-
ers and writers growing up, growing old, and yes, dying
in their company. There have been enormous variations
in how these characters have been interpreted across
generations. There have been dramatic shifts in styles,
successive waves of revisionism, various stabs at rele-
vance or topicality. Yet, you can go away for decades on
end, ﬁnd your way back to a DC comic, and get reintro-
duced to the protagonists more or less where you left
them. It is often this hope—of rekindling something we
once felt—which draws us aging comic fans back to
some of these titles. It is almost as if we would lose
something important within ourselves if watching Bat-
man stalk across a darkened alley or Spiderman swing
from building to building no longer made our hearts
beat a little faster. Indeed, when I think of my own his-
tory with comics, so much of what I remember are iter-
ative events, the routine patterns of my heroes rather
than speciﬁc storylines.
My earliest memories of comics bring me back to
my mother. When, as a fourth or ﬁfth grader, I would
stay in bed with a fever, my mother would go to the local
druggist in search of Coca-Cola syrup, which according
to Southern folklore, was supposed to have remarkable
curative powers. In that era, before specialty shops of-
fered reliable subscriptions, she would return carrying
an armload of comics, selected from a large spinning
rack at the center of the store. She brought more or less
what she could ﬁnd, so sometimes she would return with
a selection of kids’ comics (Baby Huey, Donald Duck, or
perhaps Archie), other times with Classic Illustrated, and
still other times with DC superheroes. I came to associate
comics with the sound of my mother’s voice singing me
to sleep or her hands feeling my forehead. And I suspect
that’s why I return to them now at moments of stress.
It is hard to remember when superheroes ﬁrst en-
tered my life. I suspect it must have been 1966, the year
198
Henry Jenkins

that Batman ﬁrst appeared on television. I was seven or
eight. The series rapidly became an obsession among
the neighborhood kids. One of my aunts had given me a
recording of the theme music, which my playmates and
I played at full volume, bouncing up and down on the
bed, bifﬁng and powing each other, and tumbling back-
ward into the pillows. My mother had given me an old
leotard, sewed a cape and cowl, and cut me a batarang
out of plywood. We didn’t always understand what we
saw. Once we heard an announcement for a forthcom-
ing appearance of King Tut and thought the announcer
had said King Duck, and so we spent a week battling it
out in the backyard with web-footed foes, before discov-
ering that there was this Ancient Egyptian guy. Who
knew? My father would peer out from behind his news-
paper, expressing mock horror to have discovered that
Batman and Robin had died that very day—frozen to
death in a giant snow cone or in some other death trap.
And every time, I would fall for his joke, bursting into
tears, since I could never make up my mind where Bat-
man stood in relation to the dividing line between fan-
tasy and reality.
Some of the boys in the neighborhood formed a
superhero club. I remember swearing an oath of loyalty
over a stack of comics in my tree house. We each chose
the persona of one of the members of DC’s Justice
League. The guy who lived across the street was unnat-
urally big and strong for his age and was quickly cast as
Superman. The kid next door was small, wiry, and fast
on his feet and he became the Flash. I had tired of Bat-
man by this point and aligned myself with the Green
Lantern for reasons long forgotten. We each spent our
weekly allowance on comics and would pass them
around. I have reread some of the stories of the era, only
to be disappointed. We ﬂeshed out the superhero per-
sonalities through our play and most of what I recall so
fondly wasn’t to be found on the printed page.
Death-Defying Superheroes
199

Most of those kids have disappeared from my life
and rarely enter my thoughts. Recently, one of them
tracked me down on the Internet. When we got together,
we talked in big breathless gulps about boyhood days
and then suddenly, silence fell upon us. We looked at
each other blankly as if we were suddenly confronting
not the boys we were but the middle-age men we had be-
come, and we ended the evening early. Neither of us has
called the other since.
As I sit down to write this, I am haunted by a curi-
ous memory—one of my few memories that centers on
a unique event rather than a pattern of repeated expe-
riences. It is early summer and I am sprawled out on the
ﬂoor of my family’s cabin in the North Georgia Moun-
tains coloring a picture of Batman as my mother watches
television across the room. I have spent most of the day
thrashing about in the water pretending to be Aquaman
and am now awaiting bed, when a news report inter-
rupts the show my mother is watching to tell us that
Robert F. Kennedy has been shot. Why are my memories
of my mother’s tears over Bobby Kennedy’s death so
ﬁrmly linked to my memories of superhero coloring
books? Is it because at such a moment—which would
have come when I was in sixth grade—I suddenly un-
derstood the line that separated the plots of the campy
television series from the harsh realities of adult life?
What had it meant to me to see my mother crying and
not know how to comfort her?
You could say that what drew me to comics the
week my mother died was nostalgia—which can be de-
scribed as a desperate hunger to return to a time and
place that never really existed, a utopian fantasy through
which our current longings get mapped onto the past.
Comics were comfort food, like the Southern cooked
vegetables my mother used to ﬁx for me when I came
home for holidays. Yet, these comics offered me little
comfort. I hurt every place my mother had ever touched
me and found myself unable to separate out the comics
200
Henry Jenkins

from the memories they evoked. If comics brought me
back to boyhood, then they brought me closer to a period
in my life when my mother’s love had been the most
powerful force in my life.
I was surprised that I didn’t stop reading comics
while my mother was dying, but as an adult I had been
reading comics every week for years. I returned to comics
sometime in my mid-thirties—searching for something
I couldn’t name at the time. A few years later, when I was
diagnosed with gout, I found myself drawn even more
passionately back into the world of the Flash and the
Green Lantern. A growing recognition of my own mor-
tality drew me into the death-defying world of the super-
heroes, who, unlike me, never grew older and never had
bodies that ached. For me, the comics work as a reverse
portrait of Dorian Gray: They remain the same while my
body ages and decays. As such, they help me to reﬂect
on the differences between who I am now and who I was
when I ﬁrst read them.
I am telling too simple a story because as an adult,
comics kept coming in and out of my life. There were
various attempts to get my own son engaged with comics,
all doomed to failure; or the way the release of the Bat-
man ﬁlms rekindled my passion for that character; or
my periodic raids on comic shops to examine some title
that a student brought to my attention. Although there
are huge gaps in my knowledge of any given character,
and whole comic series that came and went without my
knowledge, I never really left comics. However, it took
me a while to admit that I wasn’t just wandering into
comics shops now and again to see what was new, but
that I was going there every week and coming away with
bags full. As an adult, it took me a while to come out as
a comics fan.
Even though my own work on fan culture had de-
bunked many stereotypes about science ﬁction fans,
there was a side of me that still believed clichés about
middle-age comic book readers. If I have an origin story
Death-Defying Superheroes
201

for my passion for superheroes, I also have an origin
story for my fear of becoming a comics fan. It begins in
Tom’s smelly basement when I was in seventh grade and
had decided I was too old for comics and ready to move
on to more mature reading matter, like Mad or Famous
Monsters of Filmland. Tom was a somewhat pudgy kid
who lived down the street from my grandmother and we
became friends initially out of geographic accident and
emotional necessity; his house was a place to go when I
wanted to escape being cooped up with someone who
was constantly complaining about her aging and ailing
body. Tom had just moved to Atlanta from Michigan. At
a time when all of my other friends were committed to
DC, Tom read almost exclusively Marvel. We would sit
in his basement and rummage through a huge mound
of yellowing comics, reading late into the night by ﬂash-
light. By then, reading comics was something you did to
escape from the controlling gaze of moms. Tom’s two
cocker spaniels snorted somewhere in the dark void
around us. Tom’s basement smelt of dog breath, [fos-
silized] poop, and mildew—things that make you faintly
uncomfortable when you are a boy but which grow in
your memory with each passing year. As an adult, I am
uncomfortable with the degree to which boys who held
onto their comics into adulthood bore a stigma of ar-
rested development. It was as if we had never left the
basement or the tree house, still hanging out with the
boys, still imagining what it would be like to be an adult,
and that basement-like atmosphere pervades most of
the dark, subterranean, and clubhouse-like shops where
comics are most often sold.
Tom was perhaps the ﬁrst comics collector I knew.
I would meet many others, each waging their own cam-
paign against death and decay, protecting their trea-
sures with plastic bags, acid-proof cardboard backing,
and steel boxes. Consider the case of two undergradu-
ate friends who were both comics collectors, both guilt-
ridden Catholics and both named Mark. One of the
202
Henry Jenkins

Marks was a square-jawed fellow who wanted to be Clark
Kent. He wasn’t just dull, he was desperately dull. For
him, memorizing as many facts as he could from Super-
hero concordances was one of the ways he could bring
his corner of the galaxy more fully under his control.
Years later, when I began to seriously collect comics, my
wife bought me some reference books at a used book
sale. When we examined them closely, we discovered
Mark’s name scrawled on the inside front cover. I’m not
sure what surprised me the most, that Mark had ﬁnally
gotten rid of those books or that my interest in comics
had grown to the point where I saw value in owning
these books in the ﬁrst place. The second Mark took me
to his apartment and showed me an entire room full of
steel boxes, containing thousands of individually bagged
comics and creeped me out with a speech about how his
comics would be safe and secure long after he was dead.
Years later, I visited him in Brooklyn and sure enough,
he still had all of those boxes of comics and many more.
By that time, however, I wanted nothing more than to sit
up all night asking him for recommendations. The mau-
soleum had become a library.
For all of that, collecting comics wasn’t terribly dif-
ferent from collecting any other kind of book. But there
is a key difference. Unlike, say, leather-bound books,
comics were never made to last. They were printed on
cheap paper with bad ink, and the assumption was that
they would be read and discarded. But no one ever
thought that people would still be reading them decades
later any more than one imagined holding on to old
newspapers. Superheroes may be invincible, but comics
rot. What makes old comics valuable for collectors is
that so many of them have been destroyed. Every mom
who threw away her son’s comics increased the fortunes
of those who were lucky enough to hold on to theirs.
Many fans spend their entire life and much of their in-
come trying to recover the issues they had once dis-
carded so casually. And so, fans become preoccupied
Death-Defying Superheroes
203

with the challenges of preserving their collections, with
forestalling their ultimate destruction.
To her credit, my mother never threw away my
comics. She took them up to the lake house and left
them in a drawer. Over the years, they were literally read
to death. Young visitors would paw through them with
peanut butter-covered ﬁngers. The staples came un-
done and pages would come off when you tried to read
them one last time. The humidity made the pages more
and more waterlogged and mildewed. The sun bleached
the lurid covers as they were left for too long lying on
the window ledge. And in the end, not a single one of the
superhero books made it past my adolescent years. The
Classic Illustrateds were more expensive than the rest—
and came with the aura of high culture—so mom treated
them as sacred and eternal, not unlike the way she dealt
with National Geographic magazines. They are the only
comics from my childhood that I still possess. I still re-
call how many Jack Kirby books got ripped up when a
Boy Scout troop was rained-in for one weekend at our
cabin, but I still loan out my comics to my students
rather than worry about keeping them in pristine con-
dition. I have refused to take that last step into fan boy
culture. For the moment, I am more interested in read-
ing and sharing comics than in keeping them out of
harm’s way. I know nothing lasts forever; you are better
off really enjoying the things you love while you can.
These are some of the thoughts that passed through
my head as I sat on my deathwatch. I put aside Batman,
not ready to face young Bruce’s angst, and turned instead
to Spiderman, only to ﬁnd a comic storyline that dealt
with the memories stirred up by the anniversary of Uncle
Ben’s death. Eco is right that superheroes don’t move
closer to death. In fact, they move further away from it
with their origins often bound with trauma and loss. Yet,
death deﬁnes the cycles of their lives. Almost all of the
comics I brought to the hospice dealt—at least in part—
with childhood trauma and loss. If comics provide youth-
204
Henry Jenkins

ful fantasies of empowerment and autonomy, they do so
by severing the ties between the superheroes and their
parents. Batman takes shape in Bruce Wayne’s mind as
he vows vengeance over his parents’ tombstones. Super-
man’s parents send him away from a dying planet. Peter
Parker, not yet aware that with great power comes great
responsibility, is too self-centered to stop a crook, al-
lowing him to escape and kill his Uncle Ben. What sep-
arates the villains from the heroes isn’t the experience
of loss, but what they did after that loss, how it shaped
their sense of themselves and their place in the world.
Some were strengthened by loss, others deformed.
Most of the literature of childhood has emotional
violence at its heart. Through ﬁction, we expose children
to the real life forces we seek to shelter them from, al-
most inevitably the death of or separation from one’s
parents. In comics, these events do not occur one time,
but crop up again and again; these images of death and
mourning deﬁne characters’ identities. In the months
that followed my mother’s death, I found myself return-
ing, almost involuntarily, to memories of her ﬁnal days,
the way that a tongue seeks out and presses against a
loose tooth just to see if it still hurts. I came away with
a new understanding of why the superheroes hold onto
their grief; they can draw upon it as a source of strength.
At one point in my life, I read those stories to learn what
it was like to have the power and autonomy of adult-
hood. Now, I read them to see how to confront death and
still come out the other side. They helped me realize the
common human experience of loss and recovery.
The comics of our childhood are impossible to re-
cover. Even if you hold on to your comics, the stories on
the page are not the same ones you remember, you ﬁnd
something new and different each time you come back.
In my case, the death-defying superheroes helped me
ﬁnd a way to hold on to my mother while letting go.
Death-Defying Superheroes
205

Henry Jenkins is Director of the Comparative Media
Studies Program at MIT.
206
Henry Jenkins

Death-Defying Superheroes
207

Through photographs, each family constructs a portrait-
chronicle of itself—a portable kit of images that bears witness
to its connectedness. It hardly matters what activities are pho-
tographed so long as photographs get taken and are cherished.
Photography becomes a rite of family life just when, in the in-
dustrializing countries of Europe and America, the very insti-
tution of the family starts undergoing radical surgery. . . .
Photography came along to memorialize, to restate symboli-
cally, the imperiled continuity and vanishing extendedness of
family life. Those ghostly traces, photographs, supply the token
presence of the dispersed relatives. A family’s photograph al-
bum is generally about the extended family—and, often, is all
that remains of it. . . .
The force of a photograph is that it keeps open to
scrutiny instants which the normal ﬂow of time immediately
replaces.
—Susan Sontag, On Photography

THE SX-70 INSTANT CAMERA
Stefan Helmreich

The Polaroid SX-70 camera, introduced during the
1970s, was a folding chrome-and-leather single-lens
reﬂex camera that looked like a cross between a tiny,
trapezoidal accordion and a collapsible robot toy. It de-
livered instant color photos, framed in white plastic
borders, in just under 1.5 seconds. Once outside the
camera, in the light, the pictures took about a minute to
develop fully, ripening from an initial turquoise haze
into a creamy colorful lucidity, a process one could
watch through the transparent Mylar membrane cover-
ing the swirl of chemicals that would constitute the
photograph. In the time it took for SX-70 pictures to
materialize, experimentally inclined people like myself
would sometimes smudge and smear the colors beneath
the Mylar—an activity more famously engaged in by the
artist Lucas Samaras, who took many Polaroid self-
portraits and then mutated his likeness into fantastic
shapes.
My grandfather, Howard G. Rogers, a chemist with
only a year of college, at Harvard, during the Depression,
invented some of the pliable molecules inside Polaroid’s
instant color ﬁlm. His key creation was a molecule
called a dye-developer, a compound that fused image
dyes to photographic developers, allowing instant color
ﬁlm, in effect, to embed its own darkroom chemicals.
His dye-developer molecules sat in limbo at the bottom
of the photo frame of each unexposed Polaroid photo
card and, with the snap of the SX-70 shutter, would be
squeezed up into the picture plane by rollers inside
the maw of the camera. As pictures emerged from the
SX-70’s tight mechanical jaws, they made a wonderfully
distinctive noise, something like: Zt-ZzzzT. For some, the
one-minute wait that followed was too much; when the
ﬁlm exited the camera, these impatient folk would wave
210
Stefan Helmreich

the photo in the air to hurry along its development (This
gesture—which my grandfather informed me was com-
pletely useless—was commemorated in the 2003 hit
song “Hey Ya” by the rap duo Outkast, in which one line
enjoins people on a dance ﬂoor to “Shake it like a Po-
laroid picture”). Growing up, I was always curious about
how SX-70 ﬁlm worked, and from time to time, my
grandfather would narrate me into the microscopic, mil-
lisecond world within the layers of a Polaroid picture.
The problem before my grandfather had been this:
to get three color dyes—cyan, magenta, and yellow—to
express the complementary colors to which they corre-
sponded: red, green, and blue. A primary requirement
was that different dyes not bleed into each other. An-
other was that variable rates of dye formation be con-
trolled. Within the time that an instant color photo
came into being, events had to unfold in a tightly com-
pressed time sequence. The problem required under-
standing events on extremely small spatial and temporal
scales.
My grandfather’s idea was to fuse dyes and devel-
opers into one megamolecule. Effectively joining these
ingredients would allow the elements of photography to
be squashed into a compact space—and, more, would
enable the instantaneity of instant photography itself.
This scheme, however, went against a prevailing wisdom
that believed it risky to put dyes and developers into close
proximity. But Edward Land, my grandfather’s boss, was
committed to the notion that when confronted with an
obstacle, one should consider doing the opposite of the
expected.1 My grandfather took this wisdom to heart. In
his Patent #2,983,606, granted on May 9, 1961, dye de-
velopers are described as key components of “novel pro-
cesses for forming monochromatic as well as multicolor
The SX-70 Instant Camera
211

pictures by transfer and reversal practices wherein a
single reagent is utilized for the formation of a negative
image as well as a positive image of said negative.”2
Reﬂecting on his invention later in his life, my
grandfather said, “When an idea like this comes, that
you’re sure is good, it spreads throughout your body. I
felt intoxicated, but more ‘all there’ than usual—almost
as if I were a giant.”3 This language triggers memories of
my grandfather chatting with me over the dinner table,
shrinking me down to the size of an atom, so that I could
rub shoulders with molecules and then zoom back out
to look at a family photo taken with the SX-70.
All of our family pictures were taken with Polaroid
ﬁlm. In-laws sometimes grumbled that the colors were
not as vivid as they might be, which always sent my
grandfather into a distracted accounting, storing up
complaint and commentary for his next visit to the lab.
Ours was a kin group wed not just to family photos, but
also to a family photo technology. It was incumbent upon
us to be loyal to my grandfather’s attempts to get his col-
ors right, which meant that we also had to be dedicated
to Polaroid products. In a way, the SX-70—a cryptic ab-
breviation of “special experiment seventy,” a code name
Polaroid used for the realization of absolute one-step
photography—made of our family an experimental lab-
oratory. And while my grandfather clearly enjoyed his
time with his ﬁve children and ﬁve grandchildren, par-
ticularly at the lakeside cabin he and my grandmother
purchased in Maine with Polacolor proﬁts, he often
seemed preoccupied. Years later, he reﬂected in print on
preoccupation, distraction, and inspiration:
I became more and more impressed with the power
of the subconscious. . . . If you put good input into
your subconscious, that is, carefully observed re-
sults and carefully thought-out analyses, and let
some good hard facts into your subconsciousness,
along with the need to know the answers to some
212
Stefan Helmreich

problems or the need to invent the way out of some
difﬁculties, then sometimes further focusing and
work wasn’t as helpful as just a little time, or a
change of scene, or a stimulus of another sort
[which] would sometimes bring the answer.4
The family, was, I think, for him, “a stimulus of an-
other sort,” a technology for jostling his subconscious.
Elements of daily life at home became a playful experi-
ment—from his fascination with engineering tiny
poached eggs with fractionated yolks to his proclivity for
taking stereoscopic pictures of me and my cousins at
moments when we were embarked on some particularly
three-dimensional enterprise, such as learning to sail.
In other words, my grandfather’s work became part
of the family’s play. My mother—growing into an adult
in the psychedelic sixties—modulated my grandfather’s
fascination with color into her own stirrings of chemi-
cals in the paints she used in her watercolor paintings.
In the mid-1970s, I made birthday gifts for my grand-
father that made fun of the sciences of imaging. One
present, a favorite, described an imaginary invention
that I dubbed “the image inverter.” It turned images up-
side down so that one could see them the way the eye ac-
tually receives them. Another consisted of a manual for
a camera with no lens. Always ready for a laugh, and to
consider the unexpected, my grandfather found these
takes on his professional work hilarious and displayed
them prominently.
My cousins and I began smearing Polaroid pic-
tures at around the same time as Lucas Samaras. My
grandfather gave us advice on getting the best results
and was always eager to watch his invention unfastened
from its original aim. As we transformed family photos,
our extended family was itself in transformation. In the
1960s and 1970s, our parents’ generation had swerved
away from the middle-class Catholic-Protestant model
of my grandparents. I was born hours before my parents
The SX-70 Instant Camera
213

were married. One of my mother’s sisters sidestepped
marriage and Christianity altogether, moved into the
Maine woods with a back-to-the-land mountain man,
and joined him in raising their kids in the Jewish tradi-
tion. My grandfather greeted all these transformations
with equanimity. My grandmother grew into a Catholi-
cism that became ever more, well, catholic. The SX-70
pictures from this period reveal traditions morphing
and mutating.
Later in life, after retirement, my grandfather
would glide into occasional reveries about new inven-
tions he wished to realize. Sometimes, the oxygen he
took for his emphysema would intoxicate him, and he
would describe such things as edible dyes that, once
ingested, could accentuate color perception. In what
has become a piece of family folklore, Polaroid scientists
were once summoned to his bedside during one of these
rhapsodic episodes, to determine whether this now-
renowned chemist might be hatching new, counterintu-
itive, but perhaps effective ideas for color photography.
According to these corporate visitors, this was not the
case. But rather than seeing this story as one in which
my grandfather takes a detour away from himself, I view
it as revealing a reversed but true image of my grand-
father, much like the image that bounces off the interior
mirror of an SX-70 at the last moment before the expo-
sure of a photograph. I see my grandfather’s reveries
as an attempt to reverse engineer—with the aid of the
oxygen tank that he, after all, controlled—the feeling of
intoxication he associated with invention; maybe his
occasional ﬂights of fancy were a direct sounding of the
subconscious he found so intriguing. I like to think that
he was taking us on a tour of the kinds of worlds sited
within SX-70 ﬁlm, a domain in which the rules of reality
were understood at a higher degree of resolution, where
molecules caught up in the representation of famil-
iar people, places, and things revealed themselves at the
214
Stefan Helmreich

most microscopic level to be mirrors of our ever-changing
selves, developing and transforming.
Stefan Helmreich is Associate Professor in the
Anthropology Department at MIT.
The SX-70 Instant Camera
215

The old saying: “We bring our lares with us” has many varia-
tions. . . . The house is not experienced from day to day only, on
the thread of a narrative, or in the telling of our own story.
Through dreams, the various dwelling-places in our lives co-
penetrate and retain the treasures of former days.
And after we are in [a] new house, when memories of
other places we have lived in come back to us, we travel to the
land of Motionless Childhood, motionless the way all Immemo-
rial things are. We live ﬁxations, ﬁxations of happiness. We
comfort ourselves by reliving memories of protection. Some-
thing closed must retain our memories, while leaving them
their original value as images. Memories of the outside world
will never have the same tonality as those of home and, by re-
calling these memories, we add to our store of dreams; we are
never real historians, but always near poets, and our emotion
is perhaps nothing but an expression of a poetry that was lost.
—Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space: The Classic Look at
How We Experience Intimate Places

SALVAGED PHOTOGRAPHS
Glorianna Davenport

I stare at the ﬁrst photograph that I have pulled out of
a small cardboard box labeled “Glorianna to make
copies.” It is a picture of my father in his youth by a lake
with a dog. I never knew my father had a dog. Three
years ago, I promised my siblings that I would digitize a
large collection of memorabilia—images and videos. For
this, I recently added a scanner to my image-processing
setup at our cranberry farm. My promise still unful-
ﬁlled, guilt is balanced with the anticipation of new dis-
coveries. As I continue to muse, the image of my father
is transformed into bits.
The small cardboard box is ﬁlled with an unruly
group of most-wanted photographs selected by my sib-
lings as we painstakingly divided up family heirlooms
after selling my mother’s house in 1999. My mother did
not choose to be part of these ﬁnal decisions. She already
had her ﬁll of dealing with the remains of her family
heritage ten years earlier, when the house my grand-
parents had built in the 1930s—in which we had spent
our childhood summers, and into which my parents
moved after my grandparents passed away—was con-
sumed by a devastating ﬁre.
The reaction of survivors to the sudden and near
total loss of personally meaningful possessions can cre-
ate a sort of frenzy. In our family, my mother and all of
her children contributed to clearing and then to comb-
ing the site, carefully freeing larger and smaller artifacts
from the debris of our lost home. For the two months fol-
lowing the ﬁre, we each, at different times, searched the
charred remains for anything that might be recoverable
and threw the rest into a large dumpster.
When I arrived at the recovery scene, the smell of
wet char was overwhelming. My older sister and her
husband had turned a small space in the old library into
218
Glorianna Davenport

a conservation lab. This room was the least damaged by
the ﬁre; however, the water that poured through the
ﬂoorboards as the ﬁremen fought the ﬂames above had
ﬂooded the bookshelves and drawers, the boxes with let-
ters dating from the early 1800s forward, and almost a
century of family photographs. The image of my father
that I have just scanned is one of the few surviving frag-
ments of this twentieth-century collection.
The salvaging of paper artifacts requires a differ-
ent kind of patience from that required by larger objects
such as pianos, sofas, and china. With paper, the injury
caused by heat, water, and falling debris are soon aug-
mented by mildew if the paper is not properly dried. In
this ﬁre, the damaged pages numbered in the thousands;
conservation required each page to be separated and
dried before sorting into collection categories. That any
paper trail of our family history exists today reﬂects the
painstaking work of my older sister and brother-in-law.
The fascinations of our youth give shape to our
future passions. As I begin my efforts to digitize my
family’s history, I realize anew that this box holds not
only a collection of photographs but keys to many of my
later life decisions. Photographs led me to cameras, and
over the years the camera became an object I could
think with. I could think about light and shadow, about
composing the frame, and about what it meant to live in
a certain way, to make decisions at many levels, and to
document the world. I could think about the chemistry
and the mechanics of editing. I remember the brown
leather case of the Rolleiﬂex sitting on my mother’s bu-
reau. I can smell the chemicals that pervaded the photo
shop on Madison Avenue. I don’t know how old I was
when I ﬁrst looked into the lens and noticed the sight
and sound of the cuh-chunk-click made by the shutter
Salvaged Photographs
219

mechanism. The mystery of this mechanism continued
to fascinate me for many years.
Slowly I separate a few large square black-and-
white prints that have stuck together. Who is this strik-
ingly beautiful woman wearing a luscious lipstick and
bending over two young girls and a boy dressed in party
clothes and wearing paper party hats? The youngest
girl—possibly three—plays with beads. The older of the
two girls, perhaps ﬁve, holds the hand of an older boy in
a checked jacket and bow tie. Another boy stands in the
distance. Only the older girl looks toward the camera:
where are the others looking? What was the event? I
think my mother may have taken photographs for other
families; perhaps this photograph was not even taken in
our home.
Other pictures seem more familiar. A laughing child
is about to spray water across a familiar terrace; this is
clearly me. A woman bounces a laughing baby on her
knee; I easily identify my aunt, who later died of cancer
in our home. An image of my father on a sailboat, a pic-
ture of my youngest sister acting as Mary in a school
play—each image awakens memories and poses new
questions.
Reaching into the box once more, I pull out a nar-
row album of Polaroid portraits, its covers long since lost,
its pages formatted with cascading transparent envelopes
held together by a plastic binding. This album used to
sit on the piano in my grandparents’ living room. Most
of the portraits were taken by my grandfather. In a mo-
ment, I am back at the site of the ﬁre: the buckled ﬂoor-
boards, the drenched piano, the charred Polaroid
camera. And then just as quickly, the album becomes a
prism through which I see that house and its objects be-
fore anyone imagined there would be a ﬁre: the framed
documents dating back to the founding fathers, the
music chest, the way my grandfather hid modern elec-
tronic contraptions in two-hundred-year-old chests.
220
Glorianna Davenport

My mind returns to my grandfather and his Po-
laroid. By the time I was eight or nine, my grandfather
had become mentor to my technological bent. For years
it had been my grandfather’s practice to take portraits—
group shots of the family celebrating one of many sum-
mer birthdays, as well as individual portraits of each
grandchild year by year, usually taken out on the grass
“circle” in front of the house. My brother John sits next
to a large pumpkin in the circle; my younger sister
Sharon hugs a pumpkin and stares wistfully into space;
my sister Ann sits on a large rock in Maine; my sister
Susie is posed next to the sewing box she had won in a
sewing competition. What do these images tell of the un-
even, often difﬁcult roads that lay ahead for each of us?
I do not remember exactly when, but one summer I
discovered that the way to avoid being in the picture was
to take the picture. My grandfather, an electrical engineer
trained at MIT, loved gadgets and regularly purchased
and experimented with the latest Polaroid cameras. I
must have enticed him to let me borrow one. He seemed
to enjoy teaching me about the nature of the lens and
how best to frame a shot. However, he soon tired of my
using up the costly Polaroid ﬁlm packs for experiments
that did not yield images that he found meaningful, and
gave me my own 35 mm camera—a PONY IV—for my
birthday. With this, I was able to control depth of ﬁeld
with focal length and shutter speed and could experi-
ment more freely with composition and subject.
Several summers of intensive photographic activity
ensued. Since sending photographs away for factory
processing was expensive and did not allow maximum
control over the image, my grandfather decided to set up
a small darkroom in the bathroom across from his lab.
This experimental operation irked my grandmother
who—especially in the heat of the summer—could not
tolerate the smell of the chemicals that overran the
house. My grandfather prevailed: I spent the next two or
Salvaged Photographs
221

222
Glorianna Davenport
three summers avidly recording the world in black and
white, processing rolls of negatives, and exploring the
disciplines by which one selects and then controls the
printed image.
The editing function allows us to pick, choose, and
modify content as we examine each image for its evoca-
tive value. These early explorations served me well in
my adult career as I moved into ﬁlm and interactive
video, seeking a better understanding of how stories are
made and shared.
The process of recovering from the house ﬁre has
brought me in touch with old lessons: not all documents
are worth salvaging, but most are, and photographs are
particularly valuable to later generations of a family, al-
lowing them evidence to better reconstruct the tale of
their past.
I will no doubt digitize all the images that were
“most wanted,” but when it comes to printing and fram-
ing the “story,” I will be more selective. The editor in me,
picking through the debris after the ﬁre, is uniquely po-
sitioned. Having found the charred but no longer func-
tioning Polaroid camera, I could choose, if reluctantly,
to relegate it to the dumpster as I now can navigate
through its images, developed, digitized, and jostling for
position in some future album.
Glorianna Davenport is Principal Research Scientist
at the MIT Media Lab.

Salvaged Photographs
223

I raised to my lips a spoonful of the tea in which I had soaked
a morsel of the cake. No sooner had the warm liquid mixed with
the crumbs touched my palate than a shudder ran through me
and I stopped, intent upon the extraordinary thing that was hap-
pening to me. An exquisite pleasure had invaded my senses,
something isolated, detached, with no suggestion of its origin.
And at once the vicissitudes of life had become indifferent to
me, its disasters innocuous, its brevity illusory—this new sen-
sation having had on me the effect which love has of ﬁlling me
with a precious essence; or rather this essence was not in me
it was me. . . .
And suddenly the memory revealed itself. The taste was
that of the little piece of madeleine which on Sunday mornings
at Combray (because on those mornings I did not go out before
mass), when I went to say good morning to her in her bedroom,
my aunt Léonie used to give me, dipping it ﬁrst in her own cup
of tea or tisane. The sight of the little madeleine had recalled
nothing to my mind before I tasted it; perhaps because I had so
often seen such things in the meantime, without tasting them,
on the trays in pastry-cooks’ windows, that their image had
dissociated itself from those Combray days to take its place
among others more recent; perhaps because of those memo-
ries, so long abandoned and put out of mind, nothing now sur-
vived, everything was scattered; the shapes of things, including
that of the little scallop-shell of pastry, so richly sensual under
its severe, religious folds, were either obliterated or had been
so long dormant as to have lost the power of expansion which
would have allowed them to resume their place in my con-
sciousness. But when from a long-distant past nothing sub-
sists, after the people are dead, after the things are broken and
scattered, taste and smell alone, more fragile but more endur-
ing, more unsubstantial, more persistent, more faithful, remain
poised a long time, like souls, remembering, waiting, hoping,
amid the ruins of all the rest; and bear unﬂinchingly, in the tiny
and almost impalpable drop of their essence, the vast structure
of recollection.
—Marcel Proust, Remembrance of Things Past

THE ROLLING PIN
Susan Pollak

If I close my eyes, I can almost go back to my grand-
mother’s kitchen. The fragrance of pot roast permeates
the air, redolent with caramelized onions, potatoes, and
carrots. I can see the golden lemon sponge cake, made
with nearly a dozen eggs, just emerging from its worn
silver Bundt pan. And I can smell the cups of steaming
black tea with sugar. This was Grandma Tilly’s healing
elixir, which could soothe any pain and still the rivers of
my childhood tears and adolescent rage.
A shaft of sun on the kitchen table illuminates the
sugar bowl and the ﬂowered, blue plastic tablecloth. The
light reminds me of the serenity of Vermeer’s interiors
and of his women, completely absorbed in their domes-
tic tasks. I see my grandmother in her apron, her hair
the purest, softest white. She is legally blind but is hold-
ing her beloved rolling pin. Even though she can see only
shadows, she is still cooking for us, baking the most de-
licious sweets.
To think about my grandmother, with her rolling
pin and her fragrant kitchen, is to meditate on loss. She
was the stable anchor in my life, mediating between
an absent, depressed father and an irrational, erratic
mother. Thankfully, she lived behind us so I could es-
cape to her kitchen when I needed solace. I remember
the sheer joy of climbing over the stone wall that sepa-
rated our houses and bounding into her kitchen, feeling
both free and deeply connected.
I was nine months pregnant with my ﬁrst child
when she died. Even though she was seriously ill, she
was holding on, waiting for the birth of her ﬁrst grand-
child. We were hoping, praying, that she would be able
to cradle the child in her arms. Every day felt like a race
between birth and death. Tilly, a union organizer with a
will of steel, seemed in control of her death.
226
Susan Pollak

The baby was breech, and my doctor informed me
that unless it turned I would need a Caesarian section.
Days before the baby’s due date, my grandmother died.
I spent the night weeping, mourning her loss and the
fact that my children would never know her warmth and
her kindness. During that night of grief, the baby turned,
its head pointing down, ready to be born.
My grandmother has been dead for nearly ﬁfteen
years, but when I make cookie dough with my children
I use her wooden rolling pin with its chipped red handles.
I exert gentle pressure and roll the dough back and
forth. I add ﬂour and ﬂip it over to the other side. This
tactile ritual takes me back to the warmth of her kitchen,
the aromas of her cooking, and the comfort of her pres-
ence. As I bake, I often tell my children stories about
Grandma Tilly. The loss is still present but now bitter-
sweet. I miss the comfort of her world, yet I am deeply
grateful that she was such a presence in my life.
As I use her rolling pin and feel its texture and
weight against my ﬂoured hands, I think of the hun-
dreds of pies and cookies it helped create. It anchors me
in the past, yet continues to create memories for the
future. The object becomes timeless.
Marcel Proust gives us deeper insight into the na-
ture of the evocative object. In Remembrance of Things
Past he describes an epiphany evoked by a madeleine, a
small, scalloped cake: “dispirited after a dreary day with
the prospect of a depressing morrow, I raised to my lips
a spoonful of the tea in which I had soaked a morsel of
the cake. . . . A shudder ran through me and I stopped,
intent upon the extraordinary thing that was happening
to me. An exquisite pleasure had invaded my senses.”1
This humble cake set into motion Proust’s mas-
terpiece on memory and loss. His poetic understanding
The Rolling Pin
227

of the power of the senses to evoke a state of conscious-
ness is unmatched:
But when from a long-distant past nothing sub-
sists, after the people are dead, after the things are
broken and scattered, taste and smell alone, more
fragile but more enduring, more unsubstantial,
more persistent, more faithful, remain poised a
long time, like souls, remembering, waiting, hop-
ing, amid the ruins of all the rest, and bear un-
ﬂinchingly, in the tiny and almost impalpable drop
of their essence, the vast structure of recollection.2
Evocative objects can hold the “vast structure of
recollection.” This is more than poetic construction—ob-
jects can have a profoundly healing function. The British
psychoanalyst D. W. Winnicott developed the idea of the
“transitional object.” We think of the child’s teddy bear
or the “blankie” as a link to the love and comfort of the
mother, but Winnicott also located the capacity for ten-
derness and caring in such objects. What is less known,
but germane to the purpose of this essay, is that they are
also the basis of symbolism and creativity: “In this way
I feel that transitional phenomena do not pass, at least
not in health. They may become a lost art, but this is
part of an illness in the patient, a depression, and some-
thing equivalent to the reaction to deprivation in in-
fancy. . . .3 The object can hold an unexplored world,
containing within it memory, emotion, and untapped
creativity.
As a psychologist, I inhabit multiple worlds.
Through transference and countertransference, I have
a special relationship to the stories, dreams, and objects
of others. Working with my patients, I become both
translator and participant/observer of their inner land-
scape. When a case deeply engages me, the objects and
stories of others assume weight in my world, inhabiting
my thoughts and imagination.
228
Susan Pollak

The Case of Mr. B.
Mr. B., a ﬁfty-year-old married man, entered treatment
to work on an abusive and traumatic relationship with
his parents. He was a novelist, but had been unable to
write for a number of years. During the course of treat-
ment, his father died after a long illness. The father, a
distant, tyrannical alcoholic, never let his son know that
he loved him. Although Mr. B. had written a number of
books, his father had never made an effort to read them.
A number of months after his father’s death, Mr. B.
was visiting his mother. During the visit, they returned
to the town where Mr. B. had grown up. Out of nostal-
gia, he looked for the bakery that made his favorite treat,
a thin cake covered with chocolate and vanilla frosting,
called a “half-moon.” One of Mr. B’s fondest childhood
memories was of his father surprising the family with a
box of these cookies. Remarkably, the bakery was still in
business, and Mr. B. bought a box of half-moons for him-
self and his children. Because he had grown up in difﬁ-
cult times when money was tight, his own father bought
day-old cookies, which were often broken and stale.
Mr. B had never tasted the cookies either fresh or whole.
To his taste buds, there was something wrong about
the moist, intact cakes. He saved them, waiting for them
to become stale. After a few days, the texture was “right”—
the frosting hard, the cake dry—and he could savor and
re-create the lost tastes of his childhood.
Never underestimate the power of an evocative ob-
ject. The incident with the cookie—the ﬁnding of a lost
object and sharing it with his children—gave him access
to the “vast structure of recollection.” Entering this for-
gotten world of smell and taste was a pathway to new
memories. Some symbolic essence of childhood had
been recovered. As Mr. B. grieved, he was able to recover
positive feelings about his father that had eluded him
for the two years of our treatment. For months after the
death he had experienced a profound terror. He had
The Rolling Pin
229

recurrent nightmares where he would look for his father
in vain, searching in attics and basements, only to ﬁnd
the house in ruins, littered with shards of glass and
shattered bricks.
The re-ﬁnding of the cookie corresponded to a
turning point in Mr. B’s grief. This sweet was a concrete
and positive link to his past, an evocative object that was
both sustaining and stabilizing. Mr. B. was able to recall
acts of generosity and to develop a deeper understand-
ing of his father’s need to live in a drunken haze. He was
able to tell his children stories about their grandfather.
The cookie had become a gateway, connecting him to
“enduring and faithful” memories. It became a way to in-
tegrate what was positive and “sweet” about his father.
Slowly, with hesitation, Mr. B. began to write again; he
began a novel about childhood.
Toward the end of Remembrance of Things Past,
Proust makes a connection that Winnicott would whole-
heartedly endorse: “Ideas come to us as the successors
to griefs, and griefs, at the moment when they change
into ideas, lose some part of their power to injure our
heart.”4 Proust’s stymied protagonist is able to give up
his fruitless search for his lost mother, which frees him
to act. As his pain is transformed into ideas and images,
he begins to write.
My patient experienced a parallel process. When
he had mourned, remembered, and worked through all
that he had not received from his father, his rage and
paralysis subsided and he was able to write again. Win-
nicott would agree that a return to health is also a return
to creativity. The evocative object holds more than mem-
ory; it holds healing potential. We create our objects and
are inspired by them. As I found with my rolling pin, and
my patient with his cookie, the evocative object is tran-
sitional in the fullest sense of the word—it can bring to-
gether generations, anchor memory and feeling, and
evoke attachments that have long been forgotten.
230
Susan Pollak

Susan Pollak is a Clinicial Instructor in Psychology at
Harvard Medical School.
The Rolling Pin
231

Whenever we are trying to recover a recollection, to call up
some period of our history, we become conscious of an act sui
generis by which we detach ourselves from the present in order
to replace ourselves, ﬁrst, in the past in general, then, in a cer-
tain region of the past—a work of adjustment, something like
the focusing of a camera. But our recollection still remains vir-
tual: we simply prepare ourselves to receive it by adopting the
appropriate attitude. Little by little it comes into view like a
condensing cloud; from the virtual state it passes into the ac-
tual; and as its outlines become more distinct and its surface 
takes on color, it tends to imitate perception. But it remains 
attached to the past by its deepest roots, and if, when once real-
ized, it did not retain something of its original virtuality, if,
being a present state, it were not also something which stands
out distinct from the present, we should never know it for a
memory. . . .
But the truth is that we shall never reach the past unless
we frankly place ourselves within it. Essentially virtual, it can-
not be known as something past unless we follow and adopt the
movement by which it expands into a present image, thus
emerging from obscurity into the light of day. In vain do we seek
its trace in anything actual and already realized: we might as
well look for darkness beneath the light.
—Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory

THE PAINTING IN THE ATTIC
Caroline A. Jones

The object in question is stock-in-trade for an art his-
torian; the illustration shows it: an oil painting in the
standard illusionist mode. Of course, as a painting
(even a bad one), it is meant to transcend thing-ness al-
together. We are meant to assemble the photons reﬂect-
ing from this colored mud-on-canvas to see a grouping
of people, apparently children of various ages, standing
together in an indeterminate space. What becomes
evocative about this object for a given viewer is unpre-
dictable, but probably the expressions on the children’s
faces would provoke some thought: two girls smile, a
boy conveys mock surprise, a small girl looks solemn, a
baby screams. The dramatically different facial expres-
sions on these children seem to seal each one into a
separate world; none seems to react to any other. In-
stead, each face projects an image of an inner emotional
state.
What is evocative for the “I” of this essay is much
more speciﬁc than these general observations, because
it was “I” who painted this picture more than thirty
years ago. Untitled depicts my own brothers and sisters
(and myself). A bit embarrassing, it hangs in my attic,
relegated to a spot where only a few outside my family
will ever see it.
Some might believe that I, as the artist, know all
there is to know about this painting. But my claims are
much more humble. Since I was the maker, I can limn
rather precisely the boundaries of my own ignorance at
that time. There will be certain things I can use from my
professional toolkit as an art historian to interpret as-
pects of the painting that were not obvious to the girl
who painted it. Likewise, there are aspects that become
available to me as that person that would not be evident
to any other art historian. What I want to emphasize
234
Caroline A. Jones

here is the coruscating light that gleams between these
surfaces—the practical problems ﬁring up an art stu-
dent’s enthusiasms in 1972 and the strategies used by
professional art historians to pry insights from objects
in 2006. There is iridescence in this layered view. Inter-
preting the light relayed from one surface to the other
produces the self-reﬂection characteristic of my present
self.
Some art historians assert a quasi-positivist re-
liance on data—historical inventories, interviews, crit-
ics’ writings, letters, sale records, as well as the visual
layers of paint and canvas, preparatory studies, related
works—to help argue for a single interpretation that will
replace all other readings of the privileged object. This
piling-on of evidence is more for the consumers of art
history than for we who live within it; we are ﬁred by in-
spired hunches, intuitive insights, strong viewings that
help us make sense of “evidence” in the present. The evi-
dence is necessary, and the positivist approach works
for those who are uncomfortable about the leaps of faith
necessary to tie facts into meanings. Indeed, on one oc-
casion when I opened the ﬂoor to questions following
a psychoanalytic analysis of the erotic space in Richard
Diebenkorn’s drawings, one audience member asked
me scornfully, “Well he’s alive, why don’t you just ask
him?” In the case of the present object, I possess all the
omniscience my interlocutor might have dreamed of.
Surely I can solve any puzzle about the Untitled painting
at hand, because I have unparalleled access into the
privileged intention of the maker. Surprisingly, what I
have to report is that interpreting one’s own work is no
less complex than ﬁnding meaning in another’s.
There are many concrete things I can tell you
about this concrete thing, but they will not add up to an
The Painting in the Attic
235

absolute truth. I can state the circumstances and
struggles that attended the painting’s production dur-
ing my senior year of high school: how separate photo-
graphs and family snapshots were used as source
materials (providing one explanation for the mix of ex-
pressions), how the background defeated me, how I ran
out of patience and ideas and simply daubed a bosky
blend of Thalo green and Cadmium yellow to suggest a
vague, verdant setting. I can talk about the painting’s
trajectory as an object—how it survived years under a
leaky roof in my parents’ house, how creosote or some
other rooﬁng chemical dripped down the front of the
canvas. How cleaning that off left a trace, a vertical line
coursing past my brother’s depicted ear. I can reminisce
about where this unframed painting hung—over a par-
ticular couch in the family TV room, barely coordinating
with the nubbly turquoise fabric—and how the people it
depicted often sat on that same couch, changing more
quickly than the painting would.
But the most extraordinary thing about this object
is what I realized upon re-encountering it later as a
professional art historian, something I had never con-
sidered as its maker: namely, that the image is retro-
spective. My age in this depiction (I am the girl at far left)
is about eleven. When I painted it I was seventeen. This
simple fact produces an anachronistic slippage between
the denotative date of the picture (the ages of the chil-
dren in the painting, their hairstyles, clothing, even pos-
tures allude to 1966) and the chronological date of the
picture’s completion (1972). Few viewers would ﬁnd this
remarkable, but it ﬂoored me when I recognized its
obvious signiﬁcance. The painting’s convenient optic
excludes a member of my family who was born in
1967—the retarded youngest sibling in this clan.
Thinking with this thing conﬁrms one of my
strongest convictions as a professional art historian—
what the painter consciously puts into the picture is a
tiny fragment of what can be gleaned by later viewers.
236
Caroline A. Jones

Intention is but a minuscule part of art’s meaning; the
aesthetic object has a larger, and often much longer, life.
As it came back into my life, I was able to reﬂect on the
omission of my youngest sister, who grew up with me,
was and is adored, but still struggles to ﬁnd a place in a
family (and a world) predicated on competency and
achievement. Even when I painted the picture, I already
knew that the presumed trajectory for each of us—col-
lege, marriage, children, career—would not be likely
options for this individual, this “special” sib.
Evocation is customarily sweet. We summon this
word to describe emotions that tingle with nostalgia, sa-
voring the subtle ﬂavors of past pleasures and recalling
childhood play. Here, evocation is more painful, as I am
forced to acknowledge that I simply deleted my youngest
sister to produce the image of an ideal phase of my
family’s life, before the traumatic event that would for-
ever mark us as different, our familial business as never
worthy of the happy-ever-after of all story lines. More
interesting than the admittedly amateur painting itself
is this strategic anachronism. Completely invisible to
me then, the attributes of this repressive fantasy are ob-
vious to me now. What interests me is the way such
traces were nonetheless embedded in this painting by
the adolescent who made it, coded messages in a bottle
cast on the bilderﬂut for later viewers who might want to
parse the patterns in the paint.
Far more than representational skill, the artist I
aspired to be had to deploy the constituents of painting
precisely to evoke a situation, without words, to tell a
tale. Arguably, this has been the main job of pictures
since the Renaissance. Photographic cameras, in this
argument, merely codiﬁed a preexisting value system in
which the perfectly composed image of a single moment
prevailed over narrative change. Like the Christian icon
that lies behind so much of Western aesthetics, the oil
painting was intended to be an eternal object whose
perfected, crystallized composition would never be
The Painting in the Attic
237

disturbed by the vicissitudes of time. Time would even
be phenomenologically banished from the pictorial
realm—it would never be acknowledged as itself part of
a viewing regime. Pictures in the Western tradition
would be composed to convey a single event, the “preg-
nant moment” praised by Enlightenment aesthetician
Johann Joachim Winckelmann as the highest form of
art. But the painting under consideration, Untitled 1972,
refuses the prägnanz of a single moment. That it does so
indicates more than lack of skill. In other words, we
might ﬁnd a technical reason for the lack of internal
unity to these depicted ﬁgures, for the obvious disparity
in their emotional moments. Indeed, I’ve acknowledged
one such technical reason—the multiplicity of photo-
graphs and snapshots from which the image was con-
cocted. But attributing the lack of unity solely to this
fact begs the question of why those disparate photo-
graphs were chosen in the ﬁrst place. Such a solution
fails to address the painting’s refusal to be uniﬁed. The
painting insists that the perfect moment is always
already fractured, never uniﬁed in the ﬁrst place. One
preteen mugs, the baby cries, the little one refuses
the obligatory camera smile. Only the oldest two—me
and my older sister—appear to be composed for the
camera/painting. Pictorial idealism fragments in the
face of a reality it aims to signify.
The depictions of these particular individuals in
some cases align with what I can tell you of their fates.
The then-youngest girl is portrayed with the sense of
sober moral judgment that would govern her adult prac-
tice as an acutely political feminist art writer; the oldest
boy shows the goofy sense of humor that would win him
the love of friends, family, and coworkers; the oldest girl
shines with that sense of assurance and maternal re-
sponsibility she would bring to her later management
style; the little baby boy wails with his birth-order in-
justice of being ﬁfth in line, “left behind” but sure to
make his presence known. I can hardly begin the anal-
238
Caroline A. Jones

ysis of my own image, an eleven-year-old painted by a
seventeen-year-old viewed by a more-than-ﬁfty-year-
old. The gesture I am shown to make is ambiguous.
Am I protecting my younger sister, or constraining
her movements? Isn’t my smile a bit tight, the shoul-
ders hunched with a certain tension felt more by the
seventeen-year-old than the prepubescent girl? These
questions can never be answered; the artiﬁce of a conclu-
sion is tailored to the goals of narrative, not life. Simi-
larly, just because my youngest sibling was not in this
picture does not deny the enormous role she continues
to play in my extended family. Mascot of the high-school
marching band, moralizer to her nieces and nephews,
and greatest appreciator of my cooking, she has never
commented on her absence from this painting. Perhaps,
unlike me, she registers the other absences ﬁrst.
There are many narratives in this painting. Mine
has been the absence of my retarded sister. Another
might begin with the absence of the parents. The family
shown is one constituted by relations among siblings
who seem to experience themselves partly as a cohort
and partly as a miniaturized enactment of the larger
family itself. The oldest sister sits as the mother would,
cradling the squalling infant with a conﬁdent smile. As
for me, I seem to be posed as another kind of parent, a
little father perhaps, standing as I would want that
father to be, stalwart and steadfast in support of that al-
most frightened little girl. Just over my head is the only
spot where the confected background threatens to open
out—a small gap emerging behind and above me, even
as my gaze seems focused on something outside the
frame. These gazes (and that opening) threaten to split
the painting. My gaze and the youngest girl’s seemingly
converge, looking outside, to the left and above the
frame. The eyes of the standing brother and oldest sis-
ter share a different focus, more socialized and ingrati-
ating, given to something within the frame—an implied
viewer constituted, in photographic practices, by the
The Painting in the Attic
239

camera’s lens, or possibly by the photographer. Their
gazes meet the viewer’s, giving the picture its point of
view and whatever comedic value it might possess. The
baby is not given a gaze, as if he has no interior within
that countenance—or perhaps he is all interior, all the
time. Infant despair folds his features as if unmediated
by structures of consciousness, forming a wrinkled yet
continuous surface in which any interior is always in-
stantly exteriorized, neither censored nor composed.
His expression approaches comedy only in this con-
text—since we convince ourselves that his pressing
needs are purely animal, simple (put me down, feed me,
change me, don’t make me sit still).
The bodies of these children are rendered in such
a way that they are more like a map of adjacent territo-
ries than interacting three-dimensional forms (skin
touches skin in only two spots—my ﬁngertips on my sis-
ter’s arms, and the oldest sister’s arm under one of the
baby’s). Again, there are technical reasons for this, such
as the anatomical ineptitude of the student painter (de-
feating the artist’s scant ability to depict structures
under surfaces of cloth or skin), or the conversion of
black-and-white photographs to color (without the nec-
essary skills to compensate by rendering the secondary
hues reﬂected back onto adjacent colors). But to leave
you with these technical explanations would, again, be
insufﬁcient. Their partiality would foreclose the range of
other interpretations that might glimmer between then
and now, between student artist and art historian, be-
tween the person reﬂecting on her childhood and the
object that speaks to her from a mysterious past. Inter-
pretation always belongs to its present, yet mere tech-
nical explanations are never adequate to the lived
complexities of the past.
None of what I have just said is known to the 1966
child or her 1972 limner. These narratives are drawn
out of the painting only after decades, pulled out of this
composition by the later version of the person situated
240
Caroline A. Jones

within it, at a moment when there is sufﬁcient distance
to put the blended strains together to form a story for
the present. It is not so much true, as a truth—a truth
of evocation, not locked in this conﬁguration, but
elicited from these pigmented surfaces by present inter-
est and desire.
In the end, this object’s evocations move beyond
autobiography to philosophy. When we look and think
about a painting, we are making a thing coherent and
meaningful, and as it accrues meaning its very object-
ness becomes unstable. Such instability is crucial. It is
important that these are not real people, otherwise we
could not stare at them, hang them on the wall, and so
forth. It is equally important to the maker and viewer
that they are people, imaginatively given inner lives,
feelings, motivations, historical fates. In this respect it
is intriguing to think of such a liminal thing in terms of
D. W. Winnicott’s theorizing of the transitional object,
an important object (a teddy bear, for example) that the
child experiences as both part of himself and not-
himself: “The transitional object is never under magical
control like the internal object, nor is it outside control
as the real [primary parent] is.”1 For Winnicott, each de-
parture into independence, each transition into sepa-
rate existence, could be mediated by this evocative
object.
The Winnicottian object is one whose inertness is
as important as its aliveness. The teddy bear can be
violently attacked, aggressively loved, fully animated,
or completely ignored. The child knows it is inert and yet
willingly animates it for imaginative purposes. The tran-
sitional object is needed periodically to stabilize the
maturing individual—bridging between the infant’s il-
lusion of total omnipotence and the disenchanted world
he must enter as an adult. Winnicott’s ethical position
in relation to the holders of transitional objects provides
a parallel to my thinking about the “object relations”
pertaining between viewers and paintings—even when,
The Painting in the Attic
241

as in this case, the viewer and painter might be the same
person dispersed over time. Winnicott puts it this way:
“Of the transitional object it can be said that it is a mat-
ter of agreement between us and the baby that we will
never ask the question: ‘Did you conceive of this or was
it presented to you from without?’ . . . The question is
not to be formulated.”2 Did I make this painting? Or was
this painting made from external circumstances, “pre-
sented to [me] from without”? The question is not to be
formulated, for any answer would be beside the point of
evocative objects.
As we evoke meanings from the special objects we
call art, we become their willing subjects. We think with
them, in order to think ourselves into coherent subjec-
tivity. We presume a homologous relation between au-
thor and viewer, but as I have argued here, some objects
remind us that there can be no such equivalence. Even
the author is not equivalent to her later self. It is the
point of artworks to be evocative objects, soliciting us to
be their subjects, and, in turn, the author of their mean-
ings, at least for a while.
Caroline A. Jones is Associate Professor of the
History of Art at MIT.
242
Caroline A. Jones

The Painting in the Attic
243

Thus the shadow of the object fell upon the ego, and the latter
could henceforth be judged by a special agency, as though it
were an object, the forsaken object. In this way an object-loss
was transformed into an ego loss and the conﬂict between the
ego and the loved person into a cleavage between the critical ac-
tivity of the ego and the ego as altered by identiﬁcation.
—Sigmund Freud, “Mourning and Melancholia”

THE SUITCASE
Olivia Dasté

It is here, still closed, in front of me. This is my
grandmother’s suitcase, one she would have used when
she came from France. It is small, just large enough for
one person to pack for a one- or two-week trip. It is ﬁre-
house red. It has tan leather handles and an exterior
made of a sturdy canvas material. It has two large
golden buckles, several zippers, and interior compart-
ments. It is the perfect balance between elegant and
practical, just like her. The logo boasts “Globe Trotter,”
echoing my grandmother’s love of travel. With her new-
found liberty after her husband and children had gone,
she began to discover the world adventuring to Egypt,
Sweden, and several times to America. But this suitcase
is new; she had been saving it for one ﬁnal trip.
We stayed in her apartment in Bordeaux only for a
few nights, just long enough to attend the funeral and
embrace loved ones. It was the day after she died, her
body not even cold, when my mother began furtively
emptying out my grandmother’s apartment. My father
and I, exhausted by grief, walked around her apartment,
fearful to displace anything, looking for her. We had been
there just a few weeks ago; she was doing wonderfully.
My mother faced the departure of her mother-in-
law full frontal and leapt into a mechanical frenzy of
sorting, organizing, and throwing away. With each book,
shoe, and coat my mother grabbed and threw in a trash
bag for donations or garbage, my stomach turned and
my heart sank. The evidence of her life was being
erased. In the kitchen, I held the glass she used the day
before, fresh lipstick marks still on the rim. She would
be back. She is still here.
There was no stopping my mother’s rampage: my
father was too drained to confront another problem; my
aunts and uncles were standing like sheep before a hur-
246
Olivia Dasté

ricane; and my brother was too busy trying to comfort
me to deal with my mother. Putting down the glass, I de-
termined to confront her, pausing only when I saw the
suitcase, on the upper shelf of my grandmother’s closet,
shining like a sign.
Hiding in my grandmother’s bedroom, I placed the
suitcase on the bedcover and opened it. The emptiness
I found echoed my own. I had to act fast. I closed my eyes
and pictured my grandmother as I had seen her last.
She was wearing her favorite navy skirt, formed to her
curves by time, the light blue collared shirt with the
dancing butterﬂies, her well-loved red cardigan, and her
white necklace. With movements that seemed auto-
matic, I went to collect these and other items she would
need.
The red cardigan still had her scented hand-
kerchief folded in the pocket; her white plastic pearl
necklace was scented with her perfume and still had her
foundation rubbed in. From the kitchen I took our two
pink-and-green ﬂower-painted teacups in which we had
our morning coffee. I was taking our breakfasts with 
us; our long, animated conversations; our ritual of shar-
ing our dreams; our nightmares and laughter, often
aimed at the least sane in our family, the two of us often
being the likeliest candidates. I carefully packed the
crystal butterﬂy my brother and I had given her for
Christmas, reliving the memory of picking it out for her,
together saving for it, excitedly giving it to my father to
take to her in France, and later her gentle teasing over
the phone, scolding, “You must be crazy! What have I
done to deserve this? My granddaughter is absolutely
nuts!”
I packed the cut-out quotes about love, family,
humor, and life that she kept everywhere around her
The Suitcase
247

apartment, on the walls, in books, in drawers, and
silently promised her that I would live by them. I added
her jasmine-scented face lotions, the ones that I would
kiss on her face each night, and her black hairbrush
with her silver hairs, seeing her fuss as she did each
morning until she found her mise-en-plis acceptable
enough to go out. And I added the pictures and letters.
My grandmother, I discovered, had kept each and every
letter I had written to her, from the very ﬁrst one, writ-
ten by my pregnant mother, as me, to my last one, re-
ceived three days before. She had kept my scribbles,
jokes, stories, drawings, stickers, poems, and all of the
pictures of me and my brother growing up. The suitcase
is for both of us. It holds her for me and me for her. At
the chapel, I reluctantly contemplated the body I no
longer recognized. It was at the airport, hugging the
suitcase, that I felt her heart. I would not let it go until
it had to be stowed away in the overhead compartment.
I found myself wishing I had bought an extra ticket, an
extra seat for the suitcase next to me.
A year later, I have not opened the suitcase, but today I
have slipped inside her letters to me and some pictures
of us together. I fall asleep with the suitcase in my arms,
but increasingly, it feels dangerous to open it. Memories
evolve with you, through you. Objects don’t have this
ﬂuidity; I fear that the contents of the suitcase might be-
tray my grandmother.
Two and a half years after I packed the suitcase, I begin
to open its buckles, one at a time. Unable to go further,
I leave it like that for a while. Only now I place it on my
bed and slowly begin again, determined this time to
open it but working so much against myself. Finally, I
have only to lift the top, but I am not ready for the smell
of her perfume, her hair, jewelry, and clothes to come at
me so fast. She reaches me from inside. I close my eyes,
my face already wet as I ﬁnd her red sweater. I don’t have
248
Olivia Dasté

to pull it to my face to feel as though I am hugging her
tight, but I do. I smile. I am with her in Bordeaux and we
have all the time in the world.
The suitcase brings her back to me with the worry
that I will lose her if I open the suitcase too often; her
smell will evaporate, the letters will fade, and the clothes
will no longer hold her shape. I think she would tell me
to live with the living and to be careful: craziness runs
in the family.
Olivia Dasté worked on the Research Staff of the MIT
Initiative on Technology and Self and now lives in
Paris.
The Suitcase
249


Objects of Meditation
and New Vision

Bold, overhanging, and, as it were, threatening rocks, thunder-
clouds piled up the vault of heaven, borne along with ﬂashes
and peals, volcanoes in all their violence of destruction, hurri-
canes leaving desolation in their track, the boundless ocean
rising with rebellious force, the high waterfall of some mighty
river, and the like, make our power of resistance of triﬂing mo-
ment in comparison with their might. But provided our own 
position is secure, their aspect is all the more attractive for its
fearfulness; and we readily call these objects sublime, because
they raise the forces of the soul above the height of vulgar com-
monplace, and discover within us a power of resistance of quite
another kind, which gives us courage to be able to measure
ourselves against the seeming omnipotence of nature. . . .
But with this we also found in our rational faculty an-
other non-sensuous standard, one which has that inﬁnity itself
under it as a unit, and in comparison with which everything in
nature is small, and so found in our minds a pre-eminence over
nature even in its immeasurability.
—Immanuel Kant, The Critique of Judgment

CHINESE SCHOLARS’ ROCKS
Nancy Rosenblum

How can a rock, the quintessential physical object, be
metaphysical? How can a stone sing? Where does na-
ture stop and culture begin?
Tap a stone and it rings, as if it were a cast metal
bell. It is resonant. A black Lingbi rock has an astonish-
ing, glossy skin. A Taihu tilts dizzily to the side as if it
were an overhanging peak, embodying what the Chinese
call “awkwardness.” A Ying has veining and a wildly
wrinkled surface, suggesting age. My rocks are un-rock-
like. They are plain limestone contradicting itself. The
most earthy and banal material transcends itself to be-
come exotic.
Gaze at a stone and it disorients. Scholars’ rocks
can be tiny miniatures an inch tall or dramatic free-
standing “mountains” thirty feet tall. The same shapes
and turnings, contours and depths are replicated in
every dimension. The rocks draw me into the mystery of
scale. A tiny scholars’ rock grows before my eyes. It be-
comes a mountain. It is huge and theatrical. It is a whole
landscape, a whole world. Its holes of many sizes and di-
rections, its wild punctured surfaces, give it inﬁnite
depth. It contains deep space. There is movement in-
side. Its meaning comes not just from its contour but
from the forms within. Looking at the holes is like look-
ing at the stars. It is a world within a world.
The rocks’ disorienting effects are speciﬁc and dis-
tinctive. One is the deliberate confusion of scale. An-
other is material turned immaterial. Another is inﬁnite,
immeasurable depth and movement in a ﬁnite space.
The result of looking steadily is a direct confrontation
with cosmology: how big is this rock, this earth, this
universe? Blake’s “world in a grain of sand,” a com-
monplace now, is made uncommon and vivid.1 A rock is
254
Nancy Rosenblum

“a little piece of a wrinkle from which you can imagine
the whole wrinkle; it’s a little piece of a rock from which
you can imagine the whole rock; it’s a little piece of a
mountain from which you can imagine the whole moun-
tain—and so on.”2
I am not of metaphysical temperament. My rocks
are compelling, though. They have the power to provide
an effortless, aesthetic experience of mystery. Of inﬁn-
ity in a ﬁnite space. Of transformation. Just by looking.
Without philosophy. Without hard ideas (a relief for an
academic). They are simple, immediate invitations to
playful speculation and to the wonderful physical play
of handling these objects, turning and inverting them to
ﬁnd new perspectives.
Scholars’ rocks are mounted on beautifully carved
wooden stands. As early as the Neolithic period in China,
ritual objects were placed on pedestals to lift them into
the realm of the sacred. Over time their religious mean-
ing was eclipsed, and the stand turns the rock into an
art object. The stand is part of the rock’s transformative
character, for removed from its stand it ﬂips back from
art to nature. The stands are more than the pedestals
for display that accompany all sorts of decorative ob-
jects, then. The stands add an iconographic element,
too. They can be read. The bumps, or “teats,” on stands
for stalactite rocks evoke the mountain teats through
which the milk of the earth ﬂowed. (An early Taoist
theme has it that somewhere in the highest mountains
is a cave that is an exact representation of the world out-
side. In its center is a stalactite that gives off the milk of
contentment.) Stands carved with clouds evoke another
transformative idea, that rocks are petriﬁed “cloud
roots.” Stands carved with water and waves enhance the
Chinese Scholars’ Rocks
255

taihu rocks, with their inﬁnitude of holes made and
multiplied by immersing the stones in moving water—
microcosms of the earth’s geology. The stand’s styliza-
tions are a clue to the age and region of the object when
it was ﬁrst taken from nature.
Setting a rock on a stand has another effect. It iso-
lates a piece of nature, removing it from its original con-
text. It points up the resonance of a single natural
object, bringing home individuality, a thing complete in
itself. It points up the inexhaustibility and beauty of
randomness and irregularity, clearly. And because the
rock ﬂips back and forth between nature and culture, it
brings home transformation. Again, difﬁcult concepts
are made simple and immediate. This is nothing like the
isolation of everyday manufactured objects—urinals or
debris from a scrap yard—by contemporary conceptual
artists.
Scholars’ rocks are the point at which wild nature
and culture meet. Many of them are “worked” in some
way, but always so that the hand is hidden. Only high-
power glasses reveal the tiny chisel marks that enhance
the hollows and crags. They are what contemporary ex-
pressionism calls controlled accidents. The invisible
sculptural element of the scholars’ rock is integral to it
as a transformative object: inanimate to animate, na-
ture to culture.
The distinctive thing about the rocks is that the
transformation is reversible. The rock ﬂips between na-
ture and culture. Renaissance sculptors envisioned a ﬁg-
ure in a marble block, but for them nature was just the
starting point. The ideal, as in Michelangelo’s David, is to
leave nature behind. The rocks, even when they are rep-
resentational, are not denatured. They preserve duality.
Scholars’ rocks raise conceptual issues of authen-
ticity, authorship, and what it means to make some-
thing. But these academic questions are not part of
their resonance. The cultural arcana of the rocks are
not part of their resonance either. These questions are
256
Nancy Rosenblum

ancillary to the power of the rocks to ﬂip in the ways I
have described, and to likewise ﬂip me from mundane
to mystery.
Chinese rocks have a long history in art and reli-
gion. By the Song Dynasty (960–1279) the rocks became
prized by the literati for whom they were objects of con-
templation. They brought wild nature into the studio.
The rocks gave shape to the strange design of classical
Chinese gardens, which echo not green nature but the
pools and twists and turns of the inside of caves. They
were the subject of poetry. They were models for the
paintings of rocks and mountains that dominate Chi-
nese scroll painting. The rocks were treasured by em-
perors, and Chinese literature is full of stories about the
quest for these revered objects. “Scholars’ rocks” come
from their work, but the rocks go deeper into the past of
early Taoism, most likely as early as the second century
BCE when they were ﬁrst excavated from lakes and un-
derground caves.
Chinese scholars’ rocks are chosen, worked,
mounted because they are evocative of mountains, the
home of the gods. Their power to evoke the experiences
I have described are an important part of the history of
Chinese art and culture. The experience of these rocks
is not subjective. They are evocative objects. They are
gifts of nature and Chinese culture designed to be
evocative; my experience with them is not my own alone.
And yet these stones do have a purely personal,
emotional aspect for me. My late husband, Richard
Rosenblum, brought these rocks back from neglect in
China and oblivion in the West. He trusted his own way
of seeing. The art history profession and the museum
world, proud of its universal inclusiveness, had missed
a major art form from a reﬁned culture.
The rocks made our lives together an adventure.
Richard and our daughter Anna looked for them in
unlikely shops and botanical gardens and the homes of
individuals in London, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and many
Chinese Scholars’ Rocks
257

parts of China. The rocks ﬁlled our home—every ﬂoor
and every surface was covered with miniatures and
giants. Richard gathered black and gray and green 
lingbi and pure white taihu, marble dream stones with
images in their veining, and “Chrysanthemum stones”
with their gorgeous fossils. Rocks of every mineral type,
from soapstone to pudding stone, and “imitation” rocks
in crystal and wood, ivory, glass, bronze, and sophisti-
cated glazed ceramic.
Richard brought together the entire canon of
prized formal elements. He organized and studied them
and commissioned academic studies of them—techni-
cal scientiﬁc studies and art history essays to begin to
create a body of scholarship. He organized shows and
exhibited the rocks around the world; he wanted them
to be known, especially to artists. He and our daughter
donated them as gifts to museums. Together we wrote
essays and a book. Richard was an artist, and his own
sculpture, made from natural tree roots and branches,
ﬂipping between nature and human image, preceded
his discovery of the rocks. The rocks added meaning
and inspiration to his work. They excited his sculptor’s
interest in scale and his unique interest in constructing
deep space in both sculpture and digital prints.3
How can a rock be a man? “The Honorable Old
Man” rock is Richard for me—obsession, looking, open-
ness to being surprised and moved, dignity.
Nancy Rosenblum is Chair of the Department of
Government and Senator Joseph S. Clark Professor
of Ethics in Politics and Government at Harvard
University.
258
Nancy Rosenblum

Chinese Scholars’ Rocks
259

We are told that the trouble with Modern Man is that he has
been trying to detach himself from nature. He sits in the top-
most tiers of polymer, glass and steel, dangling his pulsing legs,
surveying at a distance the writhing life of the planet. . . . Nor
is it a new thing for man to invent an existence that he imag-
ines to be above the rest of life; this has been his most consis-
tent intellectual exertion down the millennia. As illusion, it has
never worked out to his satisfaction in the past, any more than
it does today. Man is embedded in nature.
The biologic science of recent years has been making this
a more urgent fact of life. The new, hard problem will be to cope
with the dawning, intensifying realization of just how inter-
locked we are. The old, clung-to notions most of us have held
about our special lordship are being deeply undermined.
And nothing would better describe what this place is like,
to an outsider, than the Cézanne demonstrations that an apple
is really part fruit, part earth.
—Lewis Thomas, Lives of a Cell

APPLES
Susannah Mandel

As far back as I can remember, I have had an unusual
fondness for apples. When my roommates offer to pick
up fruit at the grocery, they are often startled by my
speciﬁcity: “Galas are festive, but only if they’re brightly
streaked, red and yellow like a fall leaf. If the skin seems
dull, buy Fujis—you’ll see them stacked in a chilled
mountain—or some Pink Ladies. But make sure they’re
ripe; the proper color of a Lady is like champagne, or the
rose they used to tint women’s cheeks with in old photo-
graphs. If they’ve gone too soft you can get regional
apples—you’ll know them by the smell of local or-
chards—McIntosh, maybe, but only if they’re sharp red
and white. If they still have a cast of green, go for Jona-
golds, or Winesaps, or Empires from New York. . . .”
“I thought you only ate that apple from New
Zealand,” the roommate might say at this point, stand-
ing in the doorway and giving me the ﬁshy eye.
“That was last year. New Zealand apples are
magniﬁcent, but this season the Braeburns have gone
wine-y.”
This is more than connoisseurship. I have a thing
for apples. For years, the apple has been my favorite
aesthetic object—as well as a really good element of my
lunch. Since childhood, I have ﬁlled my pockets with
apples and gone around with my coat distended like
some sideways marsupial. I put apples on my night-
stand, as some people place candles. I learn their
names. And, of course, I also put them to their best and
natural use: plucking them out of the places they have
been tucked away (usually the pockets), and, at home,
on city streets, in the subway, or in forbidden corners of
libraries or museums, biting into them. If you close your
eyes, as you would in a kiss, it helps you relish at once
the cool solid weight of the ripe fruit in your hand, and
262
Susannah Mandel

the smell and sound and taste of the smooth skin break-
ing, and all the sweet juices leaking out.
As a child, one of the things I liked best about
apples was their aura of stolid historical continuity.
Each apple is unique in its excellence. But every apple
is also trivial, disposable, and identical to the one I ate
this morning and the one I will half-ﬁnish tomorrow.
The apple currently bulging my pocket has inﬁnite
echoes, inﬁnite siblings, suggesting a gallery stretching
back in time—an endless banquet of fruits. Consider: if
my apple is the same apple as yesterday’s and tomor-
row’s, then it follows that it is also the same apple as the
apple of two or four hundred years ago. Shakespeare ate
my apple! And the Romans when they ﬁrst came to the
gloomy, rainy island of England. It feels luscious to
know you are eating something historical; it makes you
feel rooted in time.
On our bookshelves when I was young, my parents
had a dog-eared copy of Howard Pyle’s The Merry Ad-
ventures of Robin Hood, dated from 1883, as well as lots
of other nineteenth-century medieval adventures and
Lang’s Fairy Books. In these jolly stories, people were al-
ways quafﬁng ale, roasting venison, and journeying
through forests with cheese and apples in their packs. I
liked to emulate their dark-age lunches, reading on the
living-room carpet, with cheddar cheese and the end of
a loaf of bread. I enjoyed the feeling—eating as I read—
that, as I crunched through an apple’s skin and juice, I
was having precisely the same experience as that of
Robin or those youngest sons of tailors as they jour-
neyed through the wood. Fashions may change, but the
tang of an apple in an American living room is, must
necessarily be, the same as the tang of an apple in 1194.
Such small questions as the changes wrought by fruit
Apples
263

husbandry over the years must yield in the face of such
transcendent eating experience. The sensory experience
of the bite collapsed the centuries together, fusing myth
and reality. In the timeless now of imagination, Robin
and I sat against trees or bookshelves and ate our lunch
together, the juice running down our chins, both in the
same moment.
My relationship with the apple has changed with
the years. Until about the age of twelve, for example, I
preferred green apples. My parents were fans of the
health beneﬁts, and offered them frequently as both
lunch staple and dessert. Green apples have the homely
name of “Granny Smith”; you feel you could be on speak-
ing terms with this fruit. There’s something in the ﬁrm
solidity of a Granny Smith that makes it feel reliable—
it is just slightly larger than a child’s ﬁst, something the
hand can curve around, with an understated tactile
pleasure, like a toy ball.
At the same time, the apple’s glossiness of skin—
something in the smoothness of the texture—makes
each green Granny seem to be like every other. One gets
the idea they could come off assembly lines, like the
plastic fruit that comes with children’s toy kitchens.
They are indistinguishably sweet, inﬁnitely repeatable,
and perpetually green.
At twelve, my taste changed abruptly. I had loved
green apples; suddenly, now, I would only eat the kind
with red-and-gold stripes. It paralleled a change in my
fondness for ﬂowers—a liking for pink or yellow roses
and tulips changed into a passion for the kind that’s
striped like a tiger.
My mother threw up her hands: how arbitrary are
the loves of children! But there was aesthetic meaning
here, as certainly as there is meaning when one’s tastes
shift in literature or music. A solid pink ﬂower petal,
like a green apple, is intense and sweet. That’s where its
power lies. In the denseness of its ﬂesh and its color, it
inspires thoughts of happy things, like perhaps an
264
Susannah Mandel

Easter dress or the sun. It ﬂames up in the gaze, but it
doesn’t hold it, and the eye, momentarily arrested by the
ﬁerceness of the blaze, soon disengages and slips over it
and away.
A striped fruit or ﬂower, on the other hand, will
catch your gaze and keep it. It will not let you look away.
When I held a red-and-yellow Gala or New Zealand
Braeburn in sunlight, I saw with fascination how it
seemed to catch ﬁre from inside. I turned it over and
over, looking, and always seeing something new. Apples’
stripes are labyrinthine. Their variations, their variabil-
ity, changed the aesthetic of the “pretty” and the “sweet”
into something deeper, a reminder that nature is com-
plex and unpredictable. Each is as unique as a snow-
ﬂake, or a big thumbprint. You can gaze into such
patterns endlessly.
Later I learned about the meditative practices of
medieval monks, who would spend long sessions con-
templating labyrinths, as monks in Asia today still
contemplate mandalas. They were trying to open their
minds to the inﬁnite. The pattern was a little image of
contained eternity, small enough to ﬁt in a temple or be
engraved on a cathedral ﬂoor. But it stood in for every-
thing in the world.
The link between labyrinths and apples is evoked
in a story from Julian of Norwich, a fourteenth-century
English mystic who claimed to regularly talk to God. She
wrote that one day God showed her something like a
hazelnut lying in the palm of her hand. When she asked,
reasonably enough, “What might this be?” she was told:
“It is all that is made.” I am pretty far from bring a
fourteenth-century mystic, but I ﬁnd something warm-
ing in the idea that all the world’s beauty and oddness
can be symbolized in the complex patterns of something
small enough to ﬁt in your hand.
From where do we take our lessons about sim-
plicity and complexity? At some point in my youth, a
wooden apple entered my life. I don’t remember when it
Apples
265

appeared, or where it went; it came from somewhere and
remained on the shelf of the room I shared with my
brother, disappearing out of our lives again several
years later, as if evaporating into smoke. It was the size
of a real apple, surprisingly light—perhaps it was hol-
low—and painted to resemble some red-and-yellow
strain, of the Braeburn or Fuji type, with a varnish that
gave it a dim but realistic glow. A paper leaf drooped
from an abbreviated wooden stem.
As a singular phenomenon this apple was inter-
esting, and I thought at ﬁrst that I found it beautiful. I
should have wanted to hold it, play with it, and keep it
in my pockets. But I realized with a slight sense of guilt,
that it was actually very boring. Its lightness, its gloss,
and perhaps the fact that it was never going to be eaten
and reduced to seeds and core, left it lacking.
I was certainly not the ﬁrst to notice the strange-
ness of an artiﬁcial fruit. In A Clockwork Orange, An-
thony Burgess uses strong metaphors to evoke the
unnaturalness of a world that removes from its citizens
the possibility of moral choice: “The attempt to impose
upon man, a creature of growth and capable of sweet-
ness,” writes one character, “to ooze juicily at the last
round the bearded lips of God, laws and conditions ap-
propriate to a mechanical creation, against this I raise
my sword-pen.”1 As Burgess records, American readers,
who didn’t realize that “clockwork orange” was old
Cockney slang used to describe “anything queer,” took
from it the secondary image of “an organic entity, full of
juice and sweetness and agreeable odour, being turned
into an automaton.”2
There is something powerful in this image of a fruit
made into a machine—something striking in the unease
it engenders. But this negative view is, perhaps, unfair
to the wooden apple. The artiﬁcial fruit on the shelf is a
wonder in itself, although, for those who are looking for
signs of life, for reassurance that the universe is still
266
Susannah Mandel

alive and kicking, it is far better to be able to touch the
real thing.
The questions that we start asking in childhood
stay with us, growing as our minds grow. Today, when I
look at modern art, I ﬁnd myself still searching for those
who play with the tension between the natural and the
artiﬁcial. René Magritte, whom I love, liked to paint both
apples and an inﬁnite number of men in bowler hats. He
walked the line that divides the natural from the
human-made, acknowledging a line that is increasingly
blurred. Magritte’s repetition of suits and hats, umbrel-
las and pipes, also mixes in obscure symbols of “the
natural world.” Sometimes he renders identical busi-
nessmen, as thoroughly multiplied as androids or
apples, falling like gusts of rain from the sky; sometimes
the businessman stares out at us, face hidden behind a
mysteriously suspended green apple. Magritte’s apples
are not particularly unusual in appearance—they are
perfect and round like all other Granny Smith apples.
But something else about Magritte is that he also liked
to insert unexpected doors in his scenes: a hole ripped
in a wooden door, a smashed picture window. It may be
that, in this identical world of suits and suburbs, the
green apple should also be seen as a gate into a differ-
ent and refreshed world of aesthetics and philosophy,
as a safeguard against the slightly weary moment ap-
proaching in which the most dedicated fan of human-
made objects might get tired of all those bowler hats.
Why, in the end, do I carry an apple in my pocket?
To put it one way: the apple is a good talisman because
it can stand both as a symbol for nature’s careless
sprawl, and as a focal point for the intense emotion, or
contemplation, we sometimes need these symbols to
evoke. But the apple has another, ﬁnal strength, which
is simply this: it resists being absorbed too far into sym-
bolism and the sublime. It’s too close to the ground; it’s
still got dirt stuck on it. On this front I am reminded of
a suggestion made by the physician and essayist Lewis
Apples
267

268
Susannah Mandel
Thomas in Lives of a Cell. Thomas writes that when we
go beaming information into space, to let any hypotheti-
cal aliens out there know what we’re like, we must be
sure to include some of Paul Cézanne’s still-life “demon-
strations” that an apple “is part fruit, part earth.” “Noth-
ing,” Thomas adds, “would better describe what this
place is like.”3 By which, of course, he means life on
Earth.
Life on Earth! Dusty, passionate, sublime. Or
maybe sometimes, an apple is simply an apple: rich in
our mouths, heavy in our hands, sweet in our pockets.
Susannah Mandel is a recent graduate of the MIT
Program in Comparative Media Studies, where she
studied comic books.


The “double” was originally an insurance against the destruc-
tion of the ego, an “energetic denial of the power of death” . . . ;
and probably the “immortal” soul was the ﬁrst “double” of the
body. This invention of doubling as a preservation against
extinction has its counterpart in the language of dreams,
which is fond of representing castration by a doubling or mul-
tiplication of a genital symbol. The same desire led the Ancient
Egyptians to develop the art of making images of the dead in
lasting materials. Such ideas, however, have sprung from the
soil of unbounded self-love, from the primary narcissism which
dominates the mind of the child and of primitive man. But
when this stage has been surmounted, the “double” reverses
its aspect. From having been an assurance of immortality, it
becomes the uncanny harbinger of death.
—Sigmund Freud, “The Uncanny”

THE MUMMY
Jeffrey Mifﬂin

I have in my custody as the archivist and curator at
Boston’s Massachusetts General Hospital a large and
signiﬁcant collection of historical objects, including
paintings, chandeliers, medical and surgical instru-
ments, antique baby bottles, and a horse-drawn ambu-
lance. The most unusual object in the MGH’s historical
collection, however, is undoubtedly its 2,650-year-old
Egyptian mummy.
On an August day in 1998, before my initial job in-
terview, I explored the circuitous halls of the hospital,
making a pilgrimage to the famous Ether Dome, the old
operating amphitheater, where in 1846 the ﬁrst public
demonstration of surgical anesthesia had taken place. I
was astonished to ﬁnd there an Egyptian mummy in an
open cofﬁn brightly decorated with painted hieroglyph-
ics. Why did the hospital have a mummy? And why
wasn’t it being better cared for? Its exhibit case was
dusty and scratched. Its leathery, exposed face was
freckled with a white substance resembling the bloom
on a plum. Its desiccated lips were drawn back in a
toothy grimace reminiscent of the scary faces I had seen
in horror movies as a child.
I now know from research in the documentary
record that Dutch merchants trading in the Ottoman
Empire donated the mummy to the hospital as an
anatomical specimen in 1823. The mummy’s name,
occupation, and place of origin are known because an
Egyptologist from Boston’s Museum of Fine Arts trans-
lated the cofﬁn’s hieroglyphics in 1960. They read, in
part: “Spoken by Osiris, he gives all food offerings for
Padihershef, deceased, son of Iref-a-en-her, his mother,
the lady Her-ibes-ines, deceased. Greetings to thee Osi-
ris.” Padihershef, a stonecutter who lived near Thebes
during the Saite Period (XXVI Dynasty), died in his late
forties. Once mummiﬁed, he was placed with other
272
Jeffrey Mifﬂin

mummies in a group burial cave. In 1823 he was ex-
humed and stashed in the hold of an American vessel,
along with barrels of raisins and cases of opium for
medical use in New England, and shipped via the Medi-
terranean and North Atlantic to the new world. His title,
Hrtyw-ntr, meaning “stonecutter in the necropolis,” re-
veals that, in life, he earned his living by tunneling
through the limestone cliffs on the West Bank of Thebes
to make tombs.
Padihershef was one of the ﬁrst Egyptian mum-
mies in the United States. He became famous when
MGH surgeon John Collins Warren unwrapped his
“twenty-ﬁve thicknesses . . . of bandage . . . imbued with
some glutinous substances, intended to preserve them”
before an audience of scientiﬁc men and published an
illustrated report, “Description of an Egyptian Mummy,”
in the ﬁrst issue, in May 1823, of the Boston Journal of
Philosophy and the Arts. His exposed face (which was
never again covered) still tends to exude the “whitish
saline efﬂorescence” described 181 years ago by Warren
in his report.
In preparation for my ﬁrst mummy loan I spent
many hours negotiating and drafting terms for an agree-
ment, locating and hiring experienced mummy movers,
and wrangling over insurance coverage. As part of the
negotiations surrounding my second mummy loan I se-
cured an agreement whereby the borrowing museum
would pay for conservation by a professional mummy
conservator, which would include cleaning (and at least
temporary elimination of the efﬂorescence). During
these periods of research, measurement, and photogra-
phy, the mummy and I became very well acquainted.
Some time ago I opened Padihershef’s wood-and-
glass exhibit case after it had been tightly sealed for sev-
eral years. When I put down my tools and lifted off the
The Mummy
273

front panel of the case a pungent aroma of spices and
resin suffused the room, a sensation common, perhaps,
for a 650 BCE Theban nose, but unforgettably peculiar
for an American in the twenty-ﬁrst century. (Dr. Warren
was similarly surprised by the same smell in 1823.) I re-
alized that the sensation stimulating my nostrils at that
moment was the same experienced by Padihershef’s
friends in Thebes just before they lowered the lid on his
cofﬁn centuries before. I looked at the mummy in a new
light. He was less abstract, and more like me. He had
been ﬂesh and blood and bone, and the ﬂesh and bone
were still there. His senses had once worked as mine now
did. His mind was gone, but neither would I live forever.
I had crossed paths with other mummies as a child
and as a college student, but had never known them in
the way that I came to connect with Padihershef.
As a teenager in St. Louis I had wanted to get away
and immerse myself in interesting work in a distant
place. The rooms in the St. Louis Art Museum that drew
me like ﬁlings to a magnet were those containing Egyp-
tian mummies. The mummies symbolized the mysteries
of the past, the enigma of time, the unfathomable
depths of the unknown. But they also helped me, I
think, to bridge the gap between the knowable and the
inconceivable. I wrote to archaeologists asking about
summer jobs, hoping for the chance to sift through and
touch and photograph the evidence of the past. I got
back several polite replies on university letterheads
thanking me for my interest and suggesting further
study in preparation for a career. Such ambitions were
considered impractical by my mother and father and
were strongly discouraged.
In the late 1960s I enrolled as a student at the Uni-
versity of Chicago. In 1968 I remained in Hyde Park for
the summer quarter, working as a night janitor at the
Oriental Institute Museum. A mimeographed schedule
of duties placed me in the mummy room around mid-
night each Monday through Friday. The room contained
274
Jeffrey Mifﬂin

ﬁve Egyptian mummies in glass exhibit cases, sur-
rounding a giant statue of the boy-king Tutankhamen,
with smaller cases displaying canopic jars, amulets,
and mummiﬁed ibexes. My duties included washing the
glass and turning off the lights in the museum, as well
as in the jumbled storeroom in the basement, sur-
rounded by human remains and shifting shapes in the
half-light. Museums at night are dark and echoing
places, and late adolescence is a troubling journey. My
time there was unsettling.
I had recurring thoughts as I perfunctorily did my
janitorial work. The mummies in the exhibit cases, I
supposed, had believed they would live forever. They
had saved enough in life to begin their death wrapped in
several hundred yards of linen. Religion (which I no
longer had) was a comfort to those who believed. The
scholars who wrote the exhibit labels in the museum
were, for the most part, transmitting accepted assump-
tions and guesses. The chaos in storage, which the pub-
lic never saw, but which I experienced at close range,
gave an entirely different impression from the orderly
presentation of supposed facts carefully packaged for
general consumption in the public exhibits. Would I ever
be able to secure such a degree of certainty about things
that mattered?
Padihershef’s life is over twenty-six centuries and
thousands of miles removed from mine. Was life simpler
(or better) for Padihershef than for me? Did he enjoy love
and the satisfaction of accomplishment? I hope so. Did
he also know fear, pain, disappointment, and failure,
those seemingly inevitable companions of the human
condition? Did he have historical perspective, or suffer
from existential angst?
He knew a few things very well and probably be-
lieved in the ordered afterlife described by the hiero-
glyphics on his cofﬁn. Surrounded as he was in Thebes
by tombs, ruins, and inscribed obelisks, he probably
had some awareness of the historical past. How did the
The Mummy
275

reverberation of his bronze chisel on stone, or the rough
texture of his wooden mallet, or the smell of a burial
evoke for him the sense of his personal past, and how
did this affect him? What was his personal measure of
himself and how did it compare with the expectations of
his society?
I have calculated the generations back to ancient
Egypt. There are about 130, I estimate, between Padi-
hershef and me. I was born in 1949, my father in 1919,
and his father in 1874. My ancestors came to America
from Wiltshire, England, in the 1680s. Grandpa, Great-
Grandpa, and the rest line up in my mind like dominoes
poised to fall, or megaliths waiting to be worn away or
covered up by centuries of weather and accumulated
strata. Was my distant progenitor in Britain mining tin
or slicing blocks of peat at the same time that Padiher-
shef was chiseling out tombs in Egypt? What was my
place in this family lineage, this historical continuum? I
have, in due course, occupied my allotted place and rep-
resented my generation. My digging and tunneling have
been of a different sort, reading and writing, exploring,
analyzing, and making available the historical record.
There is an inner frontier as complex and elusive
as any external exploration ever attempted. My wonder,
I expect, about my own place in the continuum will con-
tinue for as long as I live. As Pascal remarked, “When I
consider the short duration of my life, engulfed in the in-
ﬁnite immensity of spaces of which I am ignorant . . .
I . . . am astonished at being here rather than there.”1 I
still wonder at circumstance, chance, and the lineage of
things that matter.
Jeffrey Mifﬂin, an archivist who specializes in
technology, science, and medicine, divides his time
between the Massachusetts General Hospital and MIT.
276
Jeffrey Mifﬂin

The Mummy
277

Here, and on this sentence that was perhaps also meant for
him, he was obliged to stop. It was practically while listening to
her speak that he had written these notes. He still heard her
voice as he wrote. He showed them to her. She did not want to
read. She read only a few passages, which she did because he
gently asked her to. “Who is speaking?” she said. “Who, then,
is speaking?” She sensed an error that she could not put her
ﬁnger on. “Erase whatever doesn’t seem right to you.” But she
could not erase anything, either. She sadly threw down all the
pages. She had the impression that although he had assured
her that he would believe her implicitly, he did not believe her
enough, with the force that would have rendered the truth
present. “And now you have taken something away from me
that I no longer have and that you do not even have.” Weren’t
there any words that she accepted more willingly? Any that di-
verged less from what she was thinking? But everything before
her eyes was spinning: she had lost the center from which the
events had radiated and that she had held onto so ﬁrmly until
now. She said, perhaps in order to save something, perhaps be-
cause the ﬁrst words say everything, that the ﬁrst paragraph
seemed to her to be the most faithful and so did the second
somewhat, especially at the end. . . .
He did not remember questioning her, but that was no
excuse; he had questioned her in a more urgent manner by his
silence, his waiting, and the signs he had made to her. He had
induced her to say the truth too openly, a truth that was direct,
disarmed, irrevocable.
—Maurice Blanchot, Awaiting Oblivion

THE GEOID
Michael M. J. Fischer

“It’s my article!” Irene complains about her 124th
publication, the ﬁrst of a nine-part abridgment of her 
scientiﬁc autobiography, appearing as she nears her
97th birthday: “Why can’t they use the title the way I
wrote it?”1 She is right, of course. She usually is, even if
the words don’t always come out right. My mother is
conﬁned to chair and wheelchair. Her eyes tire too
quickly to read very much.
The title of her autobiography is Geodesy? What’s
That? My Personal Involvement in the Age-Old Quest for
the Size and Shape of the Earth, With a Running Com-
mentary on Life in a Government Research Ofﬁce.2 The
publisher has suggested another, shorter title, Geo-
desy? What’s That? and it is hardly the same. It makes
the book sound like a primer, a technical introduction
rather than what it is: a lively, sometimes sarcastic, and
above all joyous account of a career she loved. My
mother’s scientiﬁc career from 1952–1977 coincided
with the golden age of classical geodesy, and she reveled
in her ability to participate and lead.
The geoid, moiré-like, simultaneously material
earth and mathematical shape, is deﬁned as that equi-
potential surface of the earth’s gravity ﬁeld that most
closely approximates mean sea level. It is an uneven
surface with ﬂattening at the poles and bulging at the
equator. There is more ﬂattening at one pole than the
other, and it is marked by depressions here and there,
as around the Hudson Bay, caused by the Ice Age (like
a thumb pressing in on a rubber ball). There are differ-
ences too between the sea and land, and between moun-
tains and other geomorphological features. The Paciﬁc
and Atlantic sea levels are not the same. The irregulari-
ties of the geoid are measured against reference ellip-
soids, known by the numbers deﬁning their ﬂattenings.
280
Michael M. J. Fischer

For me, the geoid begins with the high school geometry
textbook my mother wrote while I myself was in high
school, struggling not to besmirch the whiz-kid reputa-
tion my older sister had established with the math
teachers. By the time I was learning geometry, my
mother was instilling in me the basics of geodesy.
In 1952, when I was in ﬁrst grade, my mother was
hired to work in the four-person Long Line Section of the
Geoid Branch of the Army Map Service. It was the pro-
jective geometry that Irene had learned in Vienna that
began to make her name within the Geoid Branch. Dur-
ing World War II, two-dimensional survey grids were
rotated until they ﬁt into neighboring surveys when
stretched to scale. My mother insisted that the future 
of map making would require three-dimensional ap-
proaches and began building the databases that would
become the world datums that carry her name.3
As Irene rose in the ranks, eventually becoming
the Geoid Branch Chief, she began to explore a series of
historical problems such as why conventional geode-
sists insisted on using limited two-dimensional short-
cuts. Sometimes Irene pursued these puzzles to break
down barriers to further conceptual development.
Sometimes she pursued them just to solve historical
puzzles, as when she investigated why determination of
the earth’s circumference by Eratosthenes (the ancient
philosopher from Cyrene) had been reduced to 180,000
stadia by Posidonius or by Ptolemy. This reduction had
been a fateful underestimation of the size of the earth
that allowed Columbus to persuade his patrons that the
distance westward by sea to India and Cathay would be
shorter than eastward overland.
My mother’s pursuit of historical puzzles of this
sort was constant conﬁrmation to me of the value of
The Geoid
281

learning languages, and of how much better my parents’
European gymnasium education had been than that
provided by my American high school. (My father had
eight years of Latin and four of Greek, and my mother
studied Latin in school, Greek after school, English and
Hebrew, and later taught herself Russian to read tech-
nical literature, and Yiddish to translate a book about
the Ukrainian village of her father’s origin). But perhaps
more important to me in my teenage years, preoccupied
with the quest for philosophical clariﬁcation, was the
example of the geoid as a model. It models the idea of
manipulable geometric constructions against which a
complicated reality could be compared, and of best-
ﬁtting ellipsoids, each ﬁtting a portion of the earth
better in different places. Historically, this work had in-
volved famous expeditions such as the two sent out by
the Académie Royale de Paris in 1735–1736 to measure
arcs in Peru and Lappland, and such systematic sur-
veys as when in the 1870s India trained pandits and
lamas to secretly measure the distance from Darjeeling
to Lhasa hiding strips of paper in Tibetan prayer wheels
to record the paces marched.
The expeditions continued in Irene’s day. She was
part of delicate negotiations to get the South Africans,
the Argentineans, the Brazilians, and others to con-
tribute their national survey data to her geodetic world
datums. As an enticement to the Argentineans for
contributing their data, Irene arranged for them to be
trained on and be able to use the Army Map Service’s
computers. Jealous bureaucrats prevented her from at-
tending conventions at which her results were pre-
sented, but the South American geodesists gave her a
quite unusual and ofﬁcial “Vote of Applause.” Today
oceanography, marine geodesy, satellite geodesy, and
now, space geodesy have transformed the ﬁeld. Irene
can’t keep up, and I can do so only as a lay outsider. We
get EOS, Transactions of the American Geophysical
282
Michael M. J. Fischer

Union, and I read or summarize the articles of interest
to her. The print is way too small for her to read.
Books on geoids rarely come in Large Print, and
when they do, they often do not come with enough white
around the margins and paragraphs to make reading
easy. Listening to someone else read takes focus and at-
tention. Becoming familiar with a book is a different pro-
cess in old age if you can’t ﬂip around in the pages or
use the index yourself, more like exploring a new terri-
tory with a cane. And if your memory is no longer quite
so good, as is the case for Irene, things easily get con-
fused. You ﬁll in hypothetically, sometimes coming to
closure about connecting the dots with false memories
that seem so clearly right. So we read a book not by
reading from beginning to end, but by zeroing in on proj-
ects and places, looking for the points of attachment, for
the personal and social in the science.
My own career repeatedly crossed outposts of my
mother’s work. Everywhere I went, there were points of
attachment, people, and memories that allowed Irene to
travel along, as we might say today, “virtually.” Now, the
evocations of the geoid create a community that Irene
and I still can share. They help to orient her world, reaf-
ﬁrm her personhood, allow her dignity amidst the indig-
nities of old age. It is not so important that the dream
world intervenes, that logic gets confused, that reading
cannot be managed, that what was once intellectual
challenge is now too technical. What is important is the
self and its relations, the ability to feel oneself as sen-
tient, as having accomplishments, as being recognized.
Irene wrote her autobiography not as a primer, but as a
sharing of memories, personal stories, and perspectives.
For my mother and me, the geoid has become a ve-
hicle for the negotiations of old age, a surface for mutual
reference. It keeps the two of us grounded and in 
synchrony. The geoid is hard as rock, ﬂuid as the sea,
smooth and distorted as a computational surface, a
The Geoid
283

transitional object that draws me into mathematics,
history, faraway places, and a community of people
from Eratosthenes to Ptolemy, mathematicians to 
astronauts, and always already into the family 
romance that an immigrant geographer-historian and
his mathematician-geodesist wife created.
Michael M. J. Fischer holds a joint appointment in
the Program in Science, Technology, and Society and
the Anthropology Program at MIT.
284
Michael M. J. Fischer

The Geoid
285

Another source of the sublime is inﬁnity. . . . Inﬁnity has a ten-
dency to ﬁll the mind with that sort of delightful horror, which
is the most genuine effect and truest test of the sublime. . . .
Whenever we repeat any idea frequently, the mind, by a
sort of mechanism, repeats it long after the ﬁrst cause has
ceased to operate. After whirling about, when we sit down, the
objects about us still seem to whirl. After a long succession of
noises, as the fall of waters, or the beating of forge-hammers,
the hammers beat and the water roars in the imagination long
after the ﬁrst sounds have ceased to affect it; and they die away
at last by gradations which are scarcely perceptible.
—Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of
Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful

FOUCAULT’S PENDULUM
Robert P. Crease

My ﬁrst encounter with Foucault’s pendulum left me
unsettled.
I was twelve years old and visiting the Franklin In-
stitute, a science museum in the heart of Philadelphia,
the city where I was born. This was before the heyday of
interactive demonstrations, but the Institute had plenty
of hands-on exhibits, mostly in electricity and mechan-
ics, that I found fascinating and gratifying. The display
in the main staircase to the right of the main entrance,
however, was different. It was a simple device: a heavy
polished silver bob, about two feet in diameter, sus-
pended by a wire cable from the ceiling four ﬂights up.
All the bob did was swing, slowly and ponderously, back
and forth over a compass rose mounted in the ﬂoor, once
every ten seconds. As the day wore on, the plane of its
oscillation slowly drifted around to the left. The change
was noticeable if you paid attention to the compass rose
for a long enough time, but was marked more tangibly
thanks to a set of four-inch steel pegs that stood in two
semicircles on the ﬂoor, like a column of stout and de-
termined toy soldiers, around the outskirts of the rose.
A small stylus underneath the bob knocked down the
peg-soldiers, one by one, about every twenty minutes or
so. The stylus would creep toward a peg-soldier, graze it,
make it wobble, and then knock it over, literally like
clockwork. The sign by the ﬁrst-ﬂoor stairwell said that
while it may seem as though the pendulum’s swing was
changing direction, what the museum visitor was really
seeing was the earth turning. Try as I might, I couldn’t
see it.
During my junior high school years the Institute
became my haven. After school, I would rush there when
I could—taking a train, then a bus—to have as much
time as possible before making my way home. My fa-
288
Robert P. Crease

vorite exhibit would change from month to month: a
wind tunnel, a mechanical clock, an electrical display
that sparked, a funnel that traced elaborate designs
when ﬁlled with sand, a telescope on the building’s roof.
The Foucault pendulum was never my favorite, but it
had a majestic presence that was unlike the others. It
stood in a kind of isolation. It had no buttons to push,
no dials to turn. It generated no sparks, gave off no
lights, and did not hum. Institute staff members started
the pendulum in the morning just before the doors
opened—I never saw this happen—and then left it to it-
self the entire day without any additional pushes, elec-
tronic or otherwise. It was huge. It ran from the bottom
of the stairwell all the way to the ceiling. It dwarfed me.
It couldn’t be taken in at a glance, whether you were
high up in the stairwell looking down on the bob and
compass rose, or at the bottom level looking at the bob
and pegs dead on. I would always spend part of each
visit returning to the staircase to watch its silver sphere
glide silently back and forth, occasionally knocking
down a peg, until some moment late in the day when the
pendulum swing had narrowed sufﬁciently so that the
bob no longer reached the outskirts of the rose and 
the rest of the peg-soldiers were safe. Still, stare as I
might, I could never see the earth turn.
One day I went to the Institute’s library and found
an article about the pendulum in a back issue of the In-
stitute’s bulletin. That provided me with information
about this particular pendulum, which had been one of
the Institute’s ﬁrst exhibits when it had moved into its
current building back in 1934. The article also inspired
me to read up on the life of the nineteenth-century
physicist Jean-Bernard-Léon Foucault, who, while play-
ing around with a pendulum-driven clock that he wanted
Foucault’s Pendulum
289

to attach to a camera, noticed that a pendulum contin-
ues to move in the same plane when its mount is turned,
and realized that with this effect he could demonstrate
the motion of the earth. Foucault’s most famous dem-
onstration—commemorated by several drawings—took
place in March 1851 at the Panthéon, which used a can-
nonball for a bob suspended by a wire over 200 feet long.
The bob glided twenty feet across the ﬂoor with each
swing, making one back and forth oscillation every six-
teen seconds, and at the end of each swing a stylus
mounted underneath the cannonball cut a mark in a
bank of wet sand.
By the end of 1851, Foucault pendulums had
sprung up all over the world. Today there are hundreds,
perhaps thousands: their wires are longer or shorter,
their bobs made of various materials, their periods
quicker or slower, and they mark the shift in the direc-
tion of the plane of oscillation in different ways. The
amount of the shift depends on the latitude. At the
North and South Poles, a pendulum would make a full,
360-degree circuit every twenty-four hours, moving ﬁf-
teen degrees per hour. The hourly deviation is smaller
closer to the equator—and the shift is clockwise in the
northern hemisphere, counter-clockwise in the south-
ern. Each and every one of these pendulums is in effect
connected by the fact that they are on the same spinning
globe. I found this, too, an inspiring vision. I imagined
clusters of people surrounding each one of these pen-
dulums in museums, schools, and churches all over
this vast planet. They are staring at it and seeing . . .
seeing what?
Armed with all my knowledge and information, I
still was not sure. Could they indeed be seeing the pen-
dulum plane as utterly motionless, and the earth—that
is, themselves, the people standing next to them, the
ﬂoor underneath, the building, and the entire rest of the
planet to which the building was attached—as moving?
Foucault himself clearly thought so, and often wrote
290
Robert P. Crease

about how his pendulum spoke “directly to the eyes.” So
did the museum curators who wrote the signs at most
of the Foucault pendulums I have seen.
Perhaps, I thought, the pendulum is a grand opti-
cal illusion, a case of our senses presenting us with one
“reality”—that two sticks are of different lengths, say, as
in the Müller-Lyer illusion—while “science” (in the form
of a ruler) presents us with something different. In the
case of Foucault’s pendulum, the collision is between
our perception that our immediate surroundings are
stationary and the astronomical conclusion that we are
whirling about. But this would still not explain how we
could see the earth moving. The ruler, after all, does not
cause the Müller-Lyer illusion to cease—we still “see”
one stick as bigger than the other, even though psy-
chologists may be able to train themselves not to do so.
The museum’s signage does not tell me what I see. My
vision does.
Still, the case of optical illusions inspired me to in-
vestigate the philosophy of perception, and its conclu-
sion that we always see things against a background or
horizon. Sometimes we can switch back and forth be-
tween what we take to be foreground and what back-
ground, an experience that has fascinated philosophers
interested in the subject: Leibniz wrote about being
aboard a moving boat and alternately perceiving the
boat or the riverbank as moving, Merleau-Ponty about
being on a train alongside another and being able to
perceive either one as moving. This helped. When I look
at the pendulum, I make it the foreground, and have
the surroundings—the stairwell, the building, and so
forth—as the background. For this reason I see the
plane of the pendulum move, and not the earth. To
think that I could see the earth move would be akin to
the error of thinking that I could touch the horizon. Are
there any circumstances, I wondered, in which I could
see the earth move? This would require somehow at-
taching the plane of the pendulum’s swing to a back-
Foucault’s Pendulum
291

ground. It could be done, I ﬁgured, and in several ways:
What would happen, for instance, if a pendulum were
made big enough for me to crawl inside, with windows
to look out from? Then my background would be my im-
mediate environment, the bob’s interior my own little
ark, and I might be able to see everything else as mov-
ing around it for the same reason that the ancients saw
the heavens revolving around the earth. Or, what would
happen if a pendulum were mounted outside on a clear
night? Then the background would be the starry heav-
ens, and I might be able to see that the plane of the pen-
dulum’s swing was ﬁxed with respect to it and that
everything other than these things was in motion.
But this transformed Foucault’s pendulum, for
me, from a scientiﬁc into a philosophical object. It
seemed now to reveal the limitations of perception. If
what we see is a function of the environment and how
we stage what’s in the foreground, didn’t this mean that
something would always be beyond the horizon of per-
ception, unable to be captured? This thought, at once
disturbing and liberating, made Foucault’s pendulum
an instrument of the sublime. Authors such as Burke
and Kant have written extensively about the sublime in
nature, art, and politics: the sublime involved an expe-
rience of the inadequacy of our senses to the presenta-
tion of a natural catastrophe. Foucault’s pendulum
exhibits a different sort of sublime. It exhibits what one
might call the scientiﬁc sublime, the kind that scientiﬁc
experiments have insofar as they reveal that nature is
inﬁnitely richer than the concepts and procedures with
which we approach it. But Foucault’s pendulum ex-
hibits yet another kind of sublime as well, having to do
with the disclosure of the futility of the expectation of
any kind of ﬁnal answer.
I found this kind of sublime manifested in Um-
berto Eco’s Foucault’s Pendulum. Casaubon, the narra-
tor, encounters the eponymous device in the Museum of
Arts and Trades in Paris, where it causes him to con-
292
Robert P. Crease

template the deceptive nature of his own perception. If
the ﬂoor beneath his feet was not still, what was? The
experience forces him to embrace a mystery—the mo-
bility of the universe—that hinted at but did not prom-
ise the comfort of a ﬁxed point. It exposed him to the
temptation to try to control, to manage, the anxiety pro-
duced by that mystery by seeking such an (illusory)
ﬁxed point. The narrator overhears an earnest and be-
spectacled boy converse emotionlessly with a female
companion about the history and signiﬁcance of the
pendulum. After a moment the couple wanders off, “he,
trained on some textbook that had blunted his capacity
for wonder, she, inert and insensitive to the thrill of the
inﬁnite, both oblivious of the awesomeness of their en-
counter.”1 Eco’s mockery is a little cheap—everyone has
sneered at conversations overheard at a museum or
concert—but it does illustrate our defenses against the
scientiﬁc sublime, or, better, our strategies for avoiding
the experience altogether.
In Eco’s bafﬂing and brilliant book, Casaubon
and his comrades encounter a group of fanatics certain
of the existence of a grand conspiracy at work in history.
They believe that if they could unravel the conspiracy
they would have access to knowledge powerful enough
to control the world. But the conspiracy does not exist—
it is a projection, a desperate and hopeless attempt to
ﬁnd a stable point, an unmoving center, a key to the
mysterious: like the pendulum itself. “Even the Pendu-
lum is a false prophet,” a companion tells Casaubon.
“You look at it, you think it’s the only ﬁxed point in the
cosmos, but if you detach it from the ceiling of the Con-
servatoire and hang it in a brothel, it works just the
same. . . . It promises the inﬁnite, but where to put the
inﬁnite is left to me.”2
The fanatics who pursue the conspiracy are,
therefore, unable to appreciate the sublime, stuck at the
last step before it, because they are still convinced of
the omnipotent power of understanding. To experience
Foucault’s Pendulum
293

the sublime requires experiencing the futility of this
quest—the futility, Kant would say, of trying to bring
what they are pursuing into accustomed categories, or
measurable limits of comprehension. Casaubon and his
knowledgeable associates, though ultimately appreciat-
ing the futility of the quest for a ﬁxed point, are never en-
tirely liberated by this realization. They remain riddled
with anxiety and vulnerable to the less rareﬁed and
more frightening reactions of the fanatics. Experiencing
the sublime, for them, never manages to place the ter-
ror at a safe distance.
A few years ago, I returned to the Franklin Insti-
tute for the ﬁrst time since high school thirty-some
years ago. The bob is new, and the compass rose has
been replaced by a backlit globe. I know much more
about the history of this pendulum, its ancestors and
siblings. I still don’t see the earth turn. Nevertheless, I
still ﬁnd it what I’d call a “deep object,” something that
guides and disciplines curiosity and fascination into
interaction and self-transformation.
Robert P. Crease is Chairman of the Department
of Philosophy, State University of New York at
Stony Brook.
294
Robert P. Crease


Perceiving is not a matter of passively allowing an organ—say
of sight or hearing—to receive a ready-made impression from
without, like a palette receiving a spot of paint. Recognizing
and remembering are not matters of stirring up old images of
past impressions. It is generally agreed that all our impressions
are schematically determined from the start. As perceivers we
select from all the stimuli falling on our senses only those
which interest us, and our interests are governed by a pattern-
making tendency, sometimes called schema. In a chaos of
shifting impressions, each of us constructs a stable world in
which objects have recognizable shapes, are located in depth
and have permanence. In perceiving we are building, taking
some cues and rejecting others. The most acceptable cues are
those which ﬁt most easily into the pattern that is being built
up. Ambiguous ones tend to be treated as if they harmonized
with the rest of the pattern. Discordant ones tend to be re-
jected. If they are accepted the structure of assumptions has
to be modiﬁed. As learning proceeds objects are named. Their
names then affect the way they are perceived next time: once
labeled they are more speedily slotted into pigeon-holes in the
future.
As time goes on and experiences pile up, we make a
greater and greater investment in our system of labels.
—Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger

SLIME MOLD
Evelyn Fox Keller

I take an organism as my object, the lowly amoeba-like
protist, Dictyostelium. In times of plenty, it lives as an
individual single-celled organism but, when food sup-
plies are exhausted, it regroups. Then, this one-celled
protist becomes part of a complex multicellular motile
slug capable of producing fruiting bodies and spores,
and of migrating in search of greener pastures where
the new spores can germinate.1 Over the years, it has at-
tracted a great deal of scientiﬁc interest, partly because
it so elegantly exempliﬁes a primitive form of biological
development, and partly for the paradoxes it embodies.
On the one hand, here is a single-celled organism, exist-
ing in a population of apparently identical organisms,
and on the other hand, it is a part of a differentiated
organism assuming a particular role and structure in
the larger entity, the multicellular organism. Here is an
object that trafﬁcs back and forth both between the one
and the many and between sameness and difference.
For me, this simple being, in its rich ambivalence, has
served as an intellectual touchstone, a sustaining object
throughout my academic career. Over and over, my
work would confront me with a dilemma and this object
would resurface to help, offering itself as a model for an
entirely new way to think about it. For me, slime mold
has unarguably served as an object-to-think-with.
My ﬁrst encounter with Dictyostelium came in
1968. I was working at Cornell Medical College in New
York City, looking for ways to fruitfully apply mathe-
matical methods to biological problems. Lee Segel, an
applied mathematician from Rensselaer Polytechnic In-
stitute was visiting Cornell for the year, and we teamed
up to tackle a couple of problems that looked as though
they might be tractable, among these the problem of
slime mold aggregation. The onset of aggregation is the
298
Evelyn Fox Keller

ﬁrst visible step in the process that eventually leads to
the cellular differentiation observed in the multicellular
organism. Prior to aggregation, there is no apparent dif-
ference among cells. But once it occurs, aggregation cre-
ates a differential environment for the cells, and therefore
it could presumably account for subsequent cell differ-
entiation. The problem is, what sets off the aggregation?
Is there some hidden-from-view prior difference, a dif-
ference that then serves as the trigger for the develop-
ment of more elaborate, structured, and clearly visible
heterogeneity? Does the onset of organization in fact re-
quire the existence of such a preexisting “cause”? Most
biologists seemed to think so, and they hypothesized
such prior structures under the name of “founder cells.”
Or was it possible that organization might emerge spon-
taneously, out of the dynamics of the population as a
whole? The ﬁrst possibility held little appeal for Segel
and me: ﬁrst, it only pushed the question of the origin
of heterogeneity further back (where did the founder
cells come from?); second, we could ﬁnd no evidence for
the existence of such specialized cells. We set out to
demonstrate the feasibility of the second possibility—
the notion that organization could emerge from the dy-
namics of the population as a whole.
The model we developed was a highly simpliﬁed—
in fact, clearly oversimpliﬁed—representation of the ac-
tual biological case. Like other mathematical models
traditionally employed in the natural sciences, it in-
cluded just enough of the known biological factors to
give rise to the essential phenomenon. At its heart, the
model demonstrated that no designated initiator, founder
cell, or organizer was required for understanding the ad-
vent of aggregation in a uniform distribution of previ-
ously undifferentiated cells. We showed that clusters of
Slime Mold
299

amoeba would result from the collective dynamics of a
population in which a change in external conditions (in
this case, depletion of the bacteria that served as their
food source) induced a change of state, and indeed, the
same change in state, in each individual amoeba. Our
account of the onset of differentiation in at least one
kind of biological development offered a way to resolve
the paradox (how does highly structured difference
arise from similarity?) that so sharply divided genetics
from embryology. We assumed that it would be of inter-
est to biologists.
But we were wrong—not so much in our model as in our
expectations. Biologists, for the most part, showed little
interest in our ideas, and despite the absence of evi-
dence, continued to adhere to the belief that founder
cells (or pacemakers) were responsible for aggregation.
At the time, Segel and I were disappointed and per-
plexed, but only after ten years had passed did I see how
this fact was of interest in itself. What made my new
recognition possible was a shift in intellectual mindset
and the focus provided by a sharp question posed on the
other end of a telephone.
By the early 1980s, I had found a new calling. I had
moved my intellectual center of gravity from theoretical
physics, molecular biology, and mathematical biology to
issues of gender and science. To me, its questions were
compelling: How to liberate science from its history of
attachment to masculinist ideologies? How to under-
stand the implications of the very different approach
to science manifested in work such as that done by the
geneticist Barbara McClintock? McClintock had not
tried to separate herself from her objects of study—corn
cells—to stay more “objective.” She imagined herself
more “among them,” herself reduced to their size, per-
haps as a way of becoming one of them.2
So, in 1981, slime mold aggregation was far from
my mind when, one evening, I received a call from Alan
300
Evelyn Fox Keller

Garﬁnkel, a recent convert to mathematical biology. He
had recently come across the paper Segel and I had writ-
ten on the subject, but he had not been able to ﬁnd any
follow-up, either in the form of critique of the work or ex-
pansion on the ideas. He asked what was going on. He
asked if there was a conspiracy. The call took me aback,
not because I thought there had or had not been any
conspiracy, but because it immediately brought into fo-
cus a problem I had been struggling with around the
disparity between McClintock’s perceptions and those
of her colleagues. I had been wondering why accounts
of biological processes that brought such explana-
tory satisfaction to her colleagues had failed to satisfy
McClintock. And vice versa? The sharply worded tele-
phone call reminded me that when I had tried to talk to
biologists about our model of slime mold aggregation I
had experienced that same wall blocking both interest
and understanding.
Suddenly, I saw my own experience as an example
of a general phenomenon—a widespread disposition to
kinds of explanation that posit a single central causal lo-
cus (governor, founder cell, pacemaker)—and that this
disposition was crucial in understanding the gap be-
tween conventional understandings of biological devel-
opment as DNA driven and McClintock’s own more
dynamic proposals. Following David Nanney, I referred to
such explanations as “master-molecule theories” and be-
gan to wonder why it should be that people tend to ﬁnd
such accounts more natural and conceptually simpler
than global, interactive accounts in which causal force is
distributed.3 One possible hypothesis that seemed plau-
sible to me was that we tend to project onto nature our
ﬁrst and earliest social experiences, ones in which we feel
passive and acted upon. But in any case, I wrote,
As scientists, our mission is to understand and
explain natural phenomena, but the words under-
stand and explain have many different meanings.
Slime Mold
301

In our zealous desire for familiar models of expla-
nation, we risk not noticing the discrepancies be-
tween our own predispositions and the range of
possibilities inherent in natural phenomena. In
short, we risk imposing on nature the very stories
we like to hear.4
Another twenty years have passed since my work
on scientists and their preferred narratives of nature.
My intellectual preoccupations have shifted again. For
more than a decade I wrote about genetics and devel-
opmental biology, and today I ﬁnd myself turning to 
developmental psychology. Insofar as my focus has 
remained on the nature of developmental processes per
se, the shift has been but a small step, and a new com-
munity of intellectual allies was easy to identify. For ex-
ample, in my work on developmental biology, I had
mounted a strong critique of the concept of the “genetic
program” (understood as a program for development en-
coded in the DNA), and I found an entire school of psy-
chology engaging in similar arguments. Its scholars
were making strong claims about the value of dynami-
cal systems theory for understanding developmental
processes. What drew these psychologists to dynamical
systems theory was the language that theory provided
for describing the emergence of novel patterns of or-
ganization in complex, nonlinear systems, patterns that
could not have been predicted from studying the behav-
ior of individual components in isolation.
To me, this had the ring of déjà vu, but much had
changed over the years since my early foray into dynam-
ical systems. In particular, familiarity with examples of
self-organization—in physics, in computer science, and
even in biology (where slime mold aggregation has be-
come a canonical example)—now extends beyond these
academic communities. One effect of a more common
knowledge of examples of self-organization is that, over
the last ﬁfteen years, a series of proposals from different
302
Evelyn Fox Keller

disciplinary quarters urge the reframing of all psycho-
logical and biological arguments in terms of dynamical
systems.5
The word reframing here is crucial. Almost all of
these proposals suggest alternatives to conventional
framings of development in terms of programs (either
genetic or developmental), where the very term program
is seen as implying the unfolding or elaboration of in-
nate capacities. The authors who have taken up the
cause of dynamical systems see in this approach an an-
tidote to the prevailing innatism of so much of contem-
porary writing in biology and cognitive science.
All of these authors seek to redress what they see
as the disproportionate emphasis currently placed on
internal factors of development; I have enormous sym-
pathy with their concerns. But in this particular in-
tellectual dispute, I found myself jolted out of any
comforting alliance by a sharp recollection of slime
mold, a call from my past. Slime mold aggregation is
illustrative of self-organization in dynamical systems,
but does it not equally well illustrate the power of a de-
velopmental program embodied in an individual cell?
And if it does, then how can it be said that dynamical
systems offer an alternative to notions of program? In-
deed, I am prompted to ask, can a viable distinction be-
tween the two even be made? For me, it cannot. The
implications of this heresy are large; they include, for
example, the possibility that the battle lines against in-
natism need, yet again, to be redrawn.
Let us return then to Dictyostelium. Our early
model was deﬁcient in many ways, yet our central point
is still valid: the aggregation of a population of single-
celled amoebae (and its subsequent development into
multicellular organisms) proceeds spontaneously, with-
out the need for distinctive founder cells; the population
emerges as the product of decentralized and local inter-
actions among molecules secreted by individual cells.
In other words, despite the elucidation of its genetic
Slime Mold
303

organization, Dictyostelium has survived as a simple
and compelling model of a self-organizing dynamical
system. Given the current state of controversy I return
to my touchstone to ask: can we therefore say that there
is no developmental program for this organism?
That depends, of course, on what we mean by a
program. The most relevant deﬁnition given by the Ox-
ford English Dictionary has two parts: ﬁrst, “a deﬁnite
plan or scheme of an intended proceedings,” and sec-
ond, “an outline or abstract of something to be done.”6
Both suffer, in this context, from an objectionable degree
of anthropomorphism. There is no “intention” guiding
the development of an organism, nor is there anywhere
an agent “doing” the work. Nevertheless, developmental
processes proceed along rather well-deﬁned tracks and
conclude with quite predictable outcomes. Remarkably
little is left to chance in a developing organism—in fact,
it might be said that one of the fundamental character-
istics of biological development is the capacity to resist
the effects of the myriad vicissitudes the growing em-
bryo inevitably encounters.7 Thus, to the extent that we
can rid the notion of program of its anthropomorphic
connotations and think of it simply as a plan or scheme
of a proceedings with a deﬁnite outcome, a plan that
need not be located in a particular structure or homun-
culus but that may instead be distributed throughout
the system, I would argue that the very reliability of
most forms of biological development demands the ex-
istence of a program.
The key idea of a plan or program for reliable de-
velopment is that the organism (or machine) must be
able to resist the disturbances that can throw it off
course, either by suppressing or by adapting to them. In
other words, such a program must have contingency
built into it—instructions, if you will—for how to re-
spond to a range of different kinds of input. In the case
of slime mold, the single cell needs to have a change-of-
state plan—a plan for changing certain key cell param-
304
Evelyn Fox Keller

eters when the food runs out. More sophisticated organ-
isms are equipped with programs (or built-in strategies)
for changing state in response to changes in a far larger
set of parameters. A computer program may not be such
a bad image after all, but think of it as a program for sur-
vival. Such a program (or strategy) no more requires an-
ticipation than does any other function that has been
evolved by the process of natural selection.
The main challenge for the notion of a program lo-
cated inside the individual cell lies elsewhere: if we are
to grant the existence of a program inside the individual
(undifferentiated) slime mold cell, that program must
not only allow for the change of state in that cell to be
triggered by starvation but also for the reproduction of
the cell. Without reproduction, there will be no popu-
lation, and without a population of cells, there can be
no aggregation. But after ﬁfty years of work, most of
which has been inspired by John von Neumann’s early
efforts, this problem too seems to have been resolved
for programs. Today, programs for reproduction—in
virtual even if not in physical space—have become ubiq-
uitous. There are of course still problems, and these
problems—primarily having to do with the programs’
lack of robustness—are largely responsible for their con-
ﬁnement in virtual space. In this sense, real organisms
remain far ahead.
As an object-to-think-with, slime mold has proven
to be an immense resource. I am grateful for this oppor-
tunity to pay it homage. Some have resisted its message,
but there is, too, the danger of overusing it. There are
limits to what it has to teach us. The particular route to
multicellularity it manifests is, after all, a rather primi-
tive one; furthermore, it bears little resemblance to the
developmental process by which most complex organ-
isms come into being. Slime mold may be equipped with
a program for adapting to the scarcity of food, but the
developmental programs of higher organisms must deal
with a far larger range of variability, and evolution has
Slime Mold
305

equipped them with an extraordinary repertoire of ways
of adapting to such variability. The world challenges
them anew each and every day and in ways that could
not possibly be met with a single tool, or even a few, or
perhaps not even with a ﬁnite number of tools. Slime
mold, in its capacity for self-organization, illustrates
one strategy for survival, and it is undoubtedly a versa-
tile and fertile object-to-think with. But ultimately more
complex living beings ﬁnd the need of a far larger reper-
toire of strategies than this little organism can possibly
be expected to display.
Evelyn Fox Keller is Professor Emeritus of History
and Philosophy of Science in the Program in Science,
Technology, and Society at MIT.
306
Evelyn Fox Keller

WHAT MAKES AN OBJECT
EVOCATIVE?
Sherry Turkle
What makes an object evocative?1 As I write, Bodies, an
exhibition of preserved humans from China, is on tour
internationally. Its objects, poised between death and
new animation, raise questions about the sanctity of
what has lived, the nature of art, and the human beings
who once were the objects on display. Thinking about
the uncanny, about thresholds and boundaries helps
us understand these objects with their universal pow-
ers of evocation.
And yet, the meaning of even such objects shifts
with time, place, and differences among individuals.2
Some ﬁnd the preserved bodies the fearsome creatures
of night terrors. For others, they seem almost reassur-
ing, an opportunity to contemplate that although death
leaves matter inert, a soul may be eternal.
To the question “What makes an object evocative?”
this collection offers pointers to theory (presented as
epigraphs) and the testimony of its object narratives,
voices that speak in most cases about familiar objects—
an apple, an instant camera, a rolling pin. One role of
theory here is to defamiliarize them. Theory enables us,
for example, to explore how everyday objects become
part of our inner life: how we use them to extend the
reach of our sympathies by bringing the world within.
As theory defamiliarizes objects, objects familiar-
ize theory. The abstract becomes concrete, closer to
lived experience. In this essay I highlight the theoretical
themes of each of the six parts of this collection (with spe-
cial emphasis on objects and the inner life) in the hope
that theory itself will become an evocative object. That
is, I encourage readers to create their own associations,

to combine and recombine objects and theories—most
generally, to use objects to bring philosophy down to
earth.
It was made of two wheels and an axle, with a pin
hanging down from the middle of the axle (not quite hit-
ting the ground), and a string at the end of the pin.
—Mitchel Resnick, “Stars”
Objects of Design and Play
Objects help us make our minds, reaching out to us to
form active partnerships. Mitchel Resnick’s pull-toy, a
wooden car on a string, embodied a paradox: “Since the
string is attached to the end of the pin, it seems that the
pin should come toward you. At the same time, it seems
that the wheels should come toward you. Both can’t be
true.” Resnick had been shown the pull-toy in his high
school physics class; he brought the idea of the toy car
home with him, but more than this, he brought home
the notion of paradox itself. He took apart his own, fa-
miliar toys for parts that enabled him to rebuild the 
pull-toy in his fashion, and even when he had come 
to understand its mysteries, he continued tinkering:
“Even after I ‘knew’ the answer, I loved tugging on the
string and thinking about the paradox.” The object took
on a life of its own. “No ideas but in things,” said the poet
William Carlos Williams.3 And the thing carries the idea.
The anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss would say
that as Resnick made and remade the pull-toy he was
becoming a scientist, more speciﬁcally, a bricoleur, a
practitioner of the science of the concrete. Bricolage is a
style of working in which one manipulates a closed set
of materials to develop new thoughts.4 Lévi-Strauss
characterizes the primitive scientist as a bricoleur, but
modern engineers, too, use this style.5
From our earliest years, says the psychologist
Jean Piaget, objects help us think about such things as
number, space, time, causality, and life.6 Piaget reminds
308
Sherry Turkle

us that our learning is situated, concrete, and personal.
We invent and reinvent it for ourselves. As Resnick plays
with pull-toys, he is learning to see himself as capable
of inventing an idea, and he is changing in other ways
as well. He is learning to be more at home with uncer-
tainty and with his own object attachments.
Object play—for adults as well as children—en-
gages the heart as well as the mind; it is a source of in-
ner vitality. Resnick reminds us of how his mentor, the
mathematician and educator Seymour Papert, consid-
ered the lessons of his childhood object: gears. An inti-
mate connection with gears brought Papert in touch
with ideas from mathematics. As Papert put it: “I fell in
love with the gears.”7 Far from being silent companions,
objects infuse learning with libido.
Another of Papert’s students, Carol Strohecker,
proposes knot-tying as a microworld that similarly 
combines ideas and emotions. Here, I pair her essay 
with the writing of Lévi-Strauss, a connection that puts
the focus on the cognitive. But reading Strohecker’s
narrative from a psychoanalytic perspective shifts the
emphasis to emotion and the particular needs of indi-
viduals.8 In Playing and Reality, Winnicott describes
how one of his patients, a seven-year-old boy, becomes
obsessed with string in response to the anxiety of being
separated from his hospitalized mother. At each hospi-
talization, the boy turns to string play as solace, as a
way of coping with her absence.9
Similarly in Strohecker’s “Knot Lab,” ten-year-old
Jill, a child of a difﬁcult divorce, is preoccupied with tying
down the ends of string as she works, using tape, nails,
and tacks to keep her knots in place. For Jill, knots are a
way to think through her personal situation. Herself at
loose ends, Jill is comforted by securing knots in transi-
tion. When she builds a knot exhibit that enables passers-
by to play with the back-and-forth movement of a True
Lovers’ Knot, her label for the knot concludes with the
phrase “please pull me.” Strohecker hears Jill speaking
through the knots: “Notice how I am suspended by two
What Makes An Object Evocative?
309

knots, one that anchors me and one that holds me. Notice
how I am two knots, waiting to be pulled this way and
that. I understand being pulled; it is something that I
know. Allowing others to pull me is a purpose that I serve.”
My datebook and its events had their own esoteric lan-
guage. Familiar venues, organizations, and individuals
were noted in tiny writing and abbreviations that only I
could decipher.
—Michelle Hlubinka, “The Datebook”
Objects of Discipline and Desire
Michelle Hlubinka writes about her datebook and her
ﬁrst timepiece—a Mickey Mouse watch that she re-
ceived on a family vacation when she was four: “Having
the watch, I entered a society not just of time-keepers,
but time-managers. And I became good at it, perhaps
too good at it.”
You think you have an organizer, but in time your
organizer has you. The organizer is one of many day-to-
day technologies that concretize our modern notion of
time. The historian of technology Lewis Mumford exam-
ines how the invention of the clock by monks in the
Middle Ages transformed social life and subjectivity.10
Clocks produced time as discrete units, making possible
a new way of thinking. Before clocks, there was day and
night, morning, mid-day, and evening. Soldiers showed
up for battle at dawn. After clocks, there were minutes
and seconds. Industrialization needed a clock-produced
world of measurable sequences and synchronized ac-
tion. Capitalism depends on regimenting human time
and human bodies.
Our clocks and datebooks do more than keep us
on time. Objects function to bring society within the self.
The historian Michel Foucault provides a frame-
work for thinking about how objects such as Hlubinka’s
watch and datebook serve as foundations of “disciplin-
310
Sherry Turkle

ary society.”11 In modern times, social control does not
require overt repression. Rather, state power can be
“object-iﬁed.”12 Every time we ﬁll out a medical ques-
tionnaire or take a pill, we are subjects of social disci-
pline. And every time we enter appointments in our
datebook, we become the kind of subjects that disciplin-
ary society needs us to be.13
When literary theorist Roland Barthes writes that
the objects of disciplinary society come to seem natural,
what is most important is that what seems natural
comes to seem right. We forget that objects have a his-
tory. They shape us in particular ways. We forget why or
how they came to be. Yet “naturalized” objects are his-
torically speciﬁc. Contemporary regimes of power have
become capillary, in the sense that power is embodied
in widely distributed institutions and objects.
From this perspective, Gail Wight’s object—the
antidepressant medication she calls “Blue Cheer”—pro-
duces a patient, just as Hlubinka’s datebook produces
a time-keeper and time-manager. At the start of Wight’s
narrative about her pills, she has a sense of herself as
an unhappy artist. Soon, psychiatry recasts her iden-
tity: she is a broken biological mechanism, but one that
medicine can ﬁx. Over time, Wight does not need the
presence of a physician to reinforce her medical iden-
tity. Over time, the pills alone can do the job.14
Eden Medina, like Wight, has her body disciplined.
In Medina’s case, the social demands are embodied in her
shoes. The ballet slippers that haunt Medina communi-
cate the shape of the body to which they want to belong:
the ideal dancer’s body, conforming to the socially con-
structed conventions of ballet. Toe shoes put Medina in
touch with body practices that teach how the ﬂesh dis-
appoints and how it needs to be disciplined and denied.15
Although it looked like a Braun transistor radio, this ob-
ject never produced sound. I asked the boy about it and
What Makes An Object Evocative?
311

he said: “It can’t play music, but I sing when I carry it.
One day I’ll have a real one.”
—Julian Beinart, “The Radio”
Objects of History and Exchange
Julian Beinart saw a new object, a mute radio made of
wood, and then he could not stop seeing it. His home-
town of Durban, South Africa, revealed itself to be rich
in technological objects fashioned from the raw materi-
als of an impoverished culture. There were bicycles made
from beer cans, cars from bent wire, radios from wood—
all technologies of everyday life copied as pure form.
As Beinart found these objects, he saw people and
social relationships of which he had been previously
unaware. The mute radio and its cousins changed the
people who made them and Beinart who discovered
them. The mute radio, with no instrumental purpose,
was free to serve as commentary on possession and lack,
on power and impoverishment.
In a famous passage on commodities, Karl Marx
describes how when wood is transformed into a table, it
remains an ordinary, sensuous thing. But when the
table becomes a commodity in a market system, the ob-
ject comes alive: it “stands on its head and evolves out
of its wooden brain grotesque ideas far more wonderful
than if it were to begin dancing of its own free will.”16
Like Marx’s commodities, Beinart’s wooden radio comes
alive as it embodies relationships to power. Yet the
wooden radio subverts itself as a commodity and reveals
the social relations that commodities are designed to
hide.
The social theorist Marcel Mauss, too, describes
the animation of objects: gifts retain something of their
givers.17 As people exchange objects, they assert and
conﬁrm their roles in a social system, with all its histor-
ical inequalities and contradictions. A gift carries an
economic and relational web; the object is animated by
the network within it.
312
Sherry Turkle

From the perspective of the philosopher Jean Bau-
drillard, the mute radio reveals something profound
about the social role of all the radios that can speak. He
describes how commodities cultivate desires that sup-
port the production and consumption capitalism re-
quires.18 This process keeps the dominant ideology
alive. It becomes invisible and alienates from the real. In
such a system, normal radios are taken for granted. But
when radios are remade in wood or throw-away tin, the
invisible is made visible. In wood, a radio is subversive,
a potent actor.
David Mitten ﬁnds a Native American axe head
that also speaks to him in a subversive way. It subverts
his sense of distance between himself and those who
came before him, a theme of the writings of Bruno La-
tour, with whom his essay is paired. For Latour, objects
speak in a way that destroys any simple stories we
might tell about our relations to nature, history, and the
inanimate; they destroy any simple sense we might have
about progress and our passage through time.19 Mitten
says that when he picked up the axe head, the land-
scape of his ancestry exploded around him, demanding
that it be placed in history, in nature, and in the social
lives of the people who had and used it. More than this,
Mitten knows that he will part with the axe head only in
death, when his daughter will inscribe his life into sto-
ries about it.
A bunny with a soft cotton collar less than half-an-inch
wide was named Collar Bunny. . . . He had a small
plastic rattle inside his body, and when he sat, the
stufﬁng in his arms made them stick out to the sides.
—Tracy Gleason, “Murray: The Stuffed Bunny”
Objects of Transition and Passage
D. W. Winnicott called “transitional” the objects of
childhood that the child experiences as both part of the
What Makes An Object Evocative?
313

self and of external reality. Collar Bunny (later renamed
“Murray”) is such an object.
He belongs to Tracy Gleason’s younger sister,
Shayna. Whatever Shayna imagines herself doing or
thinking (“like dressing herself and hopping on one foot
and telling a silly joke”) can ﬁrst be “tried on” as bunny
thoughts and actions.
Winnicott writes that the transitional object medi-
ates between the child’s sense of connection to the body
of the mother and a growing recognition that he or she
is a separate being. When Shayna starts preschool and
its rules insist that Murray cannot accompany her, she
is challenged to invent ways of bringing him along. Her
solution is to invest Murray with new powers. He devel-
ops the ability to read Shayna’s mind and intuit her
every emotion. In doing so, Murray makes it possible for
separation to be not-quite separation. Transitional ob-
jects let us take things in stages.
The transitional objects of
the nursery—the
stuffed animal, the bit of silk from the baby blanket, the
favorite pillow—all of these are destined to be aban-
doned. Yet they leave traces that will mark the rest of life.
Speciﬁcally, they inﬂuence how easily an individual de-
velops a capacity for joy, aesthetic experience, and cre-
ative playfulness. Transitional objects, with their joint
allegiance to self and other, demonstrate to the child
that objects in the external world can be loved. Winni-
cott believes that during all stages of life we continue to
search for objects we can experience as both within and
outside of the self.
It is in these terms, as an object in the space be-
tween self and surround, that Judith Donath speaks of
her much-beloved 1964 Ford Falcon. She inhabits the
car like a “skin”; it connects her to her mother, its ﬁrst
owner, and to her children, for whose safety she aban-
dons it. It brings her the joy of an object that trafﬁcs, in
her words, “between the outside world and the inner self.”
314
Sherry Turkle

Donath’s essay is paired with the writing of the an-
thropologist Igor Kopytoff, who explores objects in
terms of their life spans, a perspective that encourages
us to look at the biography of an object alongside that of
a person. Through Donath’s sensitivity to the Falcon’s
cultural biography, she was better able to understand
her own. When Donath rides the Falcon as a child in the
1970s, it is a bourgeois suburban object. When it re-
appears in New York’s East Village in the 1980s, the Fal-
con has been transformed into the neighborhood “cool
car.” By the 1990s in Cambridge, Massachusetts, the
car is exotic and glamorous, congruent with Donath’s
desire to stand out as a graduate student. “No matter
how dully mundane I felt, in the Falcon I was the Driver
of that Cool Car.”
Winnicott situated his transitional objects in play,
which he saw as an intermediate space, a privileged zone
in which outer and inner realities can meet.20 For Wil-
liam J. Mitchell, born in the outback of Australia, the
train to Melbourne provided such a space.
The train is the backdrop for a rite of passage, a
time of transition that the anthropologist Victor Turner
has characterized (for individuals and cultures) as “limi-
nal” or threshold time.21 For Turner, these times of tran-
sition are characterized by the crystallization of new
thought and the production of new symbols.
On the Melbourne train, Mitchell is taken from one
physical space (his small village in the Australian bush)
to another (the cosmopolitan Melbourne), and he is also
taken toward a new identity. He writes: “Each warmly lit
carriage interior was a synecdoche of urbanity—an en-
capsulated, displaced fragment of the mysterious life
that was lived at the end of the line.” Within the liminal
space, the self is porous. In train space, Mitchell is open
to new associations, sights, and sounds: “And there
were wondrous cabinets of curiosities, with friezes of
large, sepia photographs over the seats.”
What Makes An Object Evocative?
315

In liminal space, Mitchell brings books, words,
and objects within his expanding sense of self. It is on
the train that he ﬁrst realized that he can read.
“It was on a train, long before I was reluctantly
dragged off to school, that I ﬁrst realized I could
read . . . words in memorable sequence, the begin-
nings of narrative. . . . As the years went by, and
I made myself into an architect and urbanist, I
began to understand that objects, narratives,
memories, and space are woven into a complex,
expanding web—each fragment of which gives
meaning to all the others.”
Mitchell’s essay, rich in its discussion of language,
is paired with an excerpt from the literary theorist
Roland Barthes, whose reﬂections on objects, language,
and identity (he writes of “language lined with ﬂesh”)
also resonate with those of David Mann, writing about
the transitions facilitated by the World Book Encyclope-
dia he received as a child.22
Far more than a vehicle for the transfer of infor-
mation, Mann describes the encyclopedia as a means of
access to language:
Its pictures came to life in my mind, parsed into
nouns and danced through grammar to the music
of verbs. By the time I was four it had taught me to
read. Not through my family but through these
volumes language became a part of me, the book
of the world opened to me and I myself opened to
the world as I might otherwise never have done.
Mann and Mitchell make language itself a liminal ob-
ject, standing outside and within the self, a vehicle for
bringing what is outside within.
Mann’s description of a self constituted by lan-
guage is paired with a text by the psychoanalyst Jacques
316
Sherry Turkle

Lacan. Lacan believes that to talk of “social inﬂuences”
on the individual neutralizes ole of Freud’s most im-
portant contributions: the recognition that society
doesn’t “inﬂuence” autonomous individuals, but comes
to dwell within them with the acquisition of language.23
Lacan’s theory allows for no real boundary be-
tween self and society. People become social with the
appropriation of language. You and language become as
one. There is no natural man. Lacan’s narrative of how
language comes to “inhabit” people during the Oedipal
phase opens out to larger questions about how we build
our psyche by bringing things within. Nowhere is this
more in evidence than when we consider what we bring
within at a time of loss.
The logo boasts “Globe Trotter,” echoing my grand-
mother’s love of travel. With her newfound liberty after
her husband and children had gone, she began to dis-
cover the world. . . . But this suitcase is new; she had
been saving it for one ﬁnal trip.
—Olivia Dasté, “The Suitcase”
Objects of Mourning and Memory
After her grandmother’s death Olivia Dasté packs the
old woman’s suitcase one last time. A sweater, a hand-
kerchief, a teacup are lovingly arranged in the suitcase.
Dasté is afraid to open the suitcase too soon: “[I]t feels
dangerous to open it. Memories evolve with you,
through you. Objects don’t have this ﬂuidity; I fear that
the contents of the suitcase might betray my grand-
mother.” But after two years, mourning has done its
work. Dasté holds a fragrant red sweater to her face and
knows she doesn’t have to. Dasté has internalized her
grandmother’s spirit. “I smile. I am with her in Bordeaux
and we have all the time in the world.”
In The Year of Magical Thinking, Joan Didion de-
scribes how material objects may look during the
What Makes An Object Evocative?
317

mourning process.24 After her husband’s death, Didion
cannot bring herself to throw away his shoes because
she is convinced that he may need them. This is the
magical thinking that is associated both with religious
devotion and the “illness” of mourning. With time,
Freud believed, the true object, the lost husband, comes
to have a full internal representation.25 This completes
the formal process of mourning; it is only at this point
that the shoes can be relinquished. They have served a
transitional role.
Susan Pollak, too, begins her narrative of loss with
an echo of the tactile—brought back by the way a rolling
pin evokes her grandmother’s kitchen, the safe place of
Pollak’s childhood.26 Pollak’s thoughts then go to baking
and to the evocative object of Marcel Proust, perhaps the
most famous evocative object in all literature. Proust’s
object is the small cookie called a madeleine. When
dipped in tea, the taste of the madeleine brings Proust’s
character back to his youth, to a country home in Com-
bray, and to his aunt Albertine. Finally, the madeleine
opens him to “the vast structure of recollection.”27
“Never underestimate the power of an evocative ob-
ject,” says Pollak. As a practicing psychotherapist, she is
interested in objects for more than evocation. She argues,
following Winnicott, that transitional objects can heal.
Pollak tells the story of a patient, Mr. B., who was not able
to mourn his father until he found the “half-moon” cook-
ies his father had bought for the family when Mr. B. was
a child. At that time, money had been tight and his father
had only been able to buy day-old cookies. When Pollak’s
patient went back to his old neighborhood and found the
bakery from his childhood, he bought a dozen fresh half-
moon cookies. They were unfamiliar, almost displeasing.
He had to wait until they were a day old in order to savor
them. Only the taste and texture of his childhood could
reestablish his lost connection. After ﬁnding the cookies
he was able to talk to his children about their grand-
father. He was able to recall his father’s acts of generos-
318
Sherry Turkle

ity and to think sympathetically about why his father had
needed alcohol to endure. The cookie facilitated mourn-
ing. Mr. B., a novelist, long blocked in his writing, was
able to begin a new novel. For him, as for Proust, mem-
ory passed through the body.28
Pollak reminds us that Proust himself makes a
connection that Winnicott would wholeheartedly en-
dorse. Toward the end of Remembrance of Things Past,
he says: “Ideas come to us as the successors to griefs,
and griefs, at the moment when they change into ideas,
lose some part of their power to injure our heart.”29
My rocks are un-rock-like. They are plain limestone con-
tradicting itself. The most earthy and banal material
transcends itself to become exotic.
—Nancy Rosenblum, “Scholars’ Rocks”
Objects of Meditation and New Vision
In a narrative in which ideas are successors to grief,
Nancy Rosenblum, the widow of a sculptor who col-
lected Chinese scholars’ rocks, asks, “How can a rock be
a man?”
Scholars’ rocks are found in nature, then mounted
on meticulously worked bases. The bases transform the
rocks into things that are made as well as found, objects
that invite reﬂection on the boundary between nature
and culture. Says Rosenblum: “They have the power to
provide an effortless, aesthetic experience of mystery.
Of inﬁnity in a ﬁnite space. Of transformation. Just by
looking. Without philosophy.”30
The rocks displace scale, time, and authorial in-
tent. They are classically liminal objects in Turner’s
sense: betwixt-and-between categories, the rocks chal-
lenge the categories themselves. As Rosenblum puts it,
“Gaze at a stone and it disorients.”
In traditional rites of passage, participants are sep-
arated from all that is familiar. We saw that this makes
What Makes An Object Evocative?
319

them vulnerable, open to the objects and experiences 
of their time of transition. The contemplation of liminal
objects can make us similarly vulnerable. In their dis-
orienting qualities, in the way they remind us of the
mundane yet take us away from it, scholars’ rocks share
something of what Freud called the uncanny, those
things “known of old” yet strangely unfamiliar.31
In his writing on the uncanny, Freud analyzes the
etymology of the German words heimlich and unheim-
lich, roughly the homelike and familiar and the eerie and
strange. The two words seem to be the opposite of each
other, suggesting that the eerie is that which is most un-
familiar. But among the meanings of heimlich (familiar)
is a deﬁnition close to its opposite: it can mean con-
cealed or kept out of sight. Heimlich has a “double.” By
extension, Freud argues, our most eerie experiences
come not from the exotic, but from what is close to
home. Uncanny objects take emotional disorientation
and turn it into philosophical grist for the mill.
In this collection, Jeffrey Mifﬂin, the curator at
Boston’s Massachusetts General Hospital, uses a 2,600
year-old mummy to ponder ultimate questions: “He had
been ﬂesh and blood and bone, and the ﬂesh and bone
were still there. His senses had once worked as mine now
did. His mind was gone, but neither would I live forever.”
Mifﬂin’s mummy frightens him even as it grows in
his affections. The man who became the mummy was
Padihershef, a stonecutter who lived near Thebes dur-
ing the Saite Period (XXVI Dynasty) and died in his late
forties. His specialty was cutting stone to make tombs.
Mifﬂin begins to identify with Padihershef. When Mifﬂin
opens the mummy’s exhibit case and smells the em-
balming spice and chemicals, he is not overtaken by
their pungency, but by the thought that Padihershef’s
own friends would have smelled something quite simi-
lar as they closed his cofﬁn.
Mifﬂin calculates the generations between him-
self and the mummy, in his estimate about 130, and he
320
Sherry Turkle

wonders if his “distant progenitors in Britain were min-
ing tin or slicing blocks of peat at the same time that
Padihershef was chiseling out tombs in Egypt?” Mif-
ﬂin thinks about his own uncertainties about religion
and the afterlife in relation to Padihershef ’s probable
certainties. Mifﬂin measures their lives against each
other, each seeking to ﬁnd a place in history and in his
generation.
As a curator, Mifﬂin compares the untidy, chaotic
spaces in museum back rooms and the meticulous pre-
sentations in the front rooms where all is tidy and or-
dered. The contrast reveals something too often hidden:
we tend to present “front room” knowledge as “true.” But
its certainties are constructed. We make up a clean
story to mask our anxieties about the chaotic state of
the little that we know. Chaos compels its opposite: “the
orderly presentation of supposed facts” to which Mifﬂin
feels disconnected. He fears that he will always be
blocked in his ability to experience certainties by his
access to their opposite—his experience in the dirty
back rooms. Yet it is the contrast between the front and
back rooms that leads Mifﬂin to a new appreciation of
the complexity of knowledge.
In Purity and Danger, the anthropologist Mary
Douglas examines the evocative power of such con-
trasts, focusing on how the tension between order and
disorder is expressed through our relationship to dirt
and pollution.32 Order is deﬁned in terms of dirt, or that
which is not polluting. And dirt is deﬁned in terms of
order. Societies create the classiﬁcation “dirt” to desig-
nate objects that don’t ﬁt neatly into their ways of
ordering of the world.
This collection ends with Evelyn Fox Keller’s re-
ﬂections on her life in science, a narrative about the
power of order-disrupting (“dirty”) objects to provoke
meditation and new vision. Keller takes slime mold as
her object, an object full of paradoxes: “In times of
plenty, it lives as an individual single-celled organism
What Makes An Object Evocative?
321

but, when food supplies are exhausted, it regroups. . . .
[It] trafﬁcs back and forth both between the one and the
many and between sameness and difference.”
Turner and Douglas help us see things on the
boundary, such as slime mold, as both disruptive and
as sources of new ideas. Indeed, for Keller, the “betwixt-
and-between” slime mold not only becomes an object-
to-think-with for thinking about processes within cells,
it becomes a way to think about the politics of science.
In the late 1960s, most biologists argued that
slime mold goes from being a unicellular to a multicel-
lular organism, following a signal given by “founder
cells.” In a 1968 paper, Keller and biologist Lee Segel dis-
agreed. They suggested that changes in the slime mold’s
state followed from the dynamics of the cell population
as a whole. There was no command and control cen-
ter that took charge of the process. Biologists resisted
this suggestion. Keller says: “[D]espite the absence of
evidence, [biologists] continued to adhere to the belief
that founder cells (or pacemakers) were responsible for
aggregation.”
Two decades later, while working on a biography of
the geneticist Barbara McClintock, Keller again faced
the resistance of biologists—this time to a style of do-
ing science. Canonical scientiﬁc methods insisted on
the researcher’s distance from the object of study, but
McClintock wanted to be close to her objects, among the
corn cells of her research. She imagined herself like
a modern-day Alice, brought to their scale in order to
feel more a part. Her colleagues in biology were not im-
pressed. Keller began to identify with McClintock. Like
her subject, when Keller had looked at cells, she had
seen social and decentralized processes. Keller comes to
see her career and McClintock’s as illustrative of how bi-
ology rejects theories that challenge the dogma of single
and centralized causal factors.
As Keller wonders why people ﬁnd causal ac-
counts so compelling, she considers explanations that
322
Sherry Turkle

draw on the Freudian tradition. There, our earliest, pro-
foundly bonded, connections to the world are inter-
rupted by a sudden experience of separation. Keller
hypothesizes that “we tend to project onto nature our
ﬁrst and earliest social experiences, ones in which we
feel passive and acted upon.” Whether or not this par-
ticular hypothesis is true, she says, a more general
point certainly is: scientists were not open to the “dis-
crepancies between our own predispositions and the
range of possibilities inherent in natural phenomena. In
short, we risk imposing on nature the very stories we
like to hear.”33
What are the stories we like to hear? Keller sug-
gests that they are often the ones that conﬁrm us in
comfortable ways of thinking. But theory can help us to
see things anew.
Until now, I have discussed physical objects that en-
gender intimacy. What becomes of this intimacy when
people work with digital objects?
Any response needs to be complex, as is apparent
in the contrast between two essays in this collection.
Mitchel Resnick describes his StarLogo program that
brings its users to an encounter with ideas about emer-
gent phenomena, much as the concrete objects of Pi-
aget’s day put children in touch with ideas about
counting and simple categorization. His goal is to have
the computer enable a new kind of learning. Yet Susan
Yee’s testimony about work in a digital archive suggests
aspects to life on the screen that may be inherently
alienating.
Yee, an architect, begins her relationship with Le
Corbusier through the physicality of his drawings. As
she works in the Le Corbusier archives in Paris, his orig-
inal blueprints, sketches, notes, and plans are brought
to her in long metal boxes. Le Corbusier’s handwritten
What Makes An Object Evocative?
323

notes in the margins of his sketches, the traces of his
ﬁngerprints, the smudges, the dirt, all of these encour-
age Yee’s identiﬁcation with the designer. To Yee, the
most “miraculous” moment in the physical archive is
ﬁnding the little colored paper squares that Le Cor-
busier used to think through his design for the Palace of
the Soviets. Yee says that she could imagine Le Cor-
busier “ﬁddling” with the design elements, moving them
around, considering different shapes and volumes as he
worked. The little bits of colored paper connect Yee to
his process. Delighted, Yee “ﬁddles” with them too. The
bricolage of the master is re-experienced in the brico-
lage of the student. As it happened, Yee was visiting the
Le Corbusier archive at a dramatic moment, the day it
was converted from physical to virtual space. The
philosopher Jacques Derrida sees such transitions as
“transforming the entire public and private space of hu-
manity.”34 For one thing, while any archive is a selection
of material that erases what has been excluded—the
digitized archive goes a step further. Its virtuality in-
sures another level of abstraction between its users and
what has been selected. It brings to mind Derrida’s writ-
ing about the word processor where “erasure” is central
to his concerns: “Previously, erasures and added words
left a sort of scar on the paper or a visible image in the
memory. There was a temporal resistance, a thickness
in the duration of the erasure. But now everything neg-
ative is drowned, deleted; it evaporates immediately,
sometimes from one instant to the next.”35
Derrida’s meditation on erasure brings us back to
what troubled Yee in the archive. She is aware that, digi-
tized, the Le Corbusier archives will be available to
scholars all over the world and be protected from wear
and tear. Yet, when the archive is digitized, Yee experi-
ences the loss of her connection to Le Corbusier:
“It made the drawings feel anonymous,” she says. More
important, the digitized archives make Yee feel anony-
mous. She is grateful for her own position in a genera-
324
Sherry Turkle

tion of architects that knows drawing by hand as well as
by computer; her narrative captures an anxiety that
digital objects will take us away from the body and its
ways of understanding.
Through Yee’s essay on the archive, this collection
engages the problem of virtuality and its discontents.
Yet her cautionary essay must be read in relation to
other narratives about computational objects—repre-
sented by the promise and enthusiasm of Resnick’s
writing, as well as that of Howard Gardner, Trevor
Pinch, and Annalee Newitz—that suggest how digital
objects engage us in new and compelling ways.
Indeed, in Newitz’s description of her laptop com-
puter, the ﬂickering screen does not appear cold and
abstract, but is integrated into her sense of herself. Her
experience of the laptop is reminiscent of how Joseph
Cevetello, a diabetic, talks about his glucometer, a de-
vice for measuring blood sugar. Cevetello notes how over
time his glucometer becomes more than companion: the
glucometer “has become me.” Moment to moment, its
output determines his actions. He lances his ﬁnger,
readies an insulin injection, and waits “for my meter to
tell me what to do.” The laptop, like the glucometer, is
experienced as co-extensive with the self. Newitz feels so
close to her laptop that she cannot tell where it leaves
off and she begins. Her self-understanding depends on
analyzing the ﬂows and rhythms that pass between her-
self and the machine. In bed, Newitz remembers not to
let the blankets cover the computer’s vents so it does not
overheat. She is at one with her virtual persona: “I was
just a command line full of glowing green letters.”
Cevetello and Newitz have achieved couplings so
intimate between themselves and their objects that we
might characterize them as cyborg.36 In the cyborg world
we move beyond objects as tools or prosthetics. We are
one with our artifacts. And in the cyborg world, the natu-
ral and the artiﬁcial no longer ﬁnd themselves in oppo-
sition. Says the historian of science Donna Haraway:
What Makes An Object Evocative?
325

“Any objects or persons can be reasonably thought of
in terms of disassembly and reassembly.”37 No object,
space, or body is sacred in itself: “Any component can
be interfaced with any other if the proper standard, the
proper code, can be constructed for processing signals
in a common language.”38 Newitz still has to carry her
laptop around, but the day is not far off when computa-
tion will become part of our bodies, beginning with chips
to improve our sight and hearing. Cevetello anticipates
the day when his glucometer will be available as an im-
plant; it will provide a digital readout directly sensed by
his body.
Once we see life through the cyborg prism, becom-
ing one with a machine is reduced to a technical prob-
lem of ﬁnding the right operating system to make it (that
is, us) run smoothly. When we live with implanted chips,
we will be on a different footing in our relationships with
computers. When we share other people’s tissue and ge-
netic material, we will be on a different footing with the
bodies of others. Our theories tell us stories about the
objects of our lives. As we begin to live with objects that
challenge the boundaries between the born and created
and between humans and everything else, we will need
to tell ourselves different stories.
326
Sherry Turkle


Sherry Turkle | The Things That Matter
1.
Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, trans. John
Weightman and Doreen Weightman (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1966).
2.
See Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age
of the Internet (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995), 54–56.
3.
See, for example, Jean Piaget and Barbel Inhelder, The
Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence,
trans. Anne Parsons and Stanley Milgram (New York:
Basic Books, 1958).
4.
Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, 16ff.
5.
In science studies, two groundbreaking ethnographies
that showed the power of the concrete were Bruno Latour
and Steven Woolgar, Laboratory Life: The Social Construc-
tion of Scientiﬁc Facts (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1986 [1979]), and Karin Knorr Cetina, The
Manufacture of Knowledge: An Essay on the Constructivist
and Contextual Nature of Science (Oxford, Pergamon
Press 1981). As for Nobel laureates, Richard Feynman
wrote extensively about his everyday tinkering in Surely
You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman (New York: W. W. Norton, 1981).
6.
One example of feminist scholarship that focuses on a
scientist’s profound connection with her objects is Evelyn
Fox Keller’s biography of Barbara McClintock, A Feeling
for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock
(San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1983). Other early femi-
nist contributions include Ruth Bleier, ed., Feminist Ap-
proaches to Science (New York: Pergamon, 1986); Carol
Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and
Women’s Development (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1982); Sandra Harding and Merrill B. Hin-
Notes

tikka, eds., Discovering Reality: Feminist Perspectives on
Epistemology, Metaphysics, Methodology, and Philosophy
of Science (London: Reidel, 1983).
7.
To take only a few examples, see Arjun Appadurai, ed., The
Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988); Bill
Brown, ed., Things (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2004); Lorraine Daston, ed., Things that Talk: Object Les-
sons from Art and Science (New York: Zone Books, 2004);
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton,
The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981); Karin
Knorr Cetina, Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make
Knowledge (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1999); Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, trans.
Catherine Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1993); and Edward Tenner, When Things Bite Back
(New York: Knopf, 1996). For more resources, see the bib-
liography following these essays.
8.
For Freud’s description of loss leading to internalization
and mental representation, see Sigmund Freud, “Mourn-
ing and Melancholia,” in The Standard Edition of the Com-
plete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, ed. and
trans. James Strachey et al. (London: Hogarth, 1953–
1974), vol. XIV, 239–258. As it is for people and the wishes
associated with them, so I believe it is for objects: they be-
come powerful in our psychic lives as we bring them
within us, along with their associations, emotional and
intellectual.
9.
Ibid., “The Uncanny,” vol. XVII , 219–252. In their provo-
cation to discourse, uncanny objects contrast to fetish
objects that are stand-ins for thoughts that cannot be ex-
pressed; they take the place of what cannot be spoken;
“Fetishism,” vol. XXI, 152–157.
10.
D. W. Winnicott referred to such objects as transitional.
See Playing and Reality (New York: Routledge, 1989 [1971]).
11.
See Victor Turner, The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-
Structure (Chicago: Aldine, 1969).
Notes to Pages 7–8
329

Carol Strohecker | Knots
1.
See Carol Strohecker, “Elucidating Styles of Thinking
though Learning about Knots,” in Constructionism:
Research Reports and Essays, 1985–1990, by the MIT
Epistemology and Learning Group, the MIT Media Labo-
ratory, ed. Idit Harel and Seymour Papert (Norwood, N.J.:
Ablex, 1991), 215–233, and Strohecker, “Why Knot,”
Ph.D. diss., MIT, 1991, and “Understanding Topological
Relationships through Comparisons of Similar Knots,” AI
& Society: Learning with Artifacts 10 (1996): 58–69.
Susan Yee | The Archive
1.
See for example, Sherry Turkle, The Second Self: Comput-
ers and the Human Spirit (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2005 [1984]), 18–19.
Mitchel Resnick | Stars
1.
Portions of this essay previously appeared in my book 
Turtles, Termites, and Trafﬁc Jams: Explorations in Mas-
sively Parallel Microworlds (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1994).
2.
Seymour Papert, “The Gears of My Childhood,” in Mind-
storms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas (New
York: Basic Books, 1980), vi–viii, and Sherry Turkle, The
Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 2005 [1984]).
3.
See Friedrich Froebel, The Education of Man, trans. and
annot. W. N. Hailman (Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications,
2005 [1892]).
Joseph Cevetello | The Elite Glucometer
1.
Manfred Clynes and Nathan Kline, “Cyborgs and Space,”
Astronautics 14 (1960): 26–27 and 75–76.
2.
Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters to a Young Poet, trans.
Stephen Mitchell (New York: Vintage, 1986 [1906]), 84.
330
Notes to Pages 25–68

Michelle Hlubinka | The Datebook
1.
Benjamin Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin
Franklin, Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 1996, 63.
Annalee Newitz | My Laptop
1.
John J. Ratey, A User’s Guide to the Brain: Perception,
Attention, and the Four Theaters of the Brain (New York:
Vintage, 2002).
Julian Beinart | The Radio
1.
Jean Baudrillard, “Design and Environment or How Po-
litical Economy Escalates into Cyberblitz,” in For a Cri-
tique of the Political Economy of the Sign, trans. Charles
Levin (St. Louis, Mo.: Telos Press, 1981), 185.
David Mitten | The Axe Head
1.
Professor Cyril Stanley Smith of MIT was an innovator
in showing how this could be done, in many cultures, in
many media. See Cyril Stanley Smith, From Art to Science
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980).
Susan Spilecki | Dit Da Jow
1.
See <http://www.eastearthtrade.com/ironpalm.php> (ac-
cessed on September 8, 2006).
Nathan Greenslit | The Vacuum Cleaner
1.
Hans Selye, “Stress and Psychiatry,” The American Jour-
nal of Psychiatry 113, no. 5 (1956): 423–427.
2.
Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, trans.
Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1976 [1867]), vol. I, 163.
3.
Jean Baudrillard, The System of Objects, trans. James
Benedict (London: Verso, 1996 [1968]).
Notes to Pages 78–139
331

William J. Mitchell | The Melbourne Train
1.
Mark Twain, Following the Equator (Washington: National
Geographic Adventure Classics, 2005 [1897]), 134.
2.
Henry Lawson, “The Never-Never Land,” in Poetical Works
of Henry Lawson (Sydney: Angus and Robertson, 1984
[1906]), 113.
3.
Alexander Pope, “An Essay on Criticism,” in The Poems of
Alexander Pope (London: Penguin, 1985 [1711]), 24.
Henry Jenkins | Death-Defying Superheroes
1.
Umberto Eco, “The Myth of Superman,” Diacritics 2, no. 1
(1972): 16.
Stefan Helmreich | The SX-70 Instant Camera
1.
Victor K. McElheny, Insisting on the Impossible: The Life
of Edwin Land, Inventor of Instant Photography (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998), 358.
2.
Howard G. Rogers, “Processes and Products for Forming
Photographic Images in Color,” US Patent # 2,983,606
(ﬁled July 14, 1958; granted May 9, 1961).
3.
McElheny, Insisting, 233.
4.
Ibid., 221–222.
Susan Pollak | The Rolling Pin
1.
Marcel Proust, Remembrance of Things Past, trans. C. K.
Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin (New York: Vintage,
1981 [1913]), vol. 1, 48.
2.
Ibid., 51.
3.
D. W. Winnicott, “The Fate of the Transitional Object,” in
Psychoanalytic Explorations, ed. Clare Winnicott, Ray
Shepherd, and Madeleine Davis (Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1989), 58.
4.
Proust, Remembrance, vol. 3, 944.
332
Notes to Pages 146–230

Caroline A. Jones | The Painting in the Attic
1.
D. W. Winnicott, “Transitional Objects and Transitional
Phenomena” (1953) in Playing and Reality (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1989 [1971]), 10. I use the phrase “primary parent”
to avoid the unhelpful ﬁxation on the mother that attends
most object-relations theories, including Winnicott’s.
2.
Ibid., 12.
Nancy Rosenblum | Chinese Scholars’ Rocks
1.
William Blake, “Auguries of Innocence,” in The Portable
Romantic Poets, ed. W. H. Auden and Norman Holmes
Pearson (New York: Viking Penguin, 1978), 18.
2.
Richard Rosenblum and Valerie Doran, Art of the Natural
World: Resonance of Wild Nature in Chinese Sculptural Art
(Boston: MFA Publications, 2001), 39.
3.
<http:www.Rosenblumcollection.com> (accessed on Jan-
uary 23, 2007).
Susannah Mandel | Apples
1.
Anthony Burgess, A Clockwork Orange (New York: W. W.
Norton, 1987), 21–22.
2.
Anthony Burgess, A Clockwork Orange: A Play With
Music, based on the novella of the same name (London:
Hutchinson, 1987), viii.
3.
Lewis Thomas, The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology
Watcher (New York: Penguin, 1974), 45.
Jeffrey Mifﬂin | The Mummy
1.
Blaise Pascal, Pensées, trans. A. J. Krailsheimer (London:
Penguin, 1995 [1670]), 130.
Michael M. J. Fischer | The Geoid
1.
A longer version of this essay, entitled “The Geoid as Tran-
sitional Object,” is referenced on <http://web.mit.edu/
anthropology/faculty_staff/ﬁscher/publications.html>.
Notes to Pages 241–280
333

2.
Irene K. Fischer, Geodesy? What’s That?: My Personal In-
volvement in the Age-Old Quest for the Size and Shape of
the Earth (Lincoln, Nebraska: iUniverse, 2005).
3.
The Fischer Ellipsoid 1960, updated 1968, also known as
Mercury Datum 1960 and modiﬁed Mercury Datum, 1968.
Robert P. Crease | Foucault’s Pendulum
1.
Umberto Eco, Foucault’s Pendulum,
trans. William
Weaver (New York: Ballantine Books, 1990), 5.
2.
Ibid., 201.
Evelyn Fox Keller | Slime Mold
1.
Webster’s Online Dictionary gives a rich description of
slime mold:
1. An unusual fungus-like protist of the phylum
Myxomycota or the class Myxomycetes, having a
stage of growth in which it comprises a naked
noncellular multinucleate mass of creeping pro-
toplasm having characteristics of both plants
and animals; it also has a propagative phase in
which it develops fruiting bodies bearing spores;
it is sometimes classiﬁed as a protist. It is called
also acellular slime mold.
2. Any of several remarkable amoeba like organisms
of the phylum Acrasiomycota, mostly terrestrial,
having a fruiting phase resembling that of the
acellular slime molds, but being cellular and nu-
cleate throughout their life cycle; called also cel-
lular slime mold. The most studied species is
Dictyostelium discoideum. In their feeding phase,
they live like amoebae as individual cells, engulf-
ing bacteria as a prime food source. When the
food source diminishes, they begin to aggregate,
swarming together to form clumps which may
move toward heat and light, so as to reach the
surface of the ground; they then differentiate into
334
Notes to Pages 280–298

a form with spores contained within a spo-
rangium resting on a stalk. When the spores are
carried to another location with adequate food
supplies, the spores may germinate to resume
the life cycle. The phase of aggregation appears to
be initiated by release of cyclic AMP, serving as a
signal between the individual cells. The formation
of the fruiting body has some similarities to dif-
ferentiation in multicellular organisms, but the
mechanisms are still under study. Some biolo-
gists object to the classiﬁcation of Dictyostelium
as a slime mold, as it is neither a mold nor slimy.
Available 
at 
<http://www.webster-dictionary.net/
deﬁnition/slime%20mold> (accessed August 15, 2006).
2.
Evelyn Fox Keller, A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and
Work of Barbara McClintock (San Francisco: W. H. Free-
man, 1983).
3.
David L. Nanney, 1957, “The Role of the Cytoplasm in
Heredity,” in The Chemical Basis of Heredity, ed. W. D.
McElroy and B. Glass (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press,
1957), 134–163.
4.
See Evelyn Fox Keller, Reﬂections on Gender and Science
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), 157.
5.
Closely related are arguments for the reframing of prob-
lems of development in terms of Developmental Systems
Theory, a term that is itself sometimes (if somewhat mis-
takenly) used interchangeably with Dynamical Systems
Theory. For a more extensive discussion of the various
uses of the terms Developmental and Dynamical Systems
Theory, see Evelyn Fox Keller, “DDS: Dynamics of Devel-
opmental Systems,” Biology and Philosophy 20, nos. 2–3
(March 2005): 409–416.
6.
The Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1989), Vol. 12, 589.
7.
See Evelyn Fox Keller, The Century of the Gene (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000), chapter
4, for further discussion of developmental robustness.
Notes to Pages 298–304
335

Sherry Turkle | What Makes An Object Evocative?
1.
I thank my research assistant Anita Chan whose work on
sources was both meticulous and brimming with good
ideas. Ongoing conversations with Kelly Gray enhanced
the clarity of this note.
2.
As anthropologist Lucy Suchman puts it: “Objects and
their positions are inseparable.” See “Afﬁliative Objects,”
Organization 12, no. 3 (2005): 379–399. On this theme
she cites Donna Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs and Women:
The Reinvention of Nature (New York: Routledge, 1991);
Andrew Pickering, The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency,
and Science (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997);
Marilyn Strathern, Property, Substance, and Effect: An-
thropological Essays on Persons and Things (London:
Athlone Press, 1999), and Karen Barad, “Posthumanist
Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter
Comes to Matter,” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society 28, no.3 (2003): 88–128.
3.
William Carlos Williams, Paterson (New York: New Direc-
tions, 1946), Book I, 7.
4.
Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, trans. John
Weightman and Doreen Weightman (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1966), 24.
5.
Resnick’s experience of the pull-toy as an evocative object
is close to what the sociologist Karin Knorr Cetina calls an
“epistemic object.” Knorr Cetina describes epistemic ob-
jects as open, question-generating and complex: “They are
processes and projections rather than deﬁnitive things. . . .
Objects of knowledge . . . are more like open drawers ﬁlled
with folders extending indeﬁnitely into the depths of a
dark closet.” From “Sociality with Objects: Social Rela-
tions in Postsocial Knowledge Societies,” Theory, Culture,
and Society 14, no. 4 (1997): 12.
6.
We form our notions of these things through immersion in
our culturally speciﬁc object world. And when that culture
changes, when it offers new objects, we can come to see
the world differently. This notion of objects and culture
336
Notes to Pages 307–308

change is central to Resnick’s work with StarLogo, an ef-
fort to provide children with a new world of objects—in
this case computational objects—that will enable think-
ing about emergence. See Mitchel Resnick, Turtles, Ter-
mites, and Trafﬁc Jams: Explorations in Massively Parallel
Microworlds (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1994). Sey-
mour Papert makes this point about the power of com-
puter programming as a microworld for learning in
Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas
(New York: Basic Books, 1980). While Piaget was a con-
structivist, stressing how objects are part of children’s
building their minds, Papert and Resnick consider them-
selves constructionists, putting the emphasis on children
building for themselves the materials that will structure
their thinking. For an overview of this activist, “builder’s”
perspective on objects and intellect, see Idit Harel and
Seymour Papert, eds., Constructionism: Research Reports
and Essays, 1985–90, by the MIT Epistemology and Learn-
ing Group, the MIT Media Laboratory (Norwood, N.J.:
Ablex, 1991).
7.
See Papert, Mindstorms, viii.
8.
The psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan had a particular inter-
est in the practice of knotting and how it can integrate the
epistemic and the emotional. On this point, see Sherry
Turkle, Psychoanalytic Politics: Jacques Lacan and Freud’s
French Revolution (Guilford, Conn.: Guilford Press, 1991
[1978]).
9.
D. W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality, (London: Routledge,
1989 [1971]), 15–20.
10.
Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Har-
court, Brace & World, 1963 [1934]).
11.
Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the
Prison, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Pantheon Books,
1977); The Birth of the Clinic: An Archeology of Medical Per-
ception, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Vintage,
1994 [1963]); Madness and Civilization: A History of In-
sanity in the Age of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (New
York: Random House, 1965).
Notes to Pages 308–311
337

12.
The literary theorist Roland Barthes describes the objects
of disciplinary society as “self-naturalizing.” We begin to
accept what we have made as what has always been and
what must always be. Roland Barthes, Mythologies, trans.
Annette Lavers (New York: Hill and Wang, 1972 [1957]).
13.
Literary theorists Julia Kristeva and Judith Butler ap-
proach similar issues from a psychoanalytic perspective,
inﬂuenced by the work of the psychoanalyst Jacques La-
can who elaborates on language as constitutive of self.
Butler stresses that objects, including the body, are never
found “in the raw.” They are already shaped by language
and social discourse and thus ready to shape us. For Ju-
lia Kristeva, each individual’s psychology reproduces the
political relationships of the outer world. So, any change
we wish to make in the world ﬁrst requires a parallel ac-
tion within. Foucault describes an inner history of objects
as it plays out on a social level; Kristeva and Butler bring
the story down to the psychodynamics of individuals. See
Judith Butler, Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Lim-
its of “Sex” (New York: Routledge, 1993); and Julia Kris-
teva, Strangers to Ourselves, trans. Leon Roudiez (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1991).
14.
The antidepressants become what sociologist and histo-
rian Bruno Latour would call the “foot soldiers” of medi-
cal power. The pills conﬁrm individuals in the role of
patient. See Bruno Latour, The Pasteurization of France,
trans. Alan Sheridan and John Law (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1988).
15.
See Butler, Bodies That Matter.
16.
Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, trans.
Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1976 [1867]), vol. I, 163.
17.
Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Ex-
change in Archaic Societies, trans. W. D. Halls (New York:
W. W. Norton, 2000 [1950]), 11–12.
18.
Jean Baudrillard, For A Critique of the Political Economy
of the Sign, trans. Charles Levin, (St. Louis: Telos Press,
1981).
338
Notes to Pages 311–313

19.
In We Have Never Been Modern Bruno Latour describes
the subversion of objects as they reveal the cracks in the
social constructions that we take as “reality,” for ex-
ample what we call “modernity.” We have constructed a
notion of modernity that rests on dichotomies between
past and present, natural and social, and humans and
things, all distinctions that our ancestors, in their world
of alchemy, astrology, and phrenology, did not make.
Our objects challenge these distinctions. Objects insist
on their place in history, on the fact that they are em-
bedded in both nature and culture, and ﬁnally, the ob-
jects of modern science refuse the distinction between
humans and things. On a global level, objects such as
“the ozone layer” fuse science, nature, technology, and
politics. Technoscientiﬁc objects make manifest the so-
cial relations of our time. See Bruno Latour, We Have
Never Been Modern, trans. Catherine Porter (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993). See also Bruno
Latour and Steven Woolgar, Laboratory Life: The Social
Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts (Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1986 [1979]; Bruno Latour, Science
in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through
Society (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1987); The Pasteurization of France, trans. Alan Sheridan
and John Law (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1988); Aramis or the Love of Technology, trans.
Catherine Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1996).
20.
For Winnicott, “This area of playing is not inner psychic
reality. It is outside the individual but it is not the exter-
nal world. Into this play area the child gathers objects or
phenomena from external reality and uses these in the
service of some sample derived from inner or personal
reality.” Winnicott, Playing and Reality, 51.
21.
Victor Turner, The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-
Structure (Chicago: Aldine, 1969). Turner drew his notion
of the liminal from the work of Arnold van Gennep. See
Notes to Pages 313–315
339

Rites of Passage, trans. Monika B. Vizedom and Gabrielle
L. Caffee (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960
[1909]).
22.
Roland Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard
Miller (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1975), 67.
23.
Jacques Lacan, “On the Signiﬁcation of the Phallus,” in
Écrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: W. W.
Norton, 1977). For Lacan, the Oedipal period is the time
when language and society come to inhabit the child, pro-
viding entrée into the “symbolic” order. In Lacan’s telling,
the Oedipal crisis is resolved through language. The child
accepts the father’s interdiction to the child’s desire for
the mother by identifying with the father through an ac-
ceptance of his name. (In French there is a pun: the
father’s non and nom.) One signiﬁer (the father’s name)
comes to take the place of another (desire for the mother
and desire to be the object of her desire). What is being
signiﬁed (the primitive, irreducible desire to complete the
mother, to be what she is presumed to lack) remains the
same. In the course of a lifetime, the individual builds up
many chains of signiﬁcation, always substituting new
terms for old and always increasing the distance between
the signiﬁer that is most accessible, and all those that are
invisible and unconscious, including of course the origi-
nal signiﬁer. See Lacan, “On a Question Preliminary to
any Possible Treatment of Psychosis,” in Écrits, 200. See
also Lacan, “The Function and Field of Speech and Lan-
guage in Psychoanalysis,” in Écrits, 68.
24.
Joan Didion, The Year of Magical Thinking (New York:
Knopf, 2005).
25.
See Sigmund Freud, “Mourning and Melancholia,” The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud, trans. and ed. James Strachey et al. (Lon-
don: Hogarth Press, 1953–1974), vol. XIV, 239–258. Loss
and what follows are central to the way psychoanalytic
theory tells the story of the evolving self. When Lacan de-
scribes the Oedipal moment as the internalization of
language and social law, his narrative parallels that of
340
Notes to Pages 315–318

Sigmund Freud. Freud sketched out the process through
which loss becomes the motor for objects (here referring
to people) to become part of our inner world. Freud con-
siders the moment when a male child gives up the idea
that he will displace his father in his mother’s affections.
The loss requires a radical response. The father, or rather
the father’s interdiction, is brought inside by creating a
mental agency capable of representing it: the superego.
(This is the moment that Lacan theorized as the moment
of passage to a symbolic order.) Later losses will not result
in new psychic structures at the level of the superego. But
the basic process has been laid down: a loss, an internal-
ization of an object. Mourning is the painful but neces-
sary process through which this internalization takes
place.
26.
Psychologists Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Eugene
Rochberg-Halton investigated people’s feelings toward
household objects such as the rolling pin, ﬁnding that
they carry history and meaning. See Mihaly Csikszentmi-
halyi and Eugene Rochberg-Halton, The Meaning of
Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1981).
27.
Marcel Proust, Remembrance of Things Past, trans. C. K.
Scott Montcrieff and Terence Kilmartin (New York: Vin-
tage, 1981 [1913]), vol. 1, 48–51.
28.
Mr. B’s evokes Henri Bergson as well as Proust. Bergson
criticizes any description of memory that divides it into a
series of mechanical steps removed from sensation. For
Bergson, we must physically prepare ourselves to recall.
Remembering is not to re-experience the same thing, but
to experience something new and to draw the past into a
new realm of possibility. See Henri Bergson, Matter and
Memory, trans. Nancy M. Paul and W. Scott Palmer (New
York: Zone Books, 1990 [1896]), 133–135.
29.
Proust, Remembrance of Things Past, vol. 3, 994.
30.
The rocks carry ideas and inspire passion. They present
thought and feeling as inseparable. In microcosm, the
rocks capture what Immanuel Kant called nature’s 
Notes to Pages 318–319
341

“sublime” and illustrate Gaston Bachelard’s thesis that
only the infusion of reason with passion can lead to a full
comprehension of the world. Immanuel Kant, The Critique
of Judgment, trans. James C. Meredith (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1952 [1790]); Gaston Bachelard, The Po-
etics of Space: The Classic Look at How We Experience In-
timate Places, trans. Maria Jolas (Boston: Beacon Press,
1994 [1958]).
31.
Sigmund Freud, “The Uncanny,” The Standard Edition of
the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud,
trans. and ed. James Strachey et al., vol. XVII, 219–252.
32.
Like other boundary objects, dirt and pollution pro-
voke strong emotions and carry powerful ideas. To make
this point, Mary Douglas looks at the taboo foods of
Jewish dietary tradition. In Douglas’s formulation, every
kosher meal embodies the ordered cosmology of Genesis
in which heaven was separated from the earth and the
sea. In the story of the creation, each of these realms is
alotted its proper kind of animal life. In the heavens, two-
legged fowls ﬂy with wings; on the earth, four-legged ani-
mals hop or walk; and scaly ﬁsh swim with ﬁns. It is
acceptable to eat these “pure” creatures who behave in
harmony with their realm, but those that cross categories
(such as the lobster that lives in the sea but crawls upon
its ﬂoor) are unacceptable. Every kosher meal carries a
theory of unbreachable order. Holiness is order and each
thing must have its place. Mary Douglas, Purity and Dan-
ger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo
(New York: Routledge, 1966), especially chapter 3, “The
Abominations of Leviticus.”
33.
Evelyn Fox Keller, Reﬂections on Gender and Science (New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1985), 157.
34.
Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression,
trans. Eric Prenowitz (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1996), 17–18.
35.
Jacques Derrida, “The Word Processor,” in Paper Ma-
chine, trans. Rachel Bowlby (Stanford: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 2005), 24
342
Notes to Pages 319–324

36.
Donna J. Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto,” in Simians, Cy-
borgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. (New York:
Routledge, 1991), 162.
37.
Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and
Women, 162.
38.
Ibid., 163
Notes to Pages 325–326
343

Akrich, Madeleine. “The Description of Technological
Objects.” In Shaping Technology/Building Society,
edited by W. E. Bijker and J. Law. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1994.
Althusser, Louis. Essays on Ideology. Translated by Ben
Brewster et al. London: Verso, 1984.
Andersen, Hans Christian. Fairy Tales, edited by Jackie
Wullschlager. Translated by Tiina Nunnally. New
York: Viking, 2005 [1845].
Appadurai, Arjun, ed. The Social Life of Things: Com-
modities in Cultural Perspective. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1988.
Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space: The Classic Look
at How We Experience Intimate Places. Translated
by Maria Jolas. Boston: Beacon Press, 1994 [1958].
Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays,
edited by Michael Holquist. Translated by Michael
Holquist and Caryl Emerson. Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1981.
Balsamo, Anne. Technologies of the Gendered Body:
Reading Cyborg Women. Durham, N.C.: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 1996.
Barad, Karen. “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an
Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter.”
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 28,
no. 3 (2003): 88–128.
Barry, Andrew. “On Interactivity: Consumers, Citizens,
and Culture.” In The Politics of Display: Museum,
Selected Bibliography

Science, Culture, edited by Sharon Macdonald.
London: Routledge, 1998.
Barthes, Roland. Empire of Signs. Translated by Richard
Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1982.
———. Mythologies. Translated by Annette Lavers. New
York: Hill and Wang. 1972 [1957].
———. The Pleasure of the Text. Translated by Richard
Miller. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1975.
Baudrillard, Jean. For a Critique of the Political Economy
of the Sign. Translated by Charles Levin. St. Louis,
Mo.: Telos Press, 1981.
———. Simulacra and Simulations. Translated by Sheila
Faria Glaser. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1995.
———. The System of Objects. Translated by James
Benedict. London: Verso, 1996 [1968]).
Beniger, James R. The Control Revolution: Technological
and Economic Origins of the Information Society.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations, edited with introduc-
tion by Hannah Arendt. Translated by Harry Zohn.
New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1968.
Berger, Peter L., and Thomas Luckmann. The Social
Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology
of Knowledge. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,
1966.
Bergson, Henri. Matter and Memory. Translated by
Nancy M. Paul and W. Scott Palmer. New York:
Zone Books, 1990 [1896].
Bhabha, Homi K. The Location of Culture. London: Rout-
ledge, 1994.
Selected Bibliography
345

Bijker, Wiebe E. Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs: Toward
a Theory of Sociotechnical Change. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1995.
Bijker, Wiebe E., Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor J. Pinch,
eds. The Social Construction of Technological Sys-
tems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of
Technology. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1987.
Blanchot, Maurice. Awaiting Oblivion. Translated by
John Gregg. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1997.
Bleier, Ruth, ed. Feminist Approaches to Science. New
York: Pergamon Press, 1986.
Bollas, Christopher. The Shadow of the Object: Psycho-
analysis of the Unthought Known. London: Free
Association Books, 1987.
Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the
Judgement of Taste. Translated by Richard Nice.
London: Routledge, 1984.
———. The Logic of Practice. Translated by Richard Nice.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1990.
———. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Translated by
Richard Nice. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1977.
Breton, André. “Surrealist Situation of the Object.” In
Manifestos of Surrealism. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 1972.
Brosterman, Norman. Inventing Kindergarten. New York:
Harry N. Abrams, 1997.
Brown, Bill, ed. Things. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2004.
Bukatman, Scott. Terminal Identity: The Virtual Subject
in Postmodern Science Fiction. Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press, 1993.
346
Selected Bibliography

Burke, Edmund. A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin
of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1990 [1757].
Butler, Judith. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive
Limits of “Sex.” New York: Routledge, 1993.
———. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of
Identity (Thinking Gender). New York: Routledge,
1989.
Clynes, Manfred, and Nathan Kline. “Cyborgs and
Space.” Astronautics 14 (1960): 26–27, 74–75.
Crease, Robert P. The Prism and the Pendulum: The Ten
Most Beautiful Experiments in Science. New York:
Random House, 1993.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, and Eugene Rochberg-
Halton. The Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols
and the Self. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981.
Csordas, Thomas J. “Embodiment as a Paradigm for An-
thropology.” Ethos 18, no. 1 (1990): 5–47.
Daston, Lorraine, ed. Biographies of Scientiﬁc Objects.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
———. Things That Talk: Object Lessons from Art and
Science. New York: Zone Books, 2004.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. Anti-Oedipus: Capi-
talism and Schizophrenia. Translated by Robert
Hurley, Mark Seem, and Helen Lane. New York:
Viking Press, 1977.
———. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizo-
phrenia. Translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987.
Derrida, Jacques. Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression.
Translated by Eric Prenowitz. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1996.
Selected Bibliography
347

———.The Gift of Death, Religion and Postmodernism.
Translated by David Wills. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1995.
———. Paper Machine. Translated by Rachel Bowlby.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2005.
———. Postcard: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond.
Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1987.
———. Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work
of Mourning, and the New International. Translated
by Peggy Kamuf. New York: Routledge, 1994.
Didion, Joan. The Year of Magical Thinking. New York:
Knopf, 2005.
Dillard, Annie. Teaching a Stone to Talk: Expeditions and
Encounters. New York: Harper and Row, 1982.
Douglas, Mary. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Con-
cepts of Pollution and Taboo. New York: Routledge,
1992 [1966].
Douglas, Mary, and B. Isherwood. The World of Goods:
Towards an Anthropology of Consumption. London:
Routledge, 1996.
Durkheim, Emile. The Division of Labor in Society.
Translated by W. D. Halls. New York: Free Press,
1984 [1893].
———. The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life.
Translated by Karen E. Fields. New York: Free
Press, 1995 [1912].
———. The Rules of Sociological Method. Translated by
W. D. Halls. New York: Free Press, 1982 [18895]).
———. Suicide, a Study in Sociology, edited by George
Simpson. Translated by John A. Spaulding and
George Simpson. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1951
[1897].
348
Selected Bibliography

Durkheim, Emile, and Marcel Mauss. Primitive Classiﬁ-
cation. Translated by Rodney Needham. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1963 [1903].
Eco, Umberto. Foucault’s Pendulum. Translated by Wil-
liam Weaver. New York: Ballantine Books, 1990.
———. “The Myth of Superman.” Diacritics 2, no. 1
(1972): 14–22.
———. Travels in Hyperreality. San Diego: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1986.
Engels, Friedrich. “The Origin of Family, Private Prop-
erty, and the State.” In The Marx-Engels Reader,
edited by Robert C. Tucker. New York: W. W. Nor-
ton, 1978 [1884].
Erikson, Erik. Childhood and Society. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1963.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic
among the Azande. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1937.
Feynman, Richard. Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman.
New York: W. W. Norton, 1981.
Flusser, Vilém. “Digital Apparition.” In Electronic Cul-
ture: Technology and Visual Representation, edited
by Timothy Druckrey. New York: Aperture, 1996.
Foucault, Michel. The Birth of the Clinic: An Archeology
of Medical Perception. 1963. Translated by A. M.
Sheridan Smith. New York: Vintage, 1994 [1963].
———. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.
Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1977.
———. The History of Sexuality. Translated by Robert
Hurley. New York: Pantheon Books, 1978.
Selected Bibliography
349

———. Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in
the Age of Reason. Translated by Richard Howard.
New York: Random House, 1965.
———. “Truth and Power.” In Power/Knowledge: Se-
lected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–1977,
edited by Colin Gordon. Translated by Colin Gor-
don et al. New York: Pantheon Books, 1980.
Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete
Works of Sigmund Freud. Translated and edited by
James Strachey et al. London: Hogarth Press,
1953–1974. See esp. “Fetishism,” “The Interpreta-
tion of Dreams,” “Mourning and Melancholia.”
“Parapraxes,” and “The Uncanny.”
Froebel, Friedrich. The Education of Man. Translated
and annotated by W. N. Hailman. Mineola, N.Y.:
Dover Publications, 2005 [1892].
Galison, Peter. “Aufbau/Bauhaus: Logical Positivism
and Architectural Modernism.” Critical Inquiry 16,
no. 4 (1990): 709–752.
———. Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Micro-
physics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1997.
Garﬁnkel, H. Studies in Ethnomethodology. New York:
Prentice-Hall, 1967.
Geertz, Clifford. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected
Essays. New York: Basic Books, 1973.
Giddens, Anthony. New Rules of Sociological Method: A
Positive Critique of Interpretative Sociologies. New
York: Basic Books, 1976.
Gieryn, Thomas. “Balancing Acts: Science, Enola Gay,
and History Wars at the Smithsonian.” In The Poli-
tics of Display: Museums, Science, Culture, edited
by Sharon Macdonald. London: Routledge, 1998.
350
Selected Bibliography

Gilligan, Carol. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory
and Women’s Development. Cambridge, Mass.,
Harvard University Press, 1982.
Godelier, Maurice. The Enigma of the Gift. Translated by
Nora Scott. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1999.
Goffman, Erving. The Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Anchor Books,
1959.
Goldman, Lucien. Cultural Creation in Modern Society.
Translated by Bart Grahl. Oxford: B. Blackwell,
1977.
Goodman, Nelson. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis:
Hackett, 1978.
Gould, Glenn. “The Prospects of Recording.” In The
Glenn Gould Reader, edited by Tim Page. New York:
Vintage, 1984.
Gramsci, Antonio. Selections from the Prison Notebooks,
edited and translated by Quintin Hoare and Geof-
frey Nowell-Smith. London: Lawrence and
Wishart, 1971.
Grosz, Elizabeth A. Volatile Bodies: Toward A Corporeal
Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1994.
Haraway, Donna J. “The Cyborg Manifesto.” In Simians,
Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature.
New York: Routledge, 1991.
———. Modest-Witness@Second-Millennium.Femaleman-
Meets-Oncomouse: Feminism and Technoscience.
New York: Routledge, 1997.
———. “Postscript.” In Technoculture, edited by Con-
stance Penley and Andrew Ross. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1991.
Selected Bibliography
351

Harding, Sandra G., ed. The Feminist Standpoint Theory
Reader: Intellectual and Political Controversies.
New York: Routledge, 2004.
Harding, Sandra, and Merrill B. Hintikka, eds. Discover-
ing Reality: Feminist Perspectives on Epistemology,
Metaphysics, Methodology, and Philosophy of
Science. London: Reidel, 1983.
Harel, Idit, and Seymour Papert, eds. Constructionism:
Research Reports and Essays, 1985–90, by the MIT
Epistemology and Learning Group, the MIT Media
Laboratory. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1991.
Harre, Rom. “Material Objects in Social Worlds.” Theory,
Culture and Society, no. 19 (2002): 23–34.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Vir-
tual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature and Informat-
ics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
———. “Simulated Nature and Natural Simulations: Re-
thinking the Relations between the Beholder and
the World.” In Uncommon Ground, edited by
W. Cronin. New York: W. W. Norton, 1995.
Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology
and Other Essays. Translated by William Lovitt.
New York: Harper and Row, 1977.
———. What Is a Thing? Translated by W. B. Barton Jr.
and Vern Deutsch. Chicago: H. Regnery Co., 1968.
Henare, Amina, ed. Thinking Through Things: Theorising
Artifacts in Ethnographic Perspective. London: UCL
Press, 2006.
Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor W. Adorno. Dialectic of
Enlightenment. Translated by Edmund Jephcott.
Edited by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr. New York:
Herder and Herder, 1972.
352
Selected Bibliography

James, William. The Varieties of Religious Experience.
New York: Signet, 2003 [1902].
Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic
of Late Capitalism. Durham, N.C.: Duke University
Press, 1991.
Johnson, Mark. The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis
of Meaning, Imagination and Reason. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1987.
Jones, Caroline A., and Peter Galison. Picturing Science:
Producing Art. New York: Routledge, 1998.
Kant, Immanuel. The Critique of Judgment. Translated
by James C. Meredith. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1952 [1790].
Keller, Evelyn Fox. A Feeling for the Organism: The Life
and Work of Barbara McClintock. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman, 1983.
———. Reﬂections on Gender and Science. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1985.
Klein, Melanie. Love, Guilt, and Reparation and Other
Works, 1921–1945. New York: Dell, 1975.
Knorr Cetina, Karin. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sci-
ences Make Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1999.
———. The Manufacture of Knowledge: An Essay on the
Constructivist and Contextual Nature of Science.
Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1981.
———. “Sociality with Objects: Social Relations in Post-
social Knowledge Societies.” Theory, Culture, and
Society 14 (1997): 1–30.
Kopytoff, Igor. “The Cultural Biography of Things: Com-
moditization as Process.” In The Social Life of
Things, edited by Arjun Appadurai. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Selected Bibliography
353

Krips, Henry. Fetish: An Erotics of Culture. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1995.
Kristeva, Julia. Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection,
European Perspectives. Translated by Leon Rou-
diez. New York: Columbia University Press, 1982.
———. Strangers to Ourselves. Translated by Leon
Roudiez. New York: Columbia University Press,
1991.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions.
2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Lacan, Jacques. Écrits: A Selection. Translated by Alan
Sheridan. New York: W. W. Norton, 1977.
———. The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-
Analysis. Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York:
W. W. Norton, 1978.
Lakoff, George. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things:
What Categories Reveal about the Mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Philosophy in the
Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to
Western Philosophy. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
Landow, George. Hypertext 2.0: The Convergence of Con-
temporary Critical Theory and Technology. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Latour, Bruno. Aramis, or the Love of Technology. Trans-
lated by Catherine Porter. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1996.
———. Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science
Studies. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1999.
———. The Pasteurization of France. Translated by Alan
Sheridan and John Law. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1988.
354
Selected Bibliography

———. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and
Engineers through Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1987.
———. We Have Never Been Modern. Translated by
Catherine Porter. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1993.
Latour, Bruno, and Steven Woolgar. Laboratory Life:
The Social Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts. Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986 [1979].
Lave, Jean. Cognition in Practice: Mind, Mathematics,
and Culture in Everyday Life. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1988.
Lavine, Steven, and Ivan Karp. Exhibiting Cultures: The
Poetics and Politics of Museum Display. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1991.
Leuenberger, Christine. “Constructing the Berlin Wall:
How Material Culture Is Used in Psychological
Theory.” Social Problems 53, no. 1: 18–37.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. Structural Anthropology. Trans-
lated by Monique Layton. New York: Basic Books,
1976.
———. The Savage Mind. Translated by John Weight-
man and Doreen Weightman. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1966.
———. Totemism. Translated by Rodney Needham.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1963.
———. Tristes Tropiques. Translated by John Weight-
man and Doreen Weightman. New York:
Atheneum, 1974.
Lubar, Steven, and David Kingery. History from Things:
Essays on Material Culture. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Press, 1995.
Selected Bibliography
355

Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A
Report on Knowledge, Theory and History of Litera-
ture, Vol. 10. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1984.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁc:
An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in
the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. Lon-
don: G. Routledge and Sons, 1922.
Mann, David W. A Simple Theory of the Self. New York:
W. W. Norton, 1994.
Mannheim, Karl. Essays on the Sociology of Culture. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1956.
Marx, Karl. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy.
Translated by Ben Fowkes. London: Penguin,
1976 [1867].
———. The Grundrisse, edited and translated by David
McLellan. New York: Harper and Row, 1971
[1858].
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift: The Form and Reason for Ex-
change in Archaic Societies. Translated by W. D.
Halls. New York: W. W. Norton, 2000 [1950].
McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Exten-
sions of Man. New York: American Library, 1964.
Mead, Margaret. Coming of Age in Samoa: A Psychologi-
cal Study of Primitive Youth for Western Civilization.
New York: Blue Ribbon Books, 1928.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception.
Translated by Colin Smith. London: Routledge,
1962.
Miller, Daniel. Material Cultures: Why Some Things Mat-
ter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Mumford, Lewis. Technics and Civilization. New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World, 1963 [1934].
356
Selected Bibliography

Negroponte, Nicholas. Being Digital. New York: Vintage,
1996.
Norman, Donald A. The Design of Everyday Things. New
York: Doubleday, 1990.
———. Emotional Design: Why We Love (Or Hate) Every-
day Things. New York: Basic Books, 2004.
Papert, Seymour. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and
Powerful Ideas. New York: Basic Books, 1980.
Pasztory, Esther. Thinking with Things. Austin: Univer-
sity of Texas, 2005.
Penley, Constance, and Andrew Ross, eds. Technocul-
ture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1991.
Petroski, Henry. The Evolution of Useful Things. New
York: Knopf, 1993.
———. The Pencil: A History of Design and Circumstance.
New York: Knopf, 1989.
Piaget, Jean. The Child’s Conception of the World. 1929.
Translated by Joan and Andrew Tomlinson.
Totowa, N.J.: Littleﬁeld Adams, 1960.
———. Genetic Epistemology. Translated by Eleanor
Duckworth. New York: Columbia University Press,
1970.
Piaget, Jean, and Barbel Inhelder. The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. Trans-
lated by Anne Parsons and Stanley Milgram. New
York: Basic Books, 1958.
Pickering, Andrew. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency,
and Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1997.
Pinch, Trevor J., and Wiebe E. Bijker. “The Social Con-
struction of Facts and Artefacts: Or How the
Selected Bibliography
357

Sociology of Science and the Sociology of Technol-
ogy Might Beneﬁt Each Other.” Social Studies of
Science 14: 388–441.
Pinch Trevor, and Frank Trocco. Analog Days: The In-
vention and Impact of the Moog Synthesizer. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Poster, Mark. The Mode of Information: Poststructuralism
and Social Context. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1990.
Proust, Marcel. Remembrance of Things Past. Translated
by C. K. Scott Montcrieff and Terence Kilmartin.
New York: Vintage, 1981 [1913].
Rabinow, Paul. “Artiﬁciality and Enlightenment: From
Sociobiology to Biosociality.” In Incorporations,
edited by Jonathan Crary and Sanford Kwinter.
New York: Zone Books, 1992.
Rabinow, Paul. Making PCR: A Story of Biotechnology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. Structure and Function in Primi-
tive Society: Essays and Addresses. New York:
Free Press, 1965.
Ratey, John J. A User’s Guide to the Brain: Perception,
Attention, and the Four Theaters of the Brain. New
York: Vintage, 2002.
Resnick, Mitchel. Turtles, Termites, and Trafﬁc Jams:
Explorations in Massively Parallel Microworlds.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1994.
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg. Toward a History of Epistemic
Things: Synthesizing Proteins in the Test Tube.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997.
Rilke, Rainer Maria. Letters to a Young Poet. Translated
by Stephen Mitchell. New York: Vintage, 1986
[1906].
358
Selected Bibliography

Romanyshyn, Robert. Technology as Symptom and
Dream. London: Routledge, 1989.
Rosch, Eleanor, Evan Thompson, and Francisco Varela.
The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
Rosenblum, Richard, and Valerie Doran. Art of the Natu-
ral World: Resonances of Wild Nature in Chinese
Sculptural Art. Boston: MFA Publications, 2001.
Sacks, Oliver. Uncle Tungsten: Memories of a Chemical
Boyhood. New York: Knopf, 2001.
Sahlins, Marshall David. Culture and Practical Reason.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976.
Said, Edward W. Orientalism. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1978.
Saussure, Ferdinand de. Course in General Linguistics.
Translated by W. Baskin. New York: Philosophical
Library, 1959.
Schön, Donald A. “Designing as Reﬂective Conversation
with the Materials of a Design Situation.”
Knowledge-Based Systems 5, no. 1 (1992): 3–13.
Searle, John. “Minds, Brains, and Programs.” In Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980): 417–457.
Serres, Michel, and Bruno Latour. Conversations on
Science, Culture, and Time: Studies in Literature
and Science. Translated by Roxanne Lapidus. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995.
Smith, Cyril Stanley. From Art to Science. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1980.
Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Dell, 1978.
Star, Susan Leigh, and Geoffrey C. Bowker. Sorting
Things Out: Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.
Selected Bibliography
359

Star, Susan Leigh, and James R. Griesemer. “Institu-
tional Ecology, ‘Translations,’ and Boundary Ob-
jects: Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology.” Social Studies of
Science 19 (1989): 387–420.
Strathern, Marilyn. Property, Substance, and Effect: An-
thropological Essays on Persons and Things. Lon-
don: Athlone Press, 1999.
Suchman, Lucy. “Afﬁliative Objects.” Organization 12,
no. 3 (2005): 379–399.
———. Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of
Human-Machine Communication. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Tenner, Edward. Our Own Devices: The Past and Future
of Body Technology. New York: Knopf, 2003.
———. When Things Bite Back. New York: Knopf, 1996.
Thomas, Lewis. The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology
Watcher. New York: Penguin, 1974.
Thomas, Nicholas. Entangled Objects: Exchange, Mate-
rial Culture, and Colonialism in the Paciﬁc. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Tilley, Christopher, ed. Reading Material Culture: Struc-
turalism, Hermeneutics, and Post-Structuralism.
Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1991.
Traweek, Sharon. Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of
High Energy Physicists. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1988.
———. “Border Crossings: Narrative Strategies in
Science Studies and among Physicists in Tsukuba
Science City, Japan.” In Science as Practice and
Culture, edited by Andrew Pickering. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1992.
360
Selected Bibliography

Turkle, Sherry. Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age
of the Internet. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1995.
———. The Second Self: Computers and the Human
Spirit. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2005 [1984].
———. “Whither Psychoanalysis in Computer Culture.”
Psychoanalytic Psychology: Journal of the Division
of Psychoanalysis 21, vol. 1 (2004): 16–30.
Turkle, Sherry, and Seymour Papert. “Epistemological
Pluralism: Styles and Voices within Computer Cul-
ture.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Soci-
ety 16, no. 1 (1990): 128–157.
Turner, Victor. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of
Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1967.
———. The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure.
Chicago: Aldine, 1969.
van Gennep, Arnold. Rites of Passage. Translated by
Monika B. Vizedom and Gabrielle L. Caffee. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1960 [1909].
Vygotsky, Lev. Mind in Society, edited by Michael Cole,
Vera John-Steiner, Sylvia Scribner, and Ellen Sou-
berman. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1978.
Weber, Max. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpre-
tive Sociology, edited by Guenther Roth and Claus
Wittich. Translated by Ephraim Fischoff et al. New
York: Bedminster Press, 1968.
———. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.
Translated by Talcott Parsons. New York: Rout-
ledge, 1992 [1904].
Selected Bibliography
361

Weizenbaum, J. Computer Power and Human Reason:
From Judgment to Calculation. New York: W. H.
Freeman, 1979.
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. Language, Thought, and Reality:
Selected Writings, edited by John Bissell Carroll.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1956.
Wiener, Norbert. God and Golem, Inc.: A Comment on
Certain Points Where Cybernetics Impinges on Reli-
gion. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1966.
Williams, William Carlos. Paterson. New York: New Di-
rections, 1946.
Winner, Langdon. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” In
Daedalus 109, vol. 1 (1981): 121–136.
Winnicott, D. W. Collected Papers: Through Paediatrics to
Psycho-Analysis. London: Tavistock Publications;
New York: Basic Books, 1958.
———. Playing and Reality. New York: Routledge, 1989
[1971].
———. Psychoanalytic Explorations, edited by Clare
Winnicott, Ray Shepherd, and Madeleine Davis.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1989.
———. “The Use of an Object.” International Journal of
Psychoanalysis 50 (1969): 711–716.
Winograd, Terry. “Heidegger and the Design of Com-
puter Systems.” In Technology and the Politics of
Knowledge, edited by Andrew Feenberg and Alas-
tair Hannay. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1995.
Woolgar, Steve, and Geoff Cooper. “Do Artefacts Have
Ambivalence?” In Social Studies of Science 29,
vol. 3 (1999): 433–449.
362
Selected Bibliography

Zˇizˇek, Slavoj. “Cyberspace, or, the Unbearable Closure
of Being.” Pretexts: Studies in Writing and Culture
6, vol. 1 (1997): 53–79.
———. Mapping Ideology. London: Verso, 1994.
———. The Puppet and the Dwarf: The Perverse Core of
Christianity. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2003.
Selected Bibliography
363

Tod Machover | My Cello
Erik Erikson, Childhood and Society (New York: W. W.
Norton, 1963), 222.
Carol Strohecker | Knots
Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, trans. John
Weightman and Doreen Weightman (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1966), 17, 21.
Susan Yee | The Archive
Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever, trans. Eric Prenowitz
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 17–18.
Mitchel Resnick | Stars
Jean Piaget. Genetic Epistemology, trans. Eleanor Duck-
worth (New York: Columbia University Press, 1970), 15–16.
Howard Gardner | Keyboards
Lev Vygotsky, Mind in Society, ed. Michael Cole, Vera
John-Steiner, Sylvia Scribner, and Ellen Souberman
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978), 92–
104.
Eden Medina | Ballet Slippers
Hans Christian Anderson, “The Red Shoes,” in Fairy
Tales, trans. Tiina Nunnally, ed. Jackie Wullschlager
(New York: Viking, 2005), 207–209.
Epigraph Sources

Joseph Cevetello | The Elite Glucometer
Donna J. Haraway, “The Cyborg Manifesto,” in Simians,
Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New
York: Routledge, 1991), 162–163.
Matthew Belmonte | The Yellow Raincoat
Julia Kristeva, Strangers to Ourselves, trans. Leon Rou-
diez (New York: Columbia University Press, 1991), 187,
191.
Michelle Hlubinka | The Datebook
Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Har-
court, Brace & World, 1963 [1934]), 14–17.
Annalee Newitz | My Laptop
Vilém Flusser, “Digital Apparition,” in Electronic Culture:
Technology and Visual Representation,
ed. Timothy
Druckrey (New York: Aperture, 1996), 243–244.
Gail Wight | Blue Cheer
Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of
Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (New
York: Random House, 1965), 197.
Julian Beinart | The Radio
Jean Baudrillard, “Design and Environment or How Po-
litical Economy Escalates into Cyberblitz,” in For a Cri-
tique of the Political Economy of the Sign, trans. Charles
Levin (St. Louis: Telos Press, 1981), 188–189.
Irene Castle McLaughlin | The Bracelet
Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Ex-
change in Archaic Societies, trans. W. D. Halls (New York:
W. W. Norton, 2000 [1950]), 11–12, 14.
Epigraph Sources
365

David Mitten | The Axe Head
Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, trans.
Catherine Porter (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1993), 67.
Susan Spilecki | Dit Da Jow
William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (New
York: Signet, 2003 [1902]), 49–50.
Nathan Greenslit | The Vacuum Cleaner
Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, trans.
Ben Fowkes (London: Penguin, 1976 [1867]), vol. I, 163.
William J. Mitchell | The Melbourne Train
Roland Barthes, The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard
Miller (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1975),
60–63, 66.
Judith Donath | 1964 Ford Falcon
Igor Kopytoff, The “Cultural Biography of Things: Com-
moditization as Process,” in The Social Life of Things,
ed. Arjun Appadurai (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1986), 66–68.
Trevor Pinch | The Synthesizer
Victor Turner, The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu
Ritual (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1967), 95, 98.
Tracy Gleason | Murray: The Stuffed Bunny
D. W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1989 [1971]), 51.
366
Epigraph Sources

David Mann | The World Book
Jacques Lacan, Écrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), 65, 68, 81.
Susan Rubin Suleiman | The Silver Pin
Melanie Klein, “Love, Guilt, and Reparation,” in Love,
Guilt, and Reparation and Other Works, 1921–1945 (New
York: Dell, 1975), 342–343.
Henry Jenkins | Death-Defying Superheroes
Umberto Eco, “The Myth of Superman,” Diacritics 2, no. 1
(1972): 16.
Stefan Helmreich | The SX-70 Instant Camera
Susan Sontag, On Photography (New York: Dell, 1978),
8–9, 111.
Glorianna Davenport | Salvaged Photographs
Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space: The Classic Look
at How We Experience Intimate Places, trans. Maria Jolas
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1994 [1958]), 5–6.
Susan Pollak | The Rolling Pin
Marcel Proust, Remembrance of Things Past, trans. C. K.
Scott Montcrieff and Terence Kilmartin (New York: Vin-
tage, 1981 [1913]), vol. I, 48–51.
Caroline A. Jones | The Painting in the Attic
Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory, trans. Nancy M. Paul
and W. Scott Palmer (New York: Zone Books, 1990
[1896]), 133–135.
Epigraph Sources
367

Olivia Dasté | The Suitcase
Sigmund Freud, “Mourning and Melancholia,” in The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud, trans. and ed. James Strachey et al. (Lon-
don: Hogarth Press, 1953–1974), vol. XIV, 249.
Nancy Rosenblum | Chinese Scholars’ Rocks
Immanuel Kant, The Critique of Judgment, trans. James
C. Meredith (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1952
[1790]), 110–111.
Susannah Mandel | Apples
Lewis Thomas, The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology
Watcher (New York: Penguin, 1974), 3, 45.
Jeffrey Mifﬂin | The Mummy
Sigmund Freud, “The Uncanny,” in The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud,
trans. and ed. James Strachey et al. (London: Hogarth
Press, 1953–1974), vol. XVII, 235.
Michael M. J. Fischer | The Geoid
Maurice Blanchot, Awaiting Oblivion, trans. John Gregg
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1997), 1–2.
Robert P. Crease | Foucault’s Pendulum
Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of
Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1990 [1757]), 67.
Evelyn Fox Keller | Slime Mold
Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts
of Pollution and Taboo (New York: Routledge, 1992), 36.
368
Epigraph Sources


Tod Machover | My Cello
Illustration on page 21 courtesy of the author.
Susan Yee | The Archive
Illustrations on pages 31 and 37 courtesy of AKG Im-
ages, Ltd.
Michelle Hlubinka | The Datebook
Illustrations on pages 77 and 85 courtesy of the author.
Gail Wight | Blue Cheer
Illustration on page 93 courtesy of Laura Splan. Illustra-
tions on page 100 courtesy of the author.
Julian Beinart | The Radio
Illustrations on pages 103 and 109 courtesy of the author.
Irene Castle McLaughlin | The Bracelet
Illustrations on pages 111 and 117 courtesy of the author.
David Mitten | The Axe Head
Illustrations on pages 119 and 125 courtesy of R. Wing.
Illustration Credits
Note: All illustrations without speciﬁc credit are copyright-free
stock photos, are public domain, or were created by the book’s art
director.

Susan Spilecki | Dit Da Jow
Illustration on page 127 courtesy of the author.
William J. Mitchell | The Melbourne Train
Illustration on page 145 courtesy of Ararat Railway Heri-
tage.
Judith Donath | 1964 Ford Falcon
Illustrations on pages 153 and 161 courtesy of the author.
Trevor Pinch | The Synthesizer
Illustrations on pages 163 and 169 courtesy of the author.
Tracy Gleason | Murray
Illustrations on pages 171 and 177 courtesy of the author.
Susan Rubin Suleiman | The Silver Pin
Illustrations on pages 185 and 192 courtesy of the author.
Henry Jenkins | Death-Defying Superheroes
Illustration on page 195 from “Detective Comics” #460
© 1976 DC Comics. All rights reserved. Used with per-
mission. Illustration on page 206 from SPIDER-MAN: TM
& © 2006 Marvel Characters, Inc. Used with permission.
Stefan Helmreich | The SX-70 Instant Camera
Illustration on page 209 courtesy of Oleg Volk of VOLK-
STUDIO (www.olegvolk.net).
Glorianna Davenport | Salvaged
Illustrations on pages 217 and 223 courtesy of the author/
Davenport archive.
Illustration Credits
371

Caroline A. Jones | The Painting in the Attic
Illustration on page 233 courtesy of the author.
Olivia Dasté | The Suitcase
Illustrations on pages 245 and 249 courtesy of GLOBE-
TROTTER Ltd.
Nancy Rosenblum | Scholars’ Rocks
Illustrations on pages 253 and 259 courtesy of the au-
thor/Rosenblum Family Collection.
Jeffrey Mifﬂin | The Mummy
Illustrations on pages 271 and 277 courtesy of the author.
Michael M. J. Fischer | The Geoid
Illustration on page 279 courtesy of K. H. Ilk, University
Bonn. Illustration on page 285 courtesy of the author.
Robert P. Crease | Foucault’s Pendulum
Illustrations on pages 287 and 295 courtesy of the Mu-
seum of Science, Boston.
Evelyn Fox Keller | Slime Mold
Illustration on page 306 courtesy of M. J. Grimson and
R. L. Blanton, Biological Sciences Electron Microscopy
Laboratory, Texas Tech University.
372
Illustration Credits


“Afﬁliative Objects” (Suchman), 336n
Andersen, Hans Christian, 54
Appadurai, Arjun, 329n
Apple, the, 261–268, 307
Aramis or the Love of Technology (Latour), 339n
Archive, the, 31–36, 324
digital, 323, 324
physical, 32–35, 324
Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression (Derrida), 30, 341n
Art of the Natural World: Resonance of Wild Nature in Chinese
Sculptural Art (Rosenblum and Doran), 333n
“Auguries of Innocence” (Blake), 333n
Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, The, 330n
Awaiting Oblivion (Blanchot), 278
Axe Head, the, 119–125, 313
Bachelard, Gaston, 216, 342n
Bailey, Irma, 114–116
Ballet slippers, 55–60, 311
Barad, Karen, 336n
Barthes, Roland, 144, 316, 338n, 340n
Baudrillard, Jean, 8, 102, 139, 312, 331n, 338n
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 17
Beinart, Julian, 108, 312
Belmonte, Matthew, 75
Bergson, Henri, 232, 341n
Biography of objects, 139, 315. See also Kopytoff, Igor
Birth of the Clinic: An Archeology of Medical Perception, The
(Foucault), 337n
Blake, William, 12, 254, 333n
Blanchot, Maurice, 278
Bleier, Ruth, 328n
“Blue Cheer,” 93–100, 311
Bodies 2, 307
Index

Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex” (Butler),
338n
Bracelet, the, 111–117
Bricolage (bricoleur), 4, 5, 11, 22, 309. See also Lévi-Strauss,
Claude
engineer as bricoleur, 308 (see also Lévi-Strauss, Claude)
Brown, Bill, 329n
Budapest Diary (Suleiman), 188
Burgess, Anthony, 266, 333n
Burke, Edmund, 8, 286, 292
Butler, Judith, 338n
Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (Marx), 136, 331n, 338n
Causal explanations, preference for, 323
Cello, the, 13–20
Century of the Gene, The (Keller), 335n
Cevetello, Joseph, 68, 325–326
Childhood and Society (Erikson), 12
Chinese Scholars’ Rocks, 8, 253–259, 319, 320
Clocks, 76, 310
Clockwork Orange, A (Burgess), 266, 333n
Clockwork Orange: A Play with Music, A (Burgess), 266, 333n
“Close-to-the-object” (as style of doing science), 300, 301
Clynes, Manfred, 68, 330n
Comics and collecting, 199, 201–205
Commodities, 312
animation of, 139
Computer as creator of evocative objects, 43
Computer as evocative object, 43
Constructionism: Research Reports and Essays, 1985–1990
by the MIT Epistemology and Learning Group, The MIT
Media Laboratory (Harel and Papert), 337n
Crease, Robert P., 294
Critique of Judgment (Kant), 252, 341n
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 329n, 341n
“Cultural Biography of Things: Commoditization as Process”
(Kopytoff), 152
Cyborg, 68
Cyborg couplings, 325–326
“Cyborg Manifesto” (Haraway), 62
“Cyborgs and Space” (Clynes and Kline), 330n
Index
375

Dasté, Olivia, 249, 317
Daston, Lorraine, 329n
Datebook, the, 77–84, 310–311
Davenport, Glorianna, 222
“DDS: Dynamics of Developmental Systems” (Keller), 335n
Death-defying superheroes, 7, 195–206
Derrida, Jacques, 8, 30, 324, 342n
“Design and Environment or How Political Economy Escalates
into Cyber-Blitz” (Baudrillard), 102, 331n
Diabetes (monitoring, and “tight control” of, with objects),
65–68
Didion, Joan, 323
“Digital Apparition” (Flusser), 86
Digital database, 34
Disciplinary Society, 310–311
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (Foucault), 337n
Discovering Reality: Feminist Perspectives on Epistemology,
Metaphysics, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science
(Harding and Hintikka, eds.), 328n–329n
Dit Da Jow, 127–134
Donath, Judith, 160, 314–315
Doran, Valerie, 333n
Douglas, Mary, 8, 296, 321, 342n
Durban, South Africa, 105
Eco, Umberto, 7, 194, 196, 197, 292–294, 332n, 334n
Écrits: A Selection (Lacan), 178, 339n, 340n
Education of Man (Froebel), 330n
“Elucidating Styles of Thinking through Learning about
Knots” (Strohecker), 330n
Emergence, idea of, 42, 299
Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge (Knorr
Cetina), 329n
Erasure (as used by Derrida), 324
Erikson, Erik, 12
“Essay on Criticism, An” (Pope), 332n
Evocative objects, notion of, 5, 10, 307
activity of, 8 (see also Baudrillard, Jean; Latour, Bruno;
Lévi-Strauss, Claude; Marx, Karl; Piaget, Jean; Vygotsky,
Lev)
376
Index

as boundary objects, 8, 73, 307, 321, 322 (see also Douglas,
Mary; Turner, Victor)
bringing philosophy down to earth, 8, 307 (see also Chinese
Scholars’ Rocks; Turkle, Sherry)
as catalysts of identity, 8, 156 (see also Erikson, Erik;
Kopytoff, Igor)
computer as evocative object, 43 (see also Newitz, Annalee)
as creator of evocative objects, 43 (see also Resnick,
Mitchel)
holding power of, general, 8
identiﬁcation of self with object (e.g., car), 156, 159
in integration of intellect and emotion, 5, 8, 309
as liminal (“threshold”) objects, 8, 307, 315, 319, 320, 321
(see also Turner, Victor)
as transitional objects, 9, 314, 318 (see also Transitional
objects; Winnicott, D. W.)
uncanny objects, as 8, 307, 322 (see also Freud, Sigmund)
“Fan” life and culture, 196–202
“Fate of the Transitional Object, The” (Winnicott), 332n
Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara
McClintock, A (Keller), 328n, 335n
Feminist Approaches to Science (Bleier, ed.), 328n
“Fetishism” (Freud), 329n
Feynman, Richard, 328n
Fischer, Irene, 334n
Fischer, Michael M. J., 284
Flusser, Vilém, 86
Following the Equator (Twain), 146, 331n
For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign
(Baudrillard), 338n
Ford Falcon, 7, 153–161, 314–315
Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual, The (Turner),
162
Foucault, Jean-Bernard-Leon, 289, 290
Foucault, Michel, 92, 310–311, 337n
Foucault pendulum, the, 287–295
Foucault’s Pendulum (Eco), 292–294, 334n
Franklin, Benjamin, 331n
daily planner, 78, 81
Index
377

Franklin Institute (Philadelphia), 288, 289, 294
Freud, Sigmund
on the after-effects of early bonding and sudden separation,
323
on the fate of lost objects, 8, 317
on fetishism, 329n
Lacan’s reading of, 319–320
on “mourning,” 8, 244, 318, 329n, 340n
on the “uncanny,” 8, 142, 270, 320, 329n, 342n
Froebel, Friedrich, 43, 330n
From Art to Science (Smith), 331n
“Function and Field of Speech and Language in
Psychoanalysis, The” (Lacan), 340n
Furphy, Joseph, 150
Gardner, Howard, 51, 325
Garﬁnkel, Alan, 300, 301
“Gears of My Childhood” (Papert), 330n
Genetic Epistemology (Piaget), 38
Geodesy? What’s That? My Personal Involvement in the 
Age-Old Quest for the Size and Shape of the Earth
(I. Fischer), 280, 333n
Geoid, the, 279–284
Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies,
The (Mauss), 110, 338n
Gifts, 312. See also Mauss, Marcel
Gilligan, Carol, 328n
Gleason, Tracy, 176, 313, 314
Glucometer, the Elite, 6, 8, 63–68, 325–326
GNU/Emacs, 91
Greenslit, Nathan, 142
Growth of Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence, The
(Piaget and Inhelder), 328n
Haraway, Donna, 8, 62, 325–326, 330n, 336n, 343n
Harding, Sandra, 328n, 329n
Harel, Idit, 337n
Helmreich, Stefan, 215
Hintikka, Merrill B., 328n, 329n
Hlubinka, Michelle, 84, 310–311
378
Index

Hung, Wong Fei, 128
Hyperinstruments, 19
Identiﬁcation, child with object (knot), 27, 28
Identiﬁcation with others through identiﬁcation with object, 33
In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s
Development (Gilligan), 328n
Inhelder, Barbel, 328n
Insisting on the Impossible: The Life of Edwin Land, Inventor of
Instant Photography (McElheny), 332n
Instrumental vs. subjective technology (Turkle), 34
IRCAM (Boulez), 18
James, William, 9, 126
Jenkins, Henry, 206
Jones, Caroline A., 242
Joslin Diabetes Center, 65
Juilliard, 17, 18
Kant, Immanuel, 8, 252, 292, 294, 341n
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 306, 321–322, 328n, 335n, 342n
Keyboards, 47–51
Klein, Melanie, 184
Kline, Nathan, 330n
Knorr Cetina, Karin, 328n, 329n, 336n
Knot, the, 23–29
Knot Lab, 25–29, 309–310
Knots, 8, 309
Kopytoff, Igor, 8, 152, 315
Kristeva, Julia, 70, 338n
Kung fu, 128–132
Laboratory Life: The Construction of Social Scientiﬁc Facts
(Latour and Woolgar), 328n, 339n
Lacan, Jacques, 178, 316–317, 340n
Lam, Wing, 129
Language
as constitutive of self, 178, 317
as liminal object, 316, 317
Laptop (computer), 8, 87–91, 325, 325–326
Index
379

La Sylphide (ballet), 56
Latour, Bruno, 118, 313, 328n, 329n, 339n
Lawson, Henry, 148, 149, 332n
Le Corbusier (Charles-Edouard Jeanneret), 32, 33, 324
Lego Group, 44
“Letters to a Young Poet” (Rilke), 330n
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 4, 6–7, 22, 308, 309, 328n, 336n
Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet, The
(Turkle), 328n
Liminal (“threshold”) objects, 8, 307, 315, 316, 319, 320
Linux, 91
Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology Watcher, The (Thomas), 260,
333n
Logo turtle, 43, 44
“Love, Guilt, and Reparation” (Klein), 184
Ludiomil, 94, 95, 98, 99
Machover, Tod, 20
Madeleine (cookie), 226, 227, 228, 318
Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of
Reason (Foucault), 92, 337n
Magritte, René, 267
Mandel, Susannah, 268
Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science, The
(Pickering), 336n
Mann, David, 183, 316, 316–317
Manufacture of Knowledge: An Essay on the Constructivist
and Contextual Nature of Science, The (Knorr Cetina),
328n
Massachusetts General Hospital (Boston), 272
Mastery, play as strategy for achievement of (Erikson), 12
Matter and Memory (Bergson), 232, 341n
Marx, Karl, 8, 136, 139, 312, 338n
Mauss, Marcel, 110, 312, 338n. See also Gifts
McClintock, Barbara, 300, 301, 322
McElheny, Victor, 332n
McLaughlin, Irene Castle, 117
Meaning of Things: Domestic Symbols and the Self, The
(Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton), 329n, 341n
Medina, Eden, 60, 311
380
Index

Melbourne Train, the, 7, 145–151, 315, 316
Memory closet, 3, 4, 10
Meritol, 98
Mifﬂin, Jeffrey, 276, 320–321
Mind in Society (Vygotsky), 46
Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas
(Papert), 309, 337n
Mitchell, William J., 150, 315, 316
MIT Media Lab, 19, 24
Mitten, David, 125, 313
Moog synthesizer, 164
“Mourning and Melancholia” (Freud), 244, 329n, 340n
“Mr. B.” (case study), 229, 230, 318–319
Mumford, Lewis, 76, 310, 337n
Mummy, the (“Padihershef”), 271–277, 320, 321
“Myth of Superman” (Eco), 194, 332n
Mythologies (Barthes), 337n
Nanney, David L., 301, 335n
Neumann, John von, 305
“Never-Never Land, The” (Lawson), 332n
Newitz, Annalee, 91, 325, 325
Objects, examples of actions of
as anthropomorphic beings, 138–140
in body discipline, 311
to bring society within the self, 311
as commodities, 136, 139, 312
to internalize sense of time, 310
within mourning process, 318
to reveal relationships to nature, history, etc., 312
to reveal social relations, 312
Objects of science as objects of passion, 8, 74, 212, 309
Object (or “thing”) studies, 5
Objects as sublime, 286, 252
Objects as symbols of immigrant status, 186–192
On Photography (Sontag), 208
“On a Question Preliminary to Any Possible Treatment of
Psychosis” (Lacan), 340n
“On the Signiﬁcation of the Phallus” (Lacan), 339n
Index
381

Painting in the attic, the, 233–242
Papert, Seymour, 43, 309, 330n, 337n
gears of, 43, 309
Paradoxes, 40, 41, 43
Pascal, Blaise, 276, 333n
Pasteurization of France (Latour), 338n, 339n
Paterson (Williams), 336n
Pensées (Pascal), 333n
Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful, A (Burke), 286
Photography as ritual of family life, 208
Piaget, Jean, 6, 38, 308, 309, 323, 328n
Pickering, Andrew, 336n
Pinch, Trevor, 168, 325
Playing and Reality (Winnicott), 170, 309, 339, 332n, 337n,
339n
Pleasure of the Text, The (Barthes), 144, 339n
Poetics of Space: The Classic Look at How We Experience
Intimate Places (Bachelard), 216, 341n
Pollak, Susan, 231, 318–319
Pollution and cleanliness, 321. See also Douglas, Mary
Pope, Alexander, 150, 332n
“Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of
How Matter Comes to Matter” (Barad), 336n
“Processes and Products for Forming Photographic Images in
Color” (Rogers), 332n
Programmable bricks, 44
Property, Substance, and Effect: Anthropological Essays on
Persons and Things (Strathern), 336n
Proust, Marcel, 224, 318, 319, 332n, 341n
Psychoanalytic Politics: Jacques Lacan and Freud’s French
Revolution (Turkle), 337n
Psychopharmaceuticals and identity, 311
Pull-toy, 308, 309
Pull-toy paradox (Resnick), 40, 41, 42, 308
Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution
and Taboo (Douglas), 296, 321, 341n
Pyle, Howard, 263
Radio (mute), 103–109, 312
Ratey, John J., 90, 331n
382
Index

Red Shoes, The (Andersen), 54
Reﬂections on Gender and Science (Keller), 335n, 341n
Remembrance of Things Past (Proust), 224, 227, 228, 230,
319, 332n, 341n
Resnick, Mitchel, 44, 308, 309, 323, 330n, 337n
Rilke, Rainer Maria, 68, 330n
Rites of Passage (van Gennep), 339n
Rites of passage, 315, 319. See also Liminal objects; Turner,
Victor; Van Gennep, Arnold
Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure, The (Turner),
329n, 339n
Rochberg-Halton, Eugene, 329n, 341n
Rogers, Howard G., 210, 332n
“Role of the Cytoplasm in Heredity” (Nanney), 335n
Rolling pin, the, 225–231, 307, 318
Rosenblum, Anna, 257
Rosenblum, Nancy, 258, 319
Rosenblum, Richard, 257, 258, 333n
Salvaged photographs, 217–222
Samaras, Lucas, 210, 213
Savage Mind, The (Lévi-Strauss), 22, 328n, 336n
Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers
through Society (Latour), 339n
Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit (Turkle), 330n
Segel, Lee, 298, 300, 301, 322
Selye, Hans, 331n
Shortwave radio, 166
Silver pin, the, 7, 185–192
Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature
(Haraway), 336n
Slime mold, 297–306, 321–322
as boundary object, 321
Smith, Cyril Stanley, 331n
“Sociality with Objects: Social Relations in Postsocial
Knowledge Societies” (Knorr Cetina), 336n
Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, The
(Appadurai, ed.), 329n
Sontag, Susan, 9, 208
Spilecki, Susan, 134
Stallman, Richard, 90
Index
383

StarLogo, 44, 323
Stars, 39–45, 308
Strathern, Marilyn, 336n
Strangers to Ourselves (Kristeva), 70, 338n
Stress, 138, 139
“Stress and Psychiatry” (Selye), 331n
Strohecker, Carol, 29, 309, 310, 330n
Stuffed bunny, the (Murray), 171–176, 313, 314
Suchman, Lucy, 336n
Suitcase, the, 245–249, 317
Suleiman, Susan Rubin, 192
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman (Feynman), 328n
SX-70 Instant Camera, 209–215, 307
Synthesizer, the, 163–168
System of Objects, The (Baudrillard), 139, 331n
Taglioni, Marie, 56
Technics and Civilization (Mumford), 76, 337n
Tenner, Edward, 329n
Things (Brown, ed.), 329n
Things That Talk: Object Lessons from Art and Science
(Daston, ed.), 329n
Thomas, Lewis, 9, 260, 268, 333n
Torvalds, Linus, 91
Transitional object, 8, 228, 241, 242, 313, 314, 315, 319
Murray, the stuffed bunny (as example of), 172–176
Turkle, Sherry, 3–10, 43, 307–326, 328n, 330n, 337n
Turner, Victor, 8, 162, 315, 319, 321, 329n, 339n
Turtles, Termites, and Trafﬁc Jams: Explorations in Massively
Parallel Microworlds (Resnick), 330n, 337n
Twain, Mark, 146, 332n
“Uncanny, The” (Freud), 142, 270, 329n, 341n
“Understanding Topological Relationships through
Comparisons of Similar Knots” (Strohecker), 330n
User’s Guide to the Brain: Perception, Attention, and the Four
Theaters of the Brain, A (Ratey), 331n
Vacuum cleaner, the, 137–142
Van Gennep, Arnold, 339n
384
Index

Varieties of Religious Experience, The (James), 126
VCS-3 electronic music synthesizer, 164, 165
Violins, 14, 15, 19
Virtual vs. physical objects, 323, 324
Vygotsky, Lev, 46
Wah, Tan Kwok, 128
Web site for car, 157–159
We Have Never Been Modern (Latour), 118, 329n, 339n
Western Native Township, Johannesburg, 107, 109
When Things Bite Back (Tenner), 329n
Whitman, Walt, 9
“Why Knot?” (Strohecker), 330n
Wight, Gail, 100, 311
Williams, William Carlos, 308, 336n
Winnicott, D. W., 8, 170, 228, 241, 242, 309, 313, 314, 315,
319, 333n, 337n, 339n. See also Playing and Reality;
Transitional objects
Wireless World Synthesizer, 166, 167
WizNet (multi-user chat system), 88, 89
Woolgar, Steven, 328n, 339n
“Word Processor, The” (Derrida), 342n
World Book (Encyclopedia), 179–183, 316
as means of access to language, 178–181
Year of Magical Thinking, The (Didion), 317–318, 340n
Yee, Susan, 36, 324–325
Yellow raincoat, the, 71–75
Index
385


