Evolution of Consciousness According to Jean Gebser 
Ulrich J. Mohrhoff 
Sri Aurobindo International Centre of Education 
This article introduces and summarizes The Ever-Present Origin, the magnum opus of cul-
tural historian and evolutionary philosopher Jean Gebser, largely in his own words.     
According to Gebser, human consciousness underwent a series of mutations each of 
which has enriched reality by a new (qualitative) dimension. At present humanity is 
again undergoing such a mutation: this time from the mental, perspectival structure of 
consciousness to the integral, aperspectival structure or, using the terminology of Sri 
Aurobindo, from mind to supermind. The integrality of this consciousness consists in 
part in its ability to integrate the preceding consciousness structures, rather than sup-
pressing them (as the mental structure does) and hence being adversely affected by 
them. The article concludes with a brief account of the Mother’s personal experience of 
this mutation. 
Everything that happens to us, then, is only the answer and echo of what and how we 
ourselves are. — Jean Gebser (161)1 
What thou art within, that outside thee thou shalt enjoy. — Sri Aurobindo2  
1 Introduction 
The book 
Ursprung und Gegenwart is the magnum opus of cultural historian and evolutionary phi-
losopher Jean Gebser. Its two parts were first published in 1949 and 1953, respectively. 
As early as 1951, the Bollingen Foundation  contemplated the feasibility of an Eng-
lish-language version. In his eight-page review, the distinguished philosopher of histo-
ry and author of studies of the evolution of human consciousness Erich Kahler (Man the 
Measure, 1943; The Tower and the Abyss, 1957) encouraged publication, calling the book 
“a very important, indeed in some respects pioneering piece of work,” “vastly, solidly, 
and subtly documented by a wealth of anthropological, mythological, linguistic, artis-
tic, philosophical, and scientific material which is shown in its multifold and striking 
interrelationship.” Gebser’s study, he wrote “treads new paths, opens new vistas” and 
is “brilliantly written, [introducing] many valuable new terms and distinctions [and 
                                                             
1  Unless stated otherwise, page numbers refer to The Ever-Present Origin (Athens, OH: Ohio Uni-
versity Press, 1985). 
2  Essays Divine and Human (Puducherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Publication Department, 
1997), p. 468. 

52  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
showing] that scholarly precision and faithfulness to given data are compatible with a 
broad, imaginative, and spiritual outlook.” Despite this warmly appreciative and inci-
sive estimation, the first complete English translation was undertaken only in 1975, by 
Professors Noel Barstad (Modern Languages) and Algis Mickunas (Philosophy) at the 
University of Ohio. In 1977, after discussions with the author’s widow, Professor Bars-
tad undertook a complete retranslation and is responsible for the English version in its 
present form. The Ever-Present Origin  was eventually published in 1985 by Ohio Uni-
versity Press .3 
The author 
Born in Posen, Germany, in 1905, Jean Gebser was educated in Breslau, Königsberg,   
Rossleben, and at the University of Berlin. In 1929 he emigrated to Italy and subse-
quently lived in Spain, where he was attached to the Ministry of Education of the Span-
ish Republic. After leaving Madrid twelve hours before his apartment was bombed, he 
spent the years 1937–1939 in Paris, in a circle which included Pablo Picasso, André Ma-
lraux, Paul Eluard, and Louis Aragon. In 1939 he left for Switzerland, where he arrived 
two hours before the frontier was closed, and in 1951 he became a Swiss citizen. For 
many years Gebser was Lecturer at the Institute of Applied Psychology in Zürich. Al-
though later he was appointed honorary Professor of Comparative Studies of Civiliza-
tion at the University of Salzburg, Austria, his declining health prevented him from 
assuming the duties associated with the chair. For his many publications, including 
books on Rilke, his friend Federico García Lorca, recent developments in the sciences, 
East-West relations, evolution, and twentieth century civilization and its antecedents, 
Gebser received several prizes. He died in Berne in 1973. 
Jean Gebser on Sri Aurobindo 
In the Preface to the second edition (1966) of Ursprung und Gegenwart, reproduced in 
part in the English translation, Gebser cites the following reasons for the addition of 
new material to the text: 
The additions have been necessary in the light of many ominous as well as encouraging 
events since publication of the first edition. The ominous aspects are conceivably out-
weighed and counterbalanced by insights and achievements which, by virtue of their 
spiritual potency, cannot remain without effect. Among these achievements, the writ-
ings of Sri Aurobindo and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin are pre-eminent. . . . Both develop 
in their own way the conception of a newly emergent consciousness which Sri Aurobin-
do has designated as the “supramental.” We defined it in turn as the “aperspectival (ara-
tional-integral)” consciousness to which we first referred in Rilke and Spain (1940) and 
later in our Transformation of the Occident (1943). It remains the principal concern of the 
present work to elucidate the possibility as well as the emergence of this new conscious-
ness, and to describe its uniqueness. . . .  
The reader will have to judge for himself in what respects our discussion parallels or di-
                                                             
3  I was fortunate to meet Professor Barstad in 1992 at the XI International Gebser Conference 
in Shippensburg, PA, following an earlier correspondence by email, during which he granted 
me the permission to quote at length from his translation.  

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
53 
verges from those of the authors mentioned, the dissimilarities being occasioned by the 
differing points of departure. Although both authors have a human-universal orienta-
tion, Sri Aurobindo — integrating Western thought — proceeds from a reformed Hindu 
perspective, Teilhard de Chardin from a Catholic position, whereas the present work is 
written from a general and Occidental standpoint. But this does not preclude the one 
exposition from not merely supporting and complementing, but also corroborating the 
others. (xxix) 
In a lecture published in 1970,4 Gebser made the following statement: 
It should be kept in mind: my conception of the emerging of a new consciousness, which 
I realized in winter 1932/33 in a flashlike intuition and started describing since 1939, re-
sembles to a large extent the world conception of Sri Aurobindo, that was at that time 
unknown to me. Mine is different from his insofar, as it is directed only to the Western 
world and does not have the depth and the gravidity of origin of the genially 
represented conception of Sri Aurobindo. An explanation for this apparent phenomenon 
may be seen in the suggestion, that I was included in some manner within the strong 
field of force as radiated by Sri Aurobindo. 
2 The pre-mental structures of consciousness 
Whereas Sri Aurobindo, in his philosophical writings, is chiefly concerned with the 
large-scale evolution of consciousness, from its initial involution in matter through the 
emergence of life and mind to the eventual manifestation of the original creative con-
sciousness-force he calls “supermind,” Gebser addresses the evolution of human con-
sciousness on a finer scale, from its initial archaic structure through its magic, 
mythical, and mental structures to the eventual manifestation of its integral structure. 
The archaic structure 
The archaic structure is the most remote from the presently dominant consciousness 
structure and therefore the most difficult for us to envision. It is zero-dimensional in 
the sense of a total absence of differentiation. There is no subject-object polarity (let 
alone duality), no differentiation between self and other, between soul and nature, be-
tween the individual and the universe. If, in light of our contemporary associations 
with the word “consciousness,” we were to think of this as pre-consciousness rather 
than as a structure of consciousness, Gebser would concur: 
the early period is that period when the soul is still dormant, and its sleep or dormancy 
may have well been so deep that even though it may have existed (perhaps in a spiritual 
pre-form), it had not yet attained consciousness. (43) 
Yet the archaic structure was by no means “primitive” in a derogatory sense. Those 
belonging to it were revered by their descendants as the “true men of earlier times,” as 
“holy men” (43), as possessors of wisdom. 
 
 
                                                             
4 
Jean Gebser, Der unsichtbare Ursprung (Olten: Walter, 1970); “The Invisible Origin,” translated 
by Th. Röttgers and edited by S. Saiter, The Journal of Conscious Evolution 1, 2005 (no page 
numbers). 

54  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
The magic structure 
The emergence of the magic structure is above all a transition from undifferentiated 
identity to one-dimensional unity. The magic consciousness is focused on a single 
“point,” which can be interchanged with other “points” or, as a part, stand for a whole. 
The man of the magic structure has been released from his harmony or identity with the 
whole. With that a first process of consciousness began; it was still completely sleep-like: 
for the first time not only was man in the world, but he began to face the world in its 
sleep-like outlines. Therewith arose the germ of a need: that of no longer being in the 
world but of having the world.  
The more man released himself from the whole, becoming “conscious” of himself, the 
more he began to be an individual, a unity not yet able to recognize the world as a 
whole, but only the details (or “points”) which reach his still sleep-like consciousness 
and in turn stand for the whole. Hence the magic world is also a world of pars pro toto, in 
which the part can and does stand for the whole. Magic man’s reality, his system of asso-
ciations, are these individual objects, deeds, or events separated from one another like 
points in the over-all unity. 
These points can be interchanged at will. It is a world of pure but meaningful accident; a 
world in which all things and persons are interrelated, but the not-yet centered Ego is 
dispersed over the world of phenomena. . . . In a sense one may say that in this structure 
consciousness was not yet in man himself, but still resting in the world. The gradual trans-
fer of this consciousness, which streams towards him and which he must assimilate from 
his standpoint, and the awakening world, which he gradually learns to confront (and in 
the confrontation there is something hostile), is something that man must master.  
Man replies to the forces streaming toward him with his own corresponding forces: he 
stands up to Nature. He tries to exorcise her, to guide her; he strives to be independent 
of her; then he begins to be conscious of his own will. Witchcraft and sorcery, totem and 
taboo, are the natural means by which he seeks to free himself from the transcendent 
power of nature, by which his soul strives to materialize within him and to become in-
creasingly conscious of itself. . . . Here, in these attempts to free himself from the grip 
and spell of nature, with which in the beginning he was still fused in unity, magic man 
begins the struggle for power which has not ceased since; here man becomes the maker. 
(46) 
A hunting scene 
In his book Unknown Africa,5 Leo Frobenius describes the following rite, which he ob-
served in the Congo jungle. 
[M]embers of the hunting tribe of Pygmies (three men and a woman) drew a picture of 
an antelope in the sand before they started out at dawn to hunt antelopes. With the first 
ray of sunlight that fell on the sand, they intended to “kill” the antelope. Their first ar-
row hit the drawing unerringly in the neck. Then they went out to hunt and returned 
with a slain antelope. Their death-dealing arrow hit the animal in exactly the same spot 
where, hours before, the other arrow had hit the drawing. . . . [H]aving fulfilled its magic 
purpose. . . this arrow was then removed from the drawing with an accompanying ritual 
designed to ward off any evil consequences of the murder from the hunters. After that 
                                                             
5  Reprinted in Leo Frobenius, Kulturgeschichte Afrikas (Vienna: Phaidon, 1933). 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
55 
was done, the drawing itself was erased. (47) 
Several characteristics of the magic structure are illustrated by this scene.  
The egolessness is expressed first of all in the fact that the responsibility for the murder, 
committed by the group-ego against a part of nature, is attributed to a power already 
felt to be “standing outside”: the sun. It is not the pygmies’ arrow that kills, but the first 
arrow of the sun that falls on the animal, and of which the real arrow is only a symbol. 
(Nowadays, of course, one would interpret it just the other way around and say: the sun’s 
ray is a symbol of the arrow.) 
In this linking of the responsibility of the hunters’ group-ego (assuming the form of four 
human beings performing the rite) with the sun — which, because of its brightness, must 
be considered a symbol of consciousness — it is clear to what extent the capacity for 
consciousness of these human beings is still on the outside or connected with the out-
side. With the Pygmies in their egolessness, the moral consciousness that they must bear 
responsibility, deriving from a clearly conscious Ego, is still attributed to the sun. Their 
Ego (and with it an essential part of their soul) is still scattered over the world, like the 
light of the sun. 
This leads us directly to the second characteristic: point-like unity. This is expressed in the 
visible interchangeability of the real and the symbolic causative element: that is, in 
equating the ray of sunlight and the arrow.  
At the basis of this point-like unity lies a natural vital nexus, not a rational causal one. 
This point-related unity in which each and every thing intertwines and is interchangea-
ble, becomes apparent when the symbolic murder in a rite, performed before a hunt, 
coincides exactly with the actual one committed by the hunter. In the spaceless and 
timeless world [of the magic structure], this constitutes a working unity which operates 
without a causal nexus. (48) 
Spacelessness and timelessness are further characteristics of the magic structure. They 
are the reason why 
every “point” (a thing, event, or action) can be interchanged with another “point,” inde-
pendently of time and place. . . and of any rational causal connection. Every point. . . can 
not only be linked with any other point but is identified with it. One can substitute for 
the other completely. (48–49) 
It is the lack of spatial and temporal separation that allows things, events, or actions to 
be effectively correlated or to influence each other in a non-causal or pre-causal man-
ner. Gebser attributes the phenomena studied by parapsychology to this spaceless and 
timeless structure, which, like all previous structures, remains active in us or capable 
of being activated. 
This merging with nature, which in its spacelessness and timelessness also connotes a 
remarkable boundlessness, explains the well founded powers of magic man — powers 
which survive today in the form of human mediums. Magic man possessed not only the 
powers of second sight and divination, he was also highly telepathic. Today telepathy is 
based on a mass of authenticated data; even the most hard-bitten rationalist can no 
longer deny its existence. It is explained in part by an elimination of consciousness, 
which obscures or blacks out the ego and causes it to revert to a spaceless-timeless “un-
conscious participation” in the group soul. Clairvoyance may be interpreted in the same 
way. (55) 
All magic, even today, occurs in the natural-vital, egoless, spaceless and timeless sphere. 

56  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
This requires — as far as present-day man is concerned — a sacrifice of consciousness; it 
occurs in the state of trance, or when the consciousness dissolves as a result of mass 
reactions, slogans, or “isms.” If we are not aware of this sphere in ourselves, it remains 
an entry for all kinds of magic influences. . . . In the final analysis, our machines and 
technology, even our present-day power politics, arise from these magic roots: Nature, 
the surrounding world, other human beings must be ruled so that man is not ruled by 
them. This fear that man is compelled to rule the outside world — so as not to be ruled 
by it — is symptomatic of our times. (49–51) 
On the other hand, magic “loses its effectiveness the moment it is stripped of its basic 
vital connections and relations; the injection of consciousness disturbs and interrupts 
the ‘unconsciously’ binding vital energies.” (49)  
A meeting of two consciousness structures 
There is a moving document of this loss of effectiveness in the face of a “superior” con-
sciousness structure. 
There are surely enough historical instances of the catastrophic downfall of entire 
peoples and cultures. Such declines were triggered by the collision of deficient and ex-
hausted attitudes that were insufficient for continuance with those more recent, more 
intense and, in some respects, superior. One such occurrence vividly exemplifies the de-
cisive nature of such crises: the collision of the magical, mythical, and unperspectival 
culture of the Central American Aztecs with the rational-technological, perspectival atti-
tude of the sixteenth-century Spanish conquistadors. A description of this event can be 
found in the Aztec chronicle of Frey Bernardino de Sahagun, written eight years after 
Cortez’ conquest of Mexico on the basis of Aztec accounts. The following excerpt forms 
the beginning of the thirteenth chapter of the chronicle which describes the conquest of 
Mexico City:  
The thirteenth chapter, wherein is recounted 
how the Mexican king Montezuma 
sends other sorcerers 
who were to cast a spell on the Spanish 
and what happened to them on the way. 
And the second group of messengers —  
the soothsayers, the magicians, and the high priests —  
likewise went to receive the Spanish. 
But it was to no avail; 
they could not bewitch the people, 
they could not reach their intent with the Spanish; 
they simply failed to arrive.  
There is hardly another text extant that describes so succinctly and so memorably the 
collapse of an entire world and a hitherto valid and effectual human attitude. The magic-
mythical world of the Mexicans could not prevail against the Spaniards; it collapsed the 
moment it encountered the rational-technological mentality. The materialistic orienta-
tion of present-day Europeans will tend to attribute this collapse to the Spaniards’ tech-
nological superiority, but in actual fact it was the vigor of the Spanish consciousness vis-
à-vis the weakness of the Mexican that was decisive. It is the basic distinction between 
the ego-less man, bound to the group and a collective mentality, and the individual se-
curely conscious of his individuality. Authentic spell-casting, a fundamental element of 
the collective consciousness for the Mexicans, is effective only for the members attuned 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
57 
to the group consciousness. It simply by-passes those who are not bound to, or sympa-
thetic toward, the group. The Spaniards’ superiority, which compelled the Mexicans to 
surrender almost without a struggle, resulted primarily from their consciousness of in-
dividuality, not from their superior weaponry. Had it been possible for the Mexicans to 
step out of their egoless attitude, the Spanish victory would have been less certain and 
assuredly more difficult. (5–6) 
The mytical structure 
Just as the archaic structure was an expression of zero-dimensional identity and original 
wholeness, and the magic structure an expression of one-dimensional unity and man’s 
merging with nature, so is the mythical structure the expression of two-dimensional po-
larity. (66) 
While, according to Gebser, the liberating struggle against nature in the magic struc-
ture brought about a disengagement from nature and an awareness of the external 
world, the mythical structure leads to the emergent awareness of the internal world of 
the soul. The mythical structure is also distinct from the magic in that it bears the 
stamp of the imagination rather than the stress of emotion. 
In the magic structure, the vital connections reach awareness and are manifested in 
emotional forms: in actions dominated by impulse and instinct and subordinate to the 
demands and ramifications of spontaneous, affective reactions such as sympathy and an-
tipathy. We have already spoken of the pre-perspectival nature of the one-dimensional 
magic structure; it is spaceless and timeless, and has an emotional and instinctual con-
sciousness responsive to the demands of nature and the earth. The mythical structure, 
however, whose unperspectival two-dimensionality has a latent predisposition to per-
spectivity, has an imaginatory consciousness, reflected in the imagistic nature of myth 
and responsive to the soul and sky of the ancient cosmos.  
Although still distant from space, the mythical structure is already on the verge of time. 
The imaginatory consciousness still alternates between magical timelessness and the 
dawning awareness of natural cosmic periodicity. The farther myth stands removed 
from consciousness, the greater its degree of timelessness. . . . By contrast, the closer its 
proximity to consciousness, the greater its emphasis on time. . . . The great cosmogonical 
images in the early myths are the soul’s recollection of the world’s origination. In later 
myths, the soul recalls the genesis of earth and man, reflecting the powers of light and 
darkness in the images of the gods. Slowly the timeless becomes temporal; there is a 
gradual transition from remote timelessness to tangible periodicity. (67) 
3 The mental structure 
The philosopher Immanuel Kant is justly famous for his insight that space and time, 
rather than being features of a mind-independent “real” world “out there,” are “pure 
forms of experience.” What Kant apparently did not realize is that the “pure forms” of 
our present consciousness are temporally limited; they arose by a mutation of con-
sciousness and they will be superseded by another mutation of consciousness.  
Scarcely five hundred years ago, during the Renaissance, an unmistakable reorganiza-
tion of our consciousness occurred: the discovery of perspective which opened up the 
three-dimensionality of space. This discovery is so closely linked with the entire intellec-
tual attitude of the modern epoch that we have felt obliged to call this age the age of 
perspectivity and characterize the age immediately preceding it as the “unperspectival” 

58  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
age. These definitions, by recognizing a fundamental characteristic of these eras, lead to 
the further appropriate definition of the age of the dawning new consciousness as the 
“a-perspectival” age,6 a definition supported not only by the results of modern physics, 
but also by developments in the visual arts and literature, where the incorporation of 
time as a fourth dimension into previously spatial conceptions has formed the initial ba-
sis for manifesting the “new.” (2) 
Restricting ourselves here primarily to the art of the Christian era, we can distinguish 
two major self-contained epochs among the many artistic styles, followed today by an 
incipient third. The first encompasses the era up to the Renaissance, the other, now 
coming to a close, extends up to the present. The decisive and distinguishing characte-
ristic of these epochs is the respective absence or presence of perspective. . . The 
achievement of perspective indicates man’s discovery and consequent coming to aware-
ness of space, whereas the unrealized perspective indicates that space is dormant in man 
and that he is not yet awakened to it. . . . 
The illuminated manuscripts and gilt ground of early Romanesque painting depict the 
unperspectival world that retained the prevailing constitutive elements of Mediterra-
nean antiquity. Not until the Gothic, the forerunner of the Renaissance, was there a shift 
in emphasis. Before that space is not yet our depth-space, but rather a cavern (and 
vault), or simply an in-between space; in both instances it is undifferentiated space. This 
situation bespeaks for us a hardly conceivable enclosure in the world, an intimate bond 
between outer and inner suggestive of a correspondence — only faintly discernible — be-
tween soul and nature. This condition was gradually destroyed by the expansion and 
growing strength of Christianity, whose teaching of detachment from nature transforms 
this destruction into an act of liberation. (9–10) 
Petrarch’s ascent of Mount Ventoux 
There is a document extant that unforgettably depicts the struggle of a man caught 
between two worlds. It is a letter of the thirty-two year old Petrarch written in 1336 to 
Francesco Dionigi di Borgo San Sepolcro. In it he describes his ascent of Mount Ven-
toux, a mountain in Southern France, to the northeast of Avignon, where the Rhône 
separates the French Alps from the Cevennes and the principal mountain range of Cen-
tral France. 
For [Petrarch’s] time, his description is an epochal event and signifies no less than the 
discovery of landscape: the first dawning of an awareness of space that resulted in a fun-
damental alteration of European man’s attitude in and toward the world. . . . Petrarch’s 
letter is in the nature of a confession; it is addressed to the Augustinian professor of the-
ology who had taught him to treasure and emulate Augustine’s Confessions. Now, a per-
son makes a confession or an admission only if he believes he has transgressed against 
something; and it is this vision of space, as extended before him from the mountain top, 
this vision of space as a reality, and its overwhelming impression, together with his 
shock and dismay, his bewilderment at his perception and acceptance of the panorama, 
                                                             
6  “ ‘Aperspectival’ is not to be thought of as merely the opposite or negation of ‘perspectival’; 
the antithesis of ‘perspectival’ is ‘unperspectival.’ The distinction in meaning suggested by 
the three terms unperspectival, perspectival, and aperspectival is analogous to that of the 
terms illogical, logical, and alogical or immoral, moral, and amoral. We have employed here 
the designation "aperspectival" to clearly emphasize the need of overcoming the mere anti-
thesis of affirmation and negation.” (2) 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
59 
that are reflected in his letter. It marks him as the first European to step out of the tran-
scendental gilt ground of the Siena masters, the first to emerge from a space dormant in 
time and soul, into “real” space where he discovers landscape. . . . 
“Yesterday I climbed the highest mountain of our region,” he begins the letter, “moti-
vated solely by the wish to experience its renowned height. For many years this has been 
in my soul and, as you well know, I have roamed this region since my childhood. The 
mountain, visible from far and wide, was nearly always present before me; my desire 
gradually increased until it became so intense that I resolved to yield to it. . . .  While still 
climbing, I urged myself forward by the thought that what I experienced today will sure-
ly benefit myself as well as many others who desire the blessed life.” 
Once Petrarch reaches the summit . . . his narrative becomes unsettled; the shifts of 
tense indicate his intense agitation even at the mere recollection of his experience at the 
summit. “Shaken by the unaccustomed wind and the wide, freely shifting vistas, I was 
immediately awe-struck. I look: the clouds lay beneath my feet. [. . .] I look toward Italy, 
whither turned my soul even more than my gaze, and sigh at the sight of the Italian sky 
which appeared more to my spirit than to my eyes, and I was overcome by an inexpress-
ible longing to return home. [. . .] Suddenly a new thought seized me, transporting me from 
space into time. I said to myself: it has been ten years since you left Bologna. [. . .]” In the 
lines that follow, recollecting a decade of suffering, and preoccupied by the overpower-
ing desire for his homeland that befell him during the unaccustomed sojourn on the 
summit, he reveals that his thoughts have turned inward. Still marked by his encounter 
with what was then a new reality, yet shaken by its effect, he flees “from space into time,” 
out of the first experience with space back to the goldground of the Siena masters. 
Having confessed his anguish and unburdened his soul, he describes further his percep-
tion of space: “Then I turn westward; in vain my eye searches for the ridge of the Pyre-
nees, boundary between France and Spain. [. . .] To my right I see the mountains of Lyon, 
to the left the Mediterranean surf washes against Marseille before it breaks on Aigues-
Mortes. Though the distance was considerable, we could see clearly; the Rhône itself lay 
beneath our gaze.” Once again he turns away and yields to something indicative of his 
poetic sensibility. Helpless in the face of the expanse before him and groping for some 
kind of moral support, he opens a copy of Augustine’s Confessions where he chances upon 
a phrase. It stems from that realm of the soul to which he had turned his gaze after his 
initial encounter with landscape. “God and my companion are witnesses,” he writes, 
“that my glance fell upon the passage: ‘And men went forth to behold the high moun-
tains and the mighty surge of the sea, and the broad stretches of the rivers and the inex-
haustible ocean, and the paths of the stars, and so doing, lose themselves in 
wonderment’.” 
Once more, he is terrified, only this time less by his encounter with space than by the 
encounter with his soul of which he is reminded by the chance discovery of Augustine’s 
words. “I admit I was overcome with wonderment,” he continues; “I begged my brother 
who also desired to read the passage not to disturb me, and closed the book. I was irri-
tated for having turned my thoughts to mundane matters at such a moment, for even 
the Pagan philosophers should have long since taught me that there is nothing more 
wondrous than the soul, and that compared to its greatness nothing is great.” 
Pausing for a new paragraph, he continues with these surprising words: “My gaze, fully 
satisfied by contemplating the mountain [i.e., only after a conscious and exhaustive sur-
vey of the panorama], my eyes turned inward; and then we fell silent. . . .” Although ob-
scured by psychological reservations and the memory of his physical exertion, the 
concluding lines of his letter suggest an ultimate affirmation of his ascent and the atten-

60  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
dant experience: “So much perspiration and effort just to bring the body a little closer to 
heaven; the soul, when approaching God, must be similarly terrified.” 
The struggle initiated by his internalization of space into his soul — or, if you will, the 
externalization of space out of his soul — continued in Petrarch from that day on Mount 
Ventoux until the end of his life. The old world where only the soul is wonderful and 
worthy of contemplation . . . now begins to collapse. There is a gradual but increasingly 
evident shift from time to space until the soul wastes away in the materialism of the ni-
neteenth century, a loss obvious to most people today that only the most recent genera-
tions have begun to counter in new ways. (12–15) 
Birth of matter, ego hypertrophy 
The transition mirrored in Petrarch’s letter of six hundred years ago was primarily an 
unprecedented extension of man’s image of the world. The event that Petrarch describes 
in almost prophetic terms as “certainly of benefit to himself and many others” inaugu-
rates a new realistic, individualistic, and rational understanding of nature. The freer 
treatment of space and landscape is already manifest in the work of Ambrogio Lorenzetti 
and Giotto. . . . With Leonardo the perspectival means and techniques attain their perfec-
tion. His Trattato delia Pittura . . . is the first truly scientific and not merely theoretical de-
scription of all possible types of perspective. It is the first detailed discussion of light as 
the visible reality of our eyes and not, as was previously believed, as a symbol of the di-
vine spirit. This emergent illumination dispels any remaining obscurities surrounding 
perspective, and reveals Leonardo as the courageous discoverer of aerial and color, as 
opposed to linear, perspective. . . . Above and beyond this Leonardo’s establishment of 
the laws of perspective is significant in that it made technical drafting feasible and there-
by initiated the technological age. (12–19) 
Space is the insistent concern of this era. In underscoring this assertion, we have relied 
only on the testimony of its most vivid manifestation, the discovery of perspective. We 
did, however, mention in passing that at the very moment when Leonardo discovers 
space and solves the problem of perspective, thereby creating the possibility for spatial 
objectification in painting, other events occur which parallel his discovery. Copernicus, 
for example, shatters the limits of the geocentric sky and discovers heliocentric space; 
Columbus goes beyond the encompassing Oceanos and discovers earth’s space: Vesalius, 
the first major anatomist, bursts the confines of Galen’s ancient doctrines of the human 
body and discovers the body’s space; Harvey destroys the precepts of Hippocrates’ hu-
moral medicine and reveals the circulatory system. . . . Galileo penetrates even deeper 
into space by perfecting the telescope, discovered only shortly before in Holland, and 
employing it for astronomical studies — preparations for man’s ultimate conquest of air 
and suboceanic space that came later and realized the designs already conceived and 
drawn up in advance by Leonardo.  
This intense desire evident at the turn of the sixteenth century to conquer space, and to 
break through the flat ancient cavern wall, is exemplified not only by the transition 
from sacred fresco painting to that on canvas, but even by the most minute and mun-
dane endeavors. It was around this time that lace was first introduced; and here we see 
that even the fabric could no longer serve merely as a surface, but had to be broken 
open, as it were, to reveal the visibility of the background or substratum. Nor is it acci-
dental that in those years of the discovery of space via perspective, the incursions into 
the various spatial worlds mentioned above brought on with finality a transformation of 
the world into a spatial, that is, a sectored world. The previous unity breaks apart; not only 
is the world segmented and fragmented, but the age of colonialism and the other divi-

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
61 
sions begins: schisms and splits in the church, conquests and power politics, unbounded 
technology, and all types of emancipations.  
The over-emphasis on space and spatiality that increases with every century since 1500 
is at once the greatness as well as the weakness of perspectival man. His over-emphasis 
on the “objectively” external, a consequence of an excessively visual orientation, leads 
not only to rationalization and haptification but to an unavoidable hypertrophy of the 
“I,” which is in confrontation with the external world. (21–22) 
Perspective locates the observer as well as the observed. It locates the “I” in a tiny part 
of an ever-widening space. In order for it to be adequate to its expanding world, the “I” 
must be increasingly emphasized. While unperspectival consciousness inhabits a world 
of images, perspective consciousness inhabits a world of images that are synthesized 
into three-dimensional objects, which appear to exist independently both of the “I” 
and of each other. Their double independence is what makes these objects “material.” 
At the same time, this increasing materialization of the world occasions a correspond-
ing rigidification of the ego. Thus, on the one hand, the expansion of space brings on 
the gradual expansion and consequent disintegration of the “I” and, on the other hand, 
the materialization of the world rigidifies and encapsulates the ”I”. 
Although man’s horizons expanded, his world became increasingly narrow as his vision 
was sectorized by the blinders of the perspectival world view. The gradual movement 
toward clearer vision was accompanied by a proportionate narrowing of his visual sec-
tor. The deeper and farther we extend our view into space, the narrower is the sector of 
our visual pyramid. As it developed over the centuries, this state of affairs gave rise to 
the most destructive of the stigmas of our age: the universal intolerance that prevails 
today and the fanaticism to which it leads. A person who is anxious, or who is fleeing 
from something, or who is lost either with respect to his own ego or with respect to the 
world — it holds equally true in both instances — is a person who will always be intole-
rant, as he feels threatened in his vital interests. He “sees” only a vanishing point lost in 
the misty distance (the vanishing point of linear perspective of which Leonardo once 
wrote); and he feels obliged to defend his point fanatically, lest he lose his world entire-
ly. 
The European of today, either as an individual or as a member of the collective, can 
perceive only his own sector. This is true of all spheres, the religious as well as the politi-
cal, the social as well as the scientific. The rise of Protestantism fragmented religion; the 
ascendancy of national states divided the Christian Occident into separate individual 
states; the rise of political parties divided the people (or the former Christian communi-
ty) into political interest groups. In the sciences, this process of segmentation led to the 
contemporary state of narrow specialization and the “great achievements” of the man 
with tunnel vision. . . . As for a simple onward progression and continuity (which has al-
most taken on the character of a flight), they lead only to further sectors of particulari-
zation and, ultimately, to atomization. After that, what remains, like what was left in the 
crater of Hiroshima, is only an amorphous dust; and it is probable that at least one part 
of humanity will follow this path, at least in “spirit,” i.e., psychologically. (23) 
Mental time 
The temporicity of myth differs from the temporality of the mind. The temporistic 
movement of nature and the cosmos is unaware of the temporal phases of past, present, 
and future; it knows only the polar self-complementarity of coming and going which 
completely pervades it at all times. It is devoid of directionality, whereas the past and 

62  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
the future, viewed from the present of any given person, are temporal directions. It is 
this directional character of “time” which underscores its mental nature and therefore 
its constitutional difference from natural-cosmic temporistic movement which is mythi-
cal in nature. Or, we might say that [mental] time differs from [mythical] temporicity be-
cause of its directedness. (173) 
As soon as the Now is interposed as an “in between” between past and future, it ceases to 
be a purely mental modality of time and becomes a spatialized modality. It is no longer 
merely oriented, but has the additional (and deficient) aspect of spatiality. . . . This set-
ting-fast of time as “in-betweenness” is a perversion of time, since time thereby acquires 
spatiality. (179) 
By being interposed between past and future, the Now becomes as divider. And by 
thinking of past, present, and future as “parts” of time, it is time itself that gets divided. 
Pointing to the “lack of time” characteristic of our material, spatially accentuated 
world, Gebser asks rhetorically: “How is anyone to have time if he tears it apart?” (180) 
By virtue of the fact that it was itself divided, time became measurable; but it thereby 
forfeited its original character. (178) 
Time as a quality or an intensity was simply not taken into account and was deemed to be 
only an accidental and inessential phenomenon. Time, however, is a much more com-
plex phenomenon than the mere instrumentality or accidence of chronological time. 
The fact that we today still think in terms of the spatial, fixed, three-dimensional world 
of conceptuality is an obstacle to our realization of the more complex significance of the 
phenomenon. . . . As long as the epoch paid tribute to the three-dimensional world con-
ception, time remained a suppressed force, and as such appeared with a vengeance when 
it was finally freed (or freed itself). (285–286) 
“I have no time” — this million-fold remark by man today is symptomatic. “Time,” even 
in this still negative form is his overriding preoccupation; but when speaking of time, 
man today still thinks of clock time. How shocked he would be if he were to realize that 
he is also saying “I have no soul” and “I have no life”! For perspectival man, time did not 
yet pose a problem. Only man today who is now awakening or mutating toward the 
aperspectival consciousness takes note of every hour of his apparent lack of time that 
drives him to the brink of despair. (288) 
[T]he one-sided emphasis on space, which has its extreme expression in materialism and natu-
ralism, gives rise to an ever-greater unconscious feeling of guilt about time, the neg-
lected component of our manifest world. As we approach the decline of the perspectival 
age, it is our anxiety about time that stands out as the dominant characteristic alongside 
our ever more absurd obsession with space. It manifests itself in various ways, such as in 
our addiction to time. Everyone is out to “gain time,” although the time gained is usually 
the wrong kind: time that is transformed into a visible multiplication of spatially frag-
mented “activity,” or time that one has “to kill.” Our time anxiety shows up in our hapti-
fication of time . . . and is expressed in our attempt to arrest time and hold onto it 
through its materialization. Many are convinced that “time is money,” although again 
this is almost invariably falsified time, a time that can be turned into money, but not 
time valid in its own right. A further expression of man’s current helplessness in the face 
of time is his compulsion to “fill” time; he regards it as something empty and spatial like 
a bucket or container, devoid of any qualitative character. But time is in itself fulfilled 
and not something that has to be “filled up” or “filled out.” Finally, our contemporary 
anxiety about time is manifest in our flight from it: in our haste and rush, and by our 
constant reiteration, “I have no time.” It is only too evident that we have space but no 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
63 
time; time has us because we are not yet aware of its entire reality. Contemporary man 
looks for time, albeit mostly in the wrong place, despite, or indeed because of his lack of 
time: and this is precisely his tragedy, that he spatializes time and seeks to locate it 
“somewhere.” This spatial attachment — in its extreme form a spatial fixation — prevents 
him from finding an escape from spatial captivity. . . . (22–23) 
In everyday life, few are aware that the motorization, mechanization, and technologiza-
tion impose quantitative conditions on man that lead to an immeasurable loss of free-
dom. Machines, film, press, radio [today we can add to these the electronic time sinks of 
TV, video-games, and the Internet] lead not only to mediocrity and a dependency rela-
tionship, but also to an increasing de-individuation and atomization of the individual. 
The extent of these dangers is exemplified by present-day sports. What was once play 
has become a frenzy of record-setting. The attendant devotion of the individual — sub-
merging himself in the mass of spectators — to a worthless phenomenon is a symptom of 
the contemporary transitional era. The addiction to speed [and, nowadays, doping] re-
veals the deep anxiety in the face of time; each new record is a further step toward the 
“killing of time” (and thus of life). The preoccupation with records is a clear sign of the 
predominant role of time. Even the mass psyche is enslaved by time; it attempts to sur-
pass and free itself from time in a negative way without realizing that each new record 
brings us closer to the death of time instead of leading to freedom from it. The addiction 
to overcoming time negatively is everywhere evident. . . . Precisely these exertions, flee-
ing into quantification, are a temporal flight born of the time-anxiety which dominates 
our daily lives. (537) 
In summary, then, the following picture emerges: there is on the one hand anxiety about 
time and one’s powerlessness against it, and on the other, a “delight” resulting from the 
conquest of space and the attendant expansion of power; there is also the isolation of the 
individual or group or cultural sphere as well as the collectivization of the same individ-
uals in interest groups. This tension between anxiety and delight, isolation and collecti-
vization is the ultimate result of an epoch which has outlived itself. Nevertheless, this 
epoch could serve as a guarantee that we reach a new “target,” if we could utilize it 
much as the arrow uses an over-taut bow string. Yet like the arrow, our epoch must de-
tach itself from the extremes that make possible the tension behind its flight toward the 
target. Like the arrow on the string, our epoch must find the point where the target is al-
ready latently present: the equilibrium between anxiety and delight, isolation and col-
lectivization. Only then can it liberate itself from deficient unperspectivity and 
perspectivity, and achieve what we shall call, also because of its liberating character, the 
aperspectival world. (22–23) 
The danger of regression 
We must again approach here . . . a phenomenon that is truly terrifying so long as we 
remain unenlightened about it. We refer to the incursion of deficient magic phenomena into 
our world — the regression noticeable everywhere of our rational attitude to one of defi-
cient magic. It is not as if the mythical attitude alone is over-activated today, although 
the imagistic aspect of the cinema or the inflation of psychic imagery made conscious 
are clear testimony of a process of unbridled and uncontrolled regression to the defi-
cient mythical structure. Far stronger than this is the regression to the deficient magic 
structure. The relation of both the magic and the mental structures toward something 
outside of themselves — that of the magic to nature and of the mental to the world — re-
sults in a stronger affinity between them than between either and the mythical. . . .  
Let this one example suffice to show the basic point: wherever we encounter a predo-

64  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
minance of insistent requests (and fanaticism is a request blindly elevated to a demand 
which not only petitions but compels); wherever we find a prevalence of the idea of un-
ification in whatever form — a doctrine of unity, the establishment of an association, a 
huge organization, a one-party state and the like; wherever we encounter a stress on the 
concept of obedience, as in an overemphasis on the military, or of belonging and belong-
ings, as in the property claims of capitalistic trusts or family patriarchies; and in general 
wherever we meet up with overweening emotionalism as in mass assemblies, propagan-
da, slogans, and the like, we may conclude that we are dealing mainly with essentially 
deficient manifestations of magic. . . . Wherever we encounter an immoderate emphasis on 
the imagistic, the ambivalent, the psychic — on unbridled phantasy, imagination, or 
power of fancy — we may conclude the presence of a deficient mythical attitude that 
threatens the whole or integrality. And, too, wherever we are caught up in the labyrin-
thine network of mere concepts, or meet up with a one-sided emphasis on willful or vo-
luntaristic manifestations or attempts at spasmodic synthesis (trinitary, tripartite, 
dialectical), isolation, or mass-phenomena, we may assuredly conclude the presence of a 
deficient mental, that is, extreme rationalistic source. (153–154) 
Synthesis: a rational (deficient-mental) process 
What the mythical structure treats as poles of an indivisible polarity (indivisible like 
the north and south poles of a magnet), the mental structure treats as opposites or an-
titheses of a duality. 
Duality is the mental splitting and tearing apart of polarity. . . . Whereas there is a totality, 
even though deficient, which can be recompleted in the form of complementarity within 
the mythical structure, from duality only a deficient, because unstable, form of unity can 
be realized as the unification of opposites in a third aspect. . . . This unstable form of uni-
ty is expressed by the fact that the antitheses or contraries are only able to beget a third 
element in a temporary for-better-or-worse union, a tertium which is again separated at 
the moment of its birth. (86) 
Having been separated at the moment of its birth, the tertium becomes one of yet 
another pair of opposites or antitheses. 
[I]t does not represent a new unity but merely a quantity that becomes dependent on its 
antithesis or opposite, with which it in turn creates once more a momentarily unifying 
tertium. In this we see a further characteristic of our civilization: quantification — for the 
unification or synthesis via a third element can never be completed in time, only in the 
moment. The third element, freeing itself, becomes the procreator and carrier of one of 
the contraries able to engender a new unification and synthesis. . . . Seen as speculation, 
we could say that the speculative trinity proceeds from dualism and is expressed in what 
we shall later call triangular or pyramidal thinking when we discuss forms of thought; 
and such pyramidal thinking, which is characteristic of Plato, has its most trenchant ex-
pression in the Hegelian axiom of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. (86) 
4 The present crisis 
The crisis we are experiencing today is not just a European crisis, nor a crisis of morals, 
economics, ideologies, politics or religion. It is not only prevalent in Europe and America 
but in Russia and the Far East as well. It is a crisis of the world and mankind such as has 
occurred previously only during pivotal junctures — junctures of decisive finality for life 
on earth and for the humanity subjected to them. The crisis of our times and our world is 
in a process — at the moment autonomously — of complete transformation, and appears 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
65 
headed toward an event which, in our view, can only be described as a “global catastro-
phe.” This event, understood in any but anthropocentric terms, will necessarily come 
about as a new constellation of planetary extent.  
We must soberly face the fact that only a few decades separate us from that event. This 
span of time is determined by an increase in technological feasibility inversely propor-
tional to man’s sense of responsibility — that is, unless a new factor were to emerge 
which would effectively overcome this menacing correlation. . . . [I]f we should not or 
cannot successfully survive this crisis by our own insight and assure the continuity of 
our earth and mankind in the short or the long run by a transformation (or a mutation) 
then the crisis will outlive us. . . . Either we will be disintegrated and dispersed, or we 
must resolve and effect integrality. (xvii – xviii) 
The following passage may serve as an example of the resonances between Gebser’s 
Ever-Present Origin and Sri Aurobindo’s magnum opus, The Life Divine (Puducherry: Sri 
Aurobindo Publication Department, 2005, pp. 1090–1092).  
At present mankind is undergoing an evolutionary crisis in which is concealed a choice 
of its destiny; for a stage has been reached in which the human mind has achieved in 
certain directions an enormous development while in others it stands arrested and be-
wildered and can no longer find its way. A structure of the external life has been raised 
up by man’s ever-active mind and life-will, a structure of an unmanageable hugeness 
and complexity, for the service of his mental, vital, physical claims and urges, a complex 
political, social, administrative, economic, cultural machinery, an organised collective 
means for his intellectual, sensational, aesthetic and material satisfaction. Man has 
created a system of civilisation which has become too big for his limited mental capacity 
and understanding and his still more limited spiritual and moral capacity to utilise and 
manage, a too dangerous servant of his blundering ego and its appetites. . . . 
At the same time Science has put at his disposal many potencies of the universal Force 
and has made the life of humanity materially one; but what uses this universal Force is a 
little human individual or communal ego with nothing universal in its light of know-
ledge or its movements, no inner sense or power which would create in this physical 
drawing together of the human world a true life unity, a mental unity or a spiritual one-
ness. All that is there is a chaos of clashing mental ideas, urges of individual and collec-
tive physical want and need, vital claims and desires, impulses of an ignorant life-push, 
hungers and calls for life satisfaction of individuals, classes, nations, a rich fungus of po-
litical and social and economic nostrums and notions, a hustling medley of slogans and 
panaceas for which men are ready to oppress and be oppressed, to kill and be killed, to 
impose them somehow or other by the immense and too formidable means placed at his 
disposal, in the belief that this is his way out to something ideal. The evolution of human 
mind and life must necessarily lead towards an increasing universality; but on a basis of 
ego and segmenting and dividing mind this opening to the universal can only create a 
vast pullulation of unaccorded ideas and impulses, a surge of enormous powers and de-
sires, a chaotic mass of unassimilated and intermixed mental, vital and physical material 
of a larger existence which, because it is not taken up by a creative harmonising light of 
the spirit, must welter in a universalised confusion and discord out of which it is imposs-
ible to build a greater harmonic life. . . . 
Reason and Science can only help by standardising, by fixing everything into an artifi-
cially arranged and mechanised unity of material life. A greater whole-being, whole-
knowledge, whole-power is needed to weld all into a greater unity of whole-life. A life of 
unity, mutuality and harmony born of a deeper and wider truth of our being is the only 
truth of life that can successfully replace the imperfect mental constructions of the past 

66  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
which were a combination of association and regulated conflict, an accommodation of 
egos and interests grouped or dovetailed into each other to form a society, a consolida-
tion by common general life-motives, a unification by need and the pressure of struggle 
with outside forces. It is such a change and such a reshaping of life for which humanity is 
blindly beginning to seek, now more and more with a sense that its very existence de-
pends upon finding the way. 
Back to Gebser: 
Epochs of great confusion and general uncertainty in a given world contain the slumber-
ing, not-yet-manifest seeds of clarity and certainty. . . . [T]hese seeds are already press-
ing toward realization. This means that we are approaching the “zenith” of confusion 
and are thus nearing the necessary breakthrough. . . . The confusion in the individual’s 
everyday life, his lack of fulfillment in his work, his isolation in the masses, his power-
lessness over against the idle running of anonymity, whether of mechanisms or of bu-
reaucracies — this insecurity and enslavement are only reflections of the general 
malaise. (531) 
Anxiety is always the first sign that a mutation is coming to the end of its expressive and 
effective possibilities, causing new powers to accumulate which, because they are 
thwarted, create a “narrows” or constriction. At the culmination point of anxiety these 
powers liberate themselves, and this liberation is always synonymous with a new muta-
tion. In this sense, anxiety is the great birth-giver. . . . It is no accident that the anxiety 
orgies of the Renaissance, the dances of death and the doomsday extravagances come to 
an end precisely when perspective became an effective force through the efforts of Leo-
nardo da Vinci. (134) 
Every dead end or lack of recourse is not only an indicator that the course has run out 
and that a given development has attained its greatest (quantitative!) extent and may at 
any moment give way to a loss of tension and consequent annihilation. It is also a sign 
that only a leap, that is, only a mutation, can bring about a solution. Without a doubt we 
are at such a moment today, not only with respect to the mental structure predominat-
ing in us, but also with respect to all the previous structures that make up our integral 
constitution. (139) 
[O]nce, when the mythical structure began to pale, Greek man was faced with a prolife-
rating chaos similar to ours today. The chaos then affected the mythical world which 
had burst apart, and the threat was a destruction of the psyche. With the aid of directed 
thinking the Greeks were able to master this chaos. Our chaos today pervades our ma-
terial-spatial world. . . . The ideas of Plato gave a fixed form to the thought contents of 
the soul without which the Greeks would never have been able to extricate themselves 
from soul and myth. This fixation which made the spatial world possible was itself fixed 
by Leonardo’s perspective. Without it European man would have been lost in space just 
as the Greeks would have been lost in the soul without the set, idealized points. 
Now that this spatial world threatens to come apart because the forces it has unleashed 
are more powerful than man who realized them, the new capability is being formed in 
him which is awakened by precisely those seemingly negative powers and forces. Just as 
sense-directed thought — which was able to prevent the Greeks from perishing in the inner 
world of awakening consciousness (the soul) — was awakened by the ruptured mythical 
circle, so too could “senseful awaring” be awakened by the bursting spatial world: a 
[new] “perception” able to sustain us against perishing in the consciously realized ex-
ternal world of matter. . . . [T]he splintered spatial world of our conceptualization is the 
assurance of the possibility of a space-free aperspectival world. . . . When the Mexicans 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
67 
in their deficient mythical-magic structure encountered the mentally-oriented Spa-
niards, the magic-mythical power failed in the face of mental strength; clan conscious-
ness failed in the face of the individualized ego-consciousness. If an integral man were to 
encounter a deficient mental man, would not deficient material power fail in the face of 
integral strength? Would not the individual ego-consciousness falter in the face of the 
Itself-consciousness of mankind? the mental-rational in the face of the spiritual? frag-
mentation in the face of integrality? (272–273) 
Just as we were able to discern an efficient as well as a deficient phase of the magic 
structure where the one was distinguished by spell-casting, the other by sorcery, so too 
are we able to discern two such phases in the mental structure; the efficient or mental 
phase and the deficient or rational phase which resulted from it. It is the efficient phase 
which gives this perspectival world its distinctive stamp, which even today is, or at least 
could be, valid. The European perspectival-rational world represents, in this sense, only 
the deficient and most likely ultimate phase of the exclusive validity of the mental-
rational structure. (74) 
The efficient phase of a consciousness structure is primarily qualitative, its subsequent 
deficient phase predominantly quantitative. The two phases are well characterized by 
the German word pair Maß (measure, moderation) and Masse (mass, accumulation, 
bulk, multitude). Thus “spell-casting still retains the character of moderation, while 
witchcraft or sorcery is immoderate and unmeasured.” (94) 
Leonardo’s development of perspective with its emphatic spatialization of man’s image 
of the world marks the beginning of the deficient phase of the mental structure. . . . 
Whereas the Greek world of the classic period is a world of measure and moderation par 
excellence, the late European world and particularly its derivative cultures, the American 
and the Russian, are worlds of immoderation. (93) 
Mutations have always appeared when the prevailing consciousness structure proved to 
be no longer adequate for mastering the world. This was the case in the last historically 
accessible mutation which occurred around 500 B.C. and led from the mythical to the 
mental structure. The psychistic, deficient mythical climate of that time presented a 
threat, and the sudden onset of the mental structure brought about a decisive transfor-
mation. In our day the rationalistic, deficient mental structure presents an equal threat, 
and the breakthrough into the integral will also bring about a new and decisive muta-
tion. (294) 
When spatial consciousness was finally consolidated around 1480-1500 A. D. it was from 
that time onward liberated for new tasks. Waking, diurnal consciousness had been se-
cured; man had come to an awareness of space; thinking had become feasible. After this 
achievement modern European man believed that he too, like mythical man once before, 
had accomplished all that could be accomplished and was content to remain in his state 
of achievement. But in this case, as before, a decline sets in because of this self-
satisfaction, and, beginning with the Renaissance, mental consciousness increases in de-
ficiency and deteriorates into rationalism. This marks the inception of quantification in 
the newly secured mental consciousness structure, a process we already noted in con-
nection with the deficient epoch of the mythical structure. At the same time, however, 
the new mutation begins its course which becomes gradually but increasingly visible 
over the following centuries. This mutation will enter the general awareness at the mo-
ment when the deficient attitude reaches its maximum of rational chaos — a moment 
that we are approaching with finality during the present decades, as should be apparent 
to everyone. (303) 

68  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
Here we can discern the tragic aspect of the deficient mental structure. . . : Reason, re-
versing itself metabolistically to an exaggerated rationalism, becomes a kind of inferior 
plaything of the psyche, neither noticing nor even suspecting the connection. . . . This 
negative link to the psyche, usurping the place of the genuine mental relation, destroys 
the very thing achieved by the authentic relation: the ability to gain insight into the 
psyche. [For in] every extreme rationalization there is not just a violation of the psyche 
by the ratio, that is, a negatively magic element, but also the graver danger, graver be-
cause of its avenging and incalculable nature: the violation of the ratio by the psyche, 
where both become deficient. The authentic relation to the psyche, the mental, is per-
verted into its opposite, to the disadvantage of the ego that has become blind through 
isolation. In such an instance, man has become isolated and his basic ties have been cut; 
the moderating, measuring bond of [the efficient mental consciousness] is severed. (97) 
5 The concretion of time 
The irruption of time into our consciousness: this is the profound and unique event of 
our historical moment. It presents us with a new theme and a new task, and its realiza-
tion — which comes about through us — is attended by a wholly new reality of the world: 
a new intensity and a freer awareness which supplant the confusion that seems to give 
our world its most characteristic stamp. (283) 
Wherever time is able to become “the present,” it is able to render transparent “simul-
taneously” the timelessness of magic, the temporicity of myth, and the temporality of 
mind. (181) 
The “Present” is not identical with the “moment” but is the undivided presence of yes-
terday, today, and tomorrow which in a consciously realized actualization can lead to 
that “presentiation” which encompasses origin as an ineradicable present. (294) 
The concretion of time is one of the preconditions for the integral structure; only the 
concrete can be integrated, never the merely abstract. By integration we mean a fully 
completed and realized wholeness — the bringing about of an integrum, i.e., the re-
establishment of the inviolate and pristine state of origin by incorporating the wealth of 
all subsequent achievement. (99) 
By granting to magic timelessness, mythical temporicity, and mental-conceptual tempo-
rality their integral efficacy, and by living them in accord with the strength of their de-
gree of consciousness, we are able to bring about this realization. This concretion of the 
previous three exfoliations of original pre-temporality instantaneously opens for us pre-
conscious timelessness. 
As such, time-freedom is not only the quintessence of time . . . but also the conscious 
quintessence of all previous temporal forms. Their becoming conscious — in itself a 
process of concretion — is also a liberation from all of these time forms; everything be-
comes the present, concrete, and thus integrable. But this implies that preconscious ori-
gin becomes conscious present; that each and every time-form basic to the one-, two-, 
and three-dimensional world is integrated and thereby superseded. (356) 
The “aperspectival world” is a “world” whose structure is not only jointly based in the 
pre-perspectival, unperspectival, and perspectival worlds, but also mutates out of them 
in its essential properties and possibilities while integrating these worlds and liberating 
itself from their exclusive validity. (294) 
It is not the concern of the present work to show the shaping of the future in “time” 
since this form of time is at an end. And because time as such is coming to an end and is 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
69 
being supplanted by time freedom, any temporal projection “forward” is illusory. (296) 
The end of philosophy 
[T]he qualities of time which are today pressing toward awareness cannot be expressed 
in mere categorical systems. And so long as they remain inexpressible they cannot effec-
tively enter our awareness. We are compelled, in other words, to find a new form of 
statement. This not inconsiderable task is further complicated because we must avoid at-
tributing to the new form of statement characteristics which could appear to be “new” 
but would be in fact merely borrowings from consciousness attitudes already 
achieved. . . . 
And this must be emphasized: the age of systematic philosophy . . . is over. What is ne-
cessary today to turn the tide of our situation are not new philosophemes like the phe-
nomenological, ontological, or existential, but eteologemes. Eteology must replace 
philosophy just as philosophy once replaced the myths. . . . Every eteologeme is a “veri-
tion,” and as such is valid only when it allows origin to become transparent in the 
present. (307–309) 
[O]ur description does not deal with a new image of the world [Weltbild], nor with . . . a 
new conception of the world [Weltvorstellung]. A new image would be no more than the 
creation of a myth, since all imagery has a predominantly mythical nature . . . and a new 
conception of the world would be nothing else than yet another rationalistic construc-
tion, for conceptualization has an essentially rational and abstract nature. Our concern is 
with a new reality — a reality functioning and effectual integrally, in which intensity and 
action, the effective and the effect co-exist; one where origin . . . blossoms forth anew; 
and one in which the present is all-encompassing and entire. Integral reality is the 
world’s transparency, a perceiving of the world as truth: a mutual perceiving and im-
parting of truth of the world and of man and of all that transluces [durchscheint = shines 
or shows through] both. (7) 
[I]t should be emphasized that perception is not a super-sensory process. Concepts such 
as intuition and the like are definitely out of place when characterizing it. It is an 
integral event and, if you will, an integral state of the “itself.” (268) 
[T]he itself is on the one hand the central or “deepest” core, the intensity “in” us that is 
time-free and corresponds with the pre-spatial, pre-temporal presence of origin. It is, on 
the other hand, this identity of origin itself which pervades and suffuses everything and, 
if we are able to mutate from the spatio-temporal limitations of the purely ego-centered 
consciousness, becomes transparent even for us just as the world itself . . . becomes dia-
phanous. (135–136) 
Our way of perceiving the world depends entirely on the nature of our consciousness, 
for it establishes the boundaries and temporal limits of our world. To the degree that we 
are able to integrate these boundaries and limits with the help of an intensification (and 
not an expansion) of consciousness, we presentiate the itself. This means at the same 
time that our entire constitution becomes proportionately transparent; and not merely the 
“part” that is already manifest which we have endeavored to make vivid by our exposi-
tion of the individual structures, but also the “part” that is still latent in us which, to-
gether with the part already manifest, becomes accessible to integration. (205) 
One difficulty which to some will seem insurmountable is the difficulty of “representing” 
the aperspectival world. This world goes beyond our conceptualization. By the same token, 
the mental world once went beyond the experiential capability of mythical man, and yet 
this world of the mind became reality. Anyone who objects that the aperspectival world 

70  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
is, in spatial terms, unimaginable, incomprehensible, impalpable, inconclusive, and un-
thinkable — and there will be no end to such objections — falls victim to his own limita-
tions of comprehension and to the visual representation imposed by his world. Some will 
undoubtedly also be irritated by the talk of arational possibilities which are not to be con-
fused with the irrational or pre-rational. (267) 
A drawing by Picasso 
Let us then select and examine from the many new forms of expression a particularly vi-
vid example from the pictorial arts as a first step toward clarifying our intention. During 
recent decades, both Picasso and Braque have painted several works that have been 
judged, it would seem, from a standpoint which fails to do them justice. (24) 
 
When we look at this drawing [Pablo Picasso, 1926], we take in at one glance the whole 
man, perceiving not just one possible aspect, but simultaneously the front, the side, and 
the back. In sum, all of the various aspects are present at once. To state it in very general 
terms, we are spared both the need to walk around the human figure in time, in order to 
obtain a sequential view of the various aspects, and the need to synthesize or sum up 
these partial aspects. . . .  
In this drawing . . . space and body have become transparent. In this sense the drawing is 
neither unperspectival, i.e., a two-dimensional rendering of a surface in which the body 
is imprisoned, nor is it perspectival, i.e., a three-dimensional visual sector cut out of re-
ality that surrounds the figure with breathing space. The drawing is “aperspectival” in 
our sense of the term; time is no longer spatialized but integrated and concretized as a 
fourth dimension. By this means it renders the whole visible to insight, a whole which 
becomes visible only because the previously missing component, time, is expressed in an 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
71 
intensified and valid form as the present. It is no longer the moment . . . but the pure 
present, the quintessence of time that radiates from this drawing. . . . 
[B]oth space and time exist for the perceptual capacities of our body only in the present 
via presentiation. The presentiation or making present evident in Picasso’s drawing was 
possible only after he was able to actualize, that is, bring to consciousness, all of the 
temporal structures of the past latent in himself (and in each of us) during the course of 
his preceding thirty years of painting in a variety of earlier styles. This process was 
unique and original with Picasso. By drawing on his primitive, magic inheritance (his 
Negroid period),  his mythical heritage (his Hellenistic-archaistic period), and his classi-
cistic, rationally-accentuated formalist phase (his Ingres period), Picasso was able to 
achieve the concretion of time. (24–26) 
One should bear in mind that Gebser spent the years 1937–1939 in a circle which in-
cluded Picasso. 
Comment: Relation of space to time 
Although Gebser equates the integral consciousness structure with the consciousness 
that Sri Aurobindo referred to as “supermind,” there appear to be certain differences. 
Sri Aurobindo perceived several distinct poises within the supramental consciousness 
itself. In the primary poise, the self is coextensive with the world, the world is coexten-
sive with the substance that constitutes it, and the substance that constitutes it is one 
with the self. There is an extension of some kind, but it has neither the quality of space 
nor the quality of time. Sri Aurobindo7 speaks of it as a consciousness that regards 
“past, present and future in one view, containing and not contained in them, not si-
tuated at a particular moment of Time for its point of prospection,” nor “situated at 
any particular point of Space, but containing all points and regions in itself.” In a sec-
ondary poise, consciousness distantiates itself from its content. There now is a distance 
between the perceiver and the perceived. Concomitantly, the single, non-individuated 
consciousness of the primary poise adopts a multitude of viewpoints within its content, 
thereby taking on the aspect of a multitude of situated selves. It is here, in this poise, 
that the familiar dimensions of space — viewer-centered depth and lateral extent — 
come into being. In addition to apprehending the content of its consciousness perspec-
tively, from a multitude of spatial locations, the self now apprehends it successively. 
We can conceive of these two poises one at a time, we can even think of them as com-
plementing each other or as being integral parts of a single, indivisible regard, but it is 
altogether beyond the powers of mental consciousness to form an adequate concept or 
image of such a regard. 
Picasso’s drawing is aperspectival in that it hints at a regard that does not proceed 
from a single, fixed location. It is true, and trivially so, that by walking around an object 
one can see it sequentially from different angles, but if a drawing is to overcome the 
spatialized time of the mental structure and to integrate and concretize time in the 
present, it should integrate temporal rather than spatial perspectives; i.e., it should 
integrate past, present and future more directly, for example by depicting a person at 
different ages rather than from different angles. 
                                                             
7 The Life Divine (Puducherry: Sri Aurobindo Publication Department, 2005, p. 143). 

72  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
Gebser is well aware of the inadequacy of contemporary attempts to concretize time, 
i.e., to transform it from a quantitative dimension into a qualitative “amension”.8  
Until now the attempts with the fourth dimension have all been inadequate and are 
comparable to those made with the third dimension during the one-hundred-fifty years 
between Petrarch and Leonardo da Vinci. The inadequacy of these latter attempts is evi-
dent in their false, that is, reversed, inverted, and foreshortened perspectivation. (355) 
Gebser’s interpretation of Picasso’s drawing is symptomatic of the primacy over space 
he attributes to time, as when he writes that “space is based on [mental] time just as 
surface is based on [mythical] temporicity and the spaceless point on [magic] timeless-
ness,” (355) or that time “is a basic constituent of space, . . . its very basis and basic di-
mension.” (179) Not that there isn’t a certain logic in attributing the first coming to 
awareness of a quantitative dimension to the breaking of the mythical circle, which 
according to Gebser marks the emergence of the mental structure. Given the mythical 
structure’s emphasis on circular time and the mental structure’s emphasis on linear 
space, there is indeed a sense in which time — the broken mythical circle — forms the 
basis of space. But it seems to me that Gebser here takes his metaphors too far. Consid-
er, for instance, Petrarch’s epochal experience of spatial depth as quality. One might say 
that, in evolutionary terms, the mythical sense of time paved the way for the mental 
sense of space, but this falls short of saying that space is based on time. 
6 The concretion of the spiritual 
Once man sought truth; this was achieved over the millennia by philosophy; once man 
believed truth, and this bond was made possible over the millennia by relegio [the myth-
ical precursor of religion] and later through religion. And wherever we think and be-
lieve, those attainments endure. But for those capable of “a-waring” the whole, the true, 
this “verition” is no longer a philosophical search nor a faith beset by doubts but a dis-
covery without that search which throughout the ages was, as it were, merely the prepa-
ration. (543) 
[T]here are powers arising from within ourselves that are already at work overcoming 
the deficiency and dubious nature of our rational ego-consciousness via the new aper-
spectival awareness whose manifestations are surging forth everywhere. The aperspec-
tive consciousness structure is a consciousness of the whole, an integral consciousness 
encompassing all time and embracing both man’s distant past and his approaching fu-
ture as a living present. . . . [It] must emerge from its present concealment and latency 
and become effective, and thereby prepare the transparency of the world and man in 
which spirituality can manifest itself. (6) 
The phenomenon releasing origin is spiritual, and with each consciousness mutation it 
becomes more realizable by man. With respect to the presently emerging mutation we 
may speak of a concretion of the spiritual. The word “concretion” here is not to be con-
sidered as the antithesis of “abstraction.” . . . Concretion does not mean a transformation 
of the intangible into something tangible or substantial, but rather the completion of 
con-crescere [growing together, merging], that is, the coalescence of the spiritual with 
                                                             
8  “[O]nly time in the form of chronological time or as a geometricized magnitude is strictly 
speaking a dimension. . . . In the true sense of time freedom . . . the fourth dimension is an 
amension.” (339) 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
73 
our consciousness. (542) 
We have conceded the status of reality to only an extremely limited world, one which is 
barely one-third of what constitutes us and the world as a whole. The new integral struc-
ture, on the other hand, requires us to recognize all “preceding” structures and the irre-
vocable efficient actualities which they integrate and make perceptible. (359) 
Since the spiritual is not bound to the vital [magic], to the psychic [mythical], or to the 
mental, but rather shines through to us in their efficacy — be it vital, experiential, con-
ceptual, or reflective — a new possibility for perceptual consciousness of the spiritual for 
the whole of mankind one day had to shine forth. (542) 
This new, self-constituting consciousness structure [uncovers] and surpasses the ulti-
mate and most profound antithesis of rationalism between faith and knowledge, religion 
and science. Not only because it becomes gradually apparent to what an unsettling de-
gree scientific theses themselves often emerge from presuppositions based on belief — 
even the world of numbers and their laws has a limited validity applicable only to the 
materialized aspects of our space-time world — but also because antitheses of this kind 
are not reconcilable with the new consciousness structure. It is in the transparency of 
faith and knowledge, and not with their aid, that the sphere of Being becomes percepti-
ble in its entire diaphaneity. (529) 
This diaphaneity is all-encompassing: it is a transparency of space and time as well as of 
light, of matter and soul as well as of life and death. (541) 
Only in the mental conception are life and death opposites. (199) 
The grand and painful path of consciousness emergence, or, more appropriately, the un-
folding and intensification of consciousness, manifests itself as an increasingly intense 
luminescence of the spiritual in man. . . . (542) 
[W]e are not by any means propounding a conviction that rests only on belief in some 
“divine” governance of affairs. Let us merely be content to consider this mutation of 
consciousness, like those preceding it, as being latent in our endowment, necessarily 
breaking forth at an organically determined moment and manifesting itself in accord 
with its intensity and transformative energy in a way that cannot be . . . ignored or over-
looked. (346) 
The new attitude will be consolidated only when the individual can gradually begin to 
disregard his ego. . . . Consciousness of self was the characteristic of the mental con-
sciousness structure; freedom from the “I” is the characteristic of the integral con-
sciousness structure. (532) 
The undivided, ego-free person who no longer sees parts but realizes the “Itself,” the 
spiritual form of being of man and the world, perceives the whole, the diaphaneity 
present “before” all origin which suffuses everything. (543) 
Causation, creativity, effectiveness 
A true process always occurs in quanta, that is, in leaps; or, expressed in quasi-biological 
and not physical terms, in mutations. It occurs spontaneously, indeterminately, and, 
consequently, discontinuously. (37) 
The apparent succession of our mutations is less a biological evolution than an “unfold-
ing,” a notion which admits the participation of a spiritual reality in mutation. (41) 
[T]his process seems sudden to us only because certain “processes” — to the extent that 

74  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
we can speak here of processes — seem to take place “outside” spatial and temporal un-
derstanding and conceptualization, thus preventing us from making a spatial-temporal 
cause-and-effect relationship. We know today, however, that origin, being pre-spatial 
and pre-temporal, presentiates itself in the respective consciousness mutations, intensi-
fying and integrating them. (39) 
In creativity, origin is present. Creativity is not bound to space and time, and its truest 
effect can be found in mutation, the course of which is not continuous in time but rather 
spontaneous, acausal, and discontinuous. Creativity is a visibly emerging impulse of ori-
gin which “is” in turn timeless, or more accurately, before or “above” time and timeless-
ness. And creativity is something that “happens” to us, that fully effects or fulfills itself 
in us. . . . Creativity appears to be an irrational process, although it is actually arational. 
(313) 
The additional capacity of “verition,” which becomes a reality with the new mutation, is 
the guarantee that someone who endures the effects and transformations that are ma-
nifest in him by four-dimensional integration effects in turn a transformation of events. 
This is not in the sense that he or she can exercise, say, a new kind of magic power, a 
new mythical equipoising or polarizing, or a new kind of mental superiority over per-
sons, events, or processes. It is rather that his or her being present is in itself sufficient 
to effect new exfoliations and new crystallizations which could be nowhere manifest 
without his or her presence. (300) 
For someone able to place the whole ahead of his ego in his daily affairs. . . , for someone 
able to act out of ego-freedom, the world and even his daily life will become transparent. 
And when this happens, the events and phenomena of his surroundings will set them-
selves right. Both the social and the technological systems (which result from an over-
emphasized rationality whose deficient emphasis has made them possible) will 
restructure themselves since they are incongruous with the new mode of realization and 
its restructuration of the world. (532) 
[T]o the extent that the machine is an objectivation or an externalization of man’s own 
capabilities, it is in psychological terms a projection. We have already spoken of the de-
cisive role of projection in the emergence of consciousness: it is only because of these 
projections, which render externally visible the powers lying dormant within man, that 
he is able, or more precisely, that it is possible for him to become aware of this intrinsic 
potentiality which is capable of being comprehended and directed. 
All “making,” whether in the form of spell-casting or of the reasoned technical construc-
tion of a machine, is an externalization of inner powers or conditions and as such their 
visible, outward form. . . . 
This consideration also points up the limits of technology, for technology is definitely 
unable to bestow on man the omnipotence which he imagines himself to have. On the 
contrary, technology necessarily leads to an “omni-impotence” to the extent that the 
process of physical projection is not realized. It is, for example, a requirement of a pro-
jection that it not be left without temporal limits; it must be integrated. But such inte-
gration is possible only if the projection is retracted, and retraction can be realized only 
out of a new consciousness structure. Psychic projections can be undone only by con-
scious mental understanding. Does this perhaps suggest that material-physical projec-
tions can be resolved through the integrating spiritual capacity of diaphany? (132–133) 
 
 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
75 
7 The Mother’s experience 
There is a prodigious document — Mother’s Agenda 1951–1973 (13 volumes; Ottawa, Cana-
da: Institute for Evolutionary Research) — in which the Mother’s pioneering experience 
of supramental transformation (to use the terminology of Sri Aurobindo) is recorded.9 
What follows exemplifies the remarkable correspondences between her experience and 
Gebser’s conception of the integral consciousness structure. On November 17th, 1971, 
she stated: 
It’s as if the consciousness were no longer in the same position with respect to things, so 
they appear totally different. The ordinary human consciousness, even the broadest, al-
ways occupies the center position, and things exist in relation to that center: in the hu-
man consciousness, you are in one point, and everything exists in relation to that point 
of consciousness. But now, the point is no longer there! So things exist in themselves. . . . 
My consciousness is within things; it isn’t something that “receives.” 
One could hardly wish for a better description of the consciousness Gebser characte-
rized as “aperspectival.” Earlier, on August 31st, 1963, she remarked: 
Before, each thing was separate, divided, unconnected with others, and very superfi-
cial. . . . It doesn’t feel like that anymore. It mainly gives a feeling of intimacy, that is to 
say, there is no distance, no difference, no “something which sees” and “something 
which is seen.” 
The aperspectival consciousness is also acausal. As quoted earlier, its 
“processes” — to the extent that we can speak here of processes — seem to take place 
“outside” spatial and temporal understanding and conceptualization, thus preventing us 
from making a spatial-temporal cause-and-effect relationship. (39) 
Creativity is not bound to space and time. . . . Creativity is a visibly emerging impulse of 
origin which “is” in turn timeless, or more accurately, before or “above” time and time-
lessness. . . . Creativity appears to be an irrational process, although it is actually ara-
tional. (313) 
Gebser further observed that  
The very act of setting aims or purposes emphasizes the negative effect of [the] deficient 
forms of the magic and mental structures; every set purpose is always charged with 
might and is, moreover, emphatically self-serving. Thus it is the very antithesis of the 
wholeness of the world. (94) 
                                                             
9  The Mother — born Mirra Alfassa in Paris in 1878 — had many inner experiences from early 
childhood on. In her twenties she studied occultism in Algeria with Max Theon  and his 
English wife Alma, a highly developed medium. After her return to Paris she heard of Sri Au-
robindo from her friend Alexandra David-Neel , who had visited him in Pondicherry in 
1912. In 1914 she traveled to Pondicherry and met him in person. There, she immediately 
recognized him as the mentor she had encountered in earlier visions, and knew that her fu-
ture work was at his side. Sri Aurobindo in turn saw in her a powerful embodiment of the 
Divine Creative Force, in India traditionally known and approached simply as “The Mother.” 
In 1926, when Sri Aurobindo withdrew from outer contacts, she assumed charge of both the 
spiritual development and the physical wellbeing of his growing group of disciples. In 1952 
she created the Sri Aurobindo International Centre of Education — which also publishes this 
journal — and in 1968 she founded the international township project of Auroville . 

76  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
What is effected can be understood systematically, but the power to effect cannot. . . . 
We should also avoid the error of placing the “effected” into a causal relationship with 
the “effecting.” (285) 
The new world reality . . . is to a great extent free of causality. (358) 
Here are some corresponding passages from Mother’s Agenda: 
What I mean by Oneness is that you can’t distinguish between conceiving the action, the 
will to act, the action itself, and the result. . . . All is one, simultaneous. But how? It can’t 
be explained — it simply can’t! You can get a glimpse of the experience, but . . . ultimate-
ly, it’s inexpressible. (6 October 1962) 
Our habitual state of consciousness is to do something FOR something. . . . There used to 
be a kind of mainspring, which had its raison d’être and so persisted: do this to arrive at 
that, and this leads to that (it’s more subtle, of course); but this mainspring suddenly 
seems to have been abolished. Now a kind of absoluteness prevails at each and every 
second, in each movement, from the most subtle, the most spiritual, to the most materi-
al. The sense of linking has disappeared: that isn’t the “cause” of this, and this isn’t done 
“for” that; there is no “there” one is heading towards — it all seems . . . an absolute — in-
numerable, perpetual and simultaneous. The sense of connection has gone, the sense of 
cause and effect has gone — all that belongs to the world of space and time. (25 April 
1961) 
I have a feeling that to have access to the highest and purest power, the very notion of 
“result” must disappear completely — the Supreme Power has no sense of result at 
all. . . . The idea of something behind or ahead in time and so on is . . . it’s rather a Truth 
changing from immutable Eternity into Eternity of manifestation. (31 August 1962) 
Gebser went so far as to “surmise that the physical structure of man is changing and 
not just his spiritual structure, and that there is a similar mutation taking place.” (335) 
The transformation of the Mother’s physical structure was, in fact, the central theme of 
her Agenda.  
If it were a matter of stopping one thing and starting another, it could be done fairly 
quickly. But keeping a body alive, making sure it continues to function, while at the 
same time pursuing a new functioning and a transformation . . . that makes a kind of 
very difficult combination to realize. (6 October 1962) 
It’s no longer the heart that must pump the blood, it’s no longer the stomach that must 
digest the food — the whole functioning has to be changed completely. And every single 
one of these cells tries to make sure that everything should work as usual! (9 January 
1963) 
All the automatic habits of millenniums must be changed into a conscious action directly 
guided by the supreme Consciousness. (22 January 1966) 
Every time the rule or domination of Nature’s ordinary laws is replaced at one point or 
another by the authority of the divine Consciousness, that creates a state of transition 
that has every appearance of a frightful disorder and a very great danger. (3 February 
1968) 
Suddenly the body finds itself outside of all habits, all actions, reactions, consequences, 
etc.; and that’s . . . (the Mother opens her eyes in wonder), then it goes away. It’s so new 
for the material consciousness that, for a minute, it panics. (20 May 1970) 
The education of the physical consciousness (not the body’s global consciousness, but 

MOHRHOFF : EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS ACCORDING TO GEBSER  
77 
the consciousness of the cells) consists in teaching them, first, that there is a choice: . . . 
to choose the divine Presence, the divine Consciousness, the divine Power (all this with-
out words). . . . It is a choice of every second between Nature’s old laws, together with 
some mental influence and the whole life such as it is organized — a choice between 
that, the rule of that, and the rule of the supreme Consciousness. . .  And it’s every 
second of the day (it’s infinitely interesting), with practical examples — for instance, the 
nerves: If a nerve obeys this or that law of nature, together with the mental conclusions 
and all that — all that machinery — then the pain starts up; but if it obeys the influence 
of the supreme Consciousness, then a curious thing happens: it isn’t like something get-
ting “cured”; rather, it’s as if it disappeared as a sort of unreality. (26 June 1968) 
Compare with Gebser: 
Just as the supersession of mythical temporicity by mental time was an end of the world 
— of the mythical world that had become deficient — it is today a question of the end of 
the mental world which has become deficient. (297) 
It is indeed a matter of substituting one world for another. This shouldn’t be too sur-
prising, given that the structure of our experiential world — the only one we know — 
depends on the structure of our consciousness. According to the Mother, 
[w]hat we call “concrete,” a “concrete reality” — yes, what gives you the sense of a “real” 
existence — that particular sensation has to disappear and be replaced by. . . . It’s beyond 
words. . . . It’s all-light, all-power, all intensity of love at the same time, and a fullness! It 
is so full that nothing else can exist beside that. And when “that” is here, in the body, in 
the cells, it’s enough to direct “it” onto someone or something, and everything falls im-
mediately into place. So, in ordinary terms, it “heals”: the illness is cured. No! it doesn’t 
cure it: it cancels it! That’s it, the illness is made unreal. . . . For it isn’t the action of a 
“higher force” through matter, into others: it’s a direct action, from matter to matter. 
What people usually call “healing power” is a great mental or vital power imposing itself 
despite the resistance of matter — that’s not at all the case here! It is the contagion of a 
vibration. So it’s irrevocable. (12 July 1967) 
With a certain attitude, everything becomes divine. Everything. And what is so wonder-
ful is that when one has the experience that everything becomes divine, all that is con-
trary quite naturally disappears — quickly or slowly, at once or gradually. It means that 
becoming conscious that all is divine is the best means of rendering everything divine — 
you understand — of annulling the oppositions. (16 October 1971) 
The consciousness is on the way to where it is at once the vision of what should be and 
the capacity of realizing it. (30 October 1971) 
For a moment, all of a sudden, I saw how . . . the Divine sees the world. . . . You can’t de-
scribe how wonderful it is. . . . Naturally, this must begin with the consciousness, and 
then, gradually, the things will become such, that is to say be aware of themselves in the 
same way, as the Divine is aware of them. (27 November 1971) 
In other words, evil does not merely cease to look evil; it ceases to exist. And yet it is a 
“mere” change of consciousness that will effect this “objective” change. Let’s again re-
call Gebser: 
The additional capacity of “verition,” which becomes a reality with the new mutation, is 
the guarantee that someone who endures the effects and transformations that are ma-
nifest in him by four-dimensional integration effects in turn a transformation of events. 
This is not in the sense that he or she can exercise, say, a new kind of magic power, a 

78  
ANTIMATTERS 2 (3) 2008 
new mythical equipoising or polarizing, or a new kind of mental superiority over per-
sons, events, or processes. It is rather that his or her being present is in itself sufficient 
to effect new exfoliations and new crystallizations which could be nowhere manifest 
without his or her presence. (300) 
For someone able to place the whole ahead of his ego in his daily affairs. . . , for someone 
able to act out of ego-freedom, the world and even his daily life will become transparent. 
And when this happens, the events and phenomena of his surroundings will set them-
selves right. (532) 

