
EVOLUTION AND THE
SOCIAL MIND

The Sydney Symposium of Social Psychology series
This book is Volume 9 in the Sydney Symposium of Social Psychology series. The aim of the Sydney
Symposia of Social Psychology is to provide new, integrative insights into key areas of contemporary research.
Held every year at the University of New South Wales, Sydney, each symposium deals with an important
integrative theme in social psychology, and the invited participants are leading researchers in the ﬁeld from
around the world. Each contribution is extensively discussed during the symposium and is subsequently
thoroughly revised into book chapters that are published in the volumes in this series. For further details
see the website at www.sydneysymposium.unsw.edu.au
Previous Sydney Symposium of Social Psychology volumes:
SSSP 1. FEELING AND THINKING: THE ROLE OF AFFECT IN SOCIAL COGNITION ** ISBN 0-521-
64223-X (Edited by J. P. Forgas). Contributors: Robert Zajonc, Jim Blascovich, Wendy Berry Mendes, Craig
Smith, Leslie Kirby, Eric Eich, Dawn Macaulay, Len Berkowitz, Sara Jaffee, EunKyung Jo, Bartholomeu
Troccoli, Leonard Martin, Daniel Gilbert, Timothy Wilson, Herbert Bless, Klaus Fiedler, Joseph P. Forgas,
Carolin Showers, Anthony Greenwald, Mahzarin Banaji, Laurie Rudman, Shelly Farnham, Brian Nosek,
Marshall Rosier, Mark Leary, Paula Niedenthal, Jamin Halberstadt.
SSSP 2. THE SOCIAL MIND:  COGNITIVE AND MO TIVATIONAL ASPECTS OF INTERPERSONAL
BEHAVIOR** ISBN 0-521-77092-0 (Edited b y J. P. Forgas, K. D. Williams, & L. Wheeler). Contributors:
William & Claire McGuire , Susan Andersen, Ro y Baumeister, Joel Cooper, Bill Crano, Garth Fletcher,
Joseph P. Forgas, Pascal Huguet, Mike Hogg, Martin Kaplan, Norb Kerr, John Nezlek, Fred Rhodewalt,
Astrid Schuetz, Constantine Sedikides , Jeffry Simpson, Richard Sorrentino , Dianne Tice, Kip Williams,
Ladd Wheeler.
SSSP 3. SOCIAL INFLUENCE: DIRECT AND INDIRECT PR OCESSES* ISBN 1-84169-038-4 (Edited
by J. P. Forgas & K. D. Williams). Contributors: Robert Cialdini, Eric Knowles, Shannon Butler, Jay Linn, Bibb
Latané, Martin Bourgeois, Mark Schaller, Ap Dijksterhuis, James Tedeschi, Richard Petty, Joseph P. For-
gas, Herbert Bless, Fritz Strack, Eva Walther, Sik Hung Ng, Thomas Muss weiler, Kipling Williams, Lara
Dolnik, Charles Stangor, Gretchen Sechrist, John Jost, Deborah Terry, Michael Hogg, Stephen Har kins,
Barbara David, John Turner, Robin Martin, Miles Hewstone, Russell Spears, Tom Postmes, Martin Lea,
Susan Watt.
SSSP 4. THE SOCIAL SELF: COGNITIVE, INTERPERSONAL, AND INTERGROUP PERSPECTIVES**
ISBN 1-84169-062-7 (Edited b y J. P. Forgas & K. D. Williams). Contributors: Eliot R. Smith, Thomas
Gilovich, Monica Biernat, Joseph P. Forgas, Stephanie J. Moylan, Edward R. Hirt, Sean M. McCrea, Freder-
ick Rhodewalt, Michael Tragakis, Mark Leary, Roy F. Baumeister, Jean M. Twenge, Natalie Ciarocco,
Dianne M. Tice, Jean M. Twenge, Brandon J. Schmeichel, Ber tram F. Malle, William Ickes, Marianne
LaFrance, Yoshihisa Kashima, Emiko Kashima, Anna Clark, Marilynn B. Brewer, Cynthia L. Pickett, Sabine
Otten, Christian S. Crandall, Diane M. Mackie, Joel Cooper, Michael Hogg, Stephen C. Wright, Art Aron,
Linda R. Tropp, Constantine Sedikides.
SSSP 5. SOCIAL JUDGMENTS:  IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT PR
OCESSES** ISBN 0-521-82248-3.
(Edited by J. P. Forgas, K. D. Williams, & W. von Hippel). Contributors: Herbert Bless, Marilynn Brewer,
David Buss, Tanya Chartrand, Klaus Fiedler, Joseph P. Forgas, David Funder, Adam Galinsky, Martie
Haselton, Denis Hilton, Lucy Johnston, Ar
ie Kruglanski, Matthew Lieberman, John McClure , Mario

Mikulincer, Norbert Schwarz, Philip Shaver, Diederik Stapel, Jerr y Suls, William von Hippel, Michaela
Waenke, Ladd Wheeler, Kipling Williams, Michael Zarate.
SSSP 6. SOCIAL MO TIVATION: CONSCIOUS AND UNCONSCIOUS PR OCESSES** ISBN 0-521-
83254-3 (Edited by J. P. Forgas, K. D. Williams, & S. M. Laham). Contributors: Henk Aarts, Ran Hassin,
Trish Devine, Joseph P. Forgas, Jens Forster, Nira Liberman, Judy Harackiewicz, Leanne Hing, Mar k
Zanna, Michael Kernis, Paul Lewicki, Steve Neuberg, Doug Kenrick, Mark Schaller, Tom Pyszczynski, Fred
Rhodewalt, Jonathan Schooler, Steve Spencer, Fritz Strack, Roland Deutsch, Howard Weiss, Neal Ashka-
nasy, Kip Williams , Trevor Case, Wayne Warburton, Wendy Wood, Jeffrey Quinn, Rex Wright, Guido
Gendolla.
SSSP 7. THE SOCIAL OUTCAST: OSTRACISM, SOCIAL EXCLUSION, REJECTION, AND BULLYING*
ISBN 1-84169-424-X (Edited b y K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W. von Hippel). Contributors: Kipling D.
Williams, Joseph P. Forgas, William von Hippel, Lisa Zadro , Mark R. Leary, Roy F. Baumeister, and C.
Nathan DeWall, Geoff MacDonald, Rachell Kingsb ury, Stephanie Sha w, John T. Cacioppo, Louise C.
Hawkley, Naomi I. Eisenberger, Matthew D. Lieberman, Rainer Romero-Canyas, Geraldine Downey, Jaana
Juvonen, Elisheva F. Gross, Kristin L. Sommer, Yonata Rubin, Susan T. Fiske, Mariko Yamamoto, Jean M.
Twenge, Cynthia L. Pickett, Wendi L. Gardner, Megan Knowles, Michael A. Hogg, Julie Fitness, Jessica L.
Lakin, Tanya L. Chartrand, Kathleen R. Catanese and Dianne M. Tice, Lowell Gaertner, Jonathan Iuzzini,
Jaap W. Ouwerkerk, Norbert L. Kerr, Marcello Gallucci, Paul A. M. Van Lange, Marilynn B. Brewer.
SSSP 8. AFFECT IN SOCIAL THINKING AND BEHA VIOR* ISBN 1-84169-454-1 (Edited b y J. P. For-
gas). Contributors: Joseph P. Forgas, Carrie L. Wyland, Simon M. Laham, Martie G. Haselton, Timothy
Ketelaar, Piotr Winkielman, John T. Cacioppo, Herbert Bless, Klaus Fiedler, Craig A. Smith, Bieke David,
Leslie D. Kirby, Eric Eich, Dawn Macaulay, Gerald L. Clore, Justin Storbeck, Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D.
Vohs, Dianne M. Tice, Dacher Keltner, E. J. Horberg, Christopher Oveis, Elizabeth W. Dunn, Constantine
Sedikides, Tim Wildschut, Jamie Arndt, Clay Routledge, Yaacov Trope, Eric I. Igou, Christopher T. Burke,
Felicia A. Huppert, Ralph Erber, Susan Markunas, Joseph Ciarrochi, John T. Blackledge, Janice R. Kelly,
Jennifer R. Spoor, John G. Holmes, Danu B. Anthony.
* Published by Psychology Press; ** Published by Cambridge University Press


EVOLUTION AND THE
SOCIAL MIND
Evolutionary Psychology and
Social Cognition
Edited by
Joseph P. Forgas
University of New South Wales
Martie G. Haselton
University of California at Los Angeles
William von Hippel
University of New South Wales

Published in 2007
by Psychology Press
270 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10016
www.psypress.com
Published in Great Britain
by Psychology Press
27 Church Road
Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA
www.psypress.com
Copyright © 2007 by Psychology Press
Psychology Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Cover design by Lisa Dynan
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: 978-1-84169-458-0 (hbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to ww w.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-83778-9 Master e-book ISBN

Contents
About the Editors
xiii
Contributors
xv
Preface
xvii
1
Evolutionary Psychology and Social Thinking:
1
History, Issues, and Prospects
William von Hippel, Martie G. Haselton, and Joseph P. Forgas
Evolutionary Psychology and Social Cognition
/
2
A Natural Aﬃnity
/
3
Diﬀerent “Why” Questions
/
5
Content-Speciﬁcity and Adaptive Design
/
6
Reﬁning the Metaphor for Social Cognition
/
7
Interface with Modern Evolutionary Biology
/
8
What can Social Cognition Bring to the Table?
/
9
Overview of the Book
/
14
I. FOUNDATIONS
2
The Social Brain Hypothesis and its Relevance to Social
Psychology
21
R. I. M. Dunbar
The Social Brain Hypothesis
/
25
The Structure of Human Social Networks
/
26
Two Specializations of Social Cognition
/
28
3
The Evolution of Social Inference Processes:
33
The Importance of Signaling Theory
Steven W. Gangestad and Randy Thornhill
Signaling Systems
/
34
Processing Incidental Eﬀects
/
41
Deception
/
43
Conclusion
/
45

4
How the Mind Warps:
49
A Social Evolutionary Perspective on Cognitive Processing Disjunctions
Douglas T. Kenrick, Andrew W. Delton, Theresa E. Robertson, D. Vaughn Becker, and
Steven L. Neuberg
Our Basic Model of How Fundamental Motives Inﬂuence Cognitive
Processes
/
51
An Unexpected Disjunction between Visual Attention, Frequency Estimation, and
Memory
/
51
An Opposite Disjunction for Outgroup Males
/
57
Suppression and Ampliﬁcation
/
58
Disjunctions’ Functions
/
60
A General Model of the Biases Underlying Disjunctions
/
62
Some Empirical Implications of Considering Disjunctions in Evolutionary/Ecological
Terms
/
63
Conclusion
/
66
II. THE EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY OF AFFECT AND COGNITION
5
Appraisals, Emotions, and Adaptation
71
Phoebe C. Ellsworth
Theories of Emotion
/
73
Implications of Appraisal Theories
/
81
Ambiguous Situations and Incomplete Emotions
/
83
How Diﬀerent are Modular and Appraisal Theories, Really?
/
85
6
The Evolutionary Bases of Social and Moral Emotions:
89
Dominance, Submission, and True Love
Ross Buck
Motivation, Emotion, and Communication: The Developmental-Interactionist
View
/
89
Altruism
/
95
Attachment and Higher-Level Social and Moral Emotions
/
99
Conclusions
/
102
7
The Strange Cognitive Beneﬁts of Mild Dysphoria:
107
On the Evolutionary Advantages of Not Being Too Happy
Joseph P. Forgas
Introduction
/
107
The Evolutionary Functions of Aﬀect
/
108
Contemporary Cognitive Approaches
/
110
The Empirical Evidence
/
111
The Interpersonal Beneﬁts of Negative Aﬀect
/
118
Conclusions
/
121
viii
CONTENTS

8
Evolution, Social Cognition, and Depressed Mood:
125
Exploring the Relationship Between Depression and
Social Risk Taking
Paul B. T. Badcock and Nicholas B. Allen
Introduction
/
125
Darwinian Models of Depressed Mood
/
126
Theories of Resource/Energy Conservation
/
126
Social Theories of the Evolution of Depression
/
127
The Social Risk Hypothesis: An Integrative View
/
130
Depression and Cognition About Social Risk
/
133
Depression and Reduced Social Risk Taking
/
133
Recent Studies on Depression and Risk Propensity
/
134
Discussion and Conclusions
/
137
III. THE EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY OF MATE SELECTION
9
Coevolved Cognitive Mechanisms in Mate Search:
145
Making Decisions in a Decision-shaped World
Peter M. Todd
Searching for a Space
/
145
The Big Picture: Ecological Rationality
/
146
Sequential Decision Making in Mate Choice
/
148
Strategies for Mutual Mate Search
/
152
Summary and Connections
/
156
10
An Evolutionary Account of Strategic Pluralism in Human Mating:
161
Changes in Mate Preferences Across the Ovulatory Cycle
Jeﬀry A. Simpson and Jonathon LaPaglia
Strategic Pluralism and Human Mating: Patterned Changes in Women’s Mate
Preferences Across the Ovulatory Cycle
/
161
Basic Evolutionary Concepts
/
162
Mating Strategies in Humans
/
164
Study 1
/
166
Study 2
/
169
Broader Theoretical Considerations
/
173
11
Aligning Evolutionary Psychology and Social Cognition:
179
Inbreeding Avoidance as an Example of Investigations into
Categorization, Decision Rules, and Emotions
Debra Lieberman
Introduction
/
179
What is a Computational Theory of Mind and Why Should Social-Cognitive Scientists
Care?
/
181
ix
CONTENTS

Selection Pressures Guiding the Evolution of Inbreeding Avoidance
Mechanisms
/
182
An Information-Processing View of Inbreeding Avoidance: What Would a
Well-Engineered System for Inbreeding Avoidance Look Like?
/
184
Empirical Investigation of Systems for Inbreeding Avoidance
/
190
Conclusion
/
191
12
The Self in Intimate Relationships:
195
A Social Evolutionary Account
Garth J. O. Fletcher and Nickola C. Overall
A Conceptual and Methodological Backdrop
/
196
The Role of the Self in Mate Selection
/
197
The Self Never Sleeps
/
205
Conclusions
/
207
IV. THE EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY OF INTERPERSONAL PROCESSES
13
A Social Cognitive Evolutionary Approach to Jealousy:
213
The Automatic Evaluation of One’ s Romantic Rivals
Abraham P. Buunk, Karlijn Massar, and Pieternel Dijkstra
The Importance of Jealousy
/
213
Inventory of Relevant Rival Characteristics
/
214
Experimentally Manipulating Rival Characteristics
/
216
Body Build
/
219
Sexual Versus Emotional Inﬁdelity
/
222
Conclusion
/
225
14
Cognitive and Social Adaptations for Leadership and
Followership:
229
Evolutionary Game Theory and Group Dynamics
Mark van Vugt and Rob Kurzban
Leadership and Followership in an Evolutionary Framework
/
230
An Evolutionary Game Analysis of Leadership
/
231
Non-human Evidence for Leadership
/
235
Leadership in Humans
/
236
Discussion
/
238
15
Proximate and Ultimate Origins of a Bias for Prototypical Faces:
245
An Evolutionary Social Cognitive Account
Jamin Halberstadt
The Prototypicality Bias as an Adaptation
/
247
Domain Speciﬁcity of the Prototypicality Bias
/
248
The Prototypicality Bias as a Side-Eﬀect
/
250
Conclusion
/
258
x
CONTENTS

16
The Social Prediction Dynamic:
263
A Legacy of Cognition and Mixed Motives
Oscar Ybarra, Matthew C. Keller, Emily Chan, Andrew S. Baron, Jeﬀrey Hutsler,
Stephen M. Garcia, Jeﬀrey Sanchez-Burks, and Kimberly Rios Morrison
Social Pressures on Cognitive Evolution
/
264
On Social Scientists Trying to Predict People
/
265
The Averseness of Being the Target of Prediction
/
268
The Social Prediction Dynamic: Delineating the Theoretical Framework
/
270
Situational Factors Moderate the Need to be Unpredictable
/
272
Conclusion
/
275
17
The Evolution of an Ostracism Detection System
279
Jennifer R. Spoor and Kipling D. Williams
Introduction
/
279
The Evolutionary Importance of Inclusion in Groups
/
280
Model of Ostracism Detection
/
281
Experimental Tests of the Ostracism Detection System
/
283
The Indiscriminate Ostracism Detection System
/
286
Implications and Conclusions
/
288
18
The Behavioral Immune System:
293
Its Evolution and Social Psychological Implications
Mark Schaller and Lesley A. Duncan
The Past
/
295
The Present
/
299
The Future
/
305
Author Index
308
Subject Index
320
xi
CONTENTS


About the Editors
Joseph P. Forgas received his DPhil and subsequently a DSc from the University
of Oxford. He is currently Scientia Professor Psychology at the University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. He has also spent various periods of time
working at the Universities of Giessen, Heidelberg, Stanford, Mannheim, and
Oxford. His enduring interest is in studying the role of cognitive and aﬀective
processes in interpersonal behavior. His current projects investigate how mood
states can inﬂuence everyday social judgments and interaction strategies. He has
published some 17 books and more than 130 articles and chapters in this area.
He has been elected Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences in Australia, the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, the American Psychological Society, and the
Society for Personality and Social Psychology. He is recipient of the Alexander
von Humboldt Research Prize (Germany) and a Special Investigator Award, and
a Professorial Research Fellowship from the Australian Research Council.
Martie G. Haselton received her PhD in Psychology in the year 2000 from the
University of Texas, Austin. She is currently associate professor of Communica-
tion Studies and Psychology at the University of California, Los Angeles. She
serves as co-editor in chief at Evolution and Human Behavior, board member of
the UCLA Center for Behavior, Evolution, and Culture, associate director of the
NSF-funded Interdisciplinary Relationship Science Program at UCLA, and
elected member at large of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society. She has
dozens of scientiﬁc publications on bias in social judgment, psychological
changes in women across the ovulatory cycle, and the evolution of human mate
choice and sexuality.
William von Hippel received his BA from Yale University, and his PhD from the
University of Michigan. He taught at Ohio State University for 11 years prior to
coming to the University of New South Wales in 2001. He has over 50 publica-
tions and served as Associate Editor of Psychological Science and Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin. His main research areas include social cognitive aging,
executive functioning, and evolutionary psychology.
xiii


Contributors
Nicholas B. Allen, University of
Melbourne, Australia
Paul B. T. Badcock, University of
Melbourne, Australia
Andrew S. Baron, Harvard University,
Cambridge, USA
D. Vaughn Becker, Arizona State
University, Polytechnic Campus, Mesa,
USA
Ross Buck, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, USA
Abraham P. Buunk, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands
Emily Chan, Colorado College, Colorado
Springs, USA
Andrew W. Delton, University of
California, Santa Barbara, USA
Pieternel Dijkstra, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands
R. I. M. Dunbar, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK
Lesley A. Duncan, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
Phoebe C. Ellsworth, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
Garth J. O. Fletcher, University of
Canterbury, New Zealand
Joseph P. Forgas, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia
Steven W. Gangestad, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, USA
Stephen M. Garcia, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
Jamin Halberstadt, University of Otago,
Dunedin, New Zealand
Martie G. Haselton, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA
Jeﬀrey Hutsler, University of Nevada,
Reno, USA
Matthew C. Keller, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond,
USA
Douglas T. Kenrick, Arizona State
University, Tempe, USA
Rob Kurzban, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, USA
Jonathon LaPaglia, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
Debra Lieberman, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, USA
Karlijn Massar, University of Groningen,
The Netherlands
Kimberly Rios Morrison, Stanford
University, Stanford, USA
xv

Steven L. Neuberg, Arizona State
University, Tempe, USA
Nickola C. Overall, University of
Auckland, New Zealand
Theresa E. Robertson, University of
California, Santa Barbara, USA
Jeﬀrey Sanchez-Burks, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
Mark Schaller, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
Jeﬀry A. Simpson, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
Jennifer R. Spoor, Butler University,
Indianapolis, USA
Randy Thornhill, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, USA
Peter M. Todd, Indiana University,
Bloomington, USA, and Max Planck
Institute, Berlin, Germany
Mark van Vugt, University of Kent,
Canterbury, UK
William von Hippel, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia
Kipling D. Williams, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, USA
Oscar Ybarra, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, USA
xvi
CONTRIBUTORS

Preface
T
he collection of chapters in this book seeks to combine the study of
human social cognition—the way we think, decide, plan and analyse
social situations—with an evolutionary framework that considers these
activities in light of evolutionary adaptations for solving problems of survival and
reproduction faced by our ancestors over thousands of generations. The very
suggestion that social thinking is enabled by evolved psychological adaptations is
controversial. People often bridle at the suggestion that their most intimate
thoughts and decisions—the partners they choose, the people they like, the
courses of action they prefer—are tied in important ways to their biology and
evolutionary heritage.
This book seeks to provide an up-to-date integration of some of the most
recent developments in social cognition with research on evolutionary inﬂuences
on social thinking. Arguably, one of the most intriguing recent developments in
social psychology has been the growing recognition of evolutionary theories as
relevant to explaining many kinds of complex human social behaviours. The key
objective of this book is to provide an informative, scholarly yet readable over-
view of recent advances in research on the application of evolutionary psychology
to the study of social cognition, and to oﬀer a closer integration between these
two, hitherto largely separate research traditions. The chapters included here all
argue that a complete understanding of social cognitive processes is inconceiv-
able without paying full attention to the way human thinking and decision
making have been shaped by the manifold demands of the ancestral environment
our forebears faced. Indeed, as Robin Dunbar (chapter 2) argues, the very
evolution of that marvellous computational organ, the human brain, is intim-
ately tied to the social cognitive demands of co-ordinating and negotiating
interactive behaviours in human groups of ever-increasing size and complexity.
The chapters oﬀer important new insights into the way everyday social
thinking operates, and how evolutionary principles can illuminate such
intriguing questions as: Why do people ﬁnd prototypical faces more attractive
than atypical ones? Why do people behave in ways that make it more diﬃcult to
make valid predictions about them? How do men and women go about assessing
xvii

potential mates, and making choices? What makes men and women jealous, and
why? What are the adaptive functions of negative aﬀect? Are emotional reactions
to social situations shaped by evolutionary experiences? Why do we pay attention
to some kinds of information, and ignore others? Do evolutionary inﬂuences
play a role in such social cognitive phenomena as beliefs, attitudes, judgments,
prejudice and group preferences? Can we identify evolutionary principles in the
way people respond to, and cope with social exclusion and ostracism?
We recognize, of course, that no single book could possibly include every-
thing that is interesting and exciting in the current applications of evolutionary
ideas to social cognitive phenomena. In selecting and inviting our contributors,
we aimed to achieve coverage that is representative of the exciting new develop-
ments in social cognition and evolutionary psychology, while simultaneously
selecting some of the best examples of clear theorizing and careful research in this
area. This book is divided into four parts. Part I deals with some of the funda-
mental issues concerned with the application of evolution theories to social
cognitive phenomena. In Part II we look at the way evolution illuminates our
understanding of the links between aﬀect and social cognition. Part III surveys
recent research on the evolutionary psychology of the social cognitive processes
involved in romantic relationships. Part IV surveys a variety of areas where
evolutionary principles have been used to illuminate interpersonal and inter-
group processes, such as jealousy, leadership and followership, preferences for
diﬀerent faces, and ostracism.
THE ORIGINS OF THIS BOOK: THE SYDNEY SYMPOSIUM OF
SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY SERIES
This book is the ninth volume in the Sydney Symposium of Social Psychology
series, held every year at the University of New South Wales, Sydney. Perhaps a
few words are in order about the origins of this volume, and the Sydney Sym-
posium of Social Psychology series in general. First, we should emphasize that
this is not simply an edited book in the usual sense. The objective of the Sydney
Symposia is to provide new, integrative understanding in important areas of
social psychology by inviting leading researchers in a particular ﬁeld to a three-
day residential Symposium in Sydney. This Symposium has received generous
ﬁnancial support from the University of New South Wales, allowing the careful
selection and funding of a small group of leading researchers as contributors.
Draft papers by all contributors are prepared and circulated well in advance of
the symposium and are placed on a dedicated website. Thus, participants had
an opportunity to review and revise their papers in the light of everybody else’s
draft contribution even before they arrived in Sydney.
A vital part of the preparation of this book has been the intensive three-day
face-to-face meeting between all invited contributors. Sydney Symposia are char-
acterized by open, free-ranging and critical discussion between all participants,
xviii
PREFACE

with the objective being to explore points of integration and contrast between
the proposed papers. A further revision of each chapter is prepared soon after the
Symposium, incorporating many of the shared points that emerged in our dis-
cussions. Thanks to these collaborative procedures, the book does not simply
consist of a set of chapters prepared in isolation. Rather, this Sydney Symposium
volume represents a collaborative eﬀort by a leading group of international
researchers intent on producing a wide-ranging and up-to-date review of research
on evolutionary inﬂuences on social thinking. We hope that the published papers
will succeed in conveying some of the sense of fun and excitement we all shared
during the Symposium. For more information on the Sydney Symposium series
and details of our past and future projects please see our website
(www.sydneysymposium.unsw.edu.au). Eight previous volumes of the Sydney
Symposium series have been published. All Sydney Symposium books feature
original contributions from leading international researchers on key issues in
social psychology. Detailed information about our earlier volumes can be found
on the series page in this book, and also on our website.
Given its breadth of coverage, the present book should be useful both as a
basic reference book, and as an informative textbook to be used in advanced
courses dealing with social cognition and courses on evolutionary psychology.
The main target audience for this book comprises researchers, students and
professionals in all areas of the social and behavioural sciences, such as social,
cognitive, clinical, counselling, personality, organizational and applied psy-
chology, as well as sociology, communication studies and cognitive science. The
book is written in a readable yet scholarly style, and students at the undergradu-
ate and at the graduate level should ﬁnd it an engaging overview of the ﬁeld and
thus useful as a textbook in courses dealing with evolutionary psychology and
social cognition. The book should also be of particular interest to people work-
ing in applied areas where using and understanding processes of social thinking
is important, such as clinical, counselling, educational, forensic, marketing,
advertising and organizational psychology, and health psychology.
We want to express our thanks to people and organizations who helped to
make the Sydney Symposium of Social Psychology series, and this ninth volume
in particular, a reality. Producing a complex multi-authored book such as this is a
lengthy and sometimes challenging task. We have been very fortunate to work
with such an excellent and co-operative group of contributors. Our ﬁrst thanks
must go to them. Because of their help and professionalism, we were able to
ﬁnish this project on schedule. Past friendships have not been frayed, and we are
all still on speaking terms; indeed, we hope that working together on this book
has been as positive an experience for them as it has been for us.
The idea of organizing the Sydney Symposia owes much to discussions
with, and encouragement by, Kevin McConkey, Chris Fell, Peter Lovibond and
numerous others at the University of New South Wales. Our colleagues at the
School of Psychology at UNSW, Rebekah East, Norman Chan, Vera Thomson,
Liz Goldenberg and others, have, with their advice, support and sheer hard work,
xix
PREFACE

helped to share the burden of preparing and organizing the symposium and the
ensuing book. We also wish to acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Austral-
ian Research Council and the University of New South Wales, support that was
of course essential to get this project oﬀ the ground. Most of all, we are grateful
for the love and support of our families who have put up with us during the
many months of work that went into producing this book.
Joseph Forgas, Martie G. Haselton, and William von Hippel
September 2006
xx
PREFACE

1
Evolutionary Psychology
and Social Thinking
History, Issues, and Prospects
WILLIAM VON HIPPEL
MARTIE G. HASELTON
JOSEPH P. FORGAS
Evolutionary Psychology and Social Cognition
A Natural Aﬃnity
Diﬀerent “Why” Questions
Content-Speciﬁcity and Adaptive Design
Reﬁning the Metaphor for Social Cognition
Interface with Modern Evolutionary Biology
What can Social Cognition Bring to the Table?
Overview of the Book
P
sychology has undergone a profound paradigmatic shift in the past few
decades. For most of the second half of the 20th century, a kind of
unquestioning belief in the power of environmental inﬂuences on social
thinking and behavior has ruled supreme in the social sciences. This environ-
mentalist ideology rested on some notably fallacious scientiﬁc claims, such as
Margaret Mead’s now debunked arguments that even patterns of mating
behavior are essentially culturally determined. In hindsight, it is puzzling why
well-meaning psychologists and social scientists should have chosen to deny the
obvious for so long—that biological, genetic, and evolutionary inﬂuences do
play a fundamental role in understanding social behavior.
In one way, we may regard this book as a celebration of the belated return of
balance to theories about human cognition and behavior. Using twin studies,
numerous converging lines of evidence now show that there is a signiﬁcant genetic
contribution even to high-level, elaborate social cognitive processes that shape
1

our attitudes, beliefs, and interpersonal strategies. Complementary research pro-
grams have repeatedly demonstrated the cross-cultural universality of a large
number of sophisticated social behaviors including emotional communication,
partner selection, gender diﬀerences in mating strategies, and the like. The mes-
sage of these research programs was not universally welcomed. Many adherents
of ideological environmentalism saw any evidence for genetic or evolutionary
inﬂuences on behavior as a grievous threat to their belief that the potential for re-
engineering of social arrangements has no natural limits. It is partly for such
political reasons that research into evolutionary inﬂuences on social cognition
and behavior has been so controversial for so long. This book seeks to bring
together some of the most recent research and theorizing in the ﬁeld of social
cognition and evolutionary psychology, in an attempt to show that there are
signiﬁcant beneﬁts that can be derived by adopting evolutionary principles in the
scientiﬁc study of social thinking.
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL COGNITION
To commemorate the 100th anniversary of the publication of Darwin’s psycho-
logical treatise, The Expression of Emotions in Man and Other Animals (Darwin,
1872/1965), a young Berkeley Zoologist named Ghiselin gave an address at the
American Psychological Association Conference. In the address, subsequently
published in Science (Ghiselin, 1973), Ghiselin pointed out that Darwin’s
radically new way of studying behavior—which he called “evolutionary psych-
ology”—hadn’t fully caught on. The study of white rats and college sophomores
missed the mark, and much of what purported to be evolutionary psychology
was a “warmed over version of scala naturae which arranged beings . . . from
highest to lowest” (God to man to brutes to plants, p. 179). Nonetheless, he
argued, there clearly seemed to be promise—not only in understanding the
emotions, as many had already acknowledged, but also the important role played
by sexual selection in human behavior and in so-called “higher” attributes such
as moral sentiments.
In the three and half decades since this address, the ﬁeld of evolutionary
psychology has seen dramatic progress. In the early 1990s the publication of The
Adapted Mind (Barkow, Cosmides, & Tooby, 1992; see also Buss, 1996; Buss &
Kenrick, 1998) established the outlines of the paradigm of evolutionary
psychology. In the coming years (as the contributions in the current volume aptly
demonstrate), researchers began to take seriously the notion that the brain, like
the body, is rich in evolved design. As Darwin promised, the evolutionary
approach has begun to provide a new foundation for psychological theorizing—
and along with it, new insights. By a coarse count, there are hundreds of new
discoveries that probably would not have been found without explicit evolution-
ary psychological theorizing (perhaps thousands by a ﬁne count; see Buss, 2005).
The discoveries span the domains of aﬀect and emotion (see chapters in this
2
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

volume by Badcock & Allen, chapter 8; Buck, chapter 6; Ellsworth, chapter 5;
Forgas, chapter 7), cooperation and sociality (Dunbar, chapter 2; Lieberman,
chapter 11; Spoor & Williams, chapter 17), leadership (van Vugt & Kurzban,
chapter 14), social perception and inference (Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3;
Halberstadt, chapter 15; Kenrick, Delton, Robertson, Becker, & Neuberg,
chapter 4; Schaller & Duncan, chapter 18; Ybarra et al., chapter 16), kinship
(Lieberman, chapter 11), morality (Buck, chapter 6; Lieberman, chapter 11),
and, of course, romantic relationships, mating, and sexuality (Buunk, Massar, &
Dijkstra, chapter 13; Fletcher & Overall, chapter 12; Gangestad & Thornhill,
chapter 3; Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10; Todd, chapter 9).
One of the key areas in which evolutionary theorizing has played an increas-
ing role is social psychology. In a search of all papers published in the Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology between 1985 and 2004, Webster (2006) found
an increasing linear trend in the number of articles published on evolutionary
psychology that was comparable in magnitude to other emerging areas in social
psychology (including stereotyping and prejudice and emotion and motivation).
Thus, consistent with the breadth of the contributions in this volume, evolution-
ary psychology has played an increasing role in social psychology over the last
two decades.
A NATURAL AFFINITY
Social and evolutionary psychology are both concerned with humans as highly
social animals, and thus they have a natural aﬃnity. For example, evolutionary
theorists like Dunbar (chapter 2) note that humans’ long history of living in
groups requires adaptations for social living, including sophisticated capacities
for representing the mental states of others (and others’ mental representations of
oneself; and others’ representations of one’s own representations of others’ repre-
sentations; and so on). Along similar lines, biological anthropologists Boyd and
Richerson (2006) argue that humans are unusually cooperative relative to other
animals, and that human sociality requires and enables an extraordinary capacity
for culture, teaching, and social learning. These are the very capacities that many
social scientists regard as central to human nature.
Interpersonal communication is another area where the interests of evo-
lutionary and social psychologists have been converging for some time. Darwin’s
(1872/1965) classic work on the communication of emotions in man and ani-
mals presaged the recent rapid development of empirical research on the mech-
anisms that inﬂuence nonverbal communication between individuals. There is
now clear experimental and neuropsychological evidence documenting the close
links between emotional expressions and emotional experiences, and there is
good reason to believe that some of our most powerful interpersonal signals, such
as eye gaze, touching, spacing, and gestures, are also produced by deep-seated
evolved mechanisms, as Darwin (1872/1965) proposed.
3
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

Likewise, some of the foundational studies in social psychology conducted
by Asch (1956) and Milgram (1963) documented the surprising extent to which
humans are susceptible to social inﬂuence. William James (1890) remarked that
“solitary conﬁnement is by many regarded as a mode of torture too cruel and
unnatural for civilised countries to adopt” and social psychologists followed
James’ insight by documenting how devastating social rejection can be and how
sensitive people are in detecting it. For example, Spoor and Williams (chapter
17) describe experiments using minimal cues of rejection such as being left out of
a computerized ball toss. Participants in these studies quickly show signs of
dejection, and neuroimaging reveals an increase in brain activation associated
with the experience of pain: rejection literally hurts (Eisenberger, Lieberman, &
Williams, 2003). In sum, there is considerable overlap in the topics of interest to
social and evolutionary psychologists.
Social and evolutionary psychology also share a preference for the cognitive
level of description. Social psychologists never bought the argument that
behavior should be the only unit of analysis, and evolutionary psychologists have
similarly suggested that it is most appropriate to theorize about psychological
adaptations (rather than to limit one’s analysis to overt behavior; Buss, 1995;
Cosmides & Tooby, 1994). Thus, social and evolutionary psychologists are both
inclined to theorize about the design of the cognitive adaptations underlying
social behavior. Lieberman’s analysis (chapter 11) of inbreeding avoidance and
familial cooperation beautifully illustrates the cognitive approach. She asked
what cues were available to ancestral humans that would have allowed them to
reliably estimate kinship and what kind of cognitive procedures could take them
into account to produce both sexual aversion and cooperation. She hypothesized
that coresidence duration during childhood could serve as an appropriate cue,
and a well-designed system would vary the intensity of the motivations under-
lying sexual avoidance and cooperation depending on length of coresidence (and
thus with the probability of relatedness). Similarly, Todd’s chapter (chapter 9)
points out that the social environment can be uncertain and overwhelmingly
complex; thus, evolution should favor decision rules that use a small amount of
ecologically-valid information and limited processing time to come up with what
are often very good choices, when they are employed in the proper environ-
ments. This led to the surprising discovery that assessing fewer possible mates
rather than more resulted in optimal mate choice in computer simulations
(searching too long can result in passing the best mate by or running out of time
altogether; see Todd, chapter 9). (For other excellent examples see contributions
by Dunbar, chapter 2; Kenrick et al., chapter 4; Halberstadt, chapter 15; Schaller
& Duncan, chapter 18; and Spoor & Williams, chapter 17.)
4
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

DIFFERENT “WHY” QUESTIONS
Along with a natural aﬃnity based on mutual interests, there are also diﬀerences
between the approaches of social cognition and evolutionary psychology. Chief
among these concerns the nature of explanation. Social psychologists tend to
focus on explanations involving proximate mechanisms—attention, cognitive
load, schemas, stress, frustration, norms, etc. Evolutionary psychologists, on the
other hand, tend to focus on functional explanations, often leaving the details of
proximate mechanisms unexamined. Thus, social and evolutionary psychologists
may approach the same topic very diﬀerently. For example, in understanding
certain types of mating decisions, social psychologists my invoke norms, such as
sex roles or cultural taboos. Such forces clearly exist. Parents attempt to inﬂuence
the mating decisions of their children, including, for example, the sexual permis-
siveness of their daughters. Evolutionary psychologists, on the other hand, begin
by asking what adaptive problems mechanisms of mate choice address. Thus, an
evolutionary psychologist might locate key theoretical causes at the distal level.
In mate choice, for example, evolutionary theorists might argue that females are
less sexually permissive than males because of their necessarily larger investment
in oﬀspring and greater costs associated with poor mate choice (Trivers, 1972).
Of course, evolutionary theorists propose that proximate evolved decision rules
execute the functions they study—for example, a selective sociosexual psych-
ology in women or adjustments of sexual aversion based on coresidence—but
evolutionary psychologists are less likely to focus their empirical eﬀorts on the
examination of precisely how these rules are implemented.
Few social psychologists reject the notion that the entire human body,
including the brain, has been shaped by natural selection. Reticence instead
stems from questions about the utility of distal explanations. As Conway and
Schaller (2002) point out, whereas proximate mechanisms can usually be tested
directly, distal evolutionary mechanisms usually cannot. So, social psychologists
have often asked what can be gained by this sort of seemingly irrefutable con-
jecturing. Evolutionary psychologists have responded that well-formulated evo-
lutionary hypotheses lead to speciﬁc predictions and are therefore falsiﬁable,
evolutionary explanations are required for a complete explanation of behavior,
and most importantly, they are useful as they guide researchers to new domains
of inquiry, new ideas about behavior, and ultimately new ﬁndings (e.g., Buss,
1995; Buss, Haselton, Shackelford, Bleske, & Wakeﬁeld, 1998).
As evolutionary psychology has progressed, this promise has been more fully
realized. The predictions of evolutionary theories have become sophisticated,
more speciﬁc, and genuinely diﬃcult to reconcile with alternative accounts, thus
making the utility of evolutionary theorizing harder to doubt. An interesting
irony, as we note below, is that these advances may be due in part to a more
complete integration of proximate and ultimate levels of explanations. For
example, some social psychologists have found recent evolutionary work on
menstrual cycle eﬀects particularly compelling (see, e.g., Simpson & LaPaglia,
5
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

chapter 10). This work may be compelling precisely because researchers have
linked women’s behaviors to speciﬁc proximate mechanisms (cycling hormones)
that would seem to rule out the traditional domain-general, sociocultural
explanations that are often touted as alternative explanations (e.g., mass media
eﬀects, social roles, etc.).
CONTENT-SPECIFICITY AND ADAPTIVE DESIGN
Before we elaborate on why evolutionary psychology needs the theories and
methodologies of social cognition researchers, we suggest that there are several
other lessons that evolutionary psychology might teach social cognition
researchers. Perhaps most importantly, when starting with ﬁrst principles, evo-
lutionary psychologists tend to arrive at predictions about specialized, content-
rich psychological mechanisms designed to address speciﬁc adaptive problems.
The chapters in this volume describe speciﬁc psychologies of kinship (Lieber-
man, chapter 10), leadership (van Vugt & Kurzban, chapter 14), jealousy
(Buunk et al., chapter 13), mind-reading (Dunbar, chapter 2), and mate selec-
tion (Todd, chapter 9), to name a few. The information processing rules involved
in each of these areas might overlap with those involved in others (e.g., mind-
reading likely plays a role across social domains), but they will also contain
specialized features.
In their joint research program, Kenrick, Neuberg, Maner, Schaller, and
colleagues have collected some of the best evidence for content-speciﬁcity in
social judgments (see e.g., Kenrick et al., chapter 4). For example, given the
diﬀering demands of mate choice and physical self-protection, Maner et al.
(2005) hypothesized that participants induced to feel these motivational states
would show qualitatively diﬀerent biases in interpreting the facial expressions of
others, and in speciﬁc cases these biases would diﬀer for the sexes. After viewing a
scary ﬁlm clip, participants in the studies conducted by these authors rated
neutral male faces as angrier especially when they were the faces of outgroup
members (Maner et al., 2005). Thus, when cues indicate increased danger, men
and women become vigilant about the potential threat of aggressive others. After
viewing a romantic ﬁlm clip, men but not women in the studies saw more
romantic interest in the faces of neutral opposite-sex faces, especially attractive
faces (Maner et al., 2005). Overperceiving sexual interest may function to help
individuals avoid missing sexual opportunities, which would have beneﬁted
ancestral men more than ancestral women (Haselton & Buss, 2000), and thus
would have selected for precisely the sort of bias Maner et al. documented.
In describing a related research program, Schaller and Duncan (chapter 18)
argued that one of the most daunting adaptive problems faced by ancestral
humans was exposure to communicable pathogens. Thus, these authors argued
that humans are endowed with a “psychological immune system” that tracks
heuristic cues to disease and leads to behavioral avoidance of contamination.
6
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Because judgments of disease threat are uncertain, the psychological immune
system may be adaptively overinclusive (Kurzban & Leary, 2001) by responding
to a variety of physical disﬁgurements, even when they are caused by accidents
rather than illness. Similarly, humans are more susceptible to pathogens carried
by people from foreign lands than those in their local environments (whose
pathogens are familiar to their physical immune system). Therefore, the psycho-
logical immune system may lead to a tendency to stigmatize and avoid various
classes of individuals, including disﬁgured people and foreign immigrants.
Schaller and colleagues predicted that these prejudices should increase when
disease threat is activated, and, as predicted, participants who score highly on a
measure of vulnerability to disease showed stronger implicit associations between
images of disabled individuals and disease concepts (Park, Faulkner, & Schaller,
2003). In a related study (Faulkner, Schaller, Park, & Duncan, 2004), partici-
pants were shown slide show images of accidents or diseases. Relative to the
accident condition, those in the disease condition allocated less funding to an
eﬀort to recruit immigrants from subjectively foreign lands (allocation of funds
to recruiting immigrants from familiar locations did not show this eﬀect;
Faulkner et al., 2004). In sum, theorizing about speciﬁc adaptive problems has
led to successful predictions about the diﬀering eﬀects of mating, self-protection,
and pathogen avoidance on how information is processed.
In social cognition, key concepts and proposed mechanisms tend to be far
more general and content-free. For example, theories of stereotyping, social
memory, and attribution tend not to propose speciﬁc mechanisms for how these
processes diﬀer with diﬀerent types of targets, and indeed theorizing is even rare
concerning how social versus nonsocial cognition diﬀer. Given the evidence that
human brains are adapted in part from the inﬂuence of other humans (Dunbar,
chapter 2), it seems likely that certain social cognitive routines are only initiated
in certain social situations, and that these routines diﬀer in important ways by
the type of target. Thus, it might be useful to infuse theorizing about social
cognitive processes with more content by starting with adaptive problems rather
than assuming that cognitive procedures will be domain-general (see Alexander,
Brewer, & Herrmann, 1999). In addition to leading to new predictions, this type
of integration of content and process might also enable researchers to ﬁll in some
of the “conceptual holes” in social psychology (see Daly, Salmon, & Wilson,
1997; Kenrick et al., chapter 4).
REFINING THE METAPHOR FOR SOCIAL COGNITION
Although social cognition is now much more concerned with motivation and
emotion than it was 10 or 20 years ago, we suggest that the nature of that
motivation is still underspeciﬁed and poorly understood. It is undoubtedly a step
in the right direction to conceptualize humans as motivated tacticians rather
than cognitive misers, but what motivates humans, and why are they being
7
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

tactical? Evolutionary theory provides a well-articulated perspective on these
questions that can focus social cognition research on the fundamental goals
chronically held by humans in diﬀerent situations. For example, Trivers’ work on
parental investment (1972) and reciprocal altruism (1971) provides hugely
inﬂuential mid-level theories about important motivations and tactics, but evo-
lutionary theorizing also provides much more speciﬁc predictions as well. A
wonderful example of such a prediction can be found in the chapter by Ybarra et
al. in the current volume (chapter 16), in which they propose that sometimes it is
in our interests to be ﬁgured out by others and sometimes it is not. Consistent
with this perspective, cues that suggest competition lead people to ensure
that their behaviors and motivations are opaque, whereas cues that suggest
cooperation lead people to be more transparent in their actions.
More broadly, however, the evolutionary approach to the motivated tacti-
cian clearly reveals that people were never as dumb as they were made out to be
when the ﬁeld was focused on bias and error. Rather, when people must make
decisions under uncertainty (which is probably most of the time), evolutionary
processes appear to have shaped human decisions to be biased in favor of the least
costly error (Haselton & Buss, 2000, 2003; Haselton & Nettle, 2006; Kenrick et
al., chapter 4; Schaller & Duncan, chapter 18; Spoor & Williams, chapter 17).
Furthermore, when problems are framed in a manner that is consistent with
experience, or with adaptively recurrent problems such as cheater detection,
previously unsolvable problems suddenly become simple for even uneducated
individuals (Cosmides & Tooby, 1996, 2005). People thus appear much more
like savvy bookies playing the odds than hopeless incompetents who somehow
manage to survive despite themselves (see Todd, chapter 9). Evolutionary psych-
ology thus suggests that it is time to reﬁne our metaphor of the motivated
tactician by considering what motivates him, what motivates her, and what
tactics are likely to have emerged in the never-ending social cognitive arms race
of manipulation, cooperation, and competition among individuals and groups as
people navigate an increasingly complex social world.
INTERFACE WITH MODERN EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY
Lastly, principles of modern evolutionary biology may be brought to bear on
theorizing in social cognition. Gangestad and Thornhill (chapter 3) point out
that social inference permeates the topics studied within social psychology and
yet surprisingly few researchers have made use of the vast evolutionary literature
on signaling theory. Signaling theory suggests two types of systems involved in
social inference, signaling systems and nonsignaling systems. The ﬁrst type of
system involves the transmission of factual information from senders to receivers.
The second type of system is one in which receivers make inferences on the basis
of cues emitted by targets, but targets possess no adaptations designed to convey
information to perceivers; instead, receivers base their inferences on incidental
8
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

eﬀects. Signaling systems tend to collapse if information is not factual—over
time, receivers will cease attending to deceptive signals. Given that the perfect
alignment of ﬁtness interests is rare in the animal kingdom, senders will rarely
beneﬁt from always signaling their true intentions. The consequence is that
social inference is probably based on coevolving adaptations in senders and
receivers in which senders are selected to often conceal cues indicating their true
intentions and receivers are selected to detect them (also see Ybarra et al., chapter
16). This perspective leads to new predictions about the conditions under which
communication is characterized by deception or honesty; it may explain many
of the cases in which social inference fails; and it may drive theorists to ask
themselves whether the social inference psychologies they propose obey prin-
ciples derived from modern evolutionary biology (see Gangestad & Thornhill,
chapter 3).
WHAT CAN SOCIAL COGNITION BRING TO THE TABLE?
By now we hope that it’s clear what evolutionary psychology can bring to the
study of social cognition, but the question remains concerning what social cogni-
tion can oﬀer to the study of evolutionary psychology. In answering this ﬁnal
question, we ﬁnd it helpful to consider the predominant criticisms of evolution-
ary psychology and how social cognition might address them. To enable a pre-
liminary examination of these criticisms, we sent an e-mail to the list serve for
social psychologists (SPSP) and evolutionary biologists (Evoldir) asking list
members about their perception of evolutionary psychology and whether they
have found it helpful to their understanding of human behavior. Despite the
rather disparate perspectives of members of these two groups (and keeping in
mind that respondents were undoubtedly not a representative sample of their
lists), responses to this request showed a great deal of similarity across the two
lists (see Table 1.1). In both lists evolutionary psychology evokes strong feelings,
with approximately equal numbers voicing strong support for the enterprise,
strong reservations (or even animosity) for evolutionary psychology, or a bit of
both. Indeed, several respondents requested that all identifying information be
removed from their responses prior to any dissemination.
Examination of the responses of those who are critical of evolutionary
psychology revealed a variety of concerns with the science among both social
psychologists and evolutionary biologists (for a more thorough discussion of
criticisms of evolutionary psychology, see Hagen, 2005). Furthermore, among
both disciplines, dissatisfaction with the science most often centered around the
concern that evolutionary psychologists tell “just so” stories about how we
became the way we are, and that these stories cannot be adequately tested. This
criticism is surprising, given the enormous amount of progress made by evo-
lutionary psychologists in the last 20 years. Nevertheless, a substantial portion of
the psychological and biological community appears to regard the enterprise
9
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

Table 1.1 Frequency Counts of Social/Personality Psychologists (SPSP) and Biologists (Evoldir) Who Endorsed a Particular Category of Positive
or Negative Reactions to Evolutionary Psychology
Positive
No details/other
Hypothesis
Generation
Framework
Totals
SPSP
3.5
6
28.5
(72%)
Evoldir
4
1
6
(42%)
Totals
(15%)
(14%)
(70%)
Negative
No details/other
Implications/
political uses
Just So stories/not
tested
Not X-cultural/not
socialization
Not X-species
Not genetic/
biologically naive
Totals
SPSP
1.5
.5
7
4
1
1
(28%)
Evoldir
2
1.5
5.5
1.5
1.5
3
(58%)
Totals
(12%)
(8%)
(42%)
(19%)
(8%)
(10%)
Responses could be placed in up to two categories if more than one issue was raised in the response (a very common situation), in which case each of the two categories received .5 of a response. Thus, the
total number of respondents in both lists who made positive or negative responses in a particular category can be inferred from column totals. The total number of social psychologists and evolutionary
biologists who made positive or negative comments can be inferred from the row totals (although this number is probably less informative than the nature of the reasons, as it seems more likely to be
inﬂuenced by the likely nonrepresentative nature of the sample).

with doubt or disdain, in part because they perceive the product of this research
as the telling of tales that are largely impossible to disconﬁrm. With these
criticisms in mind, we turn now to the topic of how a social cognitive approach
might help address these concerns, and thereby further the discipline of
evolutionary psychology.
Although evolutionary psychologists are already methodological pluralists,
the most obvious contribution that social cognition can make to the study of
evolutionary psychology is by providing new methodological tools that can sup-
plement the frequent reliance on self-report as a means of testing evolutionary
hypotheses. Because social cognitive theorists are concerned with the more
microlevel workings of the social mind, from the beginning of the enterprise they
have been dubious about people’s ability to self-report on these processes. Thus,
researchers in social cognition have borrowed and developed a large set of pro-
cedures and tools that enable the study of social functioning without directly
asking people what they are thinking. A variety of social cognitive methods now
exist for the assessment of goals, attention, accessibility, and (more contro-
versially) attitudes, even if people are unwilling or unable to directly report on
the contents of their mind.
Greater use of these procedures is critically important for the development
of evolutionary psychology as a discipline. First of all, measures of social cogni-
tive processing often provide clearer and more in-depth evidence for the phe-
nomena of interest than is possible through self-report. Indeed, the methods of
social cognition are uniquely well suited for the study of proximal mechanisms,
as they allow researchers to get a handle on the processes by which the mind
executes important evolved functions. Evidence of these advantages of a social
cognitive approach to evolutionary psychology abounds in this book. For
example, in their work on the behavioral immune system, Schaller and Duncan
use reaction time to show that people have an automatic association between
bodily disﬁgurement and disease, and that this association is stronger among
people who perceive themselves as particularly vulnerable to disease. Indeed,
Schaller and Duncan (chapter 18) show that people automatically activate
thoughts of disease even when they are confronted by a bodily disﬁgurement that
they know is not contagious (such as a birth mark or obesity), yet these auto-
matically activated thoughts of disease are not evident when people encounter
individuals who appear healthy but are known to carry a contagious and danger-
ous disease. Such ﬁndings speak to the primacy of appearances in activating
automatic disease cognitions, and suggest a possible functional role for these
cognitions in premedical societies. These data also provide an excellent example
of the beneﬁts of a social cognitive approach to evolutionary psychology, as
not only would people be loath to report such negative responses to disabled,
disﬁgured, or obese others, but it is also unlikely that people would be able
to introspect about such associations in their mind between surface-level
abnormalities and fear of disease.
The chapter by Kenrick et al. (chapter 4) also provides a clear example of
11
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

the advantages of evolutionary social cognition in elucidating some of the details
of proximal mechanisms for achieving distal functions. In their research, they
ﬁnd that both males and females focus greater visual attention on attractive
members of the opposite sex, but only females also spend more time encoding
attractive members of the same sex. Furthermore, although women initially
attend more to the faces of attractive men, they do not show an advantage in
memory for these attractive male faces. Thus, in line with evolutionary reasoning
that physical attractiveness is valued in both sexes but is more important in
women than men, eye gaze translates into memory for attractive women but not
for attractive men. In addition, and as predicted by an evolutionary account,
these diﬀerences in eye gaze and memory are themselves moderated by factors
such as the relationship and ovulatory status of the individuals doing the
perceiving.
Second, social cognitive measures can help researchers avoid the criticism
that evolutionary psychologists are simply tapping societal stereotypes of how
people believe they are supposed to think and act, and that these stereotypes
don’t reﬂect the real workings of the mind. For example, consider the evolution-
ary prediction that men should be particularly jealous of high-status rivals,
whereas women should be more jealous of beautiful rivals. When men and
women self-report such an eﬀect, critics of the evolutionary approach respond
that society suggests that men should be concerned with status and women
concerned with beauty, and thus people dutifully self-report that these are their
concerns, when in fact they may not really be at issue. Setting aside why society
should shape the mind in such evolutionarily advantageous ways (as socio-
cultural critics of the evolutionary approach are typically unswayed by the
argument that culture is a mechanism for achieving evolutionary goals), these
criticisms are clearly addressed by experiments such as those reported by Buunk
et al. (chapter 13). In their chapter, these authors show that nonconscious prim-
ing of status or attractiveness cues leads to gender diﬀerences in jealousy, whereby
high mate value females are more jealous when primed with attractiveness cues
and high mate value males are more jealous when primed with status cues. Low
mate value individuals were uniformly jealous, regardless of priming. This sort of
pattern of responses is very diﬃcult to explain away as an artifact of social
stereotypes or culturally induced values, particularly when moderated by
individual diﬀerences (such as perceived mate value in these experiments, or
relationship or ovulatory status in the experiments of Kenrick et al., chapter 4).
Third, and for the very reasons outlined above, social cognitive approaches
have the potential to address what appears to be the most widespread scientiﬁc
criticism of evolutionary psychology by psychologists and biologists who are
dubious of the enterprise. That is, a social cognitive approach to evolutionary
psychology is very well suited to confront the criticism that evolutionary theor-
ists are weaving a bunch of “just so” stories about the origins and development of
human nature. By couching research in terms of information processing, with a
clear emphasis on proximal mechanisms underlying distal evolutionary goals,
12
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

evolutionary social cognition has the potential to address these important
criticisms.
For a wonderful example of this marriage of evolutionary theory and social
cognition, we need only consider Halberstadt’s chapter (chapter 15), in which he
describes his research on preferences for prototypical faces and the possible evo-
lutionary origins of these preferences. Beginning with the hypothesis that the
preference for prototypical faces is an adaptation for enhancing mate quality,
Halberstadt’s ﬁrst experiments reveal the unexpected result that prototypical
members of almost all categories are preferred, whether positive or negative and
whether natural or artiﬁcial. This ﬁnding suggests that perhaps the preference for
prototypical faces is not an adaptation for mating, but rather is simply an
aspect of a more general preference for items that are easily categorized. To test
this possibility, he then partials out the subjective familiarity of the diﬀerent
category members, and ﬁnds that the sense of familiarity mediates the eﬀect of
prototypicality for artiﬁcial categories but not for natural categories.
This result narrows the range of possible causes for preferences for proto-
typicality as found in nature, but still leaves open a wide variety of reasons for
why humans prefer prototypicality in animals as well as humans. Halberstadt
(chapter 15) then tests the possibility that prototypes are preferred because pro-
totypicality communicates safety, but ﬁnds that sometimes prototypical animals
are actually the more dangerous members of their category. This result leads to a
test of an alternative possibility that is closer to his original hypothesis, which is
that natural prototypes are preferred because they represent an overgeneralization
of a mechanism adapted for the perception of humans. Consistent with this
possibility, the magnitude of the correlation between prototypicality and
attractiveness in animals is found to be a direct function of the similarity of the
animals to humans, with animals that are more similar to humans showing an
increased association between prototypicality and attractiveness. Because similar-
ity between these animal categories and humans was only measured rather than
manipulated, and thus potentially confounded with other factors, Halberstadt
then constructed drawings of faces and described them as sketches of either
criminals or aliens. Consistent with the idea that preference for prototypicality is
an adaptation for face perception, prototypical faces were preferred for both
humans and aliens, but the latter and not the former eﬀect was mediated by the
subjective familiarity of the face.
This sequence of experiments represents a superb combination of basic
research in categorization and prototypicality—long areas of interest within
social cognition—with evolutionary principles concerned with attraction and
mate selection. This series of experiments demonstrates how both disciplines can
inform each other, and how an evolutionary social cognitive approach leads to
unique predictions that are readily tested. Had Halberstadt (chapter 15) not
focused on underlying mechanisms such as perceived familiarity and perceptual
ﬂuency, this research might have started and ended with the speculation that
preference for prototypical faces may be an adaptation for ﬁnding high quality
13
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

mates. Although more experimentation is clearly necessary, Halberstadt’s social
cognitive approach to evolutionary psychology has moved beyond speculation
about ultimate goals to speciﬁc tests of underlying hypotheses, with the end
result that we can be much more conﬁdent about the evolutionary origins of
preferences for prototypical faces.
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
This book is organized into four main parts. Following this introductory chapter,
the ﬁrst part deals with some of the fundamental theoretical issues that form the
foundation of an evolutionary framework for social cognition. Robin Dunbar
(chapter 2) describes his “social brain” hypothesis that postulates a close inter-
dependence between the evolution of human brain and human group size, sug-
gesting that brain evolution was most likely driven by that primordial social
cognitive task, the need to navigate and coordinate the activities of ever larger
and ever more sophisticated and eﬀective interacting social groups. In the next
chapter, Steve Gangestad and Randy Thornhill (chapter 3) outline a carefully
elaborated evolutionary framework for understanding the most basic social cog-
nitive processes, the way social inferences are formed. Doug Kenrick and his
colleagues (chapter 4) focus on a key aspect of evolutionary social cognition—
the fact that certain kinds of information contents receive preferential treatment,
as illustrated by the emergence of numerous domain-speciﬁc mechanisms that
appear to be adapted to solve speciﬁc ﬁtness problems. Evolutionary approaches
thus oﬀer a complementary, content-focused framework to the traditional
information processing models that characterize mainstream social cognitive
research seeking universal (and mostly domain-general) explanatory principles.
The second part of the book discusses the evolutionary psychology of aﬀect
and cognition. Adaptive emotional reactions to social events require sophisti-
cated cognitive appraisal strategies, and Phoebe Ellsworth (chapter 5) outlines
how appraisal theories of emotion can inform evolutionary theorizing. Ross
Buck (chapter 6) argues that the origins of moral emotions that regulate so much
of our social thinking and behavior go back to the dawn of evolution, and he
points to the ubiquity of such emotional reactions in everyday social communi-
cation. Joseph Forgas (chapter 7) argues that negative aﬀective states have an
important adaptive function, recruiting more focused and accommodative think-
ing strategies that produce identiﬁable beneﬁts in many social cognitive tasks. In
the ﬁnal chapter in this part, Paul Badcock and Nicholas Allen (chapter 8)
suggest that depressed moods may also serve another adaptive function, reducing
risk taking and possibly competitive behaviors.
The third part of the book looks at one of the social cognitive problems
most intensively studied from an evolutionary perspective: the evolutionary
psychology of mate selection. Peter Todd (chapter 9) oﬀers a cognitive-
evolutionary analysis of how the all-important adaptive task of mate selection is
14
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

performed. Jeﬀry Simpson and Jonathon LaPaglia (chapter 10) describe the
intriguing phenomenon of patterned changes in mate preferences across the
ovulatory cycle of women, changes that are consistent with evolutionary theories
but would be diﬃcult to explain in terms of alternative cognitive models of
decision making. Debra Lieberman (chapter 11) looks at the evolutionary prob-
lem of inbreeding avoidance, and shows how humans use information readily
available from their environment to solve the problem of whom to avoid as a
mate. Garth Fletcher and Nicola Overall (chapter 12) oﬀer an intriguing discus-
sion of the role of the self in mate-selection decisions, and in particular, how
assessment of one’s own and one’s partner’s value may impact mate choices and
relationship functioning.
The ﬁnal, and largest part of the book features chapters that adopt an
evolutionary perspective in analyzing a variety of interpersonal and intergroup
processes involving social cognitive mechanisms. The phenomenon of jealousy is
the topic of the chapter by Abraham Buunk and his colleagues (chapter 13), who
argue that men and women are of a diﬀerent mind when it comes to jealousy.
Women are more likely to be jealous of a rival’s physical attractiveness, while
men are more jealous of a rival’s status and dominance, judgmental diﬀerences
that are readily understandable in terms of evolutionary mechanisms. Mark van
Vugt and Rob Kurzban (chapter 14) oﬀer an incisive analysis of the evolutionary
psychology of leadership and followership, an approach that has the capacity to
greatly enrich existing theorizing in these domains. Jamin Halberstadt (chapter
15) looks at the evolutionary basis of preferences for prototypical faces, and
suggests that such preferences are indeed likely to endure because prototypicality
indicates greater reproductive ﬁtness in a potential mate. Oscar Ybarra and his
colleagues (chapter 16) discuss the notion of human unpredictability as the basic
problem of social perception and prediction, and suggest that humans may
possess adaptive mechanisms that predispose us to avoid being too easily known
and predicted. Jennifer Spoor and Kipling Williams (chapter 17) look at the
evolutionary psychology of social rejection and ostracism, and discuss the
importance of an ostracism detection system. In the ﬁnal chapter, Mark Schaller
and Lesley Duncan (chapter 18) propose the existence of an evolved behavioral
immune system that plays an important role in inﬂuencing a variety of social
cognitive phenomena, such as norms, values, attitudes, and social communica-
tion. In their entirety, these chapters oﬀer a broad and integrated overview of the
many speciﬁc domains and research areas where evolutionary theorizing has
contributed to social cognitive research in recent years. As editors, we hope that
readers will ﬁnd these contributions as exciting and intriguing as we did, and we
hope that collecting them in one volume will stimulate further interest in the
rapidly expanding interface of evolutionary psychology and social cognition.
15
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING

REFERENCES
Alexander, M. G., Brewer, M. B., & Herrmann,
R. K. (1999). Images and aﬀect: A functional
analysis of out-group stereotypes. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
78–93.
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence
and conformity: I. A minority of one against
a unanimous majority. Psychological Mono-
graphs, 70(9, Serial No. 416).
Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (Eds.).
(1992). The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (2006). Culture
and the evolution of the human social
instincts. In S. Levinson & N. Enﬁeld (Eds.),
Roots of human sociality (pp. 453–477).
Oxford, UK: Berg.
Buss, D. M. (1995). Evolutionary psychology:
A new paradigm for psychological science.
Psychological Inquiry, 6(1), 1–30.
Buss, D. M. (1996). The evolutionary psychology
of human social strategies. In E. T. Higgins &
A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology:
Handbook of basic principles (pp. 3–38). New
York: Guilford Press.
Buss, D. M. (2005). The handbook of evolution-
ary psychology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Buss, D. M., Haselton, M. G., Shackelford, T.
K., Bleske, A. L., & Wakeﬁeld, J. (1998).
Adaptations, exaptations, and spandrels. The
American Psychologist, 53, 533–548.
Buss, D. M., & Kenrick, D. T. (1998). Evo-
lutionary social psychology. In D. T. Gilbert, S.
T. Fiske, & L. Gardner (Eds.), The handbook
of social psychology (Vol. 2, 4th ed., pp.
982–1026). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Conway, L. G., III, & Schaller, M. (2002). On
the veriﬁability of evolutionary psychological
theories: An analysis of the psychology of sci-
entiﬁc persuasion. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 6(2), 152–166.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1994). Beyond intu-
ition and instinct blindness: The case for an
evolutionarily rigorous cognitive science.
Cognition, 50, 41–77.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1996). Are humans
good intuitive statisticians after all? Rethink-
ing some conclusions from the literature
on judgment under uncertainty. Cognition,
58(1), 1–73.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2005). Neurocogni-
tive adaptations for social exchange. In D. M.
Buss (Ed.), The handbook of evolutionary
psychology (pp. 584–627). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Daly, M., Salmon, C., & Wilson, M. (1997).
Kinship: The conceptual hole in psycho-
logical studies of social cognition and close
relationships. In J. A. Simpson & D. T. Ken-
rick (Eds.), Evolutionary social psychology (pp.
265–296). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Darwin, C. (1965). The expression of emotions in
man and other animals. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. (Original work published
1872)
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., &
Williams, K. D. (2003). Does rejection hurt?
An fMRI study of social exclusion. Science,
302, 290–292.
Faulkner, J., Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Dun-
can, L. A. (2004). Evolved disease-avoidance
mechanisms and contemporary xenophobic
attitudes. Group Processes and Intergroup
Relations, 7(4), 333–353.
Ghiselin, M. T. (1973). Darwin and evolution-
ary psychology: Darwin initiated a radically
new way of studying behavior. Science,
179(4077), 964–968.
Hagan, E. H. (2005). Controversial issues in
evolutionary psychology. In D. M. Buss
(Ed.), The handbook of evolutionary psychology
(pp. 145–173). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error
management theory: A new perspective
on biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 78,
81–91.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2003). Biases
in social judgment: Design ﬂaws or design
features? In J. Forgas, K. Williams, & B. von
Hippel (Eds.), Responding to the social world:
Implicit and explicit processes in social judg-
ments and decisions (pp. 23–43). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Haselton, M. G., & Nettle, D. (2006). The
paranoid optimist: An integrative evolution-
ary model of cognitive biases. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 10, 47–66.
James, W. (1890). Principles of psychology. New
York: Henry Holt.
16
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Kurzban, R., & Leary, M. R. (2001). Evo-
lutionary origins of stigmatization: The
functions of social exclusion. Psychological
Bulletin, 127(2), 187–208.
Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D. V.,
Robertson, T. E., Hofer, B., Neuberg, S. L.,
et al. (2005). Functional projection: How
fundamental social motives can bias inter-
personal perception. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 88(1), 63–78.
Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of
obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 67(4), 371–378.
Park, J. H., Faulkner, J., & Schaller, M. (2003).
Evolved disease-avoidance processes and con-
temporary anti-social behavior: Prejudicial
attitudes and avoidance of people with
physical disabilities. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 27(2), 65–87.
Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of recipro-
cal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 46,
35–57.
Trivers, R. L. (1972). Parental investment and
sexual selection. In B. Campbell (Ed.), Sexual
selection and the descent of man, 1871–1971
(pp. 136–179). Chicago: Aldine.
Webster, G. D. (2006, January). Evolutionary
theory’s increasing role in personality and social
psychology. Poster presented at the fourth
annual Evolutionary Psychology Preconfer-
ence at the Society for Personality and Social
Psychology, Palm Springs, CA.
17
EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND SOCIAL THINKING


PARTI
FOUNDATIONS


2
The Social Brain Hypothesis
and its Relevance to
Social Psychology
R. I. M. DUNBAR
The Social Brain Hypothesis
The Structure of Human Social Networks
Two Specializations of Social Cognition
H
umans, like most mammals, are intensely social. In many ways, pri-
mates’ success from an evolutionary perspective is a direct consequence
of that sociality. Primate societies are implicit social contracts that allow
some of the problems of survival and reproduction to be solved co-operatively.
Social contracts of this kind work because they allow relevant problems to be
solved more eﬃciently by individuals collaborating in their solution. However,
social contracts require individuals to be willing to forgo some of their more
immediate personal interests in order to beneﬁt from greater returns later
through group-level co-operation. If too many individuals act in their own selﬁsh
interests, the cohesion of the group will be threatened, simply because others will
end up paying the costs of sociality. When these costs become a burden and
begin to outweigh the beneﬁts of co-operation, group stability is undermined,
leading to the rapid collapse of the contract (and, of course, society). Gürerk,
Irlenbusch, and Rockenbach (2006) provide some evidence to support this
claim in the context of small group economic games: They showed that when
punishment is prevented, individuals rapidly (within the time frame of repeated-
encounters laboratory games) switch allegiance to another group where punish-
ment is permitted. In eﬀect, free-riding does lead to the rapid breakdown of
group cohesion.
The real issue here seems to be the cognitive demands of maintaining the
stability of relationships through time. That process of negotiation is far from
21

simple. At its most basic, it requires co-ordination and compromise, and often
subtle adjustments to ensure that group members do not drift apart during
foraging. But it also requires the ability to manage conﬂict in such a way as to
reduce its natural tendency to cause groups to dissipate, and to cope eﬀectively
with the ever-present threat generated by rivals. In the limit, and certainly in the
human case, it requires individuals to be able to understand another’s perspective
suﬃciently well to appreciate what kinds of adjustments are necessary to create
the levels of “bondingness” required to keep a group together. One element of
that is knowing when to trust another individual.
However, the very fact that these processes depend on relatively sophisti-
cated cognitive skills leaves them open to abuse. Free-riders, who take the bene-
ﬁts of sociality without paying all the costs, are an inevitable by-product of a
biological system that is built on cognitive ﬂexibility rather than genetic hard-
wiring or endocrinological determinism (as is the case with many social insects, for
example). Free-riders destabilize the social contract because they oblige others to
pick up the bill. If that bill becomes too large, it will wipe out the beneﬁts
that these individuals expect to accrue from sociality and their willingness to
co-operate in the contract will soon evaporate.
It is important, at this point, to note that comparative and developmental
psychologists have taken to referring to the cognitive processes involved by the
term “social cognition”. By this, they mean the suite of explicitly cognitive
processes (causal reasoning, analogical reasoning, memory etc.) that allow an
individual to understand another’s mind states. The most important of these (at
least in so far as the broad social cognitive developmental literature is concerned)
is the phenomenon known as theory of mind (ToM), the capacity to appreciate
that another individual has a mind like one’s own. The essence of the phenom-
enon lies in the more conventional cognitive mechanisms that make these kinds
of inferences possible, but social cognition should properly be seen as the emergent
property of the system when these more fundamental cognitive processes are
applied explicitly to social contexts. There is an implicit sense that individuals of
those species that have this capacity are especially sensitive to social contexts, and
that this context brings into play a specialized suite of cognitive mechanisms not
normally used in more mundane physical world contexts (e.g., conventional
causal reasoning). This usage has perhaps been unfortunate, because the term
“social cognition” already has a rather speciﬁc meaning within social psychology.
Nonetheless, I will stick with the conventional comparative psychology usage
here, and use the term to refer to the capacity to understand the workings of
another individual’s mind.
Although the case for social cognition is well established in principle, we do
not have a very clear idea about what is involved. We know much about only one
aspect of social cognition, and this is the phenomenon known as “theory of
mind”. And even then, our knowledge is limited mainly to its natural history and
we know almost nothing about the phenomenon itself as a cognitive process
(Roth & Lesley, 1998). Indeed, there is a long-running debate in the cognitive
22
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

developmental literature as to whether theory of mind itself is a bona ﬁde module
(in the conventional evolutionary psychology sense advocated by Tooby &
Cosmides, 1990) or just an emergent property of more fundamental executive
functions (for an overview, see Barrett, Henzi & Dunbar, 2003; Mitchell, 1997).
Be that as it may, the emergent properties of theory of mind seem to have some
reality. As the ability to understand another’s mental state, to understand that
another individual believes something to be the case, it forms a component of
what philosophers refer to as “intentionality”, the state of mind associated with
terms like believing, intending, supposing, desiring and so on. In this context, ToM
is identiﬁed with second order intentionality (“I believe that you intend [. . . to
do something]”). First order intentionality is equivalent to having knowledge of
one’s own mind state (“I believe [. . . that something is the case]”), and is
thought to be the condition for most—if not all—higher vertebrates, although it
could well be more widespread in the animal kingdom.
Second order intentionality (theory of mind itself) is a major transition
point in child development and occurs at around age 4 years as a very discrete
phase change in a child’s understanding of the social world (Astington, 1993).
The transition is important because it allows children to appreciate that another
individual may hold a belief about the world that is diﬀerent from that held by
the child (a so-called “false belief”). At this point, the child is able to factor
another individual’s belief state into its calculation of events. This has an import-
ant consequence for the child’s capacity to interact with the social world in
which it is embedded because it facilitates two activities that it could not previ-
ously do: It can engage in ﬁctional play (pretending that the doll can drink tea)
and it can lie (deliberately make statements about the condition of the world that
it knows to be untrue in order to mislead another individual and cause them to
behave in a way that will beneﬁt the child). It is important to appreciate that the
latter claim does not mean to say that children younger than 4 years of age
cannot lie; rather, it is that the way they lie is very diﬀerent. Once they have theory
of mind, they can use intuitive knowledge about how another individual sees the
world to feed it information that will mislead it.
The philosopher’s notion of intentionality is implicitly reﬂexive: In prin-
ciple, intentionality forms an embedded hierarchy of mind states that has no
end. “I intend that you suppose that I want you to understand that I believe that
you wish . . .”—the sequence is limited only by the human mind’s ingenuity in
constructing meaningful sentences reﬂecting the mind states of those involved.
However, it should be self-evident that the human mind cannot manage to keep
track of an unlimited number of these mind states, and in practice the limit
seems to occur at ﬁfth order (Figure 2.1) (Kinderman, Dunbar & Bentall, 1998;
Stiller & Dunbar, in press). Even so, this is quite impressive, given that 4-year-
olds can master only two orders and most animals (with the possible exception of
great apes) only one.
In an everyday sense, it is perhaps obvious that these kinds of social cogni-
tion play an important role in human social behaviour. Ybarra et al. (chapter 16,
23
SOCIAL BRAIN HYPOTHESIS

this volume), for example, provide us with evidence that humans strive to
maintain a level of behavioural unpredictability on competitive—but not
co-operative—tasks, suggesting that we may prefer to make things easier for our
neighbours when we need to integrate our behaviour with theirs. That we can
make that distinction in itself implies that we are using theory of mind to adjust
the cognitive load we place on those with whom we interact.
There is some evidence to suggest that this form of social cognition is
relatively expensive in wetware terms (i.e., in terms of neural processing
demands). With the very limited data we have available, there is some evidence
that achievable levels of intentionality across species of primates are correlated
with neocortex volume, and speciﬁcally with frontal lobe volume (Dunbar,
2003a). This in itself is interesting (the frontal lobe is the principal seat of those
crucial cognitive executive functions thought to underpin ToM), but the main
lesson for the moment is that the computational demands of intentionality (and,
more generally, social cognition) seem to be very heavy. This may in turn provide
us with a possible candidate for the selection pressures that have driven brain
evolution in primates in particular, and perhaps mammals in general. This has
given rise to what has become known as the “social brain hypothesis” and it is to
a more detailed consideration of this that I now turn.
FIGURE 2.1 Normal adults typically start to fail multi-level intentionality tasks at sixth order
(redrawn from Kinderman, Dunbar, & Bentall, 1998).
24
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

THE SOCIAL BRAIN HYPOTHESIS
For a long time, the reason why primates have so much larger brains for body size
than all other vertebrates (Jerison, 1973) remained somewhat unclear, although
the presumption inevitably was that this must have to do with the kinds of
ecological strategies that diﬀerent species pursued. However, during the late
1980s, Byrne and Whiten (1988) proposed that the answer lay in the unusual
complexity and sophistication of the primate social world. They couched this in
terms of the use of tactical deception and coalition formation, and referred to
their hypothesis as the “Machiavellian Intelligence Hypothesis”. However,
because reference to Machiavelli raised implications of political machination that
were unintended by the original authors, the hypothesis was later renamed the
“Social Intelligence Hypothesis” or the “Social Brain Hypothesis” (Barton &
Dunbar, 1997; Dunbar, 1998).
The principal evidence adduced in support of the social brain hypothesis is
that social group size correlates with relative neocortex volume in primates,
whereas a selection of indices of ecological constraints does not correlate well
with neocortex volume (Dunbar, 1992; Dunbar & Schultz, in press). The ﬁnd-
ing that social group size correlates with relative neocortex size in primates, and
that humans seem to ﬁt into the same quantitative pattern (Dunbar, 1993) has
since been generalized in two diﬀerent directions. One has been to show that a
whole suite of behavioural (as opposed to strictly demographic) indices also
correlate with neocortex size. These have included the size of grooming cliques
(essentially, coalitions) (Kudo & Dunbar, 2001), male mating strategies
(Pawłowski, Lowen, & Dunbar, 1997), the amount of social (as opposed to
object or solitary) play (Lewis, 2001), and the amount of tactical deception
(Byrne & Corp, 2004).
This shift of emphasis to actual behavioural strategies was given further
support by Joﬀe’s (1997) demonstration that, in primates, neocortex size correl-
ates best with the length of the juvenile period, whereas the brain as a whole
correlates best with the period of parental investment (gestation plus lactation).
The signiﬁcance of this is that the juvenile period is the period of socialization,
the period during which the animals’ social skills are developed and honed
(often, of course, by imitation and social learning). Thus, Joﬀe’s ﬁnding oﬀers
evidence of an important role for what amounts to software development: The
size of the neocortex (i.e., its neural computational capacity) is important, but
part of that importance lies in its capacity to absorb and use information and
experience—and that itself is probably a function of the quantity of neural
machinery that can be brought to bear on the problem.
The ﬁnding that neocortex volume correlates with some behavioural phe-
nomena that inevitably involve social skills suggests that there might be a correl-
ation between a species’ capacities in terms of social cognition and its neocortex
volume. Since social cognition seems to have its primary representation in terms
of intentionality, this seems an obvious place to look. Though we have yet to
25
SOCIAL BRAIN HYPOTHESIS

explore this aspect of social cognition in detail, there is some prima facie evidence
to suggest that the levels of intentionality to which individual species can aspire
may be a function of brain volume. The most direct evidence for this is the fact
that the limiting achievable levels of intentionality for Old World monkeys, apes
and adult humans (taken to be ﬁrst, second and ﬁfth order intentionality,
respectively) are a linear function of frontal lobe volume. This ﬁnding is
important in so far as it may provide an explanation why certain kinds of social
phenomena are found only in humans. I will have more to say about this in the
next two sections.
THE STRUCTURE OF HUMAN SOCIAL NETWORKS
In the previous section, I pointed out that, among primates, there is a correlation
between social group size and relative neocortex volume. This relationship yields
a predicted group size for humans, based on the human neocortex volume, of
about 150 individuals (give or take some error variance). Evidence culled from
both the ethnographic and the sociological literatures indicates that groups of
this size are particularly common in a wide range of human societies (Dunbar,
1993). Not only are the clans of hunter-gatherers the world over of about this
size, but the same value characterizes a range of contemporary social groupings,
including military units (it is the standard size of the company in modern armies
the world over), business organization (it demarcates the point at which hier-
archical management structures become necessary), church congregations (a
detailed survey suggested that 200 individuals was the absolute upper limit for a
coherent, well-integrated congregation), and the typical size of personal social
networks (i.e., all those people whom one knows personally) (Barrett, Dunbar &
Lycett, 2002; Dunbar, 1993).
However, human communities, like those of all primates, are not homo-
genous social groupings. They are highly structured: Not everyone interacts with
everyone else. One way to think of them is as a series of circles of acquaintance-
ship that surround an individual, rather as the ripples on a pond spread outwards
from the point of a stone’s impact. In a recent study (Zhou, Sornette, Hill, &
Dunbar, 2005), we were able to show that the sizes of these various grouping
levels have a consistent and natural scaling ratio that is almost exactly three. The
number of individuals included within each of the successive layers is typically 5,
15, 50, 150, 500 and 1500. These seem to correspond to the following well-
established human groupings: the support clique of best friends (5), the sym-
pathy group (12–15), the number of individuals contacted at least once a month
(and the overnight camp in hunter-gatherers) (30–50), the social network (150),
mega-bands in hunter-gatherer societies (500) and tribal groupings in traditional
societies (1500). (Note that each layer includes all those individuals included
within the inner layers: In other words, the 15 includes the 5 that form the inner-
most layer, and the 15 themselves are subsumed within the 50 of the next layer.)
26
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

What seems to be important about these grouping levels is that they seem to
reﬂect degrees of familiarity or intimacy. In an analysis of Christmas card distri-
bution lists, Hill and Dunbar (2003) showed that these groupings correspond to
both levels of intimacy and frequencies of contact. All those individuals who fall
into a given ring share similar degrees of intimacy to the person at the centre, and
are contacted with roughly equivalent frequency (allowing for geographical dis-
tance). What this seems to suggest is that we have only a ﬁxed number of slots at
each level of intimacy. Once these are ﬁlled up, we cannot easily add new indi-
viduals to our social world. It is not entirely clear whether this reﬂects a purely
cognitive constraint (we can only manage so many relationships at a given level of
intimacy) or a constraint of time (we can only interact with so many individuals
per day, and the frequency of contact limits the quality of the relationship).
Either way, it seems that this relationship has important consequences for
the pattern of social relationships in two particular respects. First, if someone
moves away, the fact that we can contact them less frequently inevitably means
that our relationship with them gradually decays: In time, they will naturally
slide down through the levels of acquaintanceship until, eventually, they drop oﬀ
the edge of the 150 primary personal relationships altogether. Obviously, in the
modern world, we have a variety of mechanisms for maintaining contact (post,
telephone, e-mail), but these merely slow down the rate of decay. We have to
make the eﬀort to maintain the relationship, and if we fail to do so the relation-
ship will inexorably decay. Second, if we want to add someone new to our inner
circles, then the likelihood is that an existing member will have to drop out to
make room for them. This is not, of course, to say that the numerical boundaries
are absolutely rigid (they clearly are not), but there are limits to which we can put
pressure on them. If the issue really is one of time budgeting, then, inevitably,
time spent with one individual must result in less time being spent with others,
and hence a natural decay in the quality of the relationship that we have with
these particular individuals.
There are a number of important individual diﬀerences in respect of the size
of our social networks. First, there is a slight but statistically very robust sex
diﬀerence in the size of networks at any given level: On average, those of women
are larger than those of men (albeit, of course, with considerable overlap) (Dun-
bar & Spoor, 1995). This accords well with the ﬁnding that there is a correlation
between an individual’s achievable level of intentionality and the size of at least
the innermost layers of his/her social network size (Stiller & Dunbar, in press).
Since, on average, women perform better than men on false belief and other
social cognition tasks, it is to be expected that they would naturally have cor-
respondingly larger social circles. In addition, we have been able to show, in other
studies, that at least some psychiatric conditions (including both bipolar disorder
and schizophrenia) disrupt social cognition capacities, resulting in the loss of the
higher orders of intentionality (Kerr, Dunbar, & Bentall, 2003; Swarbrick,
2000). It may not be surprising, therefore, that individuals who suﬀer from these
conditions have rather limited social lives.
27
SOCIAL BRAIN HYPOTHESIS

TWO SPECIALIZATIONS OF SOCIAL COGNITION
I want, in this ﬁnal section, to suggest that social cognition may have important
consequences for two areas of human endeavour and experience that often seem
to be overlooked in this context. They are story-telling and religion, and might in
many ways be considered the centrepiece of what it is to be human.
Story-telling and religion have two key features in common: They require
us to be able to imagine virtual worlds that have no immediate experiential
content and they require us to assume that those whom we ask to share these
imaginings with us can genuinely follow us on this journey. I can perhaps show
this most easily in the context of drama. Consider Shakespeare sitting down to
compose his play Othello. His problem is this: To make a play interesting, you
need to have at least three characters, and you have to ensure that your audience
understands what is going on inside all these characters’ minds—anything less,
and the story becomes a dull narrative. So, the audience must understand that
Iago intends that Othello believes that his wife Desdemona was in love with Cas-
sio—which would probably not be much more than idle fantasy by Desdemona
were Iago not also able to convince Othello that Cassio himself also wanted the
same outcome. So stated, it will be obvious that, if the audience also has to factor
Cassio’s complicity into the equation to make the deception convincing for
Othello, it has to be able to work at ﬁfth order intentionality. But to do this,
Shakespeare himself must operate at one level higher: He must intend that the
audience understands . . . etc. Shakespeare was having to work comfortably at
sixth order intentionality, and this is now one level beyond the normal limits for
most adult humans.
We can look at the play another way that tells much the same story. In
practice, of course, the story is played out in a series of scenes in which a variety
of characters come and go, and express their feelings and concerns. If we look at
how Shakespeare handles the structure of his plays in more detail, then we ﬁnd
that a typical scene involves four speaking characters (Stiller, Nettle, & Dunbar,
2004). As it happens, this mirrors very closely indeed the limits on natural
human conversations (Dunbar, Duncan, & Nettle, 1995). So when Shakespeare
was constructing the play and putting the story and characters together scene by
scene, he was actually working with four characters’ mind states, and he was thus
expecting his audience to work at ﬁfth order if they were going to be able to
follow the convolutions of the plot as it developed. At this point, Shakespeare
himself, of course, had to work at sixth order.
One interpretation of this analysis is that the diﬀerence between a good
story-teller (be they dramatist or novelist) is that they can take their audience to
their natural cognitive limits and still make it work. In doing so, of course, it is
important that they do not push the audience beyond their natural limit, other-
wise the story will become incoherent for them. Indeed, those of Shakespeare’s
plays that are conventionally regarded as diﬃcult for audiences (Titus Andronicus
is a notable example) are precisely those in which he tries to include too many
28
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

characters. So good story-tellers tread a ﬁne line here: they must judge the
audience’s capacities so that they do not under-challenge them (or the story will
seem uninteresting), but at the same time they must not over-challenge them (else
they will lose all but the small number of cognitively very skilled individuals).
What probably makes story-telling cognitively demanding is that we (audi-
ence and composer alike) have to imagine a ﬁctional world. Even though, in a
conventional drama, the characters are on stage in front of us, nonetheless we
have to make a leap of imagination to suppose that these characters (the actors)
are someone other than whom they actually are. To be able even to begin to
imagine that possibility, we need minimally second order intentionality (theory
of mind). As I have already noted, Barrett et al. (2003) have argued that this
ability to work in a virtual (or ﬁctional) world may be especially demanding
cognitively and may explain why great apes (and hence humans) have such large
neocortices compared to other primates.
I have suggested elsewhere (Dunbar, 2003b, 2004) that the same demands
are true of religion. Religion in any meaningful sense requires us to imagine that
there is another universe that we cannot directly see and touch: this spirit world
exists along side the physical world we experience directly, and has its own reality
as well as being able to interact with our world. We can conceive that such a
world exists, but to do so minimally requires second order intentionality (theory
of mind). I must believe that the world as I experience it is not all there is.
Though not necessarily a statement about other minds, we can, I think, argue a
case here that believing in two simultaneous but separate worlds requires us to
run two belief states in parallel. In eﬀect, I have to believe that something is both
true (the world is as I see it) and not true (the world as I see it is not the only
possible world) at the same time. So far so good, but to make this interesting as a
social phenomenon, I have to believe that you also believe this to be the case. But
even with what is now third order intentionality, we still do not have anything
approximating religion: merely the possibility of two individuals believing in the
existence of another parallel universe. To make it into something even approxi-
mating a real religion, we both have to believe that there are beings (spirits?) in
this parallel universe who themselves have intentions [about how we should
behave]. To do this, we require fourth order intentionality. Even so, this can only
provide us with a rather impoverished form of religion—you can accept that I
believe in this parallel spirit world, but you do not have to believe in it yourself. I
refer to this as social religion, and distinguish it from religion in the communal
sense that seems to me to be fundamental to the nature of religion—i.e., such
that it can be used to enforce conformation to the communal will. To achieve
this, we have to add one further layer of intentionality: You and I have to
understand that we both believe that these denizens of the spirit world either
intend that we should behave with appropriate intentions [otherwise they will
exact retribution] or might be willing to intervene in the world on our behalf. In
eﬀect, I intend that you believe that we understand that the spirits intend that we
act with righteous intent. At this point, we are at ﬁfth order. Now we have what I
29
SOCIAL BRAIN HYPOTHESIS

would identify as communal religion: There is something that we both have to
agree on, and that something involves minds that can enforce their will on us, be
willing to help us out by intervening in the future of the world etc.
I raise these two examples here speciﬁcally because, in many ways, they
represent the essence of what it is to be human: culture, and the way in which we
humans build the complex world of the imagination in which we live and
breathe. The fact that they both seem to depend on ﬁfth order intentionality
(and hence on our unusually large neocortices) may explain why they are unique
to modern humans and have no counterpart of any kind in any other living
lineage of animals. It is my contention that nothing that we do (or any of our
ancestors have ever done) comes close to being as cognitively demanding as
story-telling and religion. Indeed, I have explicitly argued (Dunbar, 2003b,
2004) that our ﬁfth order capacities really evolved explicitly to make religion
possible. This is not for reasons intrinsic to religion itself (which should properly
be seen as just another form of story-telling), but rather because religion has
provided us with a mechanism for bonding (and bonding in a particularly deep
sense) social groups that, by primate standards, are relatively large, and hence
especially prone to the free-rider problem.
REFERENCES
Astington, J. W. (1993). The child’s discovery
of the mind. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Barrett, L., Henzi, S. P., & Dunbar, R. I. M.
(2003). Primate cognition: From “what
now?” to “what if?” Trends in Cognitive
Science, 7, 494–497.
Barrett, L., Dunbar, R. I., & Lycett, J. E.
(2002). Human evolutionary psychology.
Basingstoke, UK/Princeton, NJ: Palgrave
Macmillan/Princeton University Press.
Barton, R. A., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (1997). Evo-
lution of the social brain. In A. Whiten & R.
W. Byrne (Eds.), Machiavellian intelligence II
(pp. 240–263). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Byrne, R. W., & Corp, N. (2004). Neocortex
size predicts deception rate in primates. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London, 271,
1693–1699.
Byrne, R. W., & Whiten, A. (1988). Machi-
avellian intelligence. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Dunbar, R., & Spoor, M. (1995). Social net-
works, support cliques and kinship. Human
Nature, 6, 273–290.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a
constraint on group size in primates. Journal
of Human Evolution, 22, 469–493.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neo-
cortex size, group size and language in
humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16,
681–735.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1998). The social brain
hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology, 6,
178–190.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (2003a). Why are apes so
smart? In P. Kappeler & M. Pereira (Eds.),
Primate life histories and socioecology (pp.
285–298). Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (2003b). The social brain:
Mind, language and society in evolutionary
perspective. Annual Review of Anthropology,
32, 163–181.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (2004). The human story.
London: Faber & Faber.
Dunbar, R. I. M., Duncan, N., & Nettle, D.
(1995). Size and structure of freely forming
conversational groups. Human Nature, 6,
67–78.
Dunbar, R. I. M., & Shultz, S. (in press).
Understanding primate brain evolution.
30
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
London.
Gürerk, Ö., Irlenbusch, B., & Rockenbach, B.
(2006). The competitive advantage of sanc-
tioning institutions. Science, 312, 108–111.
Hill, R. A., & Dunbar, R. (2003). Social
network size in humans. Human Nature, 14,
53–72.
Jerison, H. J. (1973). Evolution of the brain and
intelligence. New York: Academic Press.
Joﬀe, T. H. (1997). Social pressures have
selected for an extended juvenile period in
primates. Journal of Human Evolution, 32:
593–605.
Kerr, N., Dunbar, R., & Bentall, R. (2003).
Theory of mind deﬁcits in bipolar aﬀective
disorder. Journal of Aﬀective Disorders, 73,
253–259.
Kinderman, P., Dunbar, R. I. M., & Bentall, R.
P. (1998). Theory-of-mind deﬁcits and causal
attributions. British Journal of Psychology, 89,
191–204.
Kudo, H., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2001). Neocor-
tex size and social network size in primates.
Animal Behavior, 62, 711–722.
Lewis, K. (2001). A comparative study of pri-
mate play behaviour: Implications for the
study of cognition. Folia Primatologica, 71,
417–421.
Mitchell, P. (1997). Introduction to theory of
mind. London: Arnold.
Pawłowski, B. P., Lowen, C. B., & Dunbar, R. I.
M. (1998). Neocortex size, social skills and
mating success in primates. Behaviour, 135,
357–368.
Roth, D., & Leslie, A. M. (1998). Solving belief
problems: Toward a task analysis. Cognition,
66, 1–31.
Stiller, J., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (in press). Per-
spective-taking and social network size in
humans. Social Networks.
Stiller, J., Nettle, D., & Dunbar, R. I. M.
(2004). The small world of Shakespeare’s
plays. Human Nature, 14, 397–408.
Swarbrick, R. (2000). A social cognitive model of
paranoid delusions. PhD thesis, University of
Manchester, UK.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. H.
Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The
adapted mind (pp. 19–136). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Zhou, W.-X., Sornette, D., Hill, R. A., &
Dunbar, R. (2005). Discrete hierarchical
organization of social group sizes. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 272,
439–444.
31
SOCIAL BRAIN HYPOTHESIS


3
The Evolution of Social
Inference Processes
The Importance of Signaling Theory
STEVEN W. GANGESTAD
RANDY THORNHILL
Signaling Systems
Processing Incidental Eﬀects
Deception
Conclusion
C
harles Darwin delayed publication of Origin of Species (1859) because its
profound implications for human origins might lead to its premature
rejection. Indeed, his book said nothing explicit about humans until
the ﬁnal pages and, even then, merely tantalized readers: “In the distant future,
. . . [p]sychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary
acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation. Light will be
thrown on the origin of man and his history.” A dozen years passed before
Darwin said more. In 1871 and 1872, he published The Descent of Man and
Selection in Relation to Sex and The Expression of the Emotions in Man and
Animals, which contain the ﬁrst words addressing the topic of this Sydney
symposium, Darwinian perspectives on human social cognition. Sexual selec-
tion, the major focus of the ﬁrst volume, fundamentally implicated perception
of mating prospects’ traits. The functions of emotional expression and its impact
on a social community, the topic of the second, involve social inference at their
core.
Evolutionary psychologists have investigated many phenomena over the
past two decades, including cheater detection, mate preferences, reciprocal altru-
ism, kin recognition, cooperation, friendship and trust, and many more. Most
implicate social inference and not surprisingly so: Strategic interaction typically
33

entails inferences about others. That is, the critical information processed is
information about other individuals.
In this chapter, we use evolutionary biology to ﬂesh out a framework for
talking about processes underlying social inference, deﬁned very broadly here to
be any inference an individual makes about a feature or state of another
individual. The few speciﬁc illustrations we discuss are typically familiar to
evolutionary psychologists (e.g., inferences involving sexual attractiveness, inten-
tions to cheat, kinship, and female fertility. But the framework applies to social
inference more generally (see also, e.g., Searcy & Nowicki, 2005). Brieﬂy, we
expand upon the following themes:
1.
Social inference largely relies on two broad kinds of target–perceiver system.
The ﬁrst kind is a signaling system. Here, targets possess specialized adapta-
tions to emit signals to perceivers. Perceivers possess adaptations to receive
and respond to these signals. Target and perceiver adaptations have
coevolved. The second kind of system is one in which receivers have adapta-
tions to make inferences based on speciﬁc information emitted by targets,
but targets possess no adaptations designed to convey information to
perceivers. Instead, social inference is based on incidental eﬀects of target
adaptations that have noncommunicative functions.
2.
A signaling system cannot evolve and stably persist if communication does
not beneﬁt both targets and perceivers. As perceivers do not beneﬁt by
responding to deceptive information, signaling systems will, in general, be
reliable or “honest.”
3.
In systems in which perceivers respond to incidental eﬀects emitted by
targets, perceiver adaptations may be benign or detrimental to targets.
4.
The criterion that diﬀerentiates the two sorts of systems is simply whether
targets have adaptations for signaling.
5.
The conclusion that systems will not be deceptive must be qualiﬁed in a
number of ways.
SIGNALING SYSTEMS
The hallmark of a signaling system is coadaptation of targets and perceivers:
Targets possess adaptations that function to convey information to perceivers.
And perceivers have adaptations that function to process the information
conveyed by targets.
In evolutionary biology, a function is a beneﬁcial eﬀect of a trait that led it
to be selected (Williams, 1966): The function of eyes is seeing and the function
of wings is ﬂight. To say that target adaptations function to convey information
to perceivers is to say that the beneﬁcial eﬀects that led these traits to evolve
occurred through their impact on perceivers’ adaptations to diﬀerentially
respond as a function of perceiving the traits.
34
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Signaling systems have received much attention from evolutionary biolo-
gists in the past two decades. We discuss two major kinds of signals: signals of
quality and signals of intent. We do not address signals of need, though their
evolution obeys principles similar to those for the other two (e.g., Searcy &
Nowicki, 2005).
Signals of Condition
Quality or condition refers to an individual’s ability to successfully interact with
the environment to acquire and eﬀectively expend energetic resources (e.g.,
Rowe & Houle, 1996). It is not merely “health” (e.g., Grammer, Fink, Møller, &
Thornhill, 2003); in some circumstances, individuals of superior condition may
be more prone to disease than others (see below; see also Thornhill & Gangestad,
1999a).
For a signal of condition to evolve, individuals in better condition must
beneﬁt from the signal, and receivers must beneﬁt from discriminating indi-
viduals’ condition. The beneﬁts to signals of condition (or a speciﬁc component
of condition) most discussed in the literature are mating beneﬁts. Individuals in
superior condition may make better mates for a variety of reasons: ﬁtter genes to
pass on to oﬀspring; greater ability to provide material beneﬁts such as protection
or food; greater fertility (e.g., more viable sperm, greater ability to provision
oﬀspring through gestation); absence of disease. It pays receivers to discriminate
mate value and those in better condition may receive mating beneﬁts from
signaling.
Signals of condition may evolve due to other beneﬁts. For instance, per-
ceivers may size up competitors so that they avoid contests in which they would
surely lose. Or signals may play a role in predator–prey interactions. Predators
may identify weak prey (thereby reducing predation costs) and so strong prey
may signal that they are not easy to catch. These examples illustrate an important
point: Although both targets and perceivers must beneﬁt from a signaling system
for it to evolve, the interaction context in which the signal functions need not be
cooperative in nature; it can be highly antagonistic.
A signaling system is at equilibrium when neither the signaler nor the
receiver beneﬁts from a change (i.e., in signal sent or preference exercised) if the
other retains its strategy. For a signal to be an “honest” indicator of one’s quality
at equilibrium, a reliable relation between the signaler’s quality and the signal
strength must persist. Zahavi (1975) introduced the idea that the costliness of a
trait ensures its honesty. He proposed the intuitive notion that individuals who
can aﬀord a costly handicap are more viable than those who can’t. Costly signal-
ers can aﬀord to “waste” some of their viability and still have residual viability
greater than that of less costly signalers, which renders the handicapping trait an
“honest” signal of viability. Costs may be due to the signal’s size, complexity, or
other feature requiring eﬀort to produce. Costs can also be mediated socially (see
Male Facial Masculinity).
35
SOCIAL INFERENCE

In the past 15 years, honest signaling through handicapping has been quan-
titatively modeled. Zahavi’s (1975) insight that honest signals of condition are
costly has withstood the test of time, but some of his intuitions about why this is
so have not. For a signal to validly indicate condition at equilibrium, the size of
signal that maximizes individuals’ own ﬁtness must vary as a function of condi-
tion. Those of lower quality do not cheat and produce a bigger signal because
they are actually worse oﬀ by doing so. Though individuals of lower quality gain
beneﬁts from the increased size of the signal (for instance, mating beneﬁts), the
costs they pay to produce that larger signal (generally, costs in the currency of
survival ability) more than oﬀset those gains. For condition to predict optimal
signal size, higher quality individuals either get greater beneﬁts out of the signal
or pay lower costs for marginal gains in signal size. They might get greater
beneﬁts if they live longer to enjoy them. They may pay lower costs because they
need not dig as deep into their overall “budget” to increase the size of the signal;
what they give up to increase signal size aﬀects their well-being less than what the
individual in worse condition must sacriﬁce to increase signal size.
According to Zahavi’s original verbal argument (1975), individuals in better
condition can give up more and still be more viable than individuals in worse
condition. Big signalers, then, should be healthier and more viable than those in
worse condition. While intuitively appealing, thus conclusion does not follow
from current signaling models. At equilibrium, individuals of highest quality
may have the same, higher, or even lower viability (or health) compared to small
signalers, depending on speciﬁc parameters of the system (e.g., Getty, 2002).
Quality and mortality can actually positively covary in a population, with the
highest quality individuals dying, on average, at younger ages than lower quality
individuals (Kokko, Brooks, McNamara, & Houston, 2002). This outcome can
occur when just a few winners in the signaling game win big. Individuals on the
cusp of winning big may dig deep (in costs) to make a big push to be winners,
whereas individuals not close to being a big winner may hold back, paying small
costs for small signals. This situation might exist in lekking species in which
males collectively gather and display to females and a few male winners garner
most matings.
Signals that reveal diﬀerences in quality may also evolve (Grafen, 1990).
These amplify pre-existing indicators of quality between individuals (or transmit
those diﬀerences in an easily perceived signal), so that perceivers can detect them
more readily. When establishing territories, male bullfrogs attend to the depth of
pitch of other bullfrogs’ croaks, which reﬂects bullfrog size and thereby quality
(e.g., Emlen, 1976). Bullfrogs croak to reveal quality. Croaking is energetically
costly. It need not have evolved because costs and hence levels of croaking vary
with quality; rather, it may have evolved merely because croaking captures and
transmits diﬀerences in quality.
36
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

How Signals “Get Off the Ground”
That reliable signaling systems are stable when signals predict individuals’ quality
is easy to understand: It pays mate choosers to choose on the basis of the signal,
which reinforces the signaling sex to possess a big signal, thereby stabilizing the
signal as an indicator of quality. How the signal becomes predictive of quality is
harder to explain. For a trait to evolve as a signal of quality, it must somehow
predict quality before it actually qualiﬁes as a signal. In the context of mating,
theorists propose two main scenarios by which traits become associated with
quality.
The ﬁrst route is preferred-signal-through-sensory-bias. Here, a trait is ini-
tially preferred not because mate choosers beneﬁt from the preference. Instead,
the preference is a by-product of a sensory adaptation that has a function
unrelated to mate choice. For instance, suppose mate choosers are drawn to
“redness” because ripe fruits are red (i.e., “attend-to-red” reﬂects food preference
adaptation). Potential mates who exhibit redness, though not edible, attract
attention and thereby beneﬁt on the mating market. Initially, red mates are no
better than nonred mates. As redness (or size of a red trait) becomes exaggerated
(and costly) as a result of selection for it, however, individuals in best condition
become best able to display it. Over time, then, the trait becomes an indicator
of quality (see Kokko, Brooks, Jennions, & Morley, 2003). This process
presumably explains, for instance, how the peacock’s tail evolved to be a signal of
quality.
The sensory bias model is sometimes proposed as an alternative to an honest
quality signaling model (e.g., Kirkpatrick & Ryan, 1991). In the sensory bias
model, mate-choosers prefer, say, a big red tail merely because it gains attention,
not because it is associated with condition. In the scenario above, initially this
sensory bias model does apply. The problem with the sensory bias model as a
complete explanation of signaling systems (and hence a viable, real-world alter-
native to the honest quality signaling model), however, is that it is not evolution-
arily stable. As the preferred trait becomes exaggerated, individuals in better
condition produce it at lower cost and the signal becomes an indicator of quality.
The second route is that the preferred trait varies with quality prior to it
evolving as a signal. Individuals in better condition generally have more energy
to allocate to traits important to survival and reproduction. In many species, as
individuals have greater amounts of energy available or are healthier, they allocate
a larger proportion to traits that foster immediate reproduction and a lower
proportion to survival traits. Individuals have but one life to live. When energy
budgets are low or individuals are sick, it often makes adaptive sense for indi-
viduals to protect that one life by engaging in mortality reduction eﬀorts (e.g.,
sequestering energy reserves to maintain survival, allocating eﬀort to immune
function). When individuals’ condition is more favorable to survival, they may
reproductively beneﬁt from allocating a greater amount of energy into
reproductive traits. Hence, for example, women’s estrogen and fertility levels
37
SOCIAL INFERENCE

increase with their energy stores and energy balance (e.g., Ellison, 2001). Certain
traits—often reproductive ones—tend to particularly diﬀerentiate individuals
varying in condition.
Because these traits covary with condition, selection can lead to adaptations
in mate choosers to prefer mates who exhibit these traits. When such adaptations
evolve, the discriminating traits are sexually selected for their signal value as well
for functions they had previously. Their added beneﬁt as signals lead individuals
to allocate more eﬀort into developing them, resulting in exaggeration. This
process presumably explains mate choice within many lekking species. Females
choose males who can hold central territories. Ability to hold central territories
probably covaried with male condition before it was a signal females prefer.
Subsequently, females did prefer it, males allocated even more eﬀort to it, and
ritualized displays of the ability evolved. This process may explain how females in
many species come to assess the outcomes of male–male competition.
Probable Examples of Condition Signals
The Waist-to-Hip Ratio.
Women store two kinds of fat, android fat and
gynoid fat. Gynoid fat, which is particularly rich in long-chain polyunsaturated
fatty acids thought to be important for fetal and newborn brain growth, is stored
in specialized depots in the breasts, hips, and buttocks and is reserved for preg-
nancy and lactation. Estrogen facilitates storage of gynoid fat. More generally,
estrogen facilitates a shift of energetic resources in women toward reproduction
(e.g., it increases fertility). Women in better condition can presumably aﬀord to
allocate more energy for reproduction. Hence, storage of gynoid fat probably
predicts condition or components of it (fertility and reproductive value; Jasien-
ska, Ziomkiewicz, Ellison, Lipson, & Thune, 2004). Display of gynoid fat
depots may have become exaggerated to signal condition and reproductive value
to men. Men’s preference for a relatively small waist-to-hip ratio (around. 7; e.g.,
Singh, 1993; Streeter & McBurney, 2003; Thornhill & Grammer, 1999) may be
part of a gynoid fat signaling system.
Male Facial Masculinity.
Though women do not ﬁnd masculine male faces
more attractive in general, they prefer more masculine faces when fertile in their
menstrual cycles than when not (see Penton-Voak & Perrett, 2001). Men with
more masculine faces may also be preferred by women as short-term mates (e.g.,
Little, Jones, Penton-Voak, Burt, & Perrett, 2002; Rhodes, Simmons, & Peters,
2005). Possibly, women do not prefer them as long-term mates because mascu-
line men may be less faithful and responsible (e.g., Penton-Voak & Perrett,
2001). Development of male facial masculinity is facilitated by testosterone (e.g.,
Swaddle & Reierson, 2002), which is thought to increase allocation of eﬀort into
mating and mate seeking through male–male competition (see Ellison, 2001).
Ancestrally, men in better condition may have been able to aﬀord to put larger
amounts of eﬀort into mating. Possibly, then, male facial masculinity was shaped
38
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

by selection to signal condition and women evolved to respond to facial mascu-
linity as a signal of condition.
One question is what costs keep male facial masculinity honest. The
amount of energetic eﬀort required to increase facial masculinity is probably
minimal and unlikely to maintain the honesty of the signal. More likely, the costs
are socially mediated. In some species of birds, males with large color patches or
badges signal to other males their intrasexual competitive abilities, which puts
them in the fray of competition with other such males. Males who do not truly
possess advertised competitive abilities suﬀer large costs in the process of being
tested, which keep the signals honest. Male facial masculinity (and voice quality;
e.g., Puts, Gaulin, & Verdolini, 2006) may function similarly and hence have
also evolved as a signal that regulates male–male competition.
Signals of Intent
Signals of intent have received less attention than signals of condition, but may
be very important in some species. In the courtship process, for instance, indi-
viduals of one sex may beneﬁt from knowing whether individuals of the other sex
will help care for oﬀspring after mating. The factors that create a stable system of
signals of intent should be analogous to those that stabilize systems involving
signals of condition (Andrews, 2001). Signals are honest when it doesn’t pay
individuals to “cheat”—to dishonestly emit a signal. For signals of intent to be
honest, it should not pay individuals lacking the intent to emit a signal of intent.
Romantic love may have evolved as an honest signal of intent. A way to
signal interest in and commitment to a particular person is to intently focus on
them and conspicuously ignore other potential mates. The signal is honest if
someone who has no commitment to another but rather intends to desert can’t
actually beneﬁt from ignoring other potential mates. Frank (1988) and Gonzaga,
Haselton, Smurda, Davies, and Poore (2006) have discussed the function of love
in similar terms, though with less explicit emphasis on the rationale behind
honest signaling.
If this signaling view is correct, some consequences follow. First, because the
signal is costly, the equilibrium state should be that signalers emit a signal of size
just suﬃcient for it to be honest. Because the function is to induce an inference
of intent, it does not pay to produce a signal more costly than one suﬃcient to
induce the inference. Second, the size of the signal suﬃcient to induce intent
should depend on the extent to which the signaler is perceived to have options.
Signalers perceived to have few options may have a diﬃcult time convincing
perceivers that they are giving up options by intently focusing on one individual.
Hence, the size of the signal should vary by signalers’ condition or other valued
mate characteristics (i.e., it should be greater in individuals lower in mate value).
Third, a cost of oversignaling (in addition to needless expenditure of eﬀort),
then, is that perceivers may infer a signaler to be of lower quality than they would
otherwise judge because, again, all else equal, a bigger signal is associated with
39
SOCIAL INFERENCE

lower quality. Fourth, if one sex could beneﬁt from deserting more than the other
sex could beneﬁt from deserting, the size of signal required to be honest should
be larger for the former sex than the latter sex. If men can beneﬁt from deserting
more than can women, they should, on average, signal more strongly than do
women.
The idea that romantic love evolved as a signal has been minimally explored
to date (see Galperin, Gonzaga, Laird, & Haselton, 2006).
Noncostly Signaling Systems
We’ve discussed costly honest signals of condition and intent. Costliness ensures
their honesty. Can honest signals ever be noncostly? They can be when there are
no potential conﬂicts of interest between signalers and perceivers (Searcy &
Nowicki, 2005). In cases of honest signaling of condition or intent, those in poor
condition or without intent have potential interest in falsely signaling, which
conﬂicts with the interests of perceivers. In other circumstances, no such con-
ﬂicts exist. For instance, major histocompatibility (MHC) alleles code for cell-
surface markers that the immune system uses to detect foreign pathogens. In
some species, possibly including humans, individuals obtain genes for oﬀspring
compatible with their own by choosing mates with MHC alleles dissimilar to
their own (e.g., Penn & Potts, 1999; Wedekind, Seebeck, Bettens, & Paepke,
1995). People (Pause et al., 2005) and mice (Yamazaki, Beauchamp, Curran,
Baird, & Boyse, 2000) can detect chemical signatures of MHC alleles through
scent. In these systems, individuals may have no interest in deceiving others
about their own MHC genotype, as all individuals presumably beneﬁt through
mating with an MHC compatible mate. Perhaps detection of MHC genotypes,
then, is an example of an honest, noncostly signaling system. Alternatively,
MHC detection may not involve a signaling system. Instead, human perceivers
may detect MHC signatures that are mere by-products of MHC (speciﬁcally,
self-peptides presented by MHC molecules that are shed from skin cells;
Leinders-Zufall et al., 2004; see Processing of Incidental Eﬀects).
Constraints on Signaling Systems
Principles that apply to signaling systems constrain which ones we should enter-
tain as possibly true. For signaling systems to evolve, both signalers and per-
ceivers should beneﬁt. Hence, signaling systems should generally be honest. At
equilibrium, signalers should not typically mislead perceivers. In addition, if
signals are costly, signalers should enjoy beneﬁts that pay for costs.
There are some hypotheses that these constraints rule out, including those
concerning the evolution of women’s permanent breasts and gynoid fat deposits.
A number of researchers have proposed that these signals are deceptive: (1) Low,
Alexander, and Noonan (1987) argued that breast, buttock, and thigh fat decep-
tively signal female quality (see critiques by Anderson, 1988; Caro & Sellen,
40
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

1990); (2) Miller (1996) proposed that women’s breasts deceptively signal preg-
nancy, leading men to provision nonpregnant large-breasted females (see also
Smith, 1984); (3) a common view is that women’s bodily ornaments deceptively
signal peak cycle-related fertility throughout the cycle (indeed, permanently; see
Thornhill & Gangestad, 2006), which stems from the more general view that
sexual swellings in nonhuman primates signal peak cycle-related fertility (see
below).
As these theories argue that men are duped by female signals, all propose
signaling systems that are not evolutionarily stable and hence unlikely to exist in
nature.
Many species of primates develop sexual swellings (enlarged, often diﬀeren-
tially colored anogenital areas) around the time of ovulation (though typically
they are not restricted to ovulation, and in some species are even more exagger-
ated in subfertile adolescent females). Sexual swellings are widely thought to
“advertise” ovulation. Pagel (1994) has argued that this view is probably wrong.
Females pay costs for swellings. They must experience beneﬁts to pay for the
costs. The argument that swellings advertise fertility presumes that females
beneﬁt by “waking up” males to be interested in them. Yet males should be
strongly selected to detect when females are fertile on their own using by-
products, should they be available (see below). Indeed, males in primate species
that lack swellings detect female fertility using by-products (typically, scents).
And in chimpanzees, female by-products associated with cycle-related fertility,
not swellings per se, are particularly eﬀective at motivating male sexual behavior
(e.g., Deschner, Heistermann, Hodges, & Boesch, 2004). A priori, a more plaus-
ible theory of these signals, then, is that they signal female condition, to which
male delivery of material beneﬁts to females is sensitive. Females may signal
condition around ovulation because males pay particular attention to females at
that time. Again, in some species swellings are more exaggerated in subfertile
adolescents than adult females, though males prefer adult females as sex partners.
Possibly, females beneﬁt by signaling to males their condition just prior to enter-
ing the reproductive period. Evidence that primate sexual swellings function to
advertise female condition is mixed (e.g., Domb & Pagel, 2001; Zinner, Nunn,
van Schaik, & Kappeler, 2004).
PROCESSING OF INCIDENTAL EFFECTS
In signaling systems, both targets and perceivers have adaptations that play a
role. In many cases in which perceivers make inferences about targets, targets
do not possess adaptations that function to signal. Rather, perceivers detect
incidental eﬀects or by-products of adaptations that have other functions.
As just discussed, males in many primate species (and, indeed, nonprimate
species) detect female fertility using scent cues related to estrogen levels (e.g.,
breakdown products of estrogen or ovarian function; e.g., Deschner et al., 2004;
41
SOCIAL INFERENCE

Engelhardt, Pﬁefer, Heistermann, & Niemitz, 2004; for a review, see Thornhill
& Gangestad, 2006). Females do not possess adaptations that function to pro-
duce these cues. Evidence for adaptation is to be found in design. In these
instances, there is no evidence that females have specialized mechanisms for
producing or disseminating the breakdown products that males detect. The
breakdown products are mere by-products. As females have no adaptation for
producing cues, they do not pay costs to “signal” males. Males have adaptations
to detect cues. But the cues they detect have no signaling function or, indeed, any
function; they are breakdown products (Thornhill & Gangestad, 2006).
Several studies indicate that women smell more pleasant and sexier to men
when fertile than when infertile in their menstrual cycles (e.g., Kuukasjarvi et al.,
2004; Singh & Bronstad, 2001; Thornhill et al., 2003; cf. Thornhill & Ganges-
tad, 1999b). Women probably do not possess adaptations to produce and dis-
seminate a scent that lead males to be attracted to them when fertile. Rather,
women probably excrete by-products associated with estrogen or ovarian func-
tion that men have evolved to ﬁnd pleasant. Though men have adaptations to
perceive female fertility status, women probably have no adaptations to “adver-
tise” fertility. That is, women probably do not pay costs to produce signals to
induce men to detect their fertility; instead, men have been selected to detect
cues of female fertility in absence of a specialized female signal.
Do Targets Beneﬁt from Perceiver Adaptation?
When targets signal, both targets and perceivers should beneﬁt. When perceivers
detect incidental eﬀects, targets may beneﬁt—but detection of them could also
be detrimental to targets.
In many species in which males detect female fertility through by-products,
females probably beneﬁt. If males ﬁnd fertile females, females pay fewer costs to
wait or search for mates and suﬀer fewer harmful eﬀects from ardent males
sexually harassing them when they are infertile. To say that females beneﬁt,
however, is not to say that male detection of female scent performs a function for
females. A function is a beneﬁcial eﬀect that led a trait to be selected and evolve.
Again, females probably did not evolve traits designed to signal fertility.
When perceiver detection of incidental eﬀects is detrimental to targets,
perceivers and targets have conﬂicting interests over the perceptual process; per-
ceivers beneﬁt from accurate perception, whereas signalers are harmed by it.
Conﬂicting interests between individuals can lead to recurrent antagonistic
coevolution, with no stable equilibrium (e.g., Rice & Holland, 1998). For
instance, hosts evolve adaptations to defeat pathogens; pathogens evolve adapta-
tions to undermine those adaptations, which lead to counteradaptations in hosts,
and so on. When conﬂicting interests over perceptual processes exist, targets may
evolve to suppress or confound cues picked up by perceivers; perceivers may
evolve more sensitive detection of cues, which may lead to greater suppression of
cues, and so on.
42
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Conﬂicts of Interest in Detection of Cycle-Based Fertility in Humans
In some species male perception of female fertility status is probably detrimental
to females. When males and females pair-bond and cooperatively care for oﬀ-
spring, for instance, females may often be better oﬀ when males don’t know
when they are fertile, for then males cannot time mate guarding eﬀorts to
coincide with fertility and females accordingly may be better able to seek extra-
pair sires when fertile. Humans may be an example (see Simpson & LaPaglia,
chapter 10, this volume).
In these instances, selection may operate on females to suppress incidental
eﬀects of fertility and, therefore, fertility may be “concealed.” Males, in turn,
may be selected to perceive ever-more-subtle side eﬀects of fertility status or
means of detecting them. Complete suppression of incidental eﬀects may be
diﬃcult for females to achieve, particularly if doing so adversely disrupts the
system producing side eﬀects (e.g., hormonal variations underlying ovarian
function).
Men act on cues associated with female fertility. They are more attentive to
or possessive of female partners when partners are fertile than when partners are
in the luteal phase (Gangestad, Thornhill, & Garver, 2002; Haselton & Ganges-
tad, 2006; Pillsworth & Haselton, 2006). Men also become more attentive of
mates during the fertile phase particularly when female mates are more attracted
to men other than their partners (but not their partners) when fertile (Gangestad
et al., 2002; Haselton & Gangestad, 2006)—i.e., men are most likely to give
female partners additional attention at ovulation when female partners should
least want it. This system has the signatures of being an antagonistic system,
then, in which male information pick-up is detrimental to females. Though
studies indicate that men can detect fertility cues in female scent, they probably
do so less reliably than male baboons or chimpanzees can detect the fertile states
of female baboons or chimpanzees, and possibly because women have been
selected to suppress incidental eﬀects of fertility.
DECEPTION
In the 1960s and early 1970s, as cognitive psychologists turned to mathematical
information theory for inspiration, terminology, and models, so too did
behavioral biologists frame animal communication in terms of information
transfer. An inﬂuential paper by Dawkins and Krebs (1978) dampened enthusi-
asm for this approach. To assume that communication involves information
transfer is to assume that it is accurate and truthful. Assuming that communica-
tion is truthful, Dawkins and Krebs argued, assumes that social relationships
are cooperative. When social agents have conﬂicting interests, individuals can
beneﬁt from communicating dishonestly. Conﬂicting interests pervade social
relationships, even those between siblings or parents and oﬀspring. Hence, we
43
SOCIAL INFERENCE

should view social signals skeptically; the assumption that they convey “informa-
tion” is an unwise starting point.
Almost 30 years later, signaling theory has come full circle. As we have
emphasized, signaling systems based on deception should be rare, despite con-
ﬂicting interests of targets and perceivers (Searcy & Nowicki, 2005). Stable
signaling systems do, in fact, convey “information.”
Nonetheless, individuals do sometimes deceive one another. What explains
deception? Where is it likely to be found?
Tolerated Dishonesty
To persist, a signaling system need only be honest on average across signaling
events. In some complex systems, signals may be honest in some contexts but not
others (e.g., a signal may reﬂect quality in younger but not older individuals).
Systems can persist so long as the weighted average signal is honest (Kokko,
1997).
In other cases, the costs of information processing required to extract a
perfectly honest signal are simply not paid for by marginal beneﬁts. A level of
dishonesty may be tolerated, despite the fact that, overall, the system is
honest.
Asymmetrical Errors
As Haselton (2003; Haselton & Buss, 2000) argues, perceivers can maximize
beneﬁts without maximizing accuracy. When errors have asymmetrical costs,
individuals maximize utility when they make more errors of one type than
another. Some inaccuracy in the signaling system may thereby evolve. Targets
may be able to capitalize on perceivers’ willingness to tolerate some kinds of error
more than others and engage in deceptive communication. If men are biased
against missing sexual opportunities (Haselton & Buss, 2000), women may have
little trouble feigning sexual interest in men to gain any one of a number of
beneﬁts.
Manipulated Incidental Effects
Deception may arise in systems that involve pick-up of information through
incidental eﬀects. As noted earlier, information extraction beneﬁcial to perceivers
may be detrimental to targets in these systems and selection may act on targets to
suppress incidental eﬀects. As also noted, in some cases suppression may disrupt
functionality of the system producing the incidental eﬀect. Another way for
targets to render the incidental eﬀect useless to perceivers is to produce it when
the condition it cues is absent—that is, to produce the incidental eﬀect decep-
tively. This counterstrategy should be most eﬀective if targets are harmed when
perceivers detect the absence of a target condition based on incidental eﬀects. If,
44
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

for instance, females lose when males detect absence of fertility because males can
then aﬀord to be less vigilant of partners and leave oﬀspring care to females,
females could, in theory, beneﬁt by deceptively signaling fertility when not
fertile.
Of course, this system is not stable. If an incidental eﬀect no longer provides
reliable, useful information, perceivers will be selected to ignore it. Antagonistic
systems of information pick-up are typically not stable.
CONCLUSION
Most phenomena evolutionary psychologists study probably involve some form
of social inference—inference that one interactant makes about another interact-
ant’s condition, intention, need, relationship, state, and so on. More generally,
social psychologists are interested in a wide variety of social inferences processes
(e.g., those involving inference of emotional state, personality disposition, likely
future behavior). Whenever an evolved social inference process is posited, it may
be worth asking what kind of process evolved. Does social inference involve a
signaling system? That is, have targets evolved adaptations that function to
communicate information? If so, is the system an honest one, as is typically
expected? What maintains its honesty? Would both targets and perceivers have
beneﬁted suﬃciently for the system to evolve? If deception is claimed to exist, is
deception of the sort or level that might be tolerated within an honest signaling
system?
Alternatively, does social inference involve perceiver pick-up of information
through incidental eﬀects, with no specialized adaptation for signaling on the
part of targets? If so, what are the incidental eﬀects? Why are they good cues?
Does perceiver pick-up beneﬁt targets as well as perceivers? Or do conﬂicting
interests between targets and perceivers exist, such that we the system should be
subject to antagonistic coevolution? If information pick-up harms targets, do
signatures of antagonism (cue suppression or attempted deception) exist?
If scientiﬁc psychology is truly to be rooted, in Darwin’s words, in a “new
foundation” of evolutionary thinking, the forms of social inference processes we
posit should obey principles derived from modern evolutionary biology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A version of this chapter was presented at the eighth Annual Sydney Symposium on Social
Psychology, Sydney, Australia, March 14–16, 2006.
45
SOCIAL INFERENCE

REFERENCES
Anderson, J. L. (1988). Breasts, hips and but-
tocks revisited. Ethology and Sociobiology, 9,
319–324.
Andrews, P. W. (2001). The psychology of
social chess and the evolution of attribution
mechanisms: Explaining the fundamental
attribution error. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 22, 11–29.
Caro, T. M., & Sellen, D. W. (1990). The
reproductive advantages of fat in women.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 11, 51–66.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species.
London: Murray.
Darwin, C. (1871). The descent of man and selec-
tion in relation to sex. London: Murray.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emo-
tions in man and animals. London: Murray.
Dawkins, R., & Krebs, J. R. (1978). Animal
signals: Information or manipulation? In J.
R. Krebs & N. B. Davies (Eds.), Behavioural
ecology: An evolutionary approach (pp. 282–
309). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Deschner, T., Heistermann, M., Hodges, K., &
Boesch, C. (2004). Female sexual swelling
size, timing of ovulation, and male behavior
in wild West African chimpanzees. Hormones
and Behavior, 46, 204–215.
Domb, L. G., & Pagel, M. (2001). Sexual swell-
ings advertise female quality in wild baboons.
Nature, 410, 204–206.
Ellison, P. T. (2001). On fertile ground: A nat-
ural history of reproduction. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Emlen, S. T. (1976). Lek organization and mat-
ing strategies in the bullfrog. Behavioral
Ecology and Sociobiology, 1, 283–313.
Engelhardt, A., Pﬁefer, J.-B., Heistermann, M.,
& Niemitz, C. (2004). Assessment of female
reproductive status by male longtailed
macaques, Macaca fascicularis, under natural
conditions. Animal Behaviour, 67, 915–924.
Frank, R. H. (1988). Passions within reason: The
strategic role of the emotions. New York:
Norton.
Galperin, A., Gonzaga, G., Laird, K., &
Haselton, M. G. (2006, June). Love as a
commitment device. Poster presented at the
annual meetings of the Human Behavior and
Evolution Society, Philadelphia, PA.
Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver, C.
E. (2002). Changes in women’s sexual inter-
ests and their partners’ mate retention tactics
across the menstrual cycle: Evidence for
shifting conﬂicts of interest. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London, Series B, 269,
975–982.
Getty, T. (2002). Signaling health versus
parasites. The American Naturalist, 159,
363–371.
Gonzaga, G. Haselton, M. G., Smurda, J.,
Davies, M. S., & Poore, J. C. (2006). Love,
desire, the suppression of thoughts of romantic
alternatives. Unpublished manuscript, Uni-
versity of California, Los Angeles.
Grafen, A. (1990). Biological signals as handi-
caps. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 144,
517–546.
Grammer, K., Fink, B., Møller, A. P., &
Thornhill, R. (2003). Darwinian aesthetics:
Sexual selection and the biology of beauty.
Biological Review, 78, 385–407.
Haselton, M. G. (2003). The sexual overper-
ception bias: Evidence of a systematic bias in
men from a survey of naturally occurring
events. Journal of Research in Personality, 37,
34–47.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error
management theory: A new perspective
on biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 81–
91.
Haselton, M. G., & Gangestad, S. W. (2006).
Conditional expression of female desires and
male mate retention eﬀorts across the
ovulatory cycle. Hormones and Behavior, 49,
509–518.
Jasienska, G., Ziomkiewicz, A., Ellison, P. T.,
Lipson, S. F., & Thune, I. (2004). Large
breasts and narrow waists indicate high
reproductive potential in women. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 271,
1213–1217.
Kirkpatrick, M., & Ryan, M. J. (1991). The
evolution of mating preferences and the
paradox of the lek. Nature, 350, 33–38.
Kokko, H. (1997). Evolutionarily stable strat-
egies of age-dependent sexual advertisement.
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 41, 99–
107.
Kokko, H., Brooks, R., Jennions, M. D., &
Morley, J. (2003). The evolution of mate
choice and mating biases. Proceedings of the
46
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Royal Society of London, Series B, 270, 653–
664.
Kokko, H., Brooks, R., McNamara, J. M., &
Houston, A. I. (2002). The sexual selection
continuum. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B, 269, 1331–1340.
Kuukasjarvi, S., Eriksson, C. J. P., Koskela, E.,
Mappes, T., Nissinen, K., & Rantala, M. J.
(2004). Attractiveness of women’s body
odors over the menstrual cycle: The role
of oral contraceptives and receiver sex.
Behavioral Ecology, 15, 579–584.
Leinders-Zufall, T., Brennan, P., Widmayer, P.,
Chandramani S. P., Maul-Pavicic, A., Jäger,
M., et al. (2004). MHC Class I peptides as
chemosensory signals in the vomeronasal
organ. Science, 306, 1033–1037.
Little, A. C., Jones, B. C., Penton-Voak, I. S.,
Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2002). Partner-
ship status and the temporal context of
relationships inﬂuence human female prefer-
ences for sexual dimorphism in male face
shape. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London, Series B, 269, 1095–1100.
Low, B. S., Alexander, R. D., & Noonan, K. M.
(1987). Human hips, breasts, buttocks: Is
fat deceptive? Ethology and Sociobiology, 4,
249–257.
Miller, E. M. (1996). Concealed ovulation as a
strategy for increasing per capita paternal
investment. Mankind Quarterly, 36, 297–
333.
Pagel, M. (1994). Evolution of conspicuous
estrous advertisement in old-world monkeys.
Animal Behaviour, 47, 1333–1341.
Pause, B. M., Krauel, K., Schrader, C., Sojka,
B., Westphal, E., Müller-Ruchholtz, W., &
Ferstl, R. (2005). The human brain is a
detector of chemosensorily transmitted
MHC class I-similarity in same- and oppos-
ite-sex relations. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B, 273, 471–478.
Penn, D. J., & Potts, W. K. (1999). The evolu-
tion of mating preferences and major histo-
compatibility complex genes. The American
Naturalist, 153, 145–164.
Penton-Voak, I. S., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).
Male facial attractiveness: Perceived personal-
ity and shifting female preferences for male
traits across the menstrual cycle. Advances in
the Study of Behavior, 30, 219–259.
Pillsworth, E. G., & Haselton, M. G. (2006).
Male sexual attractiveness predicts diﬀeren-
tial ovulatory shifts in female extra-pair
attraction and male mate retention. Evolution
and Human Behavior, 27, 247–258.
Puts, D. A., Gaulin, S. J. C., & Verdolini, K.
(2006). Dominance and the evolution of
sexual dimorphism in human voice pitch.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 27, 283–
296.
Rhodes, G., Simmons, L. W., & Peters, M.
(2005). Attractiveness and sexual behavior:
Does attractiveness enhance mating success?
Evolution and Human Behavior, 26, 186–
201.
Rice, W. R., & Holland, B. (1998). The
enemies within: Intragenomic conﬂict, inter-
locus contest evolution (ICE), and the
intraspeciﬁc Red Queen. Behavioral Ecology
and Sociobiology, 41, 1–10.
Rowe, L. & Houle, D. (1996). The lex paradox
and the capture of genetic variance by condi-
tion-dependent traits. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Series B, 263, 1415–1421.
Searcy, W. A., & Nowicki, S. (2005). The evolu-
tion of animal communication: Reliability and
deception in signaling systems (Monographs in
Behavior and Ecology). Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press.
Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive signiﬁcance of
female physical attractiveness: Role of the
waist-to-hip ratio. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 65, 293–307.
Singh, D., & Bronstad, P. M. (2001). Female
body odour is a potential cue to ovulation.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
Series B, 268, 797–801.
Smith, R. L. (1984). Human sperm competi-
tion. In R. L. Smith (Ed.), Sperm competition
and the evolution of animal mating systems (pp.
601–660). London: Academic Press.
Streeter, S. A., & McBurney, D. H. (2003).
Waist–hip ratio and attractiveness: New
evidence and a critique of “a critical test.”
Evolution and Human Behavior, 24, 89–98.
Swaddle, J. P., & Reierson, G. W. (2002). Tes-
tosterone increases the perceived dominance
but not attractiveness of human males. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series
B, 269, 2285–2289.
Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (1999a).
Facial attractiveness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 3, 452–460.
Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (1999b).
The 
scent 
of 
symmetry: 
A 
human
47
SOCIAL INFERENCE

pheromone that signals ﬁtness? Evolution and
Human Behavior, 20, 175–201.
Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (2006). The
evolution of women’s extended sexuality,
estrus, concealed estrus and permanent
ornamentation. Manuscript in preparation.
Thornhill, R., Gangestad, S. W., Miller, R.,
Scheyd, G., McCollough, J., & Franklin, M.
(2003). MHC, symmetry, and body scent
attractiveness in men and women. Behavioral
Ecology, 14, 668–678.
Thornhill, R., & Grammer, K. (1999). The
body and face of woman: One ornament
that signals quality? Evolution and Human
Behavior, 20, 105–120.
Wedekind, C., Seebeck, T., Bettens, F., &
Paepke, A. J. (1995). MHC-dependent mate
preferences in humans. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B, 260, 245–
249.
Williams, G. C. (1966). Adaptation and natural
selection: A critique of some current evolution-
ary thought. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Yamazaki, K., Beauchamp, G. K., Curran, M.,
Baird, J., & Boyse, E. A. (2000). Parent–
progeny recognition as a function of
MHC odortype identity. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 97,
10500–10502.
Zahavi, A. (1975). Mate selection: A selection
for a handicap. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
53, 205–214.
Zinner, D. P., Nunn, C. L., van Schaik, C. P., &
Kappeler, P. M. (2004). Sexual selection and
exaggerated sexual swellings of female pri-
mates. In P. Kappeler & C. van Schaik (Eds.),
Sexual selection in primates: New and compara-
tive perspectives (pp. 71–89). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
48
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

4
How the Mind Warps
A Social Evolutionary Perspective on
Cognitive Processing Disjunctions
DOUGLAS T. KENRICK
ANDREW W. DELTON
THERESA E. ROBERTSON
D. VAUGHN BECKER
STEVEN L. NEUBERG
Our Basic Model of How Fundamental Motives Inﬂuence Cognitive
Processes
An Unexpected Disjunction between Visual Attention, Frequency
Estimation, and Memory
An Opposite Disjunction for Outgroup Males
Suppression and Ampliﬁcation
Disjunctions’ Functions
A General Model of the Biases Underlying Disjunctions
Some Empirical Implications of Considering Disjunctions in
Evolutionary/Ecological Terms
Conclusion
I
f you walk down a crowded street at noon, which of the passing strangers
could you pick out of a lineup an hour later? From the standpoint of
common sense, and of the traditional model of attention and memory,
your ability to remember other people ought to depend on initial visual atten-
tion—you’ll encode those faces you spent more time looking at, and later
remember those encoded faces that managed to make it into long-term mem-
ory. Our research program on basic social cognitive processes began with just
this set of apparently straightforward assumptions—that memory for faces
will depend on encoding, which will in turn depend directly on initial visual
49

attention (e.g., Craik & Tulving, 1975). We were surprised to ﬁnd that we were
wrong.
Let’s begin with the classic three-step model of memory that has appeared
in general psychology textbooks for decades. In simpliﬁed form, this traditional
view involves a series of reasonably linear steps (Atkinson & Shiﬀrin, 1968).
First, some subset of all the information in a person’s current environment is
registered in sensory memory. For example, we visually attend to some stimuli
and never even rest our fovea on others: A person walking across a crowded
college campus would likely scan at the height of people’s faces, as opposed to
looking up at the sparrows and ﬁnches in the trees above her head (the opposite
might be true if she were a birdwatcher, but then the ﬁnches, but not the faces,
would get registered). At the second step, a smaller subset of the most “import-
ant” information is selected for encoding and conscious processing in short-term
memory (Cowan, 1988). For example, most people in a large crowd may be
scanned but never consciously registered; we ﬁxate on a particular few, such as
the man on stilts dressed in a clown costume, the fashion model, and the blue-
haired grandmother carrying a poodle. From this smaller subset of information
making the cut for short-term memory, a still smaller subset is presumed to get
deep enough consideration to make it into long-term memory (Ranganath,
Cohen, & Brozinsky, 2005). If, for example, you have a conversation with the
fashion model, who turns out to be your best friend’s cousin, you will remember
the conversation later, while the ﬂeeting image of the blue-haired grandmother
and her poodle are lost forever. In this chapter, we explore a number of intriguing
“disjunctions”—discrepancies between early and later information processing
that violate the expected linear order in interesting ways. For some categories of
faces, for example, observers better remember those they looked away from;
other categories of faces get preferential initial processing but are then forgotten.
One goal of this chapter is to begin developing a model of when and why
one might ﬁnd these sorts of processing disjunctions. Toward this end, we will
consider disjunctions as they reﬂect more generally on evolution-inspired models
of cognitive processing. The central assumption driving our research program is
that cognitive processing ultimately reﬂects a mind designed to extract and pon-
der information prioritized by functional relevance. We begin with the broad
assumption that attention, encoding, and memory, as well as the linkages
between these basic processes, are designed to serve adaptive ends. If one
encounters unexpected nonlinearities, we believe it may be a mistake to adopt a
default presumption that they simply reﬂect glitches in the system. Instead, it is
worth considering whether such apparent glitches may reﬂect a generally func-
tional system (cf. Fletcher, Simpson, & Boyes, 2006; Forgas, chapter 7, this
volume). Following a brief examination of several data sets in which we have
observed interesting disjunctions, we suggest the outlines of a conceptual model
with implications for understanding when and where disjunctions will be found.
Finally, we reﬂect on some additional empirical implications of thinking about
cognitive disjunctions more generally.
50
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

OUR BASIC MODEL OF HOW FUNDAMENTAL MOTIVES
INFLUENCE COGNITIVE PROCESSES
With Mark Schaller and Jon Maner, we’ve been conducting a series of studies
designed to explore how simple cognitive processes (e.g., attention, encoding,
recognition memory) are aﬀected by what we’ve been calling fundamental
motivational states (Kenrick, Neuberg, & Cialdini, 2005; Maner et al., 2005).
Under the rubric of fundamental motivational states we include aﬃliation, self-
protection, status-seeking, mate-search, mate retention, and familial care. We
assume each of these motivational states is species-typical for Homo sapiens—
involving goals that our ancestors would have needed to meet to successfully
survive and reproduce in human social groups (Kenrick, Li, & Butner, 2003).
We presumed there would be interesting interactions between bottom-up
processes like visual scanning and top-down eﬀects of fundamental motives. A
fundamental motive is often activated by bottom-up processes—as when a social
stimulus array indicates a mating opportunity, a threat to safety, or a chance to
enhance one’s status. Once any powerful motivational state is activated, however,
we presume it prompts increased attention to relevant features of the situation
and suppresses attention to others. Figure 4.1 depicts a partial model.
As shown in Figure 4.1, we presumed that activation of a mating goal would
increase attention to attractive members of the opposite sex. We also presumed
this activation would inspire goal-relevant interpretations. In line with evolution-
based assumptions of error management theory (Haselton & Buss, 2000), for
example, we expected males in a romantic frame of mind would be especially
likely to see beautiful women as feeling sexual inclinations. We also expected
selective attention to attractive women would lead to overestimations of the
frequency of those women in crowds of varying attractiveness. Finally, we
expected men would be more able to pick those attractive women out of a line-
up later. We expected both men and women in a self-protective frame of mind to
attend instead to outgroup males, and to encode those men as relatively threaten-
ing. Given the phenomenon of outgroup homogeneity, we weren’t sure whether
this initial attention would translate into better memory for outgroup males;
instead, we thought frightened participants might make more false alarms, falsely
recognizing outgroup men that they had not seen.
In some ways, our ﬁndings supported our predictions (Becker, Kenrick,
Guerin, & Maner, 2005; Maner et al., 2003, 2005). But, as often happens, some
unexpected ﬁndings were the most thought-provoking.
AN UNEXPECTED DISJUNCTION BETWEEN VISUAL ATTENTION,
FREQUENCY ESTIMATION, AND MEMORY
One series of studies examined visual attention indirectly using frequency esti-
mation (Maner et al., 2003, Exps. 1–3). Observers were brieﬂy presented with
51
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

arrays of attractive and average-looking male and female faces. Because observers
had limited time to process the faces, we expected that faces capturing initial
attention—such as attractive members of the opposite sex—should receive
greater processing and therefore be preferentially encoded into long-term mem-
ory. Thus, when asked to estimate the frequencies of various categories of faces,
observers of both sexes should overestimate the number of attractive members of
the opposite sex.
Results showed both sexes overestimating the number of attractive female
faces, suggesting that attractive female faces captured everyone’s attention
(Figure 4.2). Although the same eﬀect was observed in both sexes, it did not
seem to be due to the same mechanism: Such overestimations were more likely in
men not involved in committed relationships, but women who were involved in
relationships.
FIGURE 4.1 Basic model of fundamental goals’ eﬀects on information processing. This
model presumes activation of a given goal increases attention to goal-relevant stimuli, and then
biases how we encode those stimuli, enhancing later memory for those stimuli. The model also
presumes that activation of one goal inhibits processing of stimuli relevant to other goals, and
that some goals (such as self-protection) have stronger inhibitory eﬀects than others.
52
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

We were surprised to ﬁnd female participants did not overestimate the
number of attractive males, given that male attractiveness is a well-supported
component in female mate preferences (e.g., Gangestad & Simpson, 2000).
However, these men were complete strangers to the women, and a strange man
simply may not reach the threshold as a mating opportunity for a woman, for
reasons discussed below.
The frequency estimation data suggested that people were preferentially
attending to attractive women, but don’t really prove it, since frequency estima-
tion involves a judgment that is cognitively “downstream” from attention per se.
To examine visual attention directly, we turned to eye-tracking methods (Maner
et al., 2003, Exp. 4). In these studies, participants are presented with arrays of
diﬀerent faces, and we record how long they dwell on diﬀerent faces, and which
ones they return to. As expected from frequency estimation results, participants
of both sexes did preferentially visually attend to attractive females as compared
to average looking females. This was especially true for male participants with
FIGURE 4.2 Frequency estimation and attractiveness. When people are brieﬂy exposed to
arrays of faces, both men and women overestimate attractive female faces but not attractive
males. Overestimation scores were created by taking estimations of attractive faces in brieﬂy
shown arrays and subtracting estimations of attractive faces from a control condition where
arrays were shown for an extended period of time (so participants had time to process all of the
faces). Thus, scores greater than zero indicate attractive faces were overestimated and scores less
than zero indicate attractive faces were underestimated (data drawn from Maner et al., 2003,
Exp. 1, Table 1).
53
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

unrestricted mating orientations. Counter to the frequency estimation ﬁndings,
however, women also preferentially looked at attractive over average looking
males (see Figure 4.3; Figures 4.2–4.4 were constructed so without a disjunction
each graph should have an identical pattern).
These results were perplexing: Indirect measures suggested that attractive
males did not draw women’s attention, yet direct measures—tracking where
women’s eyes went—showed the opposite pattern. A ﬁnal study helped resolve
this paradox. This study tested participants’ memory for attractive and average
members of both sexes. Results showed that both sexes, and women in particular,
had accurate memory for attractive female faces but poor memory for attractive
male faces (Figure 4.4). So, female responses to attractive men provided our ﬁrst
evidence of a disjunction between one stage of processing and another: although
attractive men captured women’s initial attention, this extra visual processing did
not translate into greater downstream processing—the attractive men were
promptly forgotten, and their frequency was not overestimated.
FIGURE 4.3 Visual attention and attractiveness. Fixation scores greater than .50 indicate
preferential attention to attractive faces. Both sexes preferentially attended to attractive female
faces and women preferentially attended to attractive male faces. Had a disjunction not
occurred the pattern in this graph should match the graph in Figure 4.2 (based on Figure 4
from Maner et al., 2003, Exp. 4 © American Psychological Association).
54
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Another series of studies found a similar pattern among participants playing
a version of the old Concentration game requiring them to remember the loca-
tion of faces concealed behind tiles, and to match identical faces (by turning over
only two tiles on any given trial). Again, we found people of both sexes especially
good at processing attractive women but not attractive men. Indeed, across
three studies, attractive men were matched somewhat less well than were
average-looking men (Becker et al., 2005).
FIGURE 4.4 Memory and attractiveness. Both sexes preferentially remembered attractive
females. Women had particularly poor memory for attractive males. During testing, partici-
pants were shown previously seen faces as well as novel foils and asked how conﬁdent they were
that they had seen the faces before. Relative memory conﬁdence scores are based on ratings of
previously seen faces. These scores were computed by taking conﬁdence scores for attractive
faces and subtracting conﬁdence scores for average faces. Scores above zero indicate partici-
pants were more conﬁdent in having seen attractive than average faces of that category,
whereas scores below zero indicate the opposite. The eﬀect shown in this graph probably helps
understand the disjunction depicted in Figures 4.2 and 4.3: Although women preferentially
attend to attractive men, they do not remember them and thus do not later overestimate them.
These results are not an artifact of response bias: For novel foils, both sexes were more con-
ﬁdent that they had not seen novel male faces than novel female faces. In other words,
previously seen and novel female faces were more accurately discriminated from each other
than previously seen and novel male faces (based on Figure 5 in Maner et al., 2003).
55
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

Furthermore, there was again an intriguing disjunction between early and
later processing. In one experiment, we ﬁrst ﬂashed up the full array (24 faces)
for 6 s, before proceeding with the Concentration game as usual. In this variant,
women were more likely to match handsome men than average looking men or
women, but only on the initial trial (immediately after getting a view of the
whole “crowd”). By the end of the game, however, this initial advantage for
good-looking men had been lost. Again, handsome men (or at least handsome
strangers) had a very brief attentional advantage in women’s eyes, but that
advantage did not persist into downstream processing (see Figures 4.5 and 4.6).
FIGURE 4.5 Results from concentration game study, initial trial. These results are from
the ﬁrst trial only in a condition in which all participants ﬁrst were brieﬂy exposed to all faces.
These results suggest both sexes’ attention was drawn by attractive females, and that handsome
men also drew initial attention (the latter trend was signiﬁcant only for female participants).
56
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

AN OPPOSITE DISJUNCTION FOR OUTGROUP MALES
Our model of goal-directed cognitive processes led us to predict that activating a
self-protection motive would cause people to (a) pay greater attention to other
people who might be associated with heuristic danger cues, and (b) have biased
FIGURE 4.6 Results from concentration game study: Overall memory across all trials.
These results suggest any initial processing advantage for the handsome men (as shown in
Figure 4.5) was lost quickly after the initial trials.
57
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

interpretations of the possible threats those individuals might pose. In particu-
lar, we expected that perceived dangers would increase attention to outgroup
males.
Consistent with our model, we did ﬁnd that White students who are feeling
threatened (after watching a scary movie) are more likely to perceive anger in the
faces of Black men (but not in the faces of Black women or White targets of
either sex) (Maner et al., 2005). These eﬀects are not typical “priming eﬀects”—
in which people feeling a particular aﬀective state perceive that same state in
others (e.g., Forgas & Bower, 1987). Rather than projecting fear onto other
people’s faces, frightened participants projected anger, and did so only for
members of a potentially threatening outgroup. Fear also led students with
implicitly negative attitudes toward Arabs to project anger onto the faces of Arab
men and women. We also found that White participants in a self-protective
state overestimated the number of outgroup faces in the arrays (Becker et al.,
2006).
Another set of eyetracker studies reveals that self-protective motivation,
rather than causing White subjects to spend more time looking at outgroup
males, actually led them to look away from men in general (Figure 4.7, top
panel). This visual aversion also occurs if the men in the photos appear to be
looking directly at the participant, and is enhanced if the face is wearing an angry
expression.
We would thus have expected to ﬁnd that pictures of Black men, from
whom visual attention has been diverted, would be especially diﬃcult to pick out
of a line-up later. But instead we have found that priming self-protection caused
these nonattended outgroup males to be later remembered as well as, and some-
times better than, nonthreatening faces of ingroup members (Becker et al., 2006;
Figure 4.7, bottom panel). In addition, and contrary to ﬁndings on outgroup
homogeneity, we repeatedly ﬁnd that Black men are remembered with especially
high accuracy if they are angry (Ackerman et al., 2006; see Figure 4.8). Neutral
black men, on the other hand, produce a high hit rate, but also a high false alarm
rate. The punchline of these latter studies is that outgroup males all look the
same, unless they’re angry, in which case they are remembered with high accur-
acy. White participants do not, however, remember these angry outgroup males
because they look at them for a longer time; instead threatening faces seem to
manifest a version of “ﬂashbulb memory” and require less visual attention to
achieve superior recognition (Brown & Kulik, 1971).
SUPPRESSION AND AMPLIFICATION
These two types of disjunction can be called ampliﬁcation and suppression eﬀects.
Ampliﬁcation disjunctions occur when limited processing at an early stage
leads to preferential “downstream” processing (illustrated in the upper line of
Figure 4.9). The ﬁndings for Black and angry males illustrate an ampliﬁcation
58
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

disjunction: Fearful participants spent less time looking at the faces of outgroup
males yet had better memory for them. Conversely, suppression disjunctions
occur when preferential processing at an early stage does not translate into pref-
erential processing at a later stage (illustrated in the lower line of Figure 4.9). An
example of this is women’s reactions to handsome male faces—women look
preferentially at these men, but do not remember them later.
FIGURE 4.7 Attention to Black and White male faces (top); memory for these same faces
(bottom) (from Becker et al., 2006, Exp. 1).
59
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

DISJUNCTIONS’  FUNCTIONS
Why should these two types of disjunction occur? In retrospect, both the ampli-
ﬁcation and suppression eﬀects we found make functional sense. Because staring
at a stranger can be a threat gesture, it should have been unsurprising that people
look away from potentially dangerous others—outgroup males, for example,
particularly if they are angry and staring back, and particularly if other cues, such
as your own feelings of fear, suggest the current situation may be dangerous. A
fascinating implication of this research is that not looking does not mean not
attending. Given that those individuals nevertheless pose a threat, it makes sense
that the mind continues to process them even though the eyes have discreetly
moved away. Thus, the ampliﬁcation eﬀect reveals a sort of a “ﬂashbulb
memory” in which a brief but important stimulus gets enhanced mental
representation later.
The suppression eﬀect for handsome male strangers seems less intuitively
sensible at ﬁrst, but does ﬁt well with ﬁndings on women’s criteria for mate
FIGURE 4.8 Memory for Black and White faces. Although White participants are not
especially accurate at recognizing Black males with neutral facial expressions, they are quite
accurate in recognizing rapidly presented faces of angry Black men (based on Ackerman et al.,
2006). This ﬁnding provides a disjunction with other results showing that people look away
from potentially threatening faces (especially outgroup males with angry expressions).
60
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

choice. Several evolutionary psychologists have provided evidence to suggest that
male physical attractiveness is associated with so-called “good genes” (e.g., Gang-
estad, Thornhill, & Garver, 2002). Hence, it makes sense that handsome men’s
faces elicit initial attention from women. Consistently, in other work, we ﬁnd
more visual ﬁxations for handsome men amongst women who are ovulating,
who are unrestricted, or who are in a romantic frame of mind (Maner et al.,
2003; Perea et al., 2006). However, even if a woman is interested in a short-term
relationship, it is unlikely that that relationship will be with a man who has not
stayed around long enough to pass several levels of initial screening. Before
committing to a relationship with a man, women generally require additional
information, including reliable information about the man’s social status or
ﬁnancial status (Buunk, Dijkstra, Fetchenhauer, & Kenrick, 2002; Kenrick,
Sundie, Nicastle, & Stone, 2001; Li, Bailey, Kenrick, & Linsenmeier, 2002).
Clark and Hatﬁeld (1989) found in two studies conducted across two decades
that not a single woman accepted an oﬀer of a sexual liaison with a strange man,
even though about half were willing to go on a date with him. One presumes that
some of these women, undergraduates at Florida State during the peak of the
sexual revolution, were unrestricted, and that some were ovulating. But a total
stranger, regardless of his good looks, simply does not pass the initial threshold
for a woman to consider as a sexual partner. On the other hand, Clark and
FIGURE 4.9 Two diﬀerent types of disjunction (note: thanks to Mark Schaller for suggesting
this graphic depiction of disjunctions).
61
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

Hatﬁeld’s data also made it abundantly clear that, for most men, a total stranger
is well above threshold to meet his selection criteria—with over 70% of men
saying yes to an oﬀer of sex from a woman they had never before met.
Although both types of disjunctions violate the traditional linear view of
information processing, they make sense in light of a model presuming informa-
tion processing functions to promote survival and reproductive goals. Rather
than leading us to scrap our general functional model of cognitive processing,
then, these disjunctions have reinforced our view that cognitive systems are
inherently adaptive.
A GENERAL MODEL OF THE BIASES UNDERLYING
DISJUNCTIONS
Evolutionary approaches to cognitive psychology generally presume some degree
of modularity; which implies that diﬀerent types of content receive diﬀerent
types of processing (e.g., Kenrick, Sadalla, & Keefe, 1998; Tooby & Cosmides,
1992). A functional analysis of cognition thus suggests that content is of central
importance; the decision rules used for processing information about a potential
mating opportunity, for example, are diﬀerent from the decision rules used for
processing information about a potential threat.
An evolutionary perspective implies that the particular cognitive biases
used by any species should reﬂect functional constraints imposed by typical
problems their ancestors had to face. So, for example, diurnal birds (with good
vision for ﬁnding food in daylight) condition nausea to the visual features of
novel foods they encounter, but rats (nocturnal creatures with poor vision who
ﬁnd food at night) condition nausea to the taste of novel foods more easily
than to visual features (Wilcoxon, Dragoin, & Kral, 1971). Further, a given
bird species may use diﬀerent rules for remembering locations of food stores,
features of aversive foods encountered in the past, and the song of their
species. The features of aversive foods are conditioned to nausea in a single
trial, and are very diﬃcult to unlearn; the locations of stored foods are repeat-
edly and easily learned and forgotten; and the species’ song is learned during a
particular critical period by diﬀerent rules depending on the social arrange-
ment typically confronted by members of a particular species (Sherry &
Schacter, 1987).
In addition to diﬀerent cognitive rules for learning and remembering diﬀer-
ent kinds of input, animals also have diﬀerent sensory capacities and diﬀerent
innate templates for recognizing recurrent patterns of stimulation with func-
tional signiﬁcance. So, for example, hawks, which hunt small and fast-moving
animals from high above the earth, have exquisite color vision, including two
separate foveas, and several times the density of rods that humans have (Ehrlich,
Dobkin, & Wheye, 1988). On the other side, rabbits, a favorite food of these
raptors, have “hawk detectors”—early level pattern detectors built into their
62
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

retina (to avoid the several milliseconds’ delay associated with central processing,
enough time for a speedy hawk to arrive) (Levick, 1967).
Just as other animals inherit cognitive templates, so too do humans. For
instance, all species have mechanisms that allow them to recognize members of
their own species and even their speciﬁc mates or oﬀspring, and we would expect
humans to have reliably developing templates for recognizing attractive and
unattractive members within each sex. These templates, while adaptively inﬂu-
enced by the developmental environment, should also have a great deal of built-
in content (Lieberman, Tooby, & Cosmides, 2003). Similarly, humans may have
a template for outgroup member, but this template needs to be “ﬁlled in” with a
great deal of information from the environment—the look of an enemy varies by
place and time, and the template must be learned and contrasted with learned
features of people with whom we are familiar (cf. Hirshfeld, 1996).
An evolutionary approach to cognition implies strongly that adaptive
design of nervous systems did not suddenly stop with Homo sapiens, but that our
species has a brain and sensory mechanisms adapted to the recurrent demands of
human life. Humans don’t need early warning hawk-detection systems, but we
do confront a series of special problems involved in living with other humans.
For one thing, we need to be highly attentive to the grunts and groans emanating
from the mouths of other humans, and to be able to recognize and make ﬁne
discriminations regarding very complex patterns within those utterances. It
makes a big diﬀerence whether someone just said “No worries, mate” as opposed
to “Nick’s worried, Mark!” Indeed, ample evidence suggests that the human
brain is specially designed to receive and transmit linguistic information in a way
that even our most intelligent primate cousins are not (Pinker, 1994).
Our model of fundamental motivational systems presumes there is special
and diﬀerential processing for information relevant to diﬀerent social goals.
Table 4.1 indicates what we think some of those biases are.
We also presume there are evolutionarily signiﬁcant variations in how dif-
ferent individuals respond to diﬀerent types of information associated with these
fundamental problem sets. Some of those individual diﬀerences, like sex, are
innate; some, like mating strategy, depend on interactions between innate char-
acteristics and developmental inputs, and some, like one’s current mating status
or the existence of oﬀspring, are mainly determined by experiential inputs that
trigger species-typical biases.
SOME EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS OF CONSIDERING
DISJUNCTIONS IN EVOLUTIONARY/ECOLOGICAL TERMS
Although not considered in an evolutionary framework, traditional cognitive
psychologists have uncovered evidence of analogous disjunctions in such phe-
nomena as “inattentional blindness” (not consciously registering objects even
though a person is looking at those objects) and “covert attention” (conscious
63
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

processing of objects without looking directly at those objects) (e.g., Carrasco &
McElree, 2001; Mack, 2003). A consideration of the diﬀerent domains of social
life suggests other places to look for disjunctions between the diﬀerent stages of
cognition. For example, perhaps activation of status concerns will lead to a
tendency to look away from high status males, but to remember them better than
when other motives such as aﬃliation or family care are activated. In describing
his years in Tibet, for example, Heinrich Harrer (1996) noted that everyone
looked immediately at the ground if the Dalai Lama came into view. One doubts
that they forgot the initial glimpse of the young god-king, however. When
parental motivations are activated, on the other hand, people may look away
from, but still remember, low status males (who are otherwise quickly dismissed
from further processing). One might also expect that men with their relational
Table 4.1 Domains of Social Life Posing Recurrent Problems, with Examples of
Decision Constraints, and Cognitive Biases Associated with Each
Social problem
domain
Evolved decision constraints (examples)
Resultant cognitive biases (examples)
Coalition
formation
Exchange relationships are ultimately
beneﬁcial to the extent exchange partners
(a) share our genes, (b) are good bets for
future reciprocation.
Coalitional goals should lead to
preferential attention to smiling or
scornful expressions, particularly on
targets not sharing our genes.
Status
Men tend to compete for status more than
women do.
Status goals should lead to preferential
attention to large dominant males or
attractive well-dressed females. Males
should be especially prone to such
biases.
Self-protection
Outgroup members and unrelated
members of own group pose recurrent
sources of competition, disease, and
physical threat.
Attention to signs of anger, particularly
on faces of males and/or outgroup
members. Attention to signs of disease
in unrelated others.
Mate choice
Mating opportunities are low cost for
men, potentially higher cost for women;
male commitment is key for female
reproductive success.
Mating goals should increase attention
to physical attractiveness in women, to
status in men, and to one’s own mating
relevant characteristics. Women should
be attentive to signs of commitment in
desirable males.
Relationship
maintenance
Costs associated with loss of mating and
parenting investment, slightly diﬀerent,
though overlapping, for women and men.
Preferential attention to potential
interlopers, particularly those of
own sex with desirable mating
characteristics, or signs of interest in
one’s own mate.
Parental care
Human parents have high investment in
biological oﬀspring, potential conﬂicts
with interests of unrelated children.
Preferential attention to behavior of
unrelated children who are age-mates
of own oﬀspring, or to behaviors of
adults likely to pose threats (e.g., low
status males).
64
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

partners might show such a pattern for beautiful women—looking away, but
covertly devoting attentional resources.
One might expect ampliﬁcation disjunctions for subtle cues linked to social
exclusion, signs of a mate’s inﬁdelity, potential threats to one’s own status, or
disease cues in strangers, all of which are likely candidates for privileged process-
ing (Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003; Faulkner, Schaller, Park, &
Duncan, 2004; van Vugt & Kurzban, chapter 14, this volume). On the other
side, one might expect suppression eﬀects for information suggesting one’s own
insensitivity to the needs of rejected or downtrodden others, or to information
suggesting one’s own potential inﬁdelities (“I really don’t think the attractive
new lab assistant is ﬂirting with me, dear, she’s just a naturally friendly person”).
There are potentially interesting connections between these simple cogni-
tive disjunctions and other cognitive phenomena. What kinds of social stimulus
do we have diﬃculty keeping out of conscious working memory? One suspects
some social stimuli are harder to suppress than thoughts about white bears, and
these might map nicely onto the domains in Table 4.1, and include insults to
one’s status, threats to one’s children, attractive oﬀers of inﬁdelities, others ﬂirt-
ing with one’s mate, etc. There are also undoubtedly interesting adaptive dis-
continuities in judgment processes (cf. Todd, chapter 9, this volume). Further,
some forms of psychopathology may be understood as individual diﬀerences in
attention to, encoding of, and memory for, evolutionarily signiﬁcant social
situations (cf. Badcock & Allen, chapter 8, this volume).
We have found theoretically meaningful individual diﬀerences linked to
these cognitive biases, with males and females showing diﬀerent reactions to
attractive members of the opposite sex, for example, and individuals concerned
about safety being more susceptible to processing biases involving potential
threats. From an evolutionary perspective, other individual diﬀerences in cogni-
tive processing might be expected based on life-history phase of the judge (diﬀer-
ent cues ought to be privileged or suppressed by people who are prepubescent,
courting, young parents, or grandparents, for example), or the judge’s kinship
status vis-à-vis the targets being processed (cf. Laham, Gonsalkorale, & von
Hippel, 2005; Park & Schaller, 2005).
Another interesting set of questions involves the neuropsychology of dis-
junctions. Perhaps emerging neuropsychological methods could be used to
examine the possibility that certain social stimuli (such as recently encountered
handsome strangers) are inaccessible to conscious processing, but nevertheless
accessible to processing at other levels. Might females show physiological signs of
recognition of these attractive men even as they are reporting an inability to recall
them? If so, this would be a memory equivalent of the ﬁndings on “blindsight”—
in which people with certain types of brain damage are unable to report seeing a
stimulus, but can point correctly when asked to guess where it is in the visual
ﬁeld.
65
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

CONCLUSION
Evolutionary models of cognitive processes are, in a sense, all about preferential
treatment of certain classes of inputs, which often deviate from the standard
assumptions applying to the processing of nonsense syllables or other “neutral”
stimuli. Evolutionary models of cognition also typically assume that these prefer-
ential processing biases are associated with functionally relevant individual dif-
ferences (Kenrick, 1994). As one example, consider the ﬁndings that, although
men are good at outdoor map-following tasks that would have ﬁt with dispersed
hunting, women are better at detecting and remembering the location of objects
in complex arrays, a skill critical to successful foraging (which is more often the
province of women in preliterate societies) (e.g., Silverman & Eals, 1992). Like-
wise, detecting people who cheat on social contract rules is much easier than
detecting violators of logically identical rules that are not social contracts
(Cosmides & Tooby, 1992).
A particularly appealing feature of an evolutionary approach to cognition is
that, by emphasizing content, it can bring a whole new set of dimensions to
traditional process-oriented approaches. The emphasis on domain speciﬁc quali-
ﬁcations to domain-general processes, which suggests numerous separate and
specialized cognitive modules adapted to speciﬁc ﬁtness problems, has a number
of fruitful heuristic implications. The disjunctions we discussed here imply that
the operation of domain-general cognitive processes themselves, and speciﬁcally
the links between them, may be conditioned by more ancient motivational and
emotional systems. Thus, while the traditional approach has yielded numerous
important general descriptions of cognitive processing, adding an evolutionary
perspective opens a whole new set of questions about how eﬃciently these
basic processes work. Understanding these processes should be important to
developing a comprehensive and sensible model of how humans understand and
represent the social world.
REFERENCES
Ackerman, J. M., Shapiro, J. R., Neuberg, S. L.,
Kenrick, D. T., Schaller, M., Becker, D. V., et
al. (2006). They all look the same to me
(unless they’re angry): From out-group
homogeneity to out-group heterogeneity.
Psychological Science, 17, 836–840.
Atkinson, R. C. & Schiﬀrin, R. M. (1968).
Human memory: A control system and its
control processes. In K. W. Spence & J. T.
Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 2, pp. 89–195). New York:
Academic Press.
Becker, D. V., Kenrick, D. T., Guerin, S., &
Maner, J. K. (2005). Concentrating on
beauty: Sexual selection and sociospatial
memory. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 31, 1643–1652.
Becker, D. V., Maner, J. K., Robertson, T.,
Tybur, J., Shapiro, J., Ackerman, J., et al.
(2006). A disjunction between attention and
looking: Visual (in)attention to outgroup
males. Manuscript in preparation.
Brown, R., & Kulik, J. (1971). Flashbulb
memories. Cognition, 5, 73–99.
Buunk, B. P., Dijkstra, P., Fetchenhauer, D., &
Kenrick, D. T. (2002). Age and gender dif-
66
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

ferences in mate selection criteria for various
involvement levels. Personal Relationships, 9,
271–278.
Carrasco, M., & McElree, B. (2001). Covert
attention accelerates the rate of visual process-
ing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 98, 5363–5367.
Clark, R. D. & Hatﬁeld, E. (1989). Gender
diﬀerences in receptivity to sexual oﬀers.
Journal of Psychology and Human Sexuality, 2,
39–55.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive
adaptations for social exchange. In J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 277–306). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Cowan, N. (1988). Evolving conceptions of
memory storage, selective attention, and their
mutual constraints within the human
information processing system. Psychological
Bulletin, 104, 163–191.
Craik, F. I., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of
processing and the retention of words in
episodic memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 104(3), 268–294.
Ehrlich, P. R., Dobkin, D. S., & Wheye, D.
(1988). Hawk-eyed. In The birder’s hand-
book: A ﬁeld guide to the natural history of
North American birds (pp. 229–231). New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Wil-
liams, K. D. (2003, October 10). Does rejec-
tion hurt? An fMRI study of social exclusion.
Science, 302, 290–292.
Faulkner, J., Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Dun-
can, L. A. (2004). Evolved disease-avoidance
mechanisms and contemporary xenophobic
attitudes. Group Processes and Intergroup
Relations, 7, 333–353.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Simpson, J. A., & Boyes, A.
D. (2006). Accuracy and bias in romantic
relationships: An evolutionary and social psy-
chological analysis. In M. Schaller, J. A.
Simpson, & D. T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution
and social psychology (pp. 189–209). New
York: Psychology Press.
Forgas, J. P., & Bower, G. H. (1987). Mood
eﬀects on person perception judgments.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
53, 53–60.
Gangestad, S. W., & Simpson, J. A. (2000).
The evolution of human mating: Trade-oﬀs
and strategic pluralism. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 23, 573–644.
Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver, C.
E. (2002). Changes in women’s sexual inter-
ests and their partners’ mate retention tactics
across the menstrual cycle: Evidence for shift-
ing conﬂicts of interest. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B, 269,
975–982.
Harrer, H. (1996). Seven years in Tibet. New
York: Tarcher/Putnam.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error
management theory: A new perspective on
biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 81–91.
Hirschfeld, L. A. (1996). Race in the making:
Cognition, culture, and the child’s construction
of human kinds. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Kenrick, D. T. (1994). Evolutionary social
psychology: From sexual selection to social
cognition. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 26,
pp. 76–122). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Kenrick, D. T., Li, N. P., & Butner, J. (2003).
Dynamical evolutionary psychology: Indi-
vidual decision rules and emergent social
norms. Psychological Review, 110, 3–28.
Kenrick, D. T., Neuberg, S. L., & Cialdini, R.
B. (2005). Social psychology: Unraveling the
mystery. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Kenrick, D. T., Sadalla, E. K., & Keefe, R. C.
(1998). Evolutionary cognitive psychology:
The missing heart of modern cognitive sci-
ence. In C. Crawford & D. L. Krebs (Eds.),
Handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp.
485–514). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Kenrick, D. T., Sundie, J. M., Nicastle, L. D.,
& Stone, G. O. (2001). Can one ever be too
wealthy or too chaste? Searching for nonlin-
earities in mate judgment. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 80, 462–471.
Laham, S. M., Gonsalkorale, K., & von Hippel,
W. (2005). Darwinian grandparenting: Pref-
erential investment in more certain kin. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31,
63–72.
Levick, W. R. (1967). Receptive ﬁelds and trig-
ger features of ganglion cells in visual streak
of rabbit retina. Journal of Physiology, 188,
285–307.
67
COGNITIVE DISJUNCTIONS

Li, N. P., Bailey, J. M., Kenrick, D. T., & Lin-
senmeier, J. A. (2002). The necessities and
luxuries of mate preferences: Testing the
trade-oﬀs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 82, 947–955.
Lieberman, D., Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L.
(2003). Does morality have a biological basis?
An empirical test of the factors governing
moral sentiments relating to incest. Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society of London, Series B,
270, 819–826.
Mack, A. (2003). Inattentional blindness:
Looking without seeing. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 5, 180–184.
Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D. V.,
Delton, A. W., Hofer, B., Wilbur, C. J., et al.
(2003). Sexually selective cognition: Beauty
captures the mind of the beholder. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 85,
1107–1120.
Maner, J. K., Kenrick, D. T., Becker, D. V.,
Robertson, T. E., Hofer, B., Neuberg, S. L.,
et al. (2005). Functional projection: How
fundamental social motives can bias inter-
personal perception. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 88, 63–78.
Park, J. H., & Schaller, M. (2005). Does atti-
tude similarity serve as a heuristic cue for
kinship? Evidence of an implicit cognitive
association. Evolution and Human Behavior,
26, 158–170.
Perea, E. F., Anderson, U. S., Kenrick, D. T., &
Neuberg, S. L. (2006). Women’s attention–
memory disjunction for attractive male faces.
Paper presented at the 18th Annual Human
Behavior and Evolution Society Conference,
Philadelphia, PA.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct. New
York: Morrow.
Ranganath, C., Cohen, M. X., & Brozinsky, C.
J. (2005). Working memory maintenance
contributes to long-term memory formation:
Neural and behavioral evidence. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 994–1010.
Sherry, D. F., & Schacter, D. L. (1987). The
evolution of multiple memory systems.
Psychological Review, 94, 439–454.
Silverman, I., & Eals, M. (1992). Sex diﬀer-
ences in spatial abilities: Evolutionary theory
and data. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J.
Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture (pp.
531–549). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). Psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 19–136). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wilcoxon, H. C., Dragoin, W. B., & Kral, P. A.
(1971). Illness-induced aversions in rat and
quail: Relative salience of visual and gustatory
cues. Science, 171, 826–828.
68
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

PARTII
THE EVOLUTIONARY
PSYCHOLOGY OF AFFECT
AND COGNITION


5
Appraisals, Emotions, and
Adaptation
PHOEBE C. ELLSWORTH
Theories of Emotion
Implications of Appraisal Theories
Ambiguous Situations and Incomplete Emotions
How Diﬀerent are Modular and Appraisal Theories, Really?
A
century ago emotion was regarded as quite separate from cognition—
hotter, more primitive, and generally maladaptive. Reason and reﬂection
were considered higher faculties, faculties that distinguished humans
from other species, and that were more fully developed in civilized white men
than in women, children, mental patients, and members of so-called “primitive
cultures.” The assumption was that we evolved, both phylogenetically and
ontogenetically, away from emotion and toward rational thought.
Today most scholars agree that emotion is adaptive, conferring important
evolutionary advantages (Cosmides & Tooby, 2000; Nesse, 2004; Tooby &
Cosmides, 1990). This idea was pioneered by Arnold (1960), Tomkins (1962,
1963), and Lazarus (1991), and made credible to the scientiﬁc community by
brain scientists such as Damasio (1994) and LeDoux (1996).
In order to survive, an organism must respond to its environment by action.
Action is more important than thinking. A bacterium that acts in response to the
noxious or nutritive qualities of its environment by tumbling away or staying put
can survive and multiply without thinking. A brilliant thinker who understands
the universe but feels nothing has little chance of surviving: It will know that the
gun or the tiger is lethal, that the mushroom is edible, that the female passing by
has a perfect waist-to-hip ratio, but it won’t care. Unless its parents had strong
emotions motivating them to protect and nurture it, it probably would have died
in infancy.
In human beings, most behavior is driven by emotions. There are of course
71

basic drives, such as hunger, thirst, elimination, and sex, but whenever these are
frustrated, they are accompanied by emotion, and arguably it is the emotion, not
the drive, that produces the motivational force (Tomkins, 1962). And human
beings are motivated by an inﬁnite variety of provocations not associated with
biological drives—the desire to be appreciated, to have fun, to ﬁt in, and the fear
of failure and ostracism. Most of the mechanisms that evolutionary psychologists
have proposed as enhancing inclusive ﬁtness—escaping from predators, ﬁnding
food, choosing a mate, favoring one’s kin—are fraught with emotionally-driven
motivations.
Emotions would only be adaptive if they motivated behavior that was
appropriate to the situation. Emotions, to be functional, must be driven by an
appreciation of the signiﬁcance of the situation for the organism’s well being. It
means, as many evolutionary psychologists have pointed out (Barrett & Kurz-
ban, 2006; Cosmides & Tooby, 2000; Lieberman, chapter 11, this volume;
Tooby & Cosmides, 1990) that information processing is essential to emotion,
that emotions rarely exist without cognition, and often are the outcome of
complex reasoning processes. The organism (or the species) learns what matters,
which events are threats and which are opportunities, and what kinds of threat
and opportunity they are. Instead of cognition slowly replacing emotion in
ontogenetic or phylogenetic development, emotion evolved along with cogni-
tion, each clarifying and controlling the other, and each becoming increasingly
complex. People came to fear not only tigers and snakes but ridicule and loss; to
desire not only good food and mates, but social prestige and interesting activities;
to feel anger not only in response to physical attack but to criticism and snubs; to
feel disgust not only at putrefaction and deformity but at “immoral” social
customs (Rozin & Fallon, 1987). Most human emotions involve higher-order
cortical processing.
Emotion is not the only mechanism that has evolved for motivating
appropriate responses to situations. Most species accomplish the same end with
innate neural programs that are set to respond to species-speciﬁc stimuli (the red
dot on the herring gull’s bill, the silhouette of a hawk) with ﬁxed action patterns
(pecking, freezing). A particular stimulus automatically triggers a particular
adaptive response. These responses are modular in the strict sense of the term:
encapsulated, automatic, and domain-speciﬁc (Fodor, 1983).
Emotions provide a more ﬂexible alternative, “decoupling” the response
from the eliciting stimulus (Cosmides & Tooby, 2000; Ellsworth & Scherer,
2003; Scherer, 1984). Rather than triggering a speciﬁc behavior, the situation
provokes an emotion. One component of this emotion is an action tendency, a
motivation to respond in a certain way, but it is a motivation, not an actual
behavior, and it can be overruled. A person sees a small hairy object moving
across the ﬂoor, perceives it as a spider, and feels fear. Her heart beats faster and
she is motivated to run away. But then she realizes that it is not a spider at all, but
a dust-bunny. Her fear subsides, and she does not run away. Even though emo-
tions provide an adaptive motivation to immediate appropriate action, they
72
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

allow ﬂexibility both in the interpretation of the stimulus and in the choice of
response. The person realizes that the object is not a spider, so there is no need to
ﬂee. Or, if it is a spider, the initial motivation to ﬂee may be overridden by a
decision to step on it, or even by the recognition that it is a benign spider that
eats garden pests and should be left alone.
THEORIES OF EMOTION
There is general agreement that emotions are adaptive. The next question, about
which there is considerably less agreement, is “What is the emotional repertoire
in humans that enables them to recognize and deal adaptively with familiar and
unfamiliar situations that have signiﬁcance for their well-being?” Or, as Cos-
mides and Tooby (2000) put it, what is the algorithm for monitoring relevant
situation-deﬁning cues and assigning behavioral priorities?
There are two current theoretical responses to this question: categorical
theories and dimensional or appraisal theories. Of course there are intermediate
points of view, and variations within each major theoretical perspective, and the
following discussion is inevitably an oversimpliﬁcation.
Categorical Theories
According to categorical theories, there is a ﬁxed set of qualitatively distinct basic
emotions, such as fear, anger, and sorrow. Discrete emotions are natural kinds
(Barrett, 2006). Darwin (1872/1965) analyzed the properties of each distinct
category of emotion, but he was by no means the ﬁrst to conceptualize emotions
in this way. Most philosophers (cf. Solomon, 2000) and most ordinary people
think in terms of discrete, categorically distinct emotions. The most extensive
20th-century development of this point of view is that of Silvan Tomkins, who
proposed that there are nine basic emotions, each produced by a separate innate
neuromotor “aﬀective program” with its own neurophysiological, expressive, and
subjective features (Tomkins, 1962, 1963). Paul Ekman and Carroll Izard are
the two psychologists most responsible for perpetuating Tomkins’ theory and
exploring it empirically (Ekman, 1972; Izard, 1971), but there are many other
categorical theorists, some with theories of emotions in general (e.g., Levenson,
2003; Panksepp, 2000; Plutchik, 2003), and many who study a single emotion
category such as fear, disgust, or anger.
Most evolutionary psychologists who talk about emotion also assume,
implicitly or explicitly, that emotions are categorically distinct. Their categories
of emotion are domain-speciﬁc modules that detect signiﬁcant situations and
have associated algorithms that regulate behavioral responses (Cosmides &
Tooby, 2000; Tooby & Cosmides, 1990). Unlike the psychological theorists,
who usually propose a small handful of basic emotions—usually between six and
ten, the evolutionary psychologists generally postulate a very large number of
73
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

modules, each designed to respond to a single kind of situation—being chased
by a predator, seeing another man ﬂirting with your wife, competing for mater-
nal attention, being sick, and many more. Emotions are designed for coping
adaptively with recurring ancestral situations in which the wrong response would
diminish ﬁtness. Figure 5.1 illustrates some possible situation-speciﬁc modules.
Several criticisms have been leveled at traditional categorical theories (cf.
Ortony & Turner, 1990). First, most categorical theories postulate a small num-
ber of basic emotions—somewhere between 6 and 20, but both our intuition
and our lexicon include far more emotional states. Jealousy, sympathy, embar-
rassment, and loneliness are common emotions that are not included in most
categorical theories. Two common approaches to dealing with this problem are
(1) to add new categories, and (2) to postulate that the excluded emotions are
blends or mixtures of the included ones. There have been moves over the past
quarter-century to add contempt (Ekman, O’Sullivan, & Matsumoto, 1991) and
embarrassment (Keltner, 1995) to the inner circle of basic emotions. But adding a
few emotions still results in a set that falls far short of the range of emotions most
people feel. The alternative is the idea that two or more emotions can combine to
produce a third: Plutchik, for example, argues that love is a combination of joy
and acceptance, and hatred is a combination of disgust and anger (2003). But so
far the idea of emotion blends is simply a metaphor, with no evidence and not
even much theory about the mechanism involved. Do two aﬀect programs ﬁre
FIGURE 5.1 Some examples of emotion-speciﬁc eliciting situations.
74
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

simultaneously at half blast? Is there rapid alternation between one and the other,
or what? Cosmides and Tooby (2000) avoid this problem by postulating a much
larger number of situationally-speciﬁc feelings and arguing that “many well-
known mental states [e.g., malaise, shock, and the appreciation of beauty] should
be recognized as emotion states” (p. 112).
A second problem with categorical theories is that they are nominal theor-
ies—lists of six or eight or nine unrelated emotions with no means of recognizing
similarities and diﬀerences among them. Dimensional theorists since the time of
Wundt have recognized that some emotions are more similar than others
(Schlosberg, 1952). Disgust is more like anger than it is like joy or sorrow. Some
categorical theorists now talk about “families” of related emotions (Ekman,
2003), but still without much discussion of the relations among the families.
Others, like Schlosberg (1952) and Plutchik (2003) combine categories and
dimensions into hybrid circumplex models, for example, with Happiness, Sur-
prise, Fear/Suﬀering, Anger, Disgust, and Contempt arranged around a circle so
that Happiness is close to both Surprise and Contempt. An evolutionary theorist
would argue that emotions will be similar if they are responses to similar situ-
ations or if they serve similar functions. But without more precise speciﬁcation of
the kinds of similarity that matter for situations or functions, this doesn’t get us
very far. Danger, for example, would probably be seen as a relevant dimension of
similarity while the fact that two events both occurred on a Tuesday would not,
but so far no systematic attempts have been made to deﬁne the relevant kinds of
similarity.
A third criticism of categorical theories is related to the second: They don’t
deal well with incomplete emotions or with transitions between emotions. Often
people say they feel “upset” or “out of sorts” or generally good or bad but can’t
specify a particular emotion. Likewise categorical theories say little about how
emotions change from one to another. Vague emotions and emotional transi-
tions are part of emotional life, and for the most part categorical theories have
little to say about them. To say that as the situation changes diﬀerent aﬀect
programs will strengthen or weaken does little more than restate the problem.
The strategy of postulating “hundreds or even thousands” of modules may
solve the problem of excluded emotions, but in so doing, it exacerbates the
similarity problem. Consider the small sample of modules in Figure 5.1. Each
represents a diﬀerent emotion-provoking situation, but some resemble each
other more than others. Being smiled at and winning a race are positive experi-
ences; the others are not. Seeing a snake and having a sick child might both
arouse fear, but fear of quite diﬀerent sorts—one clear and immediate with an
almost automatic action tendency, the other more diﬀuse with no single obvious
motivation to action. The sick child will also arouse sorrow and pity. Hurting
one’s friend may result in guilt. Moldy food may be disgusting. The others,
although certainly not identical, cluster more closely together: Someone insults
me, someone cuts ahead and takes the last parking space, my cat spills my drink
all over my work—all of these provoke some variety of frustration and anger. So
75
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

will a guy ﬂirting with my woman, although in that situation we are likely to
label the emotion jealousy. And when I lock myself out, I feel a somewhat similar
emotion, directed at myself (Ellsworth & Tong, 2006). Even the moldy food
might provoke anger, if I think my irresponsible spouse left it lying around for
days instead of putting it back in the refrigerator. The idea of “hundreds or even
thousands” of independent, domain-speciﬁc modules fails to provide any infor-
mation about the relationships among these modules, or the ease of transition
from one emotional state to another, and in fact seems to imply that they are
unrelated.
In more recent work Cosmides and Tooby (2000) suggest that emotional
modules may vary considerably in size and speciﬁcity. At one extreme is a mod-
ule like “snake present,” with a speciﬁc stimulus and response, but they also talk
about “the appreciation of beauty,” and even “positive emotions.” In general,
most evolutionary psychologists, including Tooby and Cosmides, seem to accept
the same categories of emotion that are proposed by the categorical theorists
(Cosmides & Tooby, 2000; Nesse, 2004; Pinker, 1997; Plutchik, 2003). Some
focus on a single emotion, others talk about several emotions or even emotions in
general, but they assume that emotions such as fear, anger, disgust, and jealousy
are modules, that emotions are discrete entities, designed to respond to particular
situations in particular ways, that emotions are natural kinds.
The evidence for this assumption is not strong. In a recent article, Lisa
Feldman Barrett (2006) has reviewed the evidence against categorical theories of
emotion, and ﬁnds it persuasive. First, the correlations among the criterial com-
ponents of emotion—autonomic responses, facial expressions, reported feelings,
eliciting situations, and behavior—are fairly weak. John Lacey spent much of his
career attempting to document the autonomic proﬁles of diﬀerent emotions
(e.g., 1967), and failed. Neuroimaging studies also show inconsistent results
(Barrett, 2006). Studies that have measured two or more components of emo-
tions (e.g., facial and autonomic responses) have generally not found strong
evidence for discrete, distinct emotions. A few facial expressions correspond to a
few verbal labels (Bonanno & Keltner, 2004), but this may reﬂect the fact that
words represent discrete categories, whether or not facial expressions or emo-
tional experiences do. A wide range of situations can produce an emotion that we
would call anger, or fear, or happiness, and each of these so-called categories of
emotion can produce a wide range of responses (Frijda, 2006).
To reject the idea of discrete modules or categories is not to reject the idea
that emotion is adaptive and in fact vitally important in human evolution. The
organism must process information about its environment for signs of threats or
opportunities, and must be motivated to deal with those threats or opportun-
ities. At least one evolutionary psychologist, Nesse, rejects the modular view: As
regards emotion, “the mind’s structure consists not of distinct modules, each
shaped to carry out a particular task, but of jury-rigged and partly overlapping
mechanisms that one way or another tend to lead to adaptive behavior most of
the time” (2004, p. 1338).
76
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Appraisal Theories
In the 1980s, several diﬀerent psychologists came up with quite similar theories,
which are generally referred to as “appraisal theories” (Frijda, 1986; Roseman,
1984; Scherer, 1984; Smith & Ellsworth, 1985). The term “appraisal” dates back
to Magda Arnold (1960), who proposed that organisms constantly appraise their
environment for changes that might be signiﬁcant for their well-being, and that
these direct, immediate, and intuitive evaluations correspond to emotions. The
appraisals are associated with central and peripheral nervous system responses,
with distinctive subjective experiences, and with action tendencies. Combin-
ations of appraisals are emotions.
Appraisal theories have much in common with the views of evolutionary
psychologists. Both view information processing as central to emotion.
Appraisals and combinations of appraisals can be seen as situation-detecting
algorithms (Cosmides & Tooby, 2000), and changes in emotion in response to
changes in the situation motivate adaptive behavior (Nesse, 2004). Both
emphasize the advantages of the ﬂexibility gained from the possibility of
reappraisal of the situation and reassessment of one’s behavioral options.
Appraisal theories assume that during evolution emotions developed to (1)
evaluate events, (2) set priorities, (3) motivate appropriate behavior, (4) com-
municate reactions and intentions, and (5) provide ﬂexibility in interpretation
and response (Ellsworth & Scherer, 2003).
Appraisal theorists, however, do not focus on speciﬁc situations, such as the
presence of a snake or a guy making a move on one’s wife. Instead, they propose
a small set of more general appraisals that are particularly important in dis-
tinguishing among situations and therefore among emotions. Diﬀerent appraisal
theorists have somewhat diﬀerent lists of the appraisals they believe to be most
signiﬁcant in diﬀerentiating emotions, but in general, the similarities among
them are more conspicuous than the diﬀerences. Commonly proposed appraisal
dimensions are (1) novelty or change; (2) intrinsic pleasantness or unpleasant-
ness; (3) certainty or predictability; (4) goal facilitation or obstruction; (5)
agency (self, other person, impersonal circumstances); (6) coping potential (easy,
eﬀortful, hopeless); and (7) compatibility with social norms or one’s own per-
sonal standards. All situations can be appraised along these dimensions, and they
provide a way of assessing the similarities and diﬀerences among situations, and
hence among likely emotional responses. In Figure 5.1, two situations clearly
involve a change in circumstances in which another person deﬁnitely blocks my
goal: “Someone insults me” and “Someone cuts ahead of me and takes the last
parking space.” In both cases, appraisal theory predicts that I will feel angry. If
the guy deﬁnitely ﬂirts with my woman, I will also feel angry, but if I am
uncertain about what he’s doing, or I’m just hoping she’ll choose me, I’ll feel
something a little diﬀerent, and I might label my emotion jealousy. I don’t need
to have separate modules for P spits at me, P insults me, P snubs me, and P slaps
me: They all involve a change, a human agent, negative consequences, goal
77
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

obstruction, high certainty, and probably a violation of social norms, and they all
make me mad.
Emotions typically begin when the organism notices a change. This is the
appraisal of novelty, and creates a gateway, or state of readiness, for emotion. The
appraisal of novelty, like all appraisals, is associated with brain and bodily
responses (an orienting response), a change in subjective feelings, and a motiv-
ation to action, in this case, to attend closely to the novel stimulus. Any change
may attract attention, and in this regard appraisal theories diﬀer from the evo-
lutionary theory of Tooby and Cosmides (1990), who argue that all perceptions
that enhance ﬁtness must be situation-speciﬁc. Appraisal theorists would argue
that since any change of circumstances might aﬀect the organism’s well-being, it
is important to be sensitive to novelty in general. Of course many changes will
turn out to be insigniﬁcant, attention will be ﬂeeting, and the organism will
return to whatever it had been doing.
The next appraisal, often experienced simultaneously with novelty, is a sense
of intrinsic pleasantness or unpleasantness (Zajonc, 1980). Valence is central to
almost every theory of emotion ever devised, and in factor analyses of emotional
states, valence almost always accounts for the largest proportion of the variance
(Smith & Ellsworth, 1985). In order to survive, an organism must be able to
distinguish between things that are bad for it and things that are good for it, so as
to avoid harm and take advantage of opportunities. Moving toward beneﬁts and
away from harm is fundamental to all organisms that move, and may even be
considered the function of movement.
But human beings are vastly more complicated than the bacterium that
moves along a chemical gradient in the direction of more beneﬁcial chemicals
(Nesse, 2004). Pleasure and pain can be simple or complex, innate or learned,
individual or social, immediate or delayed, to name just a few signiﬁcant
distinctions. Valence is implicated in several diﬀerent appraisals.
Usually the simplest and most immediate is intrinsic attraction or intrinsic
aversion, appraisals that lead to approach or avoidance. Responses to some stim-
uli, such as sweet and bitter tastes or smiling and frowning faces, are apparently
innate, hardwired, and universal, but many, such as a taste for Beethoven or
single-malt scotch, are not. In either case, the immediate sense of attraction or
aversion is a response to the properties of the stimulus itself, not to its relevance
to the person’s current purposes.
People are also pleased, in a diﬀerent way, when they perceive events as
facilitating the achievement of a goal, and displeased when they perceive ob-
stacles. Some goals, like food or love or relief from pain are universal; many are
speciﬁc to particular social groups, or particular individuals, or particular occa-
sions. A theory of emotion should include some explanation of why diﬀerent
people experience diﬀerent emotions in the same situation, and why the same
person sometimes experiences diﬀerent emotions in response to apparently simi-
lar circumstances. In appraisal theories these diﬀerences are accounted for (1) by
the possibility that diﬀerent people appraise the same situation in diﬀerent ways,
78
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

and (2) by the possibility that people are pursuing diﬀerent goals (e.g., winning a
ﬁght vs. avoiding a ﬁght). For some theorists, goal relevance is necessary condi-
tion for emotion (Nesse, 2004; Pinker, 1997), and these theorists would prob-
ably not distinguish intrinsic pleasantness from goal-conduciveness. Appraisal
theorists generally keep them separate, with goal-conduciveness dependent on
the person’s particular motivations at the time, unlike intrinsic pleasantness. In
Figure 5.1, “winning the race” is much more obviously tied to an immediate goal
than “someone smiles at me.” A downpour may elicit delight if the crops are
withering but gloom and frustration if the family had been planning a day at the
beach. But a genuine friendly smile reliably elicits a moment of pleasure—it is
intrinsically positive in a way that most goal-related stimuli are not.
The idea that there is a general appraisal that tells the organism whether its
goal is becoming more or less attainable is diﬀerent from the ideas of some
evolutionary psychologists. For example, Cosmides and Tooby (2000) state that
the mechanism for choosing the right mate is very diﬀerent from the mechanism
for choosing the right food (p. 99), and this is obviously true in the sense that
nobody checks out the waist-to-hip ratio of the choices at a cafeteria. The speciﬁc
deﬁnition of desirable attributes of course depends on the speciﬁc goal that
occupies a person’s mind at the moment, as well as upon individual, contextual,
and cultural diﬀerences (an Asian may choose the jellyﬁsh over the cheese; a
Westerner usually would not). Several evolutionary psychologists have relaxed
the notion of strict modularity to allow for variations in goals and contexts
(Barrett & Kurzban, 2006; Nesse, 2004), but they do not propose a general
mechanism for recognizing whether the likelihood of reaching one’s goal is
increasing or decreasing.
Humans may also judge whether a behavior is compatible with important
personal or social values, and this appraisal is correlated with a range of positive
and negative emotional states that are weak or absent in other animals, such as
shame, guilt, contempt, righteous indignation, and pride. Human beings are
social animals, depending on shared norms about acceptable and unacceptable
behavior. Social organization is sustained by the emotional reactions of group
members to behavior that violates them. Anger and contempt can provoke group
members to exclude a violator, and exclusion is perhaps the most devastating
sanction people can impose on one another (Spoor & Williams, chapter 17, this
volume).
Certainty and control are appraisals that are often closely related. The mean-
ing of a situation is sometimes ambiguous and the outcome unclear. Uncertainty
characterizes interest and surprise. When the outcome may be unpleasant the
person feels fear; when a pleasant outcome is uncertain, the person feels hope.
People often vacillate between hope and fear as the perceived probability of
positive or negative consequences changes.
The likelihood of future outcomes often involves the person’s own ability to
change the situation or to adjust to it. Lazarus (1966) was the ﬁrst to clearly
distinguish between the appraisal of the situation and the appraisal of one’s
79
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

ability to cope with it. According to Ellsworth and Scherer, “the major function
of the . . . coping appraisal is to determine the appropriate response to an event;
given the nature of the event and the resources at one’s disposal” (2003, p. 580);
it allows for ﬂexibility in choice of behavior. Appraisals of control can be fairly
complex. Some events, like the weather, are intrinsically uncontrollable. Others
may be controllable in principle, but whether one can actually control them
depends on one’s mental, physical, material, or social resources. In dealing with
competitors or predators, in deciding between ﬁght and ﬂight, the organism
evaluates its own power relative to that of the other. Finally, coping is still a
relevant dimension even when the event is uncontrollable; in this case the focus
is on one’s ability to adjust to the change in circumstances.
The appraisal of agency plays an important role in distinguishing among
human emotions, particularly among negative emotions. An event can be
appraised as caused by oneself, by someone else, or by impersonal circumstances
(fate, chance). The same misfortune results in very diﬀerent emotions depending
upon the person’s attribution of its cause. If my child is hurt in a rockslide I feel
sad. If she is hurt because someone threw a rock at her I feel angry. If she is hurt
because I threw a rock over my shoulder and it hit her, I feel guilty. Perceptions of
agency are crucial in distinguishing between feelings of anger, sorrow, and guilt
and their associated action tendencies. Among the negative emotions in Figure
5.1, the sick child is likely to evoke sadness (circumstances). If I hurt my friend I
will feel guilty (self-agency). The guy ﬂirting with my woman, insulting me, or
taking the last parking space will make me angry (other agency). Locking myself
out evokes anger at myself, which shares some appraisals with anger and some
with shame and guilt (Ellsworth & Tong, 2006). If I anthropomorphize my cat, I
will be angry at it. If not, I will just feel frustrated or sad. Among the positive
emotions, the appraisal of agency distinguishes among joy (circumstances), pride
(self-agency) and gratitude (other-agency).
In summary, according to appraisal theories, emotions are not like irredu-
cible particles, but are composed of combinations of simpler but still meaningful
appraisals and their associated bodily reactions and action tendencies. If one
knows how a person interprets his circumstances, one can predict his emotional
state. If one knows what emotion a person is feeling, one can predict how she
interprets her circumstances. Any change in an appraisal corresponds to a change
in emotion. Over the past quarter-century, considerable empirical support for
appraisal theories has accumulated, both within and across cultures (see
Ellsworth & Scherer, 2003). The list of appraisals described here is of course not
exhaustive. Finer distinctions among emotions (e.g., between shame and guilt,
anger and indignation) may require additional appraisals, or may depend upon
the speciﬁc features of the situation (as evolutionary theorists might argue).
80
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

IMPLICATIONS OF APPRAISAL THEORIES
No Fixed Number of Emotions
Most appraisal theories are dimensional theories, with each appraisal able to
take on any value along a continuum. Instead of six or ten or twenty separate
categories of emotion, there is a potentially inﬁnite variety of emotional states,
and the capacity for subtle shades of feeling. There are no distinct boundaries
between emotions. There are no such things as anger or fear or disgust, separ-
ated by a gulf from other emotions. As appraisals change, the experience of
anger changes until at some point the emotion is better described by some other
word in the language, such as frustration or contempt. The verbal labels are
categorical; the emotional experience is not. A modular theory can account for
many more varieties of emotional experience than a theory based on a small
number of discrete categories, but it is still very diﬀerent from a dimensional
theory such as appraisal theory, which allows for an uninterrupted, continuous
change in emotions as the situation or one’s interpretation of it changes.
Appraisal theories can account for gradual changes in emotion as well as sudden
ones.
Emotion as Process
In appraisal theories the experience of emotion is not a state, but a continuous
process—a river, not a series of pools. In some ways appraisals—or particular
combinations of appraisals—are like algorithms for detecting signiﬁcant
situations, but situations are not static. The situation develops over time, and the
“same” situation can be reappraised, so that the emotion changes. The great
evolutionary advantage of emotion over triggering stimuli and ﬁxed action pat-
terns is ﬂexibility—both in interpretation (and possibly reinterpretation) of the
stimulus and in the behavioral response. In many situations the initial action
tendency is powerful and automatic, and this is as it should be, particularly in
dangerous situations, where mistaken activity is likely to be safer than mistaken
passivity. But an action tendency is not an actual behavior, and a reappraisal (or a
more complete appraisal) can check the initial impulse and result in more
appropriate behavior.
A strict modular perspective might have trouble with this sort of ﬂuidity,
and in fact Fodor (1983) argued that nonmodular mechanisms often replaced
modular mechanisms in the evolution of higher-order cognition (and, I would
argue, emotion): “Cognitive evolution would thus have been in the direction of
gradually freeing certain sorts of problem-solving systems from the constraints
under which input analyzers labor—hence of producing, as a relatively late
achievement, the comparatively domain-free inferential capacities which appar-
ently mediate higher ﬂights of cognition” (p. 43). Emotional appraisals can be
seen as this sort of “comparatively domain-free inferential capacity.” Many recent
modular theorists have considerably relaxed Fodor’s strict criteria of modularity,
81
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

however, and in a later section I will consider the compatibility of these modiﬁed
theories with appraisal theories.
Similarities Among Emotions, and Transitions
Theories that postulate a set of categorically distinct “basic emotions” have no
way of accounting for our intuition that some emotions are very similar to each
other, while others are so diﬀerent that they seem almost like opposites. In
appraisal theories, emotional experiences that share many appraisals will be more
similar than emotional states that share few. Negative outcomes brought about
by another person will produce some form of anger, across a wide range of people
and outcomes. If the event was not caused by a person but by uncontrollable
circumstances, the person will feel sad or depressed. Tooby and Cosmides (1990)
argue that situations that resemble each other will elicit similar emotions, and
that new situations that resemble situations that existed in the Pleistocene will
elicit similar emotions, but what it takes for a situation to “resemble” another is
not speciﬁed. Possibly they mean that emotions that serve similar functions will
resemble each other, but there is no more speciﬁcity in the deﬁnition of func-
tional similarity than there is in the deﬁnition of situational similarity. In prin-
ciple, evolutionary theorists could account for similarities and diﬀerences among
emotions, if they were interested; in practice, they have not. Cosmides and
Tooby speak of “algorithms that monitor for situation-deﬁning cases” (2000,
p. 410) as an essential feature of emotions, but do not say what they are: Appraisal
theory can be considered an attempt to specify some of these algorithms.
Similarly, categorical theories are vague about transitions from one emotion
to another. Does one aﬀect program shut down and another start up? Why? Or
do they both function at half-strength for a while? Functionally-speciﬁc modular
theories are mostly vague on this point too: presumably “there will be a dynamic
activation and deactivation of these systems, leading to periods of transition”
(R. Kurzban, personal communication), but this argument is so abstract that it
generates no predictions. Appraisal theories have a much easier time accounting
for transitions: Whenever an appraisal changes, the emotional experience will
change in predictable ways. If the change is big enough, the experience may be
described with a diﬀerent emotion term. For example, if the situation is negative
but the outcome is uncertain, a person will feel fear (watching from high ground,
the person see the ﬂood waters rising towards his house). But if the negative
outcome occurs for certain (the house is washed away in the ﬂood), the person
will feel despair. The appraisal of certainty has changed, and the emotional
consequence is predictable. If I discover that my dead dog had been poisoned by
my neighbor, my grief will be replaced by anger, corresponding to the change in
my appraisal of agency. Both evolutionary theories and appraisal theories predict
that changes in the appraisal of the situation lead to changes in the emotional
response, but appraisal theory speciﬁes the kinds of appraisals that are important
for these changes.
82
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

New Situations
Most of the situations that arouse people’s emotions did not exist in the
Pleistocene, and many, especially in childhood, are novel even within the span
of the individual’s own lifetime. Critics argue that modules that developed to
adapt to recurring conditions that existed in the Pleistocene cannot explain
problem solving or appropriate emotional responses in a world where those
conditions no longer recur (Chiappe & MacDonald, 2005). Evolutionary psy-
chologists have responded to this criticism by somewhat relaxing the speciﬁcity
of modularity (Barrett & Kurzban, 2006; Sperber, 1994). The stimulus for fear
may not be as particular as “a tiger running towards me with fangs bared” but
could be “a large powerful thing rapidly approaching me,” resulting in fear of
cars, motorcycles, and snowmobiles, and provoking appropriate avoidance
behavior. The crucial properties of the module are abstract, rather than con-
crete, and therefore generalizable to situations that the person has never
experienced.
So far, however, not much has been done to specify the kinds of properties
that matter. Theorists provide ad hoc examples of the applicability of prehistoric
modules to modern tasks—“collision-avoidance systems could be recruited in
driving, strategic social cognition systems could be recruited in chess, and sys-
tems evolved for identifying objects such as tools or animals could be recruited to
identify letters or words in reading”; Barrett & Kurzban, 2006), but no general
theories.
That is what appraisal theories attempt to do: to specify the appraisal fea-
tures of the situation that reliably produce emotions. Is it novel? Is my goal
blocked? How much control do I have? A phylogenetically or ontogenetically
novel situation can be appraised along the same dimensions as any other situ-
ation, and similar combinations of appraisals will result in similar emotions.
Tooby and Cosmides (1990) propose that new situations that “seem to resemble”
situations that existed in the Pleistocene will elicit the same emotions (p. 417).
Appraisal theories put some substance into the term “resemble,” specifying the
dimensions of similarity that are emotionally relevant.
AMBIGUOUS SITUATIONS AND INCOMPLETE EMOTIONS
A problem with categorical theories (or with theories that propose modules
corresponding to “fear,” “sorrow,” “jealousy,” or other discrete emotions) is that
quite often people feel emotional, but none of the basic emotion categories—or
any other speciﬁc emotion that can be named—quite ﬁts. They feel “bad,” or
“upset.” It is not a blend of other emotions; it is not anything very speciﬁc; they
just feel “out of sorts.” Some theorists explain these states by saying that they are
not emotions at all, but moods, but that seems like an evasive semantic sleight of
hand. Others might argue that the true emotion is unconscious, and that is
83
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

certainly possible, but it still doesn’t explain the nature of the person’s conscious
emotional experience.
According to appraisal theories, a person can become emotional without
making all the appraisals that typically characterize a speciﬁc emotion. With the
ﬁrst appraisal, typically the appraisal of novelty, there are changes in the central
and peripheral nervous system, an interruption of behavior, and a change in
subjective feeling. The nature of this emotionality may be highly ﬂuid, con-
stantly changing as new appraisals are added or old ones revised. Or it may
remain a vague sense of malaise or well-being, with no new appraisals occurring
until the situation changes. Or a person may be quite close to a clear emotion,
but not quite there—in a state of almost-anger, for example, if she is not sure
whether the event is actually negative or not sure whether a particular person is
actually responsible. One can know that a situation looks good or bad, and that
it is highly uncertain, but not exactly what it means. The emotion is vague, but
still enough to motivate the organism to approach, avoid, or wait. Appraisal
theories reject the idea that emotions are modular, bounded categories. Rather
than a single emotion of anger or sorrow there are many nuances of each—
irritation, indignation, rage, depression, sudden grief, and desperation. These are
names; the experience is continuous.
Differentiation
A fundamental principle of evolution is diﬀerentiation. Single-celled organisms
were followed by multicellular organisms, which ultimately evolved into the
multitude of plant and animal species that live today. Organisms developed a
huge variety of specialized capacities for sensing the vicissitudes of their
environment and for responding to it. Species have developed an astonishing
number of niche-speciﬁc adaptations (Hutchinson, 1978). Neither categorical
nor modular theories have much to say about this aspect of evolutionary theory:
the categories and modules are there, they are functional, but what was there
before they developed or how they came about are unanswered questions.
Nesse’s (2004) account of the phylogeny of emotions proposes that emo-
tions, like most other capacities, became more diﬀerentiated over the course of
evolution, and this view is entirely compatible with appraisal theories. Perhaps in
the very beginning the survival of single-celled organisms was simply a matter of
luck, but very soon they developed the ability to tumble away from noxious
stimuli and to keep going in the direction of beneﬁcial ones. There was valence
in their lives. As evolution progressed, animal species developed more speciﬁc
goals, and sensitivities to whether these goals were becoming more or less attain-
able and whether or not they had the resources to achieve them, and the variety
of emotional responses proliferated. Nesse uses the venerable evolutionary meta-
phor of a branching tree to describe the development of diﬀerentiated emotions,
and this view is also compatible with appraisal theory: As the capacity for more
sophisticated appraisals develops, the tree develops new branches. Cultures and
84
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

individuals may have concerns that foster proliﬁc elaboration of some branches,
resulting in many tiny twigs of emotional nuance, while leaving other areas less
fully diﬀerentiated. The branches of Nesse’s tree do not correspond closely to the
commonly-proposed appraisals, but the theories are similar in that they propose
an evolutionary progression of aﬀective responses from primitive to complex.
The tree is, at this stage, only a metaphor. The great virtue of this metaphor
is that it captures the idea of progressive diﬀerentiation, which is one of the
hallmarks of evolutionary theory. Some appraisal theorists have posited that the
appraisals occur in a ﬁxed sequence, phylogenetically, ontogenetically, and in the
actual experience of emotion (Scherer, 1984). Others have used a multidimen-
sional model, which misses this important theoretical insight, but allows greater
ﬂexibility, and can account for phenomena that are problematical for the tree.
For example, in sequential tree models, the ﬁrst major branch is valence, with the
positive emotions irrevocably separated from the negative emotions at an early
stage. But sometimes rapid vacillations between positive and negative emotions
are possible, as in the case of hope and fear. In a multidimensional space where
valence is one dimension among many, quick transitions between hope and fear
are more easily accounted for, as is the phenomenon of ambivalence. Both meta-
phors are heuristic, and for now there is no reason to proclaim that one is
sounder than the other, given our state of ignorance.
HOW DIFFERENT ARE MODULAR AND APPRAISAL
THEORIES, REALLY?
I am new to evolutionary theory, and relatively unschooled. But it seems to me
that both the evolutionary theorists and their critics may exaggerate the diﬀer-
ences that divide them. The gulf between them may be more a matter of seman-
tics and (perhaps willful) misunderstanding than of real fundamental diﬀerences.
As in politics, each side creates a caricature of the other side’s views that no one
actually believes. The critics of evolutionary theory describe the evolutionary
theorists’ view as involving hundreds or thousands of tiny independent modules
with little coordination or intercommunication. The evolutionary theorists
describe their critics as espousing one huge undiﬀerentiated brain with no
domain speciﬁcity whatsoever.
No one—or hardly anyone—actually espouses either of these extreme posi-
tions. Evolutionary theorists postulate superordinate programs to coordinate the
smaller modules (Cosmides & Tooby, 2000), context eﬀects and computational
resources shared by multiple systems (Barrett & Kurzban, 2006). It is wrong for
critics to rely on Fodor’s (1984) strict automatic, encapsulated version of modu-
larity in criticizing current evolutionary psychologists, since almost all of them
have relaxed those criteria. And there are diﬀerences of opinion among evo-
lutionary theorists. Sperber (1994) argues for partial modularity, and Nesse
(2004) for partial diﬀerentiation among emotions. Tooby and Cosmides (1990)
85
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

ﬂatly state that “novelty cannot in principle be a discrete selection pressure”
because it is domain general (p. 410), and they seem therefore to reject the idea
that organisms can have a general appraisal of novelty. Sperber argues that sensi-
tivity to novelty exists and is “of course not domain speciﬁc” (1994, p. 50). Most
evolutionary theorists seem to accept the English-language categories of fear,
jealousy, disgust, anger, and others as real, and as modular, and this is a genuine,
rather than a false, disagreement between evolutionary theorists and appraisal
theorists.
Appraisal theorists (and all other psychological theorists) believe in diﬀeren-
tiated mental functions and capacities. With regard to emotion, I have called
evolutionary psychologists categorical theorists because they talk of discrete emo-
tions as modules (Barrett & Kurzban, 2006; Pinker, 1997; Plutchik, 2003; and
even to some extent Nesse, 2004, although he argues that they are overlapping).
Appraisal theorists regard these “categories” as unbounded, with a continuum of
intermediate states. The evidence that such categories are real is very weak; they
are consistent with our intuitions, but not with the data, despite prodigious
eﬀorts to ﬁnd data to corroborate their existence (Barrett, 2006). Language, not
experience, is responsible for our perception of emotions as categorical, and, as
James (1890/1950) argued, it is unproductive to think of them as “psychic
entities” or to worry about how to catalogue them.
However, the appraisals themselves might be candidates for modules: the
perception of novelty; of intrinsic valence—even in sights and tastes never before
experienced; of agency; of controllability. These of course may seem to ﬂy in the
face of current evolutionary theory, because they seem like domain-general mod-
ules, but that would only be true if “domain” were deﬁned in terms of speciﬁc
content, and some evolutionary psychologists are moving away from such a
limited deﬁnition of “domain” (Barrett & Kurzban, 2006). The eﬀort at recon-
ciliation may ﬁzzle, and is certainly more diﬃcult than a continuing series of
attacks and counterattacks of positions no one seriously believes in, but it is an
interesting new direction, and worth thinking about.
REFERENCES
Arnold, M. B. (1960). Emotion and personality:
Vol. 1. Psychological aspects. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Barrett, H. C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modu-
larity in cognition: Framing the debate.
Psychological Review, 116, 628–647.
Barrett, L. F. (2006). Are emotions natural
kinds? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1,
28–58.
Bonanno, G. A., & Keltner, D. (2004). The
coherence of emotion systems: Comparing
online measures of appraisal and facial
expressions, and self-report. Cognition and
Emotion, 18, 431–444.
Chiappe, D., & McDonald, K. B. (2005). The
evolution of domain-general mechanisms in
intelligence and learning. Journal of General
Psychology, 132, 5–40.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). Evolutionary
psychology and the emotions. In M. Lewis &
J. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of
emotions (2nd ed., pp. 91–115). New York:
Guilford Press.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error:
86
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Emotion, reason, and the human brain. New
York: Avon Books.
Darwin, C. (1965). The expression of the
emotions in man and animals. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press. (Original work
published 1872)
Ekman, P. (1972). Universals and cultural dif-
ferences in facial expressions of emotions. In
J. Cole (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motiv-
ation (pp. 207–283). Lincoln, NE: Nebraska
University Press.
Ekman, P. (2003). Emotions revealed. New York:
Henry Holt.
Ekman, P., O’Sullivan, M., & Matsumoto, D.
(1991). Contradictions in the study of con-
tempt: What it all about? Motivation and
Emotion, 15, 293–296.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Scherer, K. R. (2003).
Appraisal processes in emotion. In R. J. Dav-
idson, H. Goldsmith, & K. R. Scherer (Eds.),
Handbook of aﬀective sciences (pp. 572–595).
New York/Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Tong, E. M. W. (2006).
What does it mean to be angry at yourself?
Categories, appraisals, and the problem of
language. Emotion, 6, 572–586.
Fodor, J. (1983). The modularity of mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frijda, N. (1986). The emotions. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Frijda, N. (2006). The laws of emotion.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Hutchinson, G. E. (1978). An introduction to
population ecology. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Izard, C. (1971). The face of emotion. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
James, W. (1950). The emotions. In The prin-
ciples of psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 442–485).
New York: Dover. (Original work published
1890)
Keltner, D. (1995). The signs of appeasement:
Evidence for the distinct displays of embar-
rassment, amusement, and shame. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 441–
454.
Lacey, J. J. (1967). Somatic response patterning
and stress: Some revisions of activation the-
ory. In M. H. Appley & R. Trumbull (Eds.),
Psychological stress: Issues in research (pp. 14–
42). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Lazarus, R. (1991). Emotion and adaptation.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological stress and the
coping process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Levenson, R. W. (2003). The autonomic speci-
ﬁcity of emotion. In R. J. Davidson, K. R.
Scherer, & H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook
of aﬀective sciences (pp. 212–224). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Nesse, R. (2004). Natural selection and the elu-
siveness of happiness. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London, Series B,
359, 1333–1347.
Ortony, A., & Turner, T. J. (1990). What’s basic
about basic emotions? Psychological Review,
97, 315–331.
Panksepp, J. (2000). Emotions as natural kinds
within the human brain. In M. Lewis & J.
Havilland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions
(2nd ed., pp. 137–156). New York: Guilford
Press.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New
York: Norton.
Plutchik, R. (2003). Emotions and life. Wash-
ington, 
DC: 
American 
Psychological
Association.
Roseman, I. (1984). Cognitive determinants of
emotion: A structural theory. In P. Shaver
(Ed.), Review of personality and social psych-
ology (Vol. 5, pp. 11–36). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Rozin, P., & Fallon, A. (1987). A perspective on
disgust. Psychological Review, 94, 23–41.
Scherer, K. R. (1984). On the nature and func-
tion of emotion: A component process
approach. In K. R. Scherer & P. Ekman
(Eds.), Approaches to emotion (pp. 293–318).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Schlosberg, H. (1952). The description of facial
expressions in terms of two dimensions. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology, 44, 229–237.
Smith, C. A., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1985). Pat-
terns of cognitive appraisal in emotion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
52, 475–488.
Solomon, R. C. (2000). The philosophy of
emotions. In M. Lewis & J. Haviland-Jones
(Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp.
2–29). New York: Guilford Press.
Sperber, D. (1994). The modularity of thought
87
APPRAISALS, EMOTIONS, AND ADAPTATION

and the epidemiology of representations. In
L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.),
Mapping the mind: Domain speciﬁcity in cog-
nition and culture (pp. 39–67). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Tomkins, S. S. (1962). Aﬀect, imagery, con-
sciousness: Vol. 1. The positive aﬀects. New
York: Springer.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Aﬀect, imagery, con-
sciousness: Vol. 2. The negative aﬀects. New
York: Springer.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past
explains the present: Emotional adaptations
and the structure of ancestral environments.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 11, 375–424.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Thinking and feeling:
Preferences need no inferences. The American
Psychologist, 35, 151–175.
88
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

6
The Evolutionary Bases of
Social and Moral Emotions
Dominance, Submission, and True Love
ROSS BUCK
Motivation, Emotion, and Communication: The Developmental-
Interactionist View
Altruism
Attachment and Higher-Level Social and Moral Emotions
Conclusions
T
his chapter considers the deep evolutionary roots of motivation, emo-
tion, and communication with the goal of examining the essential
natures of cooperation and competition from the viewpoint of
Developmental-Interactionist theory (Buck, 1985, 1999). We ﬁrst consider
deﬁnitions of motivation, emotion, and communication. I then argue that
fundamental functions of motivation and emotion are revealed in behaviors of
microbes, with special attention to the evolution of altruism, with empirical
evidence of “paleoaltruism” demonstrating communication and individual sac-
riﬁce for group beneﬁt in microorganisms. Finally, this chapter advances a view
of the dynamic emergence via interaction of systems of primary social and moral
emotions.
MOTIVATION, EMOTION, AND COMMUNICATION: THE
DEVELOPMENTAL-INTERACTIONIST VIEW
Developmental-Interactionist theory holds that behavior is a function of
interactions over the course of development between phylogenetically-structured
special-purpose processing systems and general-purpose processing systems structured
89

by experience (Buck, 1985, 1999). In human beings language imposes an add-
itional source of behavior control functionally independent of biology, which
may obscure true determinants of behavior by rationalizing acts that are actually
determined by deep-seated and largely unacknowledged motives and emotions.
Deﬁning Motivation and Emotion
Deﬁnitions of “motivation” generally emphasize the activation and direction of
behavior toward a goal; and deﬁnitions of “emotion” typically note the presence
of peripheral physiological responses, expressive behaviors, and subjective experi-
ences or aﬀects (Kleinginna & Kleinginna 1981a, 1981b). Developmental-
Interactionist theory suggests that motives and emotions imply one another:
Motives constitute potential for behavior built into a system of behavior control, and
emotions constitute readouts of motivational potential when that potential is acti-
vated by an eﬀective stimulus. There are three readouts: Emotion I involves
peripheral physiological responding via the autonomic, endocrine, and immune
systems; Emotion II involves expressive displays such as facial expressions and
pheromone releases; and Emotion III involves subjective or aﬀective experience
of desires and feelings (Buck, 1985, 1999). In this view, motivation and emotion
are related similarly to energy and matter in physics. Energy is a potential that is
not seen in itself, but in its manifestation in matter—in heat, light, and/or
force—when activated by an eﬀective stimulus. Thus, potential energy in an
explosive or a coiled spring is not observable in itself, but is revealed when
activated by lighting the fuse or releasing the spring. Similarly, motivation is not
seen in itself, but rather in its manifestations in emotion: in physiological
responding, expressive displays, and subjectively experienced desires and feelings.
The Developmental-Interactionist view holds that biologically-based
motives and emotions are always turned on. Neurochemical systems underlying
the experience and expression of happiness, sadness, fear, anger, sex, hunger,
thirst, etc., are always activated to some extent, like the pilot light in a gas heater.
We can turn our attention to the experience of these aﬀects, but like the feel of
the shoes on our feet, this activation is typically weak and unnoticed unless an
eﬀective stimulus is presented. But the Emotion III readout of the subjective
experience of all of the biological aﬀects is always available and accessible to us.
These aﬀects function as ever-present voices of the genes: informative even when
whispering. These primordial voices not so much control our behavior as cajole:
They coax, wheedle, tempt us with their siren song; coloring our perceptions
ranging from mild cheerfulness, annoyance, apprehension, melancholy to
passionate euphoria, fury, dread, despair.
Evolutionary Roots of Motivation and Emotion
Primes and Paleoprimes.
The above deﬁnitions encompass primary motiv-
ational-emotional states (primes) in human beings and also animals, with the
90
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

complexity of the state compatible with the complexity of the brain of the species
in question. However, these deﬁnitions can also apply to primary motivational-
emotional systems in microbes whose evolution long preceded the evolution of
the brain: paleoprimes. Paleoprimes serve functions in simple creatures analogous
to those served by motivation and emotion in human beings—activation,
approach-avoidance, dispersion, and aggregation—and these can be observed in
their behavior (Buck, 1999). Microbes are active at some times and quiescent at
others. They can be observed to approach some stimuli (light, warmth) and
avoid others. And, as we shall see, microbes also achieve dispersion, aggregation,
and cooperation by releasing molecules (pheromones) that repel, attract, or
otherwise inﬂuence others of their species.
Paleosociality.
These systems in turn underlie paleosociality, involving
microbes communicating and thereby completing social structures and organiza-
tions (Buck & Powers, 2006). As communication occurs in the course of
interaction, social organization emerges spontaneously and eﬀortlessly as a self-
organizing system. In microbes, the systems are simple enough that sending and
receiving mechanisms can be speciﬁed and the system of emergence understood
at a molecular and even genetic level. These microbial systems illustrate funda-
mental principles of social organization that illuminate mechanisms and prin-
ciples of social organization in more complex creatures, that in human beings
may often be hidden by a curtain of language.
More speciﬁcally, a combination of attachment motives and social com-
parison processes underlie a natural and eﬀortless emergence of systems of social
and moral emotions that guide every human interchange. Motivational potential
inherent in attachment systems in infants is activated through early interactions
with caregivers, giving rise to fundamental needs to love and to be loved which
constitute the aﬀective foundation of sociality (Baumeister & Leary, 1995). The
need to be loved is fundamental to human sociality. With development, inter-
actions with caregivers and peers teach the child rules that must be followed in
order to be loved: Thus the child learns that one must meet and exceed expect-
ations in order to be loved. The need to meet and exceed expectations therefore
requires both needs to be loved and learning what those rules and expectations
are and how to meet them. This learning occurs naturally, eﬀortlessly, and largely
unconsciously during the course of interactions with caregivers, peers, friends,
and lovers. There is evidence that these attachment motives are related to mech-
anisms of physical pain (Eisenberger & Lieberman, 2005; Eisenberger, Lieber-
man, & Williams, 2003; Panksepp, 1991). The pain that occurs, naturally and
eﬀortlessly, when one seems to fail in these attachment motives is demonstrated
by the research on ostracism reviewed by Spoor and Williams (chapter 17, this
volume). This is so even when on a rational level such ostracism is clearly sham:
Even though one knows rationally that one is being ostracized at random by a
computer, the pain is there, and it is real.
91
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

Primary Social and Moral Emotions
Developmental-Interactionist theory regards social, moral, and also cognitive
emotions to be higher-level emotions in contrast to biologically-based emotions,
requiring both a physiological base in neurochemical systems associated with
attachment and exploration, and a rational consideration of situational and
interpersonal contingencies (Buck, 1999). The neurochemical systems provide
the aﬀective “ﬁre” to the higher-level emotions, while the contingencies deter-
mine the quality of the emotion, rather like the interaction of physiology and
cognition in Schachter and Singer’s (1962) theory of emotion. Speciﬁcally, indi-
viduals are exquisitely aware of success or failure in meeting expectations and
being loved, and their own success or failure may be compared, automatically
and eﬀortlessly, with the success or failure of comparison others. Possible com-
binations of success and failure of self and other yields eight combinations of
fundamental interpersonal contingencies that correspond to eight primary social
emotions in four pairs of twins. If one succeeds relative to the comparison other
one tends to experience pride/arrogance, if one fails it is guilt/shame, if the other
succeeds it is envy/jealousy, if the other fails it is pity/scorn. The ﬁrst of these twins
is associated with meeting/exceeding expectations, that second with being loved.1
Deﬁning Communication
Developmental-Interactionist theory holds that social organization emerges
spontaneously and eﬀortlessly as a self-organizing system in the course of inter-
action between individuals, whether they are microbes or children. The mechan-
ism of this emergence through interaction is communication between elements,
that is, between individual microbes and individual children. “Communication”
is here deﬁned, following E. O. Wilson (1975), as occurring “whenever the
behavior of one individual (the sender) inﬂuences the behavior of another (the
receiver) . . . behavior can be deﬁned as communicative to the extent that it
reduces uncertainty in the behavior of another” (Buck, 1984, p. 4).
Symbolic and Spontaneous Communication.
Communication proceeds
in two simultaneous “streams:” one voluntary and symbolic, the other automatic
and spontaneous (Buck, 1984; Buck & VanLear, 2002). Voluntary symbolic
communication is learned, its elements are symbols that bear an arbitrary relation-
ship to the referent, and its content consists of falsiﬁable statements or proposi-
tions. In contrast, spontaneous communication is biologically structured in both
its sending and receiving aspects. An internal motivational/emotional state of the
sender is automatically and eﬀortlessly expressed in an evolved display, which
given attention is picked up by the receiver and “known” directly via evolved
preattunement as a motivational/emotional response in the receiver. The display
is not a symbol, but rather is a sign of the sender’s internal state. A sign bears
a natural relationship to the referent—an externally accessible aspect of the
92
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

referent, as in smoke being a sign of ﬁre—so that if the sign is present the referent
is present by deﬁnition. Therefore symbolic communication is not propositional
in that it cannot be false.
These simultaneous streams of communication coexist in virtually every
communicative exchange, although their relative importance varies. In formal
and structured situations, such as a lecture, symbolic communication dominates
but spontaneous communication plays a subsidiary albeit important role in con-
veying for example the charisma of the speaker and enthusiasm of the audience.
The symbolic-spontaneous mix also varies with the intimacy of personal rela-
tionship of sender and receiver. All else equal, symbolic communication pre-
dominates in formal relationships, but as personal relationships develop and
become more intimate, the relative importance of spontaneous communication
tends to increase. The symbolic-spontaneous mix also varies over the course of
development: The newborn is primarily a spontaneous communicator, but as an
infant grows into a toddler and comes to learn language, symbolic communica-
tion becomes more and more important (Buck, 1984). Finally, the symbolic-
spontaneous mix varies along the evolutionary scale: as species increase in
complexity, relatively inﬂexible spontaneous communication systems increas-
ingly interact with general-purpose symbolic communication systems, so that
communication becomes progressively more ﬂexible. This progressive evolution
of increased behavioral plasticity is anagenesis (Gottleib, 1984), and is compatible
with R. I. M. Dunbar’s social brain hypothesis (chapter 2, this volume).
Pseudospontaneous Communication.
Individuals have considerable “vol-
untary” control over the display, in that it is possible for a sender to show
motivational and emotional displays that are not really present as internal states.
Arthur VanLear and I termed this “pseudospontaneous communication,” because
while it is voluntary from the sender’s point of view, it uses the display mechan-
ism that can stimulate preattunements in the receiver, so if the receiver is taken in
it is as if it were a veridical display. A charismatic sender, for example, can
successfully “push the buttons” of an audience, and persuade by manipulating
others’ emotions (Buck & VanLear, 2002). This voluntary expression of a display
was termed “voluntary expression formation” in analyses of brain mechanisms of
primate audiovocal communication by Jurgens (1979). The question of veridical
versus manipulative displays is a fundamental issue in the evolution of com-
munication, as we shall see (see also Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this
volume).
Emotion, Communication, and Evolution
Communication in Classical Ethology.
The classical analysis of the evolu-
tion of communication stems from Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, and
particularly The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (1872/1998).
Darwin suggested that emotional displays can have adaptive value in social
93
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

animals because they reveal inner states of the responder that are useful for social
coordination, including for example aggressive dominance, fearful submissive-
ness, and sexual readiness. This implies that the inner state of the responder
(sender) must be associated with external expression, and that the receiver must
be able to “pick up” the expression via sensory cues: postures, facial expressions,
pheromones. Darwin’s thesis requires that sending and receiving mechanisms
coevolve—evolve in conjunction with one another—for the adaptive value of a
system of communication to be realized.
Ethologists including Lorenz and Tinbergen agreed that the communica-
tion of certain motivational-emotional states is adaptive (Hauser, 1996). Those
individuals who show evidence of that state in behavior tend to be favored, and
over the generations these behaviors can become “ritualized” into expressive
displays. Similar reasoning was applied to the evolution of receiving mechanisms:
Individuals who respond appropriately to these displays would tend to be
favored, so that the perceptual systems of species members can become “preat-
tuned” to the pickup of these displays. In this way, displays and preattunements
coevolve as aspects of systems of spontaneous communication.
The “Selﬁsh-Gene” Critique.
The classical view of communication was
challenged when selection was interpreted as operating, not at the level of the
individual or group, but rather at the level of the gene (Hauser, 1996). Richard
Dawkins and others argued that the ultimate unit of evolutionary selection is the
active, germ-line replicator. A replicator is “anything in the universe of which
copies are made,” an active replicator is “any replicator whose nature has some
inﬂuence over its probability of being copied,” and a germ-line replicator is a
“replicator that is potentially the ancestor of an indeﬁnitely long succession of
descendent replicators” (1982, p. 83). Dawkins argued that the only active repli-
cator lasting across evolutionary timescales is the gene, so that the “selﬁsh gene”
is the unit of selection, a replicator motivated only to make copies of itself.
Fitness was seen as based upon the survival, not of the individual organism or the
group, but rather upon inclusive ﬁtness: the survival of the genes.
The selﬁsh gene critique extended to the understanding of communication,
and speciﬁcally to the idea that accurate communication is adaptive. Instead, it
was argued that selection would actually operate against those who show veridi-
cal displays that are predictive of their true inner states and probable behaviors,
and suggested that communication is actually a means by which one animal
exploits another. In this regard, Dawkins and Krebs (1978) suggested an analogy
between animal communication and media advertising, where the object is per-
suasion rather than transfer of information. This manipulative communication
corresponds to pseudospontaneous communication as deﬁned previously, where
the display does not in fact truly reﬂect an internal state but rather is “put on”
voluntarily by the sender, but it can activate the preattunements in the receiver
and therefore be emotionally compelling. Krebs and Dawkins (1984) suggested
that mind-reading on the part of the receiver—interpreting the actual internal
94
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

state and predicting the behaviors of other animals—is the counterpart to
manipulation on the part of the sender. The sender’s counterresponse to mind-
reading may involve concealment (a poker-face) and active deception (simulat-
ing, qualifying, or falsifying one’s display) (see Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter
3, this volume, for another view of the Dawkins & Krebs position: They point
out that to evolve and stably persist a signaling system needs to be honest on
average across signaling events).
ALTRUISM
Kin Selection and Reciprocal Altruism
The phenomenon of altruism, deﬁned as the sacriﬁce of one’s own genetic ﬁtness
in favor of beneﬁting the genetic ﬁtness of another, poses a fundamental problem
for evolutionary theory. Dawkins (1989) argued that the “law of ruthless selﬁsh-
ness” governing the selection of genes implies that true altruism is impossible:
“. . . Let us try to teach generosity and altruism, because we are born selﬁsh” (p.
3). Despite this, there are apparent examples of unselﬁsh, cooperative, and even
altruistic behavior. It is widely agreed that, under conditions of kinship and/or
reciprocity, mutually cooperative communication can foster the inclusive ﬁtness
of the altruist, and therefore it can be favored by selection. Because such behavior
fosters the survival of the altruist’s own genes via inclusive ﬁtness, altruism based
on kin selection and reciprocity is actually selﬁsh and does not contradict the
selﬁsh gene hypothesis (Krebs & Dawkins, 1984).
Quorum-Sensing in Bacteria
Recently, evidence relevant to the evolution of altruism has come from an
unexpected source: microbiology. In Animal Aggregations (1931), W. C. Allee
noted self-organizing activity in simple creatures, including bacteria. Bacteria are
prokaryotes—essentially bags of DNA—that lack the nuclei, mitochondria, and
organelles associated with the eukaryotic cells that make up all complex
multicelled life. Despite their relative simplicity, recent studies have discovered
surprising complexity and sophistication in the behavior of bacteria, including
intra- and intercellular communication resulting in behavior suggestive of intel-
ligence and memory (Hellingwerf, 2005), cooperation and altruism (Griﬃn,
West, & Buckling, 2004; Kreft, 2004a, 2004b), and even “social intelligence”
(Ben-Jacob, Becker, Shapira, & Levine, 2004). In addition, there is evidence that
prokaryotes lived socially virtually from the beginning. The most ancient known
organisms are stromatolites: fossilized colonies of cyanobacteria that self-organize
and self-conﬁgure to create a spatially-bounded working community that
recovers from damage.
Recent studies have elucidated mechanisms by which such bacterial social
95
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

behavior is coordinated. Many if not most species of bacteria exhibit quorum-
sensing: mechanisms for recruiting the mass production of molecules or engaging
in other collective activities beneﬁcial to the bacteria. The bacteria are quiescent
until a critical mass of individuals—a “quorum” of millions or billions—has
assembled, and they then produce the molecule en mass in a useful concentration
(Swift, Throup, Williams, Salmond, & Stewart, 1996; Waters & Bassler, 2005).
An example is the marine bioluminescent bacterium Vibrio ﬁscheri. This bac-
terium lives freely in a planktonic state, and also exists in symbiotic relationship
with certain ﬁsh and squid (i.e., the Hawaiian squid Euprymna scolopes), causing
luminescence that functions to attract food and camouﬂage the squid in moon-
light (Waters & Bassler, 2005). In the laboratory, a growing colony of V. ﬁscheri
remains dark until a relatively high density of individuals is achieved, at which
point luminescence increases rapidly. This phenomenon is caused by the action
of signal molecules, which increase in concentration with an increasing number
of individuals. The signal molecule responsible for the activation of lumi-
nescence in V. ﬁscheri was identiﬁed in 1981, and the genetic system analyzed in
1983 (Eberhard et al., 1981; Engebrecht, Nealson, & Silverman, 1983). When
the level of signal molecules reaches a threshold, they enable proteins called LuxR
to bind to speciﬁc genes within the individual cells. A molecular apparatus
“turned on” by the interaction of LuxR and genes generates the light simul-
taneously in many individual bacteria (Fuqua, Winans, & Greenberg, 1996;
Greenberg, 1997; Waters & Bassler, 2005).
Interest in quorum sensing within microbiology has exploded in the past
decade: “the number of known regulatory systems and the diversity of phenom-
ena regulated are growing dramatically, and it now appears that most bacteria
possess at least one quorum-sensing system” (Redﬁeld, 2002, p. 365). While the
functions of these systems are extraordinarily diverse, the systems by which
quorum-sensing is based are surprisingly uniform. Quorum-sensing works by a
bacterium’s release of an autoinducer molecule into the environment. These
constitute signals or displays, and typically involve amino acids or peptides func-
tioning as pheromones (Gallio, Sturgill, Rather, & Kylsten, 2002). The bac-
terium also has the capacity to sense the concentration of this autoinducer in the
environment. If the concentration exceeds a threshold, the expression of genes
within the bacterium is altered, producing a variety of eﬀects: motility, swarm-
ing, pigment formation, etc. (Redﬁeld, 2002). The production by a bacterium of
an autoinducer, and its responsiveness to the environmental concentration
of the autoinducer, has all of the qualities of spontaneous communication de-
ﬁned previously. The display (autoinducer production) and preattunement
(responsiveness) are biologically based, the autoinducer is a sign of the referent
(concentration of individuals), and the communication is in no way intentional
and is nonpropositional.
96
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Altruism and Quorum-Sensing
The question whether quorum sensing represents a system of communication to
promote collective action useful to the group is relevant to the question of
cooperation and altruism. In everyday language, altruism is typically related to a
concern for the welfare of others and the common good. In the context of
evolutionary theory, these are not considered: “Evolutionary altruism . . . does
not require memory of past interactions, recognition of individuals, sophisti-
cated interactions or behavioral repertoires, or direct interactions between
individuals. It is therefore the simplest form of altruism” (Kreft, 2004a, p. 2751).
There is evidence of individual sacriﬁce for group beneﬁt in microorganisms
(Walters & Bassler, 2005). One example involves the slime mold Dictyostelium
discoideum. At one stage in its life cycle, slime molds exist as unicellular amoebae
feeding on bacteria. At this stage the amoebae exhibit positive chemotaxis
(attraction) vis-à-vis their prey and negative chemotaxis (repulsion) vis-à-vis one
another (Lackie, 1986). Thus, this simple organism demonstrates a sort of
“threat display” that may fulﬁll functions analogous to those ascribed to
territorial displays in more complex creatures (Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1975).
As bacteria in the environment are consumed, the amoebae begin to starve,
the negative chemotaxis to other amoebae ceases, and a positive chemotaxis
begins. Within 4–6 hours, the individual amoebae begin to move toward aggre-
gation centers, which apparently contain those individuals whose positive chemo-
taxic systems were ﬁrst “turned on” by starvation. The aggregation center next
forms a multicelled slug, or grex, in which the cells are derived from individual
amoebae. The grex moves in a looping motion like an inchworm caterpillar from
the domain of the individual amoebae in damp forest litter toward the light in a
journey that may take many days. The sensory analysis of the environment
presumably takes place in the front tip of the grex, and it is the cells in this area
that become anchored and “altruistically” die to form the cellulose stalk of a
fruiting body (Strassmann, Zhu, & Queller, 2000).
The stalk formation is altruistic on the part of these individuals in the
technical evolutionary sense. They “surrender . . . personal genetic ﬁtness for the
enhancement of personal genetic ﬁtness in others” (Wilson, 1975, p. 106), or
behave “to increase another such entity’s welfare at the expense of its own”
(Dawkins, 1976, p. 4). Cells at the rear of the grex form a mass that climbs to
the top of the stalk to become individual spores, which are released into the
environment. Given favorable conditions, they germinate into individual
amoebae, and begin the life cycle again.
A similar life cycle occurs in the soil-dwelling bacterium Myxococcus xanthus
involving quorum sensing in the development of fruiting bodies (Clarke, 1981;
Losick & Kaiser, 1997; Shimkets, 1999). In both cases, “spore development
requires a large percentage of the population to undergo a lethal diﬀerentiation
event that leads to structures whose function is to promote spore generation and
dispersion” (Waters & Bassler, 2005, p. 336). These indeed appear to be
97
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

examples of altruism—in the technical evolutionary sense—at the microbial
level: How can this be reconciled with the powerful and compelling
gene-selectionist account of evolution?
The Communicative Gene Hypothesis
Communication and the Unit of Selection.
The issue of the possibility
of “true” altruism turns on the issue of the unit of selection: whether the unit of
selection is the individual gene, or whether evolution can involve the selection
of units above the level of the individual gene. A possible solution is that
communicative relationships between genes can be replicators; units of selection
in evolution (Buck, 2002; Buck & Ginsburg, 1991, 1997). This retains a
gene-selectionist position without a largely unexamined accompanying
assumption of genetic atomism: Genes are selected in isolation from other genes:
“selection purely at the level of the individual gene” (Dawkins, 1989, pp. 84–
85). Buck and Ginsburg (1991) noted that genes do not function alone; rather,
genes function in company with other genes, and more speciﬁcally, genes func-
tion by communicating with other genes. This is not a controversial contention,
but its implications regarding the unit of selection have perhaps not been fully
appreciated.
A critical postulate of the communicative gene view is that in any system of
interacting elements, communication involves both individual elements and the
unique relationship between those elements relative to other elements. This analysis
suggests that communicative relationships can be replicators in Dawkins’s (1982)
sense. Communicative relationships arguably meet the criteria for being active
germ-line replicators. A replicator is anything of which copies are made; an active
replicator inﬂuences the probability of being copied; a germ-line replicator is an
ancestor of descendant replicators; and replicators exist across evolutionary time
scales. Communicative relationships and can be copied via the selection of the
phenotype communication; the nature of such relationships can inﬂuence the
probability of being copied; and these relationships can exist across evolutionary
timescales. Therefore, communicative relationships between genes can be active,
germ-line replicators. Moreover, communicating genes are not necessarily within
the same cell or organism. The quorum-sensing example demonstrates that genes
in diﬀerent individual bacteria can communicate via autoinducer molecules
functioning as signs of population density: It involves displays in the sender and
preattunements in the receiver.
Communicative Relationships as Units of Selection.
There are many
examples of speciﬁc communicative relationships that have existed across evo-
lutionary timescales; indeed, the ritualized displays associated the classical
ethological view meet this criterion. Speciﬁc displays associated with dominance,
submission, warning, courting, and bonding have existed across evolutionary
timescales and in many species: For example, Livingstone, Harris-Warrick, and
98
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Kravitz (1980) demonstrated that serotonin injections in crayﬁsh and lobsters
produce characteristic dominance postures. Also, injections of octopamine (the
phenol analogue of norepinephrine) produce subordinate postures; and the mat-
ing pheromone in the single-celled yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a peptide
molecule that closely resembles GnRH involved in mating in mammals, includ-
ing human beings (Loumaye, Thorner, & Catt, 1982). Both examples imply a
conservation of sending and receiving mechanisms across an enormous span of
time.
The social brain hypothesis (Dunbar, 1993, chapter 2, this volume) is quite
consistent with the communicative gene hypothesis, as is evidence that social
group size correlates with relative neocortex volume in primates. Indeed, com-
munication arguably may be the mechanism of the relationship between group
size and brain size: The social brain is the communicative brain.
ATTACHMENT AND HIGHER-LEVEL SOCIAL AND
MORAL EMOTIONS
The foregoing arguments imply that cooperative as well as competitive tenden-
cies have been built into the genome from the beginning. Indeed, cooperative
tendencies are manifested in neurochemical systems in the brain associated with
powerful prosocial motives and emotions. These powerful prosocial emotions are
hiding in plain sight: While they are involved in motivating much of the
behavior of interest to social psychology, they tend to be taken for granted and
are rarely recognized to be emotions per se. Just as eﬀectance motives and needs
for understanding underlie tendencies toward cognitive consistency, attribution
processes, and attitude formation and change, attachment motives and needs to
be loved underlie tendencies toward social referencing, modeling and imitation,
conformity, and obedience (Buck, 1976/1998, 2004). They are involved in every
human action and interaction.
The Dynamics of Social and Moral Emotions
Attachment and Social Emotions.
There is evidence in the extensive
research stemming from attachment theory (Bowlby, 1969/1982) that securely
attached persons are relatively certain of being loved, while persons with attach-
ment anxiety worry that they are not loved and persons with avoidant attach-
ment distrust others and in eﬀect eschew love (e.g., Mikulincer, 1998;
Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003, 2005; Mikulincer, Shaver, Gillath, & Nitzberg,
2005). Secure attachment therefore is associated with relatively less attention to
being loved and greater attention to meeting/exceeding expectations; anxious
attachment is associated with a greater attention to being loved; and avoidant
attachment is associated with relatively low prosocial needs and therefore rela-
tively weak social emotions. Therefore, based upon the diﬀerentiation of primary
99
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

social emotions suggested previously, a secure person would be expected to
experience pride, guilt, envy, and pity in situations where an anxious person
would experience arrogance, shame, jealousy, and scorn. Moreover, an avoidant
person would tend to not experience any of these emotions strongly with the
extreme being a psychopath with no need to be loved who is incapable of
experiencing any of the social or moral emotions.
In this analysis, attachment is viewed as both a trait and a state. Most
children can be classiﬁed as having a speciﬁc attachment style, whereas most
adults show a mixed style. This may be because as social development proceeds,
attachment security can increasingly vary with the personal relationship: We may
be secure that we are loved by some persons but anxious about the love of others.
So for example, we tend to feel pride in comparison with the former and arro-
gance in comparison with the latter. Also, we can learn to avoid attachment with
some persons. It is all too easy to be taught that certain persons are enemies who
do not deserve our love, to whom social and moral emotions are irrelevant. The
ability of even normal human beings to become situational psychopaths—to
destroy others without moral compunction—is all too apparent, as Hannah
Arendt showed in her analysis of the banality of evil (1951/1973).
This analysis implies that the eight primary social emotions are interrelated:
That for example when a person is proud they tend to pity others, and to not to
feel guilt or envy of others. Buck, Nakamura, Vieira, and Polonsky (2005) tested
this by giving scenarios about comparative success and failure to University
students in the United States and Japan. This study found support for the
hypothesized relationships between primary social emotions in virtually every
case, whether labeled in English or Japanese. This supported the hypothesis of
universal labeling—that the words for the eight primary social emotions could be
found in all languages—and the hypothesis of universal dynamics—that they
would be interrelated similarly in all languages. Future studies might measure
social comparison processes in terms of dispositional tendencies to engage in
social comparisons (Buunk & Gibbons, 2005; Gibbons & Buunk, 1999). Buunk
et al. (chapter 13, this volume) found this tendency to be positively correlated
with jealousy, and we would expect it to be similarly related to other social
emotions and also to moral emotions.
Primary Moral Emotions.
This analysis has been extended to the analysis of
eight primary moral emotions, where success or failure for self and other is com-
bined with the judgment that the outcome is just or unjust. When one’s success
is just the result is triumph, when unjust it is modesty; when one’s failure is just
the result is humiliation, when unjust it is indignation; when the other’s success is
just the result is admiration, when unjust it is resentment; when the other’s failure
is just the result is contempt, when unjust it is sympathy. The primary morals are
related to the primary social emotions: For example, envy and jealousy can go
with either admiration or resentment depending upon whether the other’s
success is seen as justiﬁed.
100
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Dominance-Submission Versus Civility
The dynamics of social and moral emotions are illustrated in Figure 6.1, which
illustrates the social and moral emotions in a situation of dominance and submis-
sion. The successful ﬁgure on the left exudes triumph, pride, and arrogance; and
regards the relatively inept ﬁgure on the right with contempt and scorn. The
unsuccessful ﬁgure feels guilt, shame, humiliation, and indignation; and regards
the other with envy, jealousy, and resentment. These can be strong acute emo-
tions; they can be ﬂeeting as one might feel as one sees a person driving by in an
expensive car, or they can be chronic, unremitting, and grinding; leading to a
lack of authentic social contact and communication, the exacerbation of stress,
unhappiness, and depression—perhaps in both parties—whose true causes may
go unrecognized.
On the other hand, if interactants show each other civility, a pattern of
positive interpersonal emotions can result. Even despite diﬀerences in wealth and
status, it is possible to have a relationship of mutual trust and respect in which
each regard the other as following the rules fairly and with a sense of justice. Each
can then regard their own successes with modesty, and respond to the other with a
sense of mutual gratitude for following the rules and admiration for their deserved
FIGURE 6.1 In a dominant–submissive relationship, conﬂict can be exacerbated by moral
considerations: The perception of unfairness can facilitate conﬂict.
101
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

success. These are the ingredients for authentic communication and the powerful
stress-buﬀering that can come with social support.
This view of primary social and moral emotions implies that sociality and
morality arise spontaneously and eﬀortlessly from interaction: a spontaneous
restructuring of socioemotional experience analogous to Piaget’s (1971) assimila-
tion and accommodation process in the realm of cognitive development. From
this point of view, organized religion is not necessary to morality, and indeed can
potentially get in the way of morality, even promoting the situational psycho-
pathy of religious intolerance and conﬂict. This suggests that kin selection and
reciprocity, rather than being the bases of altruism, are actually mechanisms to
restrict loving and altruistic feelings to kin and comrade: Rather than underlying
altruism, kin selection and reciprocity are at the roots of xenophobia (Buck &
Ginsburg, 1991, 1997).
CONCLUSIONS
Social emotions are present in every human relationship and interaction, includ-
ing those in memory and the imagination; and moral emotions are present
whenever equity considerations are relevant. This analysis suggests that their
evolutionary roots go back to the beginnings of life, and indeed there is evidence
that prosocial emotions are associated with peptides such as the endorphins,
oxytocin, and vasopressin: direct genetic products. Their potential is activated
and directed in processes of communication; their power is based in early love
and nurturance, and they are shaped and molded in the simplest and most
natural of childish play. If critical communicative experiences—reﬂecting and at
the same time generating true love—are absent or aberrant in the course of
development, social and moral emotions can be scarred for life.
Apparently trivial signals of politeness serve the vital function of reminding
interactants that each is cooperating and playing by the rules, thereby fostering
mutual respect, trust, and rapport. But, the slightest sign—a mistimed gesture, a
glance that is a fraction too long or too short, a facial nuance—can arouse strong
social and moral emotions associated with competitive dominance and submis-
sion whose origin may go unrecognized, or may be “unconscious.” Social and
moral emotions are hiding in plain sight, so omnipresent and fundamental that
they are often taken for granted, reﬂecting the evolved essence of sociality in a
Yin and Yang of cooperation and competition.
NOTE
1. “Jealousy” is deﬁned more broadly here than
in cases where jealousy is regarded as
explicitly sexual. For example, Buunk,
Massar, and Dijkstra (chapter 13, this
volume) deﬁne jealousy as involving a sexual
rival interested in one’s partner, or in whom
one’s partner is interested.
102
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Students and colleagues involved in the research reported here include R. Thomas Boone, Rebecca
Ferrer, Benson Ginsburg, David A. Kenny, Makoto Nakamura, Maxim Polonsky, Stacie Renfro
Powers, Christian Rauh, Elliott Ross, and Edward T. Vieira, Jr. This research was funded in part by
the following grants: The Russell Sage Foundation: “The Communication of Trustworthiness:
Aﬀect expression as the mechanism for building trust and cooperation” (with R. Thomas Boone);
The EJLB Foundation, Canada Council: “Emotional Expression and Communication in Schizo-
phrenic Patients” (with Elliott Ross); The Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation: “The Aﬀective
Bases of Social Organization: Communicative genes in aggression and attachment” (with B.
Ginsburg).
REFERENCES
Allee, W. C. (1931). Animal aggregations: A
study in general sociology. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Arendt, H. (1973). The origins of totalitarian-
ism. New York: Harcourt. (Original work
published 1951)
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The
need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motiv-
ation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Ben-Jacob, E., Becker, I., Shapira, Y., & Levine,
H. (2004). Bacterial linguistic communica-
tion and social intelligence. Trends in
Microbiology, 12, 366–372.
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. I.
Attachment. New York: Basic Books. (Ori-
ginal work published 1969)
Buck, R. (1984). The communication of emotion.
New York: Guilford Press.
Buck, R. (1985). Prime theory: An integrated
view of motivation and emotion. Psycho-
logical Review, 92, 389–413.
Buck, R. (1988). Human motivation and emo-
tion (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley. (Original
work published 1976)
Buck, R. (1999). The biological aﬀects: A typ-
ology. Psychological Review, 106(2), 301–336.
Buck, R. (2002). The genetics and biology of
true love: Prosocial biological aﬀects and the
left hemisphere. Psychological Review, 109,
739–744.
Buck, R. (2004). The gratitude of exchange and
the gratitude of caring: A developmental-
interactionist perspective of moral emotion.
In R. A. Emmons & M. McCullough (Eds.),
The psychology of gratitude (pp. 100–122).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Buck, R., & Ginsburg, B. E. (1991). Emotional
communication and altruism: The com-
municative gene hypothesis. In M. Clark
(Ed.), Review of personality and social
psychology: Vol. 12. Altruism (pp. 149–175)
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Buck, R., & Ginsburg, B. E. (1997). Com-
municative genes and the evolution of
empathy. In W. Ickes (Ed.), Empathic
accuracy (pp. 17–43). New York: Guilford
Press.
Buck, R., Nakamura, M., Vieira, E. T., Jr., &
Polonsky M. (2005). A developmental-
interactionist theory of biological and higher
level emotions: A cross-national comparison
of America and Japan. Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Buck, R., & Powers, S. R. (2006). The bio-
logical foundations of social organization:
The dynamic emergence of social structure
through nonverbal communication. In V.
Manusov & M. Patterson (Eds.), The Sage
handbook of nonverbal communication (pp.
119–138). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Buck, R., & VanLear, C. A. (2002). Verbal and
nonverbal communication: Distinguishing
symbolic, 
spontaneous, 
and 
pseudo-
spontaneous nonverbal behavior. Journal of
Communication, 52, 522–541.
Buunk, B. P., & Gibbons, F. X. (2005). Social
comparison orientation: A new perspective
on those who do, and those who don’t com-
pare with others. In S. Guimond (Ed.), Social
comparison processes and levels of analysis
(pp. 15–32). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Clarke, C. H. (1981). Motility and fruiting in
103
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS

the bacterium Myxococcus xanthus. In J. M.
Lackie & P. C. Wilkinson (Eds.), Biology
of the chemotactic response (pp. 155–171).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Darwin, C. (1998). The expression of the emo-
tions in man and animals (3rd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press. (Original work
published 1872)
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selﬁsh gene. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1982). The extended phenotype:
The gene as the unit of selection. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. (1989). The selﬁsh gene: New edi-
tion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R., & Krebs, J. R. (1978). Animal
signals: Information or manipulation? In J.
R. Krebs & N. B. Davies (Eds.), Behavioural
ecology: An evolutionary approach (pp. 282–
309). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientiﬁc.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). The co-evolution of
neocortical size, group size, and language in
humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16,
681–694.
Eberhard, A., Burlingame, A. L., Eberhard, C.,
Kenyon, C. L., Nealson, K. H., & Opp-
enheimer, N. J. (1981). Structural identiﬁ-
cation of autoinducer of Photobacterium
ﬁscheri luciferase. Biochemistry, 20, 2444–
2449.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1975). Ethology: The biology
of behavior (2nd ed.), New York: Holt,
Rinehart, & Winston.
Eisenberger, N. I., & Lieberman, M. D.
(2005). Why it hurts to be left out: The neu-
rocognitive overlap between physical and
social pain. In K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas,
& W. von Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast:
Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bully-
ing (pp. 109–130). New York: Psychology
Press.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Wil-
liams, K. D. (2003). Does rejection hurt? An
fMRI study of social exclusion. Science, 302,
290–292.
Engebrecht, J., Nealson, K., & Silverman, M.
(1983). Bacterial bioluminescence: Isolation
and genetic analysis of functions from Vibrio
ﬁscheri. Cell, 32, 773–781.
Fuqua, C., Winans, S. C., & Greenberg, E. P.
(1996). Census and consensus in bacterial
ecosystems: The LuxR-LuxI family of
quorum-sensing transcriptional regulators.
Annual Reviews of Microbiology, 50, 727.
Gallio, M., Sturgill, G., Rather, P., & Kylsten,
P. (2002). A conserved mechanism for
extracellular signalling in eukaryotes and
prokaryotes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 99(19), 12208–12213.
Gibbons, F. X., & Buunk, B. P. (1999). The
INCOM: Development of a measure of
social 
comparison 
orientation 
in 
two
countries. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 76, 129–142.
Gottleib, G. (1984). Evolutionary trends and
evolutionary origins: Relevance to theory in
comparative psychology. Psychological Review,
91, 448–456.
Greenberg, E. P. (1997). Quorum-sensing in
gram-negative bacteria. ASM News, 63(July),
371.
Griﬃn, A. S., West, S. A., & Buckling, A. (2004).
Cooperation and competition in pathogenic
bacteria. Nature, 430(7003), 1024–1027.
Hauser, M. D. (1996). The evolution of
communication. 
Cambridge, 
MA: 
MIT
Press.
Hellingwerf, K. J. (2005). Bacterial observa-
tions: A rudimentary form of intelligence?
Trends in Microbiology, 13(4), 152–158.
Jurgens, U. (1979). Neural control of vocaliza-
tion in nonhuman primates. In H. L. Steklis
& M. J. Raleigh (Eds.), Neurobiology of social
communication in primates (pp. 11–44). New
York: Academic Press.
Kleinginna, P. R., & Kleinginna, A. M.
(1981a). A categorized list of motivation
deﬁnitions, with suggestions for a consensual
deﬁnition. Motivation and Emotion, 5, 263–
291.
Kleinginna, P. R., & Kleinginna, A. M.
(1981b). A categorized list of emotion
deﬁnitions, with suggestions for a consensual
deﬁnition. Motivation and Emotion, 5,
348–379.
Krebs, J. R., & Dawkins, R. (1984). Animal
signals: Mind-reading and manipulation. In
J. R. Krebs & N. B. Davies (Eds.),
Behavioural ecology: An evolutionary approach
(2nd ed., pp. 380–402). Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer.
Kreft, J.-U. (2004a). Bioﬁlms promote altru-
ism. Microbiology, 150, 2751–2760.
Kreft, J.-U. (2004b). Conﬂicts of interest in
bioﬁlms. Bioﬁlms, 1, 265–276.
104
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Lackie, J. M. (1986). Cell movement and cell
behaviour. London: Allen & Unwin.
Livingstone, M. S., Harris-Warrick, R. M., &
Kravitz, E. A. (1980). Serotonin and
octopamine produce opposite postures in
lobsters. Science, 208(4439), 76–79.
Losick, R., & Kaiser, D. (1997). Why and how
bacteria communicate. Scientiﬁc American,
276(2), 68–73.
Loumaye, E., Thorner, J., & Catt, K. J. (1982).
Yeast mating pheromone activates mamma-
lian gonadotropins: Evolutionary conserva-
tion of a reproductive hormone? Science,
218(4579), 1324–1325.
Mikulincer, M. (1998). Attachment working
models and the sense of trust: An exploration
of interaction goals and aﬀect regulation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74, 1209–1224.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. (2003). The
attachment behavioral system in adulthood:
Activation, psychodynamics, and inter-
personal processes. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 35, pp. 53–152). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. (2005). Mental
representation of attachment security: The-
oretical foundation for a positive social
psychology. In M. W. Baldwin (Ed.), Inter-
personal cognition (pp. 233–266). New York:
Guilford Press.
Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P., Gillath, O., &
Nitzberg, R. A. (2005). Attachment, care-
giving, and altruism: Boosting attachment
security increases compassion and helping.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
89, 817–839.
Panksepp, J. (1991). Brain opioids: A neuro-
chemical substrate for narcotic and social
dependence. In S. Cooper (Ed.), Theory in
psychopharmacology.(pp. 149–175). London:
Academic Press.
Piaget, J. (1971). Piaget’s theory. In P. Mussen
(Ed.), Handbook of child development (Vol. I,
pp. 703–732). New York: Wiley.
Redﬁeld, R. J. (2002). Is quorum sensing a side
eﬀect of diﬀusion sensing? Trends in
Microbiology, 10, 365–370.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive,
social, and physiological determinants of
emotional state. Psychological Review, 69,
379–399.
Shimkets, L. J. (1999). Intracellular signaling
during 
fruiting-body 
development 
of
Myxococcus xanthus. Annual Review of
Microbiology, 53, 525–549.
Strassmann, J. E., Zhu, Y., & Queller, D. C.
(2000). Altruism and social cheating in the
social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum.
Nature, 408, 965–967.
Swift, S., Throup, J. P., Williams, P., Salmond,
G. P., & Stewart, G. S. (1996). Quorum sens-
ing: A population-density component in the
determination of bacterial phenotype. Trends
in Biochemical Sciences, 21, 214–219.
Waters, C. M., & Bassler, B. L. (2005).
Quorum sensing: Cell-to-cell communica-
tion in bacteria. Annual Review of Cell and
Developmental Biology, 21, 319–346.
Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology: The new
synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
105
SOCIAL AND MORAL EMOTIONS


7
The Strange Cognitive
Beneﬁts of Mild Dysphoria
On the Evolutionary Advantages of
Not Being Too Happy
JOSEPH P. FORGAS
Introduction
The Evolutionary Functions of Aﬀect
Contemporary Cognitive Approaches
The Empirical Evidence
The Interpersonal Beneﬁts of Negative Aﬀect
Conclusions
INTRODUCTION
O
ne of the greatest puzzles about human nature concerns the fascinating
and still poorly understood interplay between thinking and feeling,
rational and emotional ways of dealing with the world around us.
Aﬀect is a ubiquitous and powerful phenomenon in our lives, yet research on
human aﬀectivity has been neglected until recently. Of the three basic faculties of
the human mind that dominated philosophy and empirical psychology for the
last few hundred years—cognition, aﬀect and conation—aﬀect remains arguably
the last and least well understood (Hilgard, 1980).
What is the function of aﬀective states? In particular, is there an identiﬁable
adaptive advantage that humans derive from experiencing moods? It seems
intriguing that despite our apparently never-ending quest for happiness and
satisfaction, the human emotional repertoire is nevertheless heavily skewed
towards negative feelings. Four of the six deeply ingrained basic emotions
107

identiﬁed in humans with distinct physiological substrates are negative ones—
fear, anger, disgust and sadness—suggesting that these emotions were adaptive in
the highly dangerous and precarious ancestral environment, preparing the organ-
ism for ﬂight, ﬁght or avoidance in the face of danger.
But what about sadness? The possible adaptive functions of sadness in
particular remain puzzling and poorly understood. Even though sadness is clearly
bothersome and provides no hedonic beneﬁt, it remains one of the most endur-
ing and common aﬀective states (Ciarrochi, Forgas & Mayer, 2006). Indeed,
throughout human history much eﬀort has been extended in controlling sadness
and dysphoria, and this never-ending quest remains a major objective in con-
temporary clinical practice. This chapter will suggest that evolutionary pressures
probably shaped the development of all aﬀective responses, including sadness in
a way that is highly sensitive to situational requirements, and operates by spon-
taneously triggering diﬀerent information processing strategies that appear to be
highly adaptive to the requirements of diﬀerent social situations.
Interestingly, much recent research on the functions of aﬀect also focused on
the beneﬁcial consequences of positive aﬀect. It has been variously suggested that
feeling good promotes creativity, ﬂexibility, co-operation, integrative thinking,
successful negotiation, work motivation, relationship satisfaction and a host of
other desirable outcomes (Forgas, 1994, 1998, 2002; Forgas & George, 2001).
In contrast, most experimental and clinical work emphasized the need to limit,
control and avoid negative aﬀectivity (Ciarrochi et al., 2006; Clark & Isen,
1982). If negative aﬀect like sadness is so universally undesirable, what then
accounts for its surprising ubiquity?
This chapter will describe a series of empirical studies that demonstrate that
negative moods such as sadness may confer signiﬁcant adaptive advantages. In
particular, negative aﬀect promotes a more attentive, accommodating thinking
style that produces superior outcomes whenever a cognitive or social task
requires detailed, externally oriented, inductive thinking. The objective of this
chapter is thus to combine evolutionary theorizing and experimental research on
aﬀect and cognition, and so contribute to the age-old quest to understand the
relationship between the rational and the emotional aspects of human nature
(Hilgard, 1980; see also, in this volume, Badcock & Allen, chapter 8; Buck,
chapter 6).
THE EVOLUTIONARY FUNCTIONS OF AFFECT
The inﬂuence of feelings on thinking and behavior has long fascinated writers,
artists and laypersons alike. Ever since Plato, many theorists saw aﬀect as a
potentially dangerous, invasive force that subverts rational judgement and
action. This idea gained its most powerful expression in Freud’s psycho-dynamic
theories early last century. According to this view, aﬀect can “take over” thinking
and behaviour unless psychological resources are deployed to control these
108
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

impulses. For example, attempts to suppress negative aﬀect such as fear can
“facilitate the tendency to project fear onto another social object” (Feshbach &
Singer, 1957, p. 286).
However, the last few decades saw something like an “aﬀective revolution”
in psychology, neuroanatomy and psychophysiology producing a radically diﬀer-
ent view. Rather than viewing aﬀect as a dangerous force, recent evidence sug-
gests that aﬀect is a useful and even essential component of adaptive responding
to social situations (Adolphs & Damasio, 2001; Damasio, 1994; Ito &
Cacioppo, 2001). The idea that aﬀect is an integral aspect of social thinking and
memory was ﬁrst advanced in the 1980s by Gordon Bower (1981). Others, such
as Robert Zajonc (1980, 2000) argued that aﬀect also functions as an independ-
ent and primary force in responding to social situations, consistent with the view
that aﬀect constitutes a basic and universal human response system rooted in the
evolutionary past (Darwin, 1872/1965).
We now know that aﬀect also plays a crucial role in how people organize
and represent their daily social experiences (Forgas, 1979; Pervin, 1976). It seems
that social “stimuli can cohere as a category even when they have nothing in
common other than the emotional responses they elicit” (Niedenthal & Halber-
stadt, 2000, p. 381). Aﬀective reactions seem to deﬁne the way people mentally
represent common social episodes (Forgas, 1979), and as Pervin (1976) noted
four decades ago, “what is striking is the extent to which situations are described
in terms of aﬀects (e.g. threatening, warm, interesting, dull, tense, calm, reject-
ing) and organized in terms of similarity of aﬀects aroused by them” (p. 471).
Thus, aﬀective reactions play a universal, ubiquitous and powerful role in how
people think and behave in social situations.
Recent psychological theorizing highlights several adaptive functions associ-
ated with feelings. According to one view, the basic function of aﬀective states is
to provide feedback signals about progress in goal achievement. According to
another theory, emotional states evolved to trigger speciﬁc behavioral responses
appropriate to the situations that elicit them. Thus, emotional appraisals (Smith
& Kirby, 2001) involve spontaneous cognitive processes that produce the
appropriate aﬀective response in a given situation. Indeed, an entire “rule sys-
tem” of appropriate emotional reactions can be constructed that encapsulates
these “aﬀect rules” (Ortonyi, Clore & Collins, 1988). Many emotional reactions
to situational challenges are fast, eﬀective and precede systematic evaluations. A
good example is the extremely negative “pain aﬀect” elicited when an individual
faces social ostracism (Spoor & Williams, chapter 17, this volume), triggering
immediate neurological and psychological reactions that motivate adaptive
responses.
It is not too far-fetched to suggest that in early evolutionary history, such
wired-in emotional reactions were likely to provide distinct survival advantages
(Frijda, 1986). Individuals who detected and responded to threats and other
social and environmental challenges most rapidly and eﬀectively could derive a
ﬁtness advantage over those who did not (e.g., Blascovich & Mendes, 2000).
109
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

Extensive research now documents the functions of the adaptive aﬀective
response system (Lerner & Keltner, 2001), suggesting that aﬀective reactions
operate like domain-speciﬁc adaptations that may meet the requirements for
special design (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992; see also von Hippel, Haselton &
Forgas, chapter 1, this volume).
CONTEMPORARY COGNITIVE APPROACHES
The advent of contemporary cognitive theories produced a more ﬁnely grained
understanding of aﬀective inﬂuences on thinking and behaviour. Aﬀect can
profoundly inﬂuence the content of thinking and memory according to Bower’s
(1981) associative network model, as aﬀective states can selectively prime related
thoughts and ideas to be used in constructive cognitive tasks. Such mood-
congruence inﬂuences many cognitive tasks (Bower, 1981; Clark & Isen, 1982;
Forgas & Bower, 1987), where the open, constructive use of memory-based
information is required (Fiedler, 2001; Forgas, 1995, 2002).
More importantly, aﬀect can inﬂuence not only the content of thinking
(inﬂuencing what people think), but also the process of cognition, that is, how
people think. It was ﬁrst thought positive aﬀect simply leads to more lazy, heur-
istic and more superﬁcial processing strategies, whereas negative aﬀect triggers a
more eﬀortful, systematic, analytic and vigilant processing style (Clark & Isen,
1982; Schwarz, 1990). Such aﬀect-induced processing diﬀerences were originally
explained as motivational diﬀerences between happy and sad individuals.
According to the mood-maintenance hypothesis (Clark & Isen, 1982), those in a
positive mood may refrain from eﬀortful thinking to maintain this pleasant state.
In contrast, those in a negative mood might engage in vigilant, eﬀortful processing
as an adaptive response to improve an aversive state. Others such as Schwarz
(1990) and Wegener and Petty (1994) oﬀered a kind of functionalist “cognitive
tuning” account, suggesting that positive and negative aﬀect have a signalling/
tuning function, informing the person of whether a relaxed, eﬀort minimizing
(in positive aﬀect) or a vigilant, eﬀortful (negative aﬀect) processing style is
appropriate. More recent theories, however, suggest a more complex pattern,
showing that positive aﬀect can also produce distinct processing advantages.
Happy people often adopt a more open, creative and inclusive thinking style, use
broader categories, show greater mental ﬂexibility and can perform just as
eﬀectively on secondary tasks (Bless, 2001; Bless & Fiedler, 2006; Fiedler, 2001).
According to recent theories by Bless (2001) and Fiedler (2001; Fiedler &
Bless, 2001), the evolutionary signiﬁcance of aﬀective states is not simply to
inﬂuence processing eﬀort. Rather, they trigger equally eﬀortful, but qualita-
tively diﬀerent processing styles. Thus, positive aﬀect recruits a more assimila-
tive, schema-based, top-down processing style, as pre-existing knowledge guides
information processing. In contrast, negative aﬀect produces a more accom-
modative, bottom-up and externally focused processing strategy where attention
110
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

to situational information drives thinking (Bless, 2001; Fiedler, 2001). These
processing styles can be equally vigilant and eﬀortful, yet produce qualitatively
diﬀerent outcomes. Both positive and negative aﬀect can thus produce adaptive,
functional advantages in the right circumstances. Much has been written about
the beneﬁcial eﬀects of positive aﬀect (Forgas, 1998; Forgas & George, 2001).
Much less is known about the adaptive advantages of dysphoria. The following
experiments will explore the subtle cognitive advantages of feeling bad.
THE EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
This section will review several experiments that demonstrate the adaptive con-
sequences of negative aﬀect in such areas as judgemental errors, eyewitness
accuracy, interpersonal communication and detection of deception. One study
by Sinclair and Mark (1992) found that sad mood may improve accuracy in
person perception, as heuristic shortcuts such as primacy eﬀects are more com-
mon in happy mood. Those in sad mood were less inﬂuenced by primacy
manipulations, and paid balanced attention to both positive and negative
information in their impressions.
It seems that people spontaneously reduce positive aﬀect in anticipation of
demanding and diﬃcult social tasks, such as interacting with a stranger, by
selectively reading sad rather than happy articles (Parrott, 1993). Thus, negative
aﬀect may not only confer processing advantages, but people seem to adopt
subconscious strategies to reduce euphoria to ﬁt the requirements of the
situation.
Of course, the kind of accommodative processing promoted by negative
aﬀect will not always improve the accuracy of judgements. For example, Ambady
and Gray (2002) found that sadness and depression impaired people’s ability to
correctly interpret brief cues predictive of social behaviours. Thus, when the task
requires heuristic processing, positive mood may confer processing advantages.
In terms of an earlier dichotomy identiﬁed in the person perception literature,
positive mood seems to promote stereotype accuracy, whereas negative mood
improves diﬀerential accuracy.
Is This True . . .? Mood Effects on Interpersonal Scepticism
How do we know if the information we come across in everyday life is true or
false? Much of what we know about the world is second hand knowledge. Decid-
ing whether to accept or reject social information is a critical decision in everyday
life. Accepting invalid information as true (false positives, excessive gullibility)
can be just as dangerous as rejecting information that is valid (false negatives,
excessive scepticism). Credibility judgements can be inﬂuenced by a variety of
factors, such as information quality, prior knowledge and heuristic cues such as
source credibility and attractiveness (e.g., Petty, DeSteno, & Rucker, 2001). In
111
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

several recent experiments we found that moods also have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on accepting or rejecting information.
Many claims can potentially be evaluated against objective evidence. For
example, trivia questions, urban myths and rumours are open to checking, but
are in practice diﬃcult to test (e.g., power lines cause leukaemia; AIDS origin-
ated in Cameroon; the CIA murdered Kennedy; etc.). A second kind of
scepticism, interpersonal scepticism, concerns the acceptance or rejection of
interpersonal messages that are by their very nature ambiguous and not open to
objective validation. For example, deciding whether a smile, or a denial, is genu-
ine involves this kind of credibility judgement. Several experiments found that
induced mood states have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on both kinds of credibility
judgement: (a) the acceptance or rejection of factual claims (factual scepticism),
and (b) the acceptance or rejection of preferred interpersonal representations
(interpersonal scepticism) (East & Forgas, 2006).
Mood Effects on Factual Scepticism.
For example, in one study we asked
participants who were induced into positive, neutral and negative moods to
judge the probable truth of a number of urban legends and rumours. Mood did
have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on scepticism, but only for claims that were new and
not previously encountered by respondents, suggesting that familiarity is an
important moderator of mood eﬀects on scepticism. A follow-up experiment
explicitly manipulated the familiarity of a variety of factual claims taken from
trivia games. Some were familiar (presented to judges several weeks before), and
some were entirely new. Participants (N = 135) induced into a positive or nega-
tive mood by watching aﬀectively laden videos rated previously seen items as
more credible, and happy mood also signiﬁcantly increased the tendency to
accept familiar items as true. Negative mood in turn produced greater scepticism,
consistent with the hypothesis that negative aﬀect triggers a more externally
focused and accommodative thinking style.
Will mood still inﬂuence credibility judgements when previous exposure to
factual claims also includes explicit feedback about their actual truth or falsity? In
one experiment participants (N = 118) judged the truth of 25 true and 25 false
general knowledge trivia statements, and were also told whether each item was
true. Two weeks later, after a positive or negative mood induction, they rated the
credibility of some familiar statements from the earlier session, as well as some
completely new statements. Results showed that only sad participants were able
to correctly distinguish between true and false claims they had seen previously.
Happy participants seemed unable to remember the truth of claims, and were
more likely to rate all previously seen, familiar information as true, even if they
were told previously that the information was false.
This pattern conﬁrms that happy mood increased and sad mood reduced
the tendency to rely on the “what is familiar is true” heuristic, whereas negative
mood conferred an adaptive advantage by promoting a more accommodative,
systematic processing style (Fiedler & Bless, 2001). Overall, negative mood
112
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

increased, and positive mood decreased the degree of scepticism people display
when assessing the truth of ambiguous factual claims. This eﬀect seems due to
negative mood reducing, and positive mood increasing the tendency to use
perceived familiarity as an indication of truthfulness.
Mood Effects on Interpersonal Scepticism.
Mood may also inﬂuence
people’s tendency to accept or reject interpersonal communications as genuine
or false. Negative moods might produce more critical and sceptical judgements,
while happy people may accept interpersonal messages at “face value”, as genuine
and trustworthy. In one experiment, we asked happy and sad participants (N =
90) to judge the genuineness of people displaying positive, neutral and negative
facial expressions. As predicted, those in a negative mood were signiﬁcantly less
likely to accept facial expressions as genuine than those in the neutral or happy
condition. Curiously, happy participants were more conﬁdent in their judge-
ment about the genuineness of the facial expressions than were the other groups.
In another study, instead of positive and negative facial displays, the six basic
emotions were used as targets (i.e., anger, fear, disgust, happiness, surprise and
sadness; Ekman, 1972). Once again, negative mood reduced, and positive mood
increased people’s tendency to accept the facial displays as genuine, consistent
with the more attentive and accommodative processing style associated with
negative moods.
Mood Effects on the Detection of Deception.
Do these mood eﬀects also
occur in realistic situations involving both verbal and nonverbal communication?
To explore this, we asked happy or sad participants to accept or reject the
videotaped statements of targets who were interrogated after a staged theft, and
were either guilty, or not guilty. The targets were instructed to either steal, or
leave in place a movie pass in an empty room, unobserved by anyone, and then
deny taking the movie ticket. So some targets were lying and some were telling
the truth when denying the theft. Those in a positive mood were more likely to
accept denials as truthful. Sad participants made signiﬁcantly more guilty
judgements, and were signiﬁcantly better at correctly detecting deceptive (guilty)
targets (Figure 7.1). Negative aﬀect thus produced a signiﬁcant advantage at
accurately distinguishing truths from lies in the observed interviews. A signal
detection analysis also conﬁrmed that sad judges were more accurate in detecting
deception (identifying guilty targets as guilty) than were neutral or happy judges,
consistent with the predicted mood-induced processing diﬀerences.
In summary, negative aﬀect seems to increase scepticism both about factual,
and about interpersonal messages, and those in a negative mood were also sig-
niﬁcantly better able to detect deception. These results are conceptually consist-
ent with recent aﬀect-cognition theories showing that negative aﬀect generally
produces a more situationally oriented, accommodative and inductive cognitive
style that provides an adaptive advantage when it comes to accurately detecting
deception. This conclusion is also consistent with some earlier claims about
113
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

“depressive realism”, and recent research by Lane and DePaulo (1999), who
found that dispositionally dysphoric individuals might have an advantage at
detecting speciﬁc types of lies, such as false reassurances.
Negative Affect Reduces Judgemental Errors
Interpreting the behaviour of others is a critical and demanding cognitive task in
everyday life (Heider, 1958). The fundamental attribution error (FAE) or cor-
respondence bias refers to a pervasive tendency by people to see intentionality
and internal causation and underestimate the impact of situational forces in
their judgements of others (Gilbert & Malone, 1995). The FAE largely occurs
because, all things being equal, observers pay disproportionate attention to the
most conspicuous information in the focus of their attention—the actor—and
fail to adequately process information about situational constraints (Gilbert,
1991). If the detailed processing of situational information is facilitated, for
example, by a negative mood state, the incidence of the FAE may be reduced.
These experiments explored the possibility that good moods can increase, and
bad moods can reduce the FAE (Forgas, 1998).
Past work shows that moods can inﬂuence attribution strategies. Happy
persons tend to identify stable, internal causes when doing well, and blame
unstable, external causes for doing badly in achievement situations (Forgas,
Bower & Moylan, 1990). In contrast, sad people make more internal and stable
FIGURE 7.1 The eﬀects of mood and the target’s veracity (truthful, deceptive) on judgements
of guilt of targets accused of committing a theft (average percentage of targets judged guilty in
each condition) (after East & Forgas, 2006).
114
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

attributions for their failures than for their successes. Moods can even inﬂuence
explanations for deeply involving events, such as relationship conﬂicts with one’s
intimate partner (Forgas, 1994).
It was expected here that the more accommodative processing promoted by
negative mood should enhance the processing of situational information, and so
reduce the incidence of incorrect internal attributions (Gilbert & Malone,
1995). Further, in terms of Jones and Davis’ (1965) theory of correspondent
inferences, these mood eﬀects should be most pronounced when the behaviour
of the actor is particularly informative and salient as it deviates from popular
expectations.
In one experiment, happy or sad participants (N = 96) were asked to read
and make attributions about the writer of an essay advocating a popular or
unpopular position (for or against nuclear testing) which they were told was
either assigned, or was freely chosen. As also found by Jones and Harris (1967),
essay content inﬂuenced attributions even when the essay was assigned. Happy
persons were more likely, and sad people were less likely than controls to commit
the FAE and incorrectly infer attitude diﬀerences based on coerced essays. It
seems that the accommodative processing style recruited by negative mood sig-
niﬁcantly reduced the FAE, especially when correspondent inferences could be
readily based on highly salient and captivating information (an unpopular essay;
Gilbert, 1991).
Similar eﬀects can also occur in real life. In a ﬁeld study, participants (N =
120) who were feeling good or bad after seeing happy or sad movies were asked
to read and make attributions about the writers of popular and unpopular essays
arguing for, or against recycling (cf. Forgas & Moylan, 1987). Once again, those
in a negative mood after seeing sad ﬁlms were signiﬁcantly less likely to commit
the FAE. In other words, positive aﬀect increased and negative aﬀect decreased
the FAE, especially when the essays were highly salient because they advocated
unpopular positions.
Are these eﬀects indeed due to the more attentive processing of situational
information in negative mood? To test this, happy or sad participants (N = 84)
again made attributions based on freely chosen or coerced essays advocating
popular or unpopular positions (for or against environmentalism; Forgas, 1998,
Exp. 3). Their subsequent recall of essay details was also assessed as a measure of
mood-induced diﬀerences in information processing style. Once again, negative
mood signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of the FAE, especially when the essays
advocated unpopular positions. Paradoxically, happy persons were more con-
ﬁdent in their judgements, indicating that judges had no introspective awareness
of mood eﬀects on processing strategies and attributions. Recall memory data
conﬁrmed that those in a negative mood remembered signiﬁcantly more than
did others, demonstrating a direct association between mood and the amount of
processing the stimulus information received. A mediational analysis further
conﬁrmed that processing strategy was a signiﬁcant mediator of mood eﬀects on
attributions.
115
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

Thus, mild negative moods produced improved judgements, reducing the
incidence of the fundamental attribution error, both in laboratory and in real-life
settings. These eﬀects were directly due to the more detailed and accommodative
processing style associated with dysphoria, consistent with the suggested evo-
lutionary beneﬁts of negative aﬀect in conferring cognitive advantages when
dealing with complex social information. These results then lend support to
evolutionary explanations that emphasize the adaptive, functional signiﬁcance of
aﬀective states.
Dysphoria Improves Eyewitness Memory
Can mood also inﬂuence the accuracy of eyewitness recollections? In a series of
three experiments we found that positive aﬀect promoted, and negative aﬀect
inhibited the incorporation of false details into eyewitness memories. Aﬀect may
inﬂuence eyewitness memory (1) when the event is ﬁrst witnessed (encoding
stage), (2) when misleading information is encountered later on (post-event
stage) and (3) when the information is retrieved (retrieval stage). These studies
explored mood eﬀects at Stage 2, on the incorporation of false information into
memories (Forgas, Vargas & Laham, 2005). We expected that good moods can
promote, and bad moods can inhibit the incorporation of false information into
eyewitness memory, consistent with the information processing consequences of
these aﬀective states.
In the ﬁrst experiment (N = 96), participants viewed pictures showing a car
crash scene (negative event), and a wedding party scene (positive event). One
hour later, allegedly as part of an unrelated study, they received an autobiographi-
cal mood induction (recall happy or sad events from their past), and completed
a short questionnaire about the scenes that either contained, or did not contain
misleading information (e.g., set in italics here: “Did you see the overturned car
next to the broken guard rail?”, “Did you see the ﬁreman holding a ﬁre hose?”).
After a further 45-minute interval ﬁlled with other tasks, the accuracy of their
eyewitness memory for the scenes was tested. As predicted, exposure to mislead-
ing information signiﬁcantly reduced eyewitness accuracy, and positive mood
increased, and negative mood decreased this tendency. In fact, negative mood
almost completely eliminated this common “misinformation eﬀect”. A signal
detection analysis conﬁrmed that negative aﬀect when exposed to false details
signiﬁcantly improved and positive mood impaired memory performance.
In a second experiment (N = 144), students in a lecture theatre witnessed a
staged 5-minute aggressive encounter between a lecturer, and a female intruder
(Forgas et al., 2005, Exp. 2). One week later eyewitnesses to this episode received
a mood induction (viewed short 10-minute video-ﬁlms), and then responded to
a brief questionnaire about the episode that contained planted, misleading
information (set in italics here: “Did you see the lecturer removing his micro-
phone, as the woman wearing a light jacket moved towards him?”, “Can you
remember the young woman ﬁddling with her scarf as the lecturer gave her
116
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

something from his wallet?”). After a further 45-minute interval, the accuracy of
their eyewitness memory for the episode was tested.
Those in a positive mood while receiving the misleading information were
more likely subsequently to report it as true (Figure 7.2). In contrast, negative
aﬀect seems to have all but eliminated this source of error in eyewitness memory.
Signal detection analyses conﬁrmed that negative aﬀect improved the ability to
discriminate between correct and misleading details. Interestingly, those in the
positive mood, although actually less accurate, were more conﬁdent in their
accuracy, suggesting that there was no meta-cognitive awareness of these mood
eﬀects.
Can people suppress the impact of their moods when instructed to do so? In
a third study, participants (N = 80) saw 5-minute videotapes showing (a) a
robbery in a convenience store, and (b) a wedding scene. After a 45-minute
interval they received an audio-visual mood induction and then completed a
short questionnaire that either did, or did not contain misleading information
about the event. Some were also instructed to “disregard and control their aﬀect-
ive states”. Finally, the accuracy of their eyewitness memory for the two events
was tested. Participants also completed the Snyder self-monitoring scale, and the
Crowne-Marlowe social desirability scale during a separate testing session at the
beginning of the semester.
Exposure to misleading information again reduced eyewitness accuracy, and
did so most when people where in a happy rather than a sad mood. A signal
detection analysis again conﬁrmed the beneﬁcial eﬀects of negative aﬀect for
memory performance. Instructions to control aﬀect did not reduce this mood
eﬀect, but rather, produced an overall conservative response bias. Interestingly,
FIGURE 7.2 The interaction between mood and the presence or absence of misleading
information on recognition (Experiment 2): Positive mood increased, and negative mood
decreased the inﬂuence of misleading information on subsequent eye-witness reports (false
alarms) (after Forgas et al., 2005).
117
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

individuals who scored high on self-monitoring and social desirability were
better able to suppress mood eﬀects when instructed to do so than were others.
Summary.
These experiments oﬀer convergent evidence that negative moods
can have signiﬁcant adaptive eﬀects on cognitive performance, by reducing
people’s susceptibility to misleading information and thus improving eyewitness
accuracy. Paradoxically, happy mood reduced accuracy yet increased conﬁdence,
suggesting that people were unaware of the consequences of their mood states for
their thinking and memory. Instructions to suppress aﬀect were only eﬀective for
participants who scored high on self-monitoring, and social desirability. These
results are consistent with aﬀect-cognition theories that predict that good and
bad moods should have an asymmetric eﬀect on processing strategies and out-
comes (Bless, 2001; Fiedler & Bless, 2001; Forgas, 1995, 2002). Within an
evolutionary approach to social cognition advocated here, our results suggest that
both good and bad mood can have a signiﬁcant impact on eyewitness memories,
due to the kind of information processing strategies they generate, and these
ﬁndings may have a number of applied implications for forensic, organizational
and clinical psychology.
THE INTERPERSONAL BENEFITS OF NEGATIVE AFFECT
Could negative aﬀect also confer identiﬁable beneﬁts when it comes to eﬀective
interpersonal communication, such as the production of persuasive messages?
Despite extensive research on responding to persuasion (Petty et al., 2001) there
has been little work on how such messages are produced. What role does every-
day mood play in the production of persuasive messages? It was expected that
accommodative processing promoted by negative aﬀect should produce more
concrete and factual thinking and result in the production of superior persuasive
messages. This prediction is also consistent with much early theorizing about
rhetorical eﬀectiveness going back to Aristotle (Cooper, 1932), as well as psycho-
logical research suggesting that “expository information that is concrete . . .
tends to be interesting and well recalled” (Sadowski, 2001, p. 263).
In the ﬁrst experiment (Forgas, in press, Exp. 1), participants (N = 59)
received an audio-visual mood induction, and were then asked to produce per-
suasive arguments for or against an increase in student fees, and Aboriginal land
rights. They produced an average of seven arguments, and each argument was
rated by two raters blind to the manipulations for overall quality, persuasiveness,
level of concreteness and valence (positive–negative). Those in a negative mood
produced arguments on both issues that were of signiﬁcantly higher quality and
more persuasive than the arguments produced by happy participants. This mood
eﬀect was largely due to the greater speciﬁcity and concreteness of arguments
produced in a negative mood. A mediational analysis showed that it was mood-
induced variations in argument concreteness that inﬂuenced argument quality.
118
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

In a further experiment, happy or sad participants (N = 125) were asked to
produce persuasive arguments for or against Australia becoming a republic, and
for or against a radical right-wing party. Two raters (r = .91) assessed each
argument in terms of (a) persuasiveness and argument quality, (b) valence (the
use of positive or negative contents) and (c) self-relevance (the extent to which
participants used personal, self-relevant themes). Sad mood again resulted in
higher quality and more persuasive arguments (see Figure 7.3), consistent with
the theoretical prediction that negative mood should promote a more careful,
systematic, bottom-up processing style that is more attuned to the requirements
of a particular situation (Bless, 2001; Bless & Fiedler, 2006; Fiedler, 2001;
Forgas, 2002). However, the ultimate signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings depends on
whether the arguments produced by happy and sad participants indeed diﬀer in
actual persuasive power, as distinct from ratings of persuasiveness produced by
trained raters.
In Experiment 3 the arguments produced by happy or sad participants were
presented to a naive audience of 256 undergraduate students. Their baseline
FIGURE 7.3 Mood eﬀects on the quality and concreteness of the persuasive messages
produced: Negative aﬀect increases the degree of concreteness of the arguments produced, and
arguments produced in negative mood were also rated as more persuasive (after Forgas, in
press, Exp. 2).
119
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

attitudes on the four issues were assessed at the beginning of the term. After
reading one of the pro- or contra-persuasive arguments on one of the issues
written by one of the happy or sad participants in Experiments 1 and 2, their
attitude on all four issues was again assessed. Observed changes in attitudes in
response to the persuasive arguments were assessed against the baseline meas-
urement obtained earlier. Results showed that arguments written by negative
mood participants in Experiments 1 and 2 were signiﬁcantly more successful in
producing a real change in attitudes than were arguments produced by happy
participants. Attitudes were also more likely to change when the arguments
advocated a popular rather than an unpopular position, and negative mood
arguments were especially successful in producing attitude change when they
advocated a popular position.
Finally, in Experiment 4 persuasive attempts by happy and sad people were
directed at a “partner” to volunteer for a boring experiment using e-mail
exchanges (Forgas, in press). The motivation to be persuasive was also manipu-
lated by oﬀering some of them a signiﬁcant reward if successful (movie passes).
Mood again had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on argument quality: People in a negative
mood produced higher quality persuasive arguments than did the neutral group,
who in turn did better than the positive group. However, the oﬀer of a reward
reduced mood eﬀects on argument quality, conﬁrming a key prediction of the
Aﬀect Infusion Model (Forgas, 1995, 2002), that mood eﬀects on information
processing—and subsequent social inﬂuence strategies—are strongest in the
absence of motivated processing. A mediational analysis again conﬁrmed that
negative mood induced more accommodative thinking, and more concrete and
speciﬁc arguments, as predicted.
This series of experiments thus conﬁrms that persuasive arguments pro-
duced in negative mood are not only of higher quality as judged by raters, but are
also signiﬁcantly more eﬀective in producing genuine attitude change in people.
Arguments produced in negative mood were more eﬀective, because they con-
tained more concrete details and more factual information (Cooper, 1932). Such
messages are seen by people as more interesting and more memorable (Sadowski,
2001). However, when motivation to be eﬀective is already high, mood eﬀects
tend to diminish, as predicted by the Aﬀect Infusion Model (Forgas, 2002).
These results are consistent with other studies suggesting that negative aﬀect
typically promotes a more concrete, accommodative, externally focused informa-
tion processing style that also can reduce the incidence of judgemental errors and
improve eye-witness memory (Forgas, 1998; Forgas et al., 2005). This kind of
concrete, accommodative processing also has direct beneﬁts when it comes to the
eﬀective use of social inﬂuence strategies, such as the production of persuasive
arguments. This ﬁnding may have interesting applied implications, for example
in industrial and organizational settings where encounters involving persuasive
communication are very common (Forgas & George, 2001). Managing success-
ful relationships and resolving personal conﬂicts also involves a great deal of
persuasive communication, often in situations that are aﬀectively charged. It is
120
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

an intriguing possibility that mild negative aﬀect may actually promote a more
concrete, accommodative and ultimately, more successful communication style
in intimate relationships.
CONCLUSIONS
In contrast with the overwhelming emphasis on the beneﬁts of positive aﬀect in
the recent literature, these results highlight the potentially adaptive and bene-
ﬁcial consequences of negative mood (Forgas & George, 2001). Positive aﬀect is
not always desirable (Sinclair, 1988). People in a negative mood are less prone to
judgemental errors (Forgas, 1998), are more resistant to eye-witness distortions
(Forgas et al., 2005) and are less likely to adopt dysfunctional self-handicapping
strategies (Alter & Forgas, in press). To this list we may now add another caveat:
People in a negative mood may also be better at producing high-quality and
eﬀective persuasive messages.
Just how robust and reliable are these eﬀects? Given the consistency of the
results across a number of diﬀerent experiments, diﬀerent populations and dif-
ferent mood inductions, we can be reasonably conﬁdent of the reliability of these
eﬀects. Future experiments may also provide additional insights into the precise
nature of the adaptive mechanisms responsible for these eﬀects.
Dealing with social information is necessarily a complex and demanding
cognitive task that requires a degree of elaborate processing. The empirical stud-
ies presented here suggest that in many situations, negative aﬀect such as sadness
may increase, and positive aﬀect decrease the quality and eﬃcacy of cognitive
processes and interpersonal behaviours. Much has been learned about the way
aﬀective states inﬂuence memory, thinking and judgements in recent years, yet
not enough is known about the evolutionary mechanisms that are responsible for
the way we respond to various aﬀective states.
Negative Affect: An Evolutionary Adaptation?
Our ﬁndings are broadly consistent with the notion that over evolutionary time,
aﬀective states became adaptive, functional triggers to elicit information process-
ing patterns that are appropriate in a given situation. However, one recurring
problem in applying evolutionary principles to understanding social cognition is
that such interpretations are usually post hoc, and notoriously hard to prove.
How do we really know if an experimentally demonstrated phenomenon, such as
the beneﬁcial inﬂuences of negative aﬀect on social information processing dem-
onstrated in these studies, is indeed an evolutionary adaptation, or merely the
side eﬀect of an adaptation, or perhaps even just error?
There are some commonly accepted criteria, but no hard and fast rules.
Discerning the evolutionary roots of very speciﬁc eﬀects can be very diﬃcult, as
Halberstadt (chapter 15, this volume) shows. Any phenomenon claiming to be
121
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

evolutionary in origin needs to be culturally universal. Although few explicitly
cross-cultural studies have so far been carried out on mood eﬀects on informa-
tion processing, there is reason to believe that these eﬀects, as are indeed most
fundamental cognitive phenomena, are not culture dependent. The convergent
validation of this eﬀect in a variety of diﬀerent cognitive tasks, using a variety of
mood induction procedures, and diﬀerent subject populations also suggests that
the eﬀect is real and universal. Some evidence from neuropsychology and in
particular from fMRI studies should be helpful to bolster the case for evolution-
ary origins, and we are currently engaged in such research. At this point, how-
ever, we must accept that the case for the evolutionary nature of mood
eﬀects on thinking is not yet made.
This is not necessarily a major problem, however, as applying an evolution-
ary frame of thinking to social cognitive phenomena can be beneﬁcial in a variety
of ways. Taking an evolutionary perspective helps us to realize that the phenom-
ena we study have biological roots, and oﬀers an important and productive link
between cognitive theorizing and the neurosciences (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992).
Perhaps evolutionary psychology at this stage is more a “meta-theory”, a way of
thinking about psychology, than a strictly testable theory (Ketelaar & Ellis,
2000). Nevertheless, evolutionary principles help to link and integrate a variety
of otherwise disconnected ﬁndings, and thus help to bring order and connected-
ness into our ﬁeld, as the contributions to this volume amply demonstrate.
Further research on the nature of aﬀective inﬂuences on complex interpersonal
behaviours should be of considerable theoretical, as well as applied relevance to
researchers interested in evolutionary approaches to social cognition.
REFERENCES
Adolphs, R. & Damasio, A. (2001). The inter-
action of aﬀect and cognition: A neuro-
biological perspective. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.),
The handbook of aﬀect and social cognition
(pp. 27–49). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates, Inc.
Alter, A., & Forgas, J. P. (in press). On being
happy but fearing failure: The eﬀects of
mood 
on 
self-handicapping 
strategies.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
Ambady, N., & Gray, H. M. (2002). On being
sad and mistaken: Mood eﬀects on the
accuracy of thin slice judgments. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 947–
961.
Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B. (2000). Chal-
lenge and threat appraisals: The role of aﬀect-
ive cues. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and
thinking: The role of aﬀect in social cognition
(pp. 59–82). New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Bless, H. (2001). Mood and the use of general
knowledge structures. In L. L. Martin (Ed.),
Theories of mood and cognition: A user’s guide-
book (pp. 9–26). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Bless, H., & Fiedler, K. (2006). Mood and the
regulation of information processing and
behavior. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Hearts and
minds: Aﬀective inﬂuences on social cognition
and behaviour (pp. 65–84). New York:
Psychology Press.
Bower, G. H. (1981). Mood and memory. The
American Psychologist, 36, 129–148.
Ciarrochi, J. V., Forgas, J. P., & Mayer, J. (Eds.).
Emotional intelligence in everyday life (2nd
ed.). New York: Psychology Press.
Clark, M. S., & Isen, A. M. (1982). Towards
122
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

understanding the relationship between feel-
ing states and social behavior. In A. H.
Hastorf & A. M. Isen (Eds.), Cognitive
social psychology (pp. 73–108). New York:
Elsevier-North Holland.
Cooper, L. (1932). The rhetoric of Aristotle. New
York: Appleton-Century.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error. New
York: Grosste/Putnam.
Darwin, C. (1965). The expression of emotions in
man and animals. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press. (Original work published 1872)
East, R., & Forgas, J. P. (2006). Mood eﬀects
on factual and interpersonal scepticism.
Unpublished manuscript, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
Ekman, P. (1972). Universals and cultural dif-
ferences in facial expressions of emotion. In
J. Cole (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motiv-
ation (Vol. 19, pp. 207–283). Lincoln, NE:
University of Nebraska Press.
Feshbach, S., & Singer, R. D. (1957). The
eﬀects of fear arousal and suppression of fear
upon social perception. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 55, 283–288.
Fiedler, K. (2001). Aﬀective inﬂuences on social
information processing. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.),
The handbook of aﬀect and social cognition
(pp. 163–185). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Fiedler, K., & Bless, H. (2001). The formation
of beliefs in the interface of aﬀective and cog-
nitive processes. In N. Frijda, A. Manstead,
& S. Bem (Eds.), The inﬂuence of emotions on
beliefs (pp. 210–246). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Forgas, J. P. (1979). Social episodes: The study
of interaction routines. London/New York:
Academic Press.
Forgas, J. P. (1994). Sad and guilty? Aﬀective
inﬂuences on explanations of conﬂict
episodes. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 66, 56–68.
Forgas, J. P. (1995). Mood and judgment: The
Aﬀect Infusion Model (AIM). Psychological
Bulletin, 116, 39–66.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). Happy and mistaken?
Mood eﬀects on the fundamental attribution
error. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 318–331.
Forgas, J. P. (2002). Feeling and doing: Aﬀect-
ive inﬂuences on interpersonal behavior.
Psychological Inquiry, 13, 1–28.
Forgas, J. P. (in press). When sad is better than
happy: Mood eﬀects on the eﬀectiveness of
persuasive messages. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology.
Forgas, J. P., & Bower, G. H. (1987). Mood
eﬀects on person perception judgements.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
53, 53–60.
Forgas, J. P., Bower, G. H., & Moylan, S. J.
(1990). Praise or blame? Mood eﬀects on
attributions for success or failure. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
809–819.
Forgas, J. P., & George, J. M. (2001). Aﬀective
inﬂuences on judgments and behavior in
organizations: An information processing
perspective. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 86, 3–34.
Forgas, J. P., & Moylan, S. J. (1987). After the
movies: The eﬀects of transient mood states
on social judgments. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 13, 478–489.
Forgas, J. P., Vargas, P., & Laham, S. (2005).
Mood eﬀects on eyewitness memory:
Aﬀective inﬂuences on susceptibility to mis-
information. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 41, 574–588.
Frijda, N. (1986). The emotions. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gilbert, D. T. (1991). How mental systems
believe. The American Psychologist, 46,
107–119.
Gilbert, D. T., & Malone, P. S. (1995). The
correspondence bias. Psychological Bulletin,
117, 21–38.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. New York: Wiley.
Hilgard, E. R. (1980). The trilogy of mind:
Cognition, aﬀection, and conation. Journal
of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 16,
107–117.
Ito, T., & Cacioppo, J. (2001). Aﬀect and atti-
tudes: A social neuroscience approach. In J. P.
Forgas (Ed.), The handbook of aﬀect and social
cognition 
(pp. 
50–74). 
Mahwah, 
NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965). From acts
to dispositions. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (pp.
124–167). New York: Academic Press.
Jones, E. E., & Harris, V. A. (1967). The attri-
bution of attitudes. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 3, 1–24.
123
COGNITIVE BENEFITS OF MILD DYSPHORIA

Ketelaar, T., & Ellis, B. J. (2000). Are evo-
lutionary explanations unfalsiﬁable? Evo-
lutionary psychology and the Lakatosian
philosophy of science. Psychological Inquiry,
11, 1–21.
Lane, J. D., & DePaulo, B. M. (1999). Com-
pleting Coyne’s cycle: Dysphorics’ ability to
detect deception. Journal of Research in
Personality, 33, 311–329.
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2001). Fear, anger,
and risk. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81, 146–159.
Niedenthal, P., & Halberstadt, J. (2000).
Grounding categories in emotional response.
In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and thinking:
The role of aﬀect in social cognition (pp. 357–
386). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Ortonyi, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1988).
The cognitive structure of emotions. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Parrott, W. G. (1993). Beyond Hedonism:
Motives for inhibiting good moods and for
maintaining bad moods. In D. M. Wegner &
J. W. Pennebaker (Eds.), Handbook of mental
control (pp. 278–305). Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Pervin, L. A. (1976). A free response description
approach to the study of person situation
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 34, 465–474.
Petty, R. E., DeSteno, D., & Rucker, D. (2001).
The role of aﬀect in attitude change. In J. P.
Forgas (Ed.), The handbook of aﬀect and social
cognition (pp. 212–236). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Sadowski, M. (2001). Resolving the eﬀects of
concreteness on interest, comprehension and
learning. Educational Psychology Review, 13,
263–281.
Schwarz, N. (1990). Feelings as information:
Informational and motivational functions of
aﬀective states. In E. T. Higgins & R. Sor-
rentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and
cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 527–561). New York:
Guilford Press.
Sinclair, R. C. (1988). Mood, categorization
breadth and performance appraisal: The
eﬀects of order of information acquisition
and aﬀective state on halo, accuracy, informa-
tion retrieval and evaluations. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 42,
22–46.
Sinclair, R. C., & Mark, M. M. (1992). The
inﬂuence of mood state on judgment and
action. In L. L. Martin & A. Tesser (Eds.),
The construction of social judgments (pp. 165–
193). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Smith, C. A., & Kirby, L. D. (2001). Aﬀect and
cognitive appraisal processes. In J. P. Forgas
(Ed.), The handbook of aﬀect and social cogni-
tion (pp. 75–94). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. H.
Barkow & L. Cosmides (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 19–136). London:
Oxford University Press.
Wegener, D. T., & Petty, R. E. (1994). Mood
management across aﬀective states: The
hedonistic contingency hypothesis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 1034–
1048.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking:
Preferences need no inferences. The American
Psychologist, 35, 151–175.
Zajonc, R. B. (2000). Feeling and thinking:
Closing the debate over the independence of
aﬀect. In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Feeling and think-
ing: The role of aﬀect in social cognition (pp.
31–58). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
124
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

8
Evolution, Social Cognition,
and Depressed Mood
Exploring the Relationship Between
Depression and Social Risk Taking
PAUL B. T. BADCOCK
NICHOLAS B. ALLEN
Introduction
Darwinian Models of Depressed Mood
Theories of Resource/Energy Conservation
Social Theories of the Evolution of Depression
The Social Risk Hypothesis: An Integrative View
Depression and Cognition About Social Risk
Depression and Reduced Social Risk Taking
Recent Studies on Depression and Risk Propensity
Discussion and Conclusions
INTRODUCTION
T
he idea that the human capacity for depressed mood evolved in response
to speciﬁc adaptive problems is by no means new. The argument enjoys
a six-decade history (McGuire & Troisi, 1998), and has drawn contribu-
tions from a broad range of theorists (see Allen & Badcock, 2003). Generally,
explanatory frameworks that have emerged from this expanding body of litera-
ture can be meaningfully grouped into two broad categories: explanations that
emphasize the inherently social nature of the selection pressures that have shaped
the human capacity for depression, and those that also focus upon non-social
inﬂuences (Gilbert, 2006). We shall now consider each of these schools of
thought in turn.
125

DARWINIAN MODELS OF DEPRESSED MOOD
While evolutionary approaches have been proposed to explain both the ubiqui-
tous human capacity for depressed mood states, as well as the emergence in some
individuals of clinically signiﬁcant depressed states (see Allen & Badcock, 2006,
for a review of both types of models), in this chapter we shall focus on explan-
ations for depressed mood only. Although the concept of adaptation should not
be reﬂexively applied to biological and behavioural features without sound
logical reasons, we propose that mood states are appropriate targets for an evo-
lutionary analysis. First, they are ubiquitous human capacities indicating a con-
siderable degree of specialization (Cosmides & Tooby, 1994). Second, they are
activated by speciﬁc contexts, suggesting that their input is specialized (Oatley,
1992). Finally, mood states are characterized by complex but co-ordinated sets of
output in terms of physiology, overt behaviour and conscious experience.
While there has been some very useful work on the distinct adaptive func-
tions of other negative mood states like anxiety (Öhman, Dimberg & Ost,
1985), the adaptive signiﬁcance of depressed mood has proven more elusive. For
example, there is considerable evidence that the essential psychological “theme”
of anxiety is threat, whereas the “theme” for depression is loss (Clark & Beck,
1989) or defeat (Price, 1972). Despite such distinctions, the argument that
anxiety is an adaptive response to threat (facilitating early detection and
responses) is more widely accepted than any evolutionary claim regarding depres-
sion. Indeed, it is not even clear what kind of loss is most relevant to depression
(McGuire, Troisi & Raleigh, 1997).
Nesse (1998) has argued that circumstances involving the loss (or the threat
thereof) of a reproductive resource are likely to shape negative mood states,
whereas circumstances involving the gain (or potential gain) of such resources are
likely to shape positive ones. Thus, an evolutionary understanding of depression
should depend on: (1) identifying recurrent situations in the ancestral environ-
ment typically associated with biologically signiﬁcant loss; (2) describing the
selection pressures in such situations (i.e., the particular social-reproductive goals
that they would have threatened); and (3) isolating the features of depressed
mood that would have enabled the organism to cope with these pressures (Nesse,
1990). While this approach has engendered a range of propositions, three
prevailing schools of thought characterize the literature: the conservation of
resources, social competition and attachment theories of depression.
THEORIES OF RESOURCE/ENERGY CONSERVATION
Conservation of resource theories assert that the inhibition of appetitive func-
tions associated with depression (i.e., low levels of energy, pleasure and appetitive
motivation) is likely to be adaptive by allowing an individual to conserve
resources and later redirect them towards more productive endeavours. These
126
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

theories tend to emphasize both social and non-social outcomes, and as such, do
not usually consider social processes to be uniquely inﬂuential in the evolution of
depressive mechanisms (Gilbert, 2006). According to such views, depressed
mood is instigated by a low rate of positive reward or insuﬃcient control over
rewards or punishments. Seligman’s (1975) learned helplessness theory, for
example, was founded on studies of animals exhibiting helpless behaviour when
subjected to uncontrollable aversive events. Nesse’s (2000) resource allocation
model concentrates more on low rates of rewarding outcomes. Here, depressed
mood represents an adaptive response to the propitiousness of situations by
adjusting resource allocation (e.g., energy and investment) to inhibit investments
in poor pay-oﬀ activities. In a similar vein, incentive disengagement theory
(Klinger, 1975) proposes that depressed states disengage an organism from
unobtainable incentives or goals, whilst Leahy’s (1997) “sunk costs” model sug-
gests that depression occurs when people persevere too long with behaviours that
result in insuﬃcient or diminishing rewards. Consistent with such models,
Champion and Power (1995) have argued that depression-prone people tend to
over-invest in a limited number of goals and, when such goals fail, there is a
collapse in an individual’s incentive and motivational systems.
SOCIAL THEORIES OF THE EVOLUTION OF DEPRESSION
The Evolution of the Social Brain
The social brain hypothesis (see Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume) asserts that
group living results in strong evolutionary pressures that favour the selection of
cognitive capacities that facilitate an individual’s successful navigation of com-
petitive and highly complex social environments. A seminal chapter by Hum-
phrey (1976) has pointed out that the complexity of social relations within
primate groups poses particularly diﬃcult adaptive problems for the members of
such groups. Given the likely impact of these processes on fundamental neural
design, it is not surprising that the attention of neuroscientists has recently been
drawn to the way in which social information and behaviour is processed by the
human brain (Adolphs, 2003).
Although there are substantial adaptive advantages to group living—most
obviously, better protection from predators, improved success as predators, and
more ready access to mates—there is also genetic competition between group
members, meaning that those attributes best suited to never-ending Machiavel-
lian games of “social chess” or “plot and counter plot” will be positively selected.
Importantly, the pursuit of adaptive goals within social contexts is not
without risk. For example, co-operating in a group of exploiters might mean that
they beneﬁt at one’s own expense, and competing for status and access to
resources against more powerful conspeciﬁcs is likely to elicit constant attacks,
loss of status and/or humiliation. It is crucial, then, for individuals to evaluate
127
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

risks against beneﬁts whenever they pursue a particular social role or goal. Addi-
tionally, risks of attachment loss (separation) for a young child will be calculated
and coped with in a diﬀerent way to, for example, risks encountered when
competing for sexual partners. This means that humans need to monitor the
social roles they are engaged in, and increase certain behaviours when opportun-
ities exist, or inhibit them when they entail too much risk. It is the latter circum-
stance that has been the subject of social theories of the evolution of depression.
Social Competition Theories
One of the earliest and most inﬂuential approaches to the evolution of depres-
sion has emphasized the role of social competition in shaping the human cap-
acity for depressed mood. A central claim of evolutionary theory is that an
individual’s access to reproductive resources will vary according to his or her
position, or rank, within the wider social group (Buss, 1999). Accordingly,
humans are powerfully motivated to acquire status through competitive
encounters with others (Buss, 1991).
The ﬁrst author to apply this argument to depression was Price (1967), who
has developed a Darwinian explanation of depressive states based on ritual agon-
istic (or ﬁghting) behaviours. Price has argued that in any agonistic encounter
between competitors, the winning contestant will typically adopt an escalating
strategy to increase its chances of success (i.e., continuing to participate in the
contest, possibly threatening or attacking its opponent); the losing contestant
will adopt a de-escalating strategy, characterized by subordinate or yielding
behaviour (Price, 1998). This latter strategy represents a withdrawal from the
ﬁght, reducing the risk of physical incapacity or death by sending “no-threat”
signals to de-activate the aggressive behaviour of the attacker. Here, depression is
conceptualized as an evolved, involuntary de-escalating strategy—enabling the
individual to acknowledge defeat in ritual agonistic encounters, and adapt to the
corresponding loss of social rank (Price, Sloman, Gardner, Gilbert, & Rohde,
1994).
However, while ﬁghting and intimidation are eﬀective competitive strat-
egies for most species, this is not always the case with humans and other primates
(de Waal, 1989). Instead, resource acquisition and the formation of important
social defences rely heavily upon an individual’s ability to elicit help from others.
Thus, ritual agonistic behaviours have been replaced, at least partially, by com-
petition through attraction—such that an individual’s ﬁtness prospects will
depend largely upon his or her social value, prestige and attractiveness (Barkow,
1989). Gilbert and colleagues (e.g., Gilbert, Allan & Trent, 1995) embrace this
argument in their notion of Social Attention Holding Power (SAHP).
SAHP refers to “the ability to elicit positive attention and social rewards, in
the form of approval, praise, acceptance, respect, admiration, desire, etc.” (Gil-
bert, 1997, p. 118). Gilbert suggests that humans compete for status through
bestowing beneﬁts on others to maximize SAHP, and that status diﬀerences are
128
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

attributable to diﬀerences in the degree and quality of attention conferred by
others (Buss, 1999). The biological signiﬁcance of high SAHP has been high-
lighted by recent research demonstrating that rhesus macaques sacriﬁce a ﬂuid
reward in order to view images of high status conspeciﬁcs, but require an over-
payment of ﬂuid rewards in order to view images of low status conspeciﬁcs
(Deaner, Khera & Platt, 2005). These ﬁndings suggest that even in non-human
primates, social attention is diﬀerentially allocated according to status.
Importantly, agonistic strategies to cope with conspeciﬁc challenges have
not disappeared, but are over-laid with SAHP-oriented systems. Consequently,
not only may aggression be a common response to being deprived of the
approval, support, admiration, respect or love to which one thinks oneself is
entitled (Baumeister, Smart & Boden, 1996), but loss of control over such
signals may activate the defensive, subordinate and social defeat responses of loss
of conﬁdence, anxiety and depression.
The Attachment Theory of Depression
Central to the attachment theory of depression is the proposed ﬁtness con-
sequences of aﬀective bonding. Indeed, according to Buss (1991), mate reten-
tion, reciprocal dyadic alliance formation and coalition building are among the
principal social selection pressures that have shaped human evolution.
One of the ﬁrst proponents of the attachment model of depression was
Bowlby (1969), who forwarded an evolutionary argument for interpersonal
attachments based on parent–child interactions. Given the gradual maturation
and protracted helplessness of human infants, the survival and emergent repro-
ductive success of one’s oﬀspring necessitates an intensive contribution of time,
commitment, energy and resources (Ingram, Miranda & Segal, 1998). Bowlby
(1988) argues that aﬀective bonding ensures that a parent will provide the neces-
sary commitments to safeguard the survival, and latent reproductive success, of
his or her child(ren), and thus, the survival and perpetuation of that parent’s
genes.
It has also been suggested that aﬀectional bonding between adult sexual
partners has evolved to ensure the contribution of protection and resources from
the father during the mother’s pregnancy, and periods when the female must
focus on the care of oﬀspring (Ainsworth, 1991). Aﬃliative relationships are also
seen to play a central role in the formation of social defences and the acquisition
of resources, as they enable the individual to elicit assistance from conspeciﬁcs
(Ainsworth, 1991).
In speciﬁc relation to depression, the attachment model suggests that
behaviours designed to maintain proximity to caregivers are instigated when
signiﬁcant aﬀectional bonds are threatened (Gilbert, 1992). The model
attributes depressive onset to the loss or dissolution of signiﬁcant interpersonal
relationships (Ingram et al., 1998), and has germinated several hypotheses
concerning the adaptive function of depressive states. Some, for example, have
129
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

suggested that depression inhibits exploratory or risk-laden activities in the
absence of secure attachment bonds, and instigates appeasement-related
behaviours designed to maintain relationships (Gilbert, 1992). Others have
argued that the depressive response serves as a distress call (Frijda, 1994), pro-
vokes a search for the lost relationship (Averill, 1968), or motivates the suﬀerer to
avoid further deterioration of pre-existing bonds (Ingram et al., 1998).
THE SOCIAL RISK HYPOTHESIS: AN INTEGRATIVE VIEW
While the perspectives outlined above provide important, complementary
insights into the adaptive signiﬁcance of depression, we have suggested elsewhere
that they are not mutually exclusive (Allen & Badcock, 2003). The conservation
of resources views, while explaining the inhibition of reward-seeking behaviour
that is prominent in depression, do not explicitly account for the features of
depressed mood that are inextricably associated with social cognition and
behaviour, especially self-depreciation and the fact that depression is speciﬁcally
related to withdrawal from social contexts. They also do not explain why precipi-
tants of depression are typically social rather than asocial in nature (e.g., Monroe,
Rohde, Seeley & Lewinsohn, 1999). Moreover, although the idea that depression
evolved as a response to the loss or dissolution of attachment bonds points to the
social origins of depressive phenomena, its explanatory power is limited by the
fact that only a proportion of human relationships (especially amongst adults)
can be validly characterized as attachment relationships (Haslam, 1994), and
that the contexts that elicit depression often involve humiliation and entrapment
rather than interpersonal loss (Brown, Harris & Hepworth, 1995). Furthermore,
the idea that depressed states motivate an individual to re-establish lost relation-
ships or seek out new ones does not ﬁt well with the demobilization and social
withdrawal that characterize depression. Finally, while the argument that depres-
sion evolved from more primitive subordinate strategies explains many of its
features and has led to some supportive research ﬁndings (e.g., Gilbert & Allan,
1998), previous accounts have not explicitly explored the way in which this rank-
oriented strategy has been adapted to the human social environment, especially
with respect to the diversity of human social relationships (Haslam, 1994), and
the dramatic advances in social cognition associated with evolution whereby
humans (and possibly some other primates) developed the capacity to think
about the mental states of others (Byrne & Whiten, 1986). We have proposed
that many of the important insights of these approaches can be integrated and
extended by an analysis of social risk assessment in depression (Allen & Badcock,
2003).
Wiggins and Trapnell (1996) have argued that all forms of interpersonal
relatedness can be understood in terms of two fundamental dimensions: agency
(or power) and communion (aﬃliation). These dimensions of relatedness are
emphasized by the social competition and attachment views, respectively.
130
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Notably, both of these domains of interpersonal behaviour present social risks—
that is, risks to one’s social circumstances, well-being and reputation. The
dimension of agency, for example, presents risks of defeat, humiliation and
entrapment, whereas the dimension of aﬃliation presents risks of rejection and
shunning. Our social risk hypothesis (Allen & Badcock, 2003) suggests that
depressive phenomena can be interpreted as a defensive psychobiological
response to increased risk within either one of these interpersonal domains.
Avoiding Social Exclusion
Many theorists have argued that depressed states are fundamentally related to
reductions of positive aﬀect (anhedonia being a key deﬁning feature), and that
the regulators of positive aﬀect are embedded in social cognition and behaviour
(Allen & Badcock, 2003; Joiner & Coyne, 1999). Central to our functional or
evolutionary view of depression is the proposition that there are various bio-
logical processes that guide individuals to enact certain social roles. There are
many clues in the research literature that suggest that social processes (both in
terms of social cognition and interpersonal behaviour) play a crucial role in the
aetiology and maintenance of depressed states. Critical empirical observations
include ﬁndings that depression is often precipitated by interpersonal events (as
noted above), and that interpersonal processes typically mediate the exacerbation
or resolution of depressive episodes (Joiner & Coyne, 1999). Stressful inter-
personal contexts are amongst the most reliable precipitants of depressed states
(Monroe et al., 1999) and certain interpersonal behaviours, such as excessive
reassurance seeking, are strong and speciﬁc predictors of risk for depression
(Joiner & Metalsky, 2001).
Our model of the function of depressed states seeks to explain why there is
such a close link between social cognition, social behaviour and depressive
phenomena. The social risk hypothesis of depression (Allen & Badcock, 2003)
suggests that depressed mood (i.e., down-regulation of positive aﬀect and con-
ﬁdent engagement in the world) evolved to facilitate a risk-averse approach to
social interaction in situations where individuals were typically at risk of exclu-
sion from social contexts (i.e., dyadic relationships or groups) that were vital to
dealing with adaptive, socio-reproductive challenges.
As we have already noted, evolutionary models emphasize that an indi-
vidual’s access to non-plentiful, ﬁtness-enhancing resources depends largely
upon his or her position in a social context. Indeed, given that human groups
contain concentrations of particular reproductive resources, including potential
mates, kin to whom altruism can be directed, and non-kin with whom to
exchange resources, the eﬀect of social exclusion on various proximal adaptive
tasks can be considerable (Buss, 1990). Furthermore, in the ancestral environ-
ment, social exclusion may have threatened one’s survival by excluding the indi-
vidual from group-based beneﬁts such as protection from predators and foraging
for food.
131
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

Consequently, a critical matter for the individual is to detect when the
danger of exclusion from currently beneﬁcial social relationships is high. The
argument that individuals are highly sensitive to how they are perceived and
valued by others, and that this sensitivity is based on an evolved human drive for
social belonging, has previously been forwarded by others (e.g., Baumeister &
Leary, 1995), and has also received empirical support (see Spoor & Williams,
chapter 17, this volume). The social risk hypothesis maintains that the loss or
dissolution of signiﬁcant interpersonal relationships, and/or experiences implica-
tive of low status (such as defeat or humiliation), can be categorized more
broadly as signals that throughout evolutionary history have been associated with
the kind of lowered social value that could lead to ostracism from important
social contexts. Indeed, we would argue that precipitants of depression do not
just involve loss or defeat, but rather, any socially relevant experience that indi-
cates (or has indicated through evolutionary history) to an individual that his or
her ability to successfully negotiate important social contexts is critically low.
Such precipitants may include, for example, negative interpersonal experiences
(such as losses or rejections); the failure of an important goal; loss of social rank
or status; and/or perceptions of a lack of control in social situations (as is the
case with experiences of entrapment). According to this view, the psychological
theme for depression is not so much about defeat or loss, but more about
inadequacy. Finally, once the depression mechanism is activated, we have argued
that the usual opportunistic social investment strategy of individuals shifts
towards a risk-averse strategy—namely, that of depressed mood (Allen &
Badcock, 2003).
Actions of the Depression Mechanism within the Social Ecology
The social risk hypothesis suggests that the adaptive function of the depressive
state is to protect an individual’s ﬁtness prospects by minimizing behaviours that
put social connections at risk, and ensuring the reduction and avoidance of
further threats to reproductive opportunities.
Arguably, under the threat of social exclusion, those who were able to
cautiously increase their social value, while minimizing the risk of further reduc-
tions, were more likely to have preserved their participation in adaptive social
contexts, and were favoured by natural selection. On the other hand, those who
did not adjust their social behaviour in the face of low social value were at even
greater risk of exclusion from critical social alliances.
Thus, we have argued that the depression mechanism controls aspects of
both social perception and behaviour to reduce the likelihood of further, critical
reductions in an individual’s social value (Allen & Badcock, 2003). The mechan-
ism aﬀects social-perceptual processes in that the individual becomes hypersensi-
tive to indications of social risk. In terms of social behaviour, the mechanism
inﬂuences both communicative behaviour (signalling in order to reduce threats
and to elicit safe forms of support), and resource acquisition behaviours (a
132
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

general reduction in behavioural propensities towards high-risk investments that
may result in interpersonal conﬂict or competition).
DEPRESSION AND COGNITION ABOUT SOCIAL RISK
There exists a wealth of research to support the idea that depressed mood is
associated with an increased sensitivity to indicators of social risk. For example,
in a study requiring depressed versus non-depressed participants to evaluate the
potential risks and beneﬁts associated with a range of domain-speciﬁc decision-
making scenarios, Pietromonaco and Rook (1987) found that depressed
individuals were considerably more sensitive to risks in the social domain. Fur-
thermore, Mathews, Ridgeway and Williamson (1996) report that depressed
individuals display attentional vigilance towards socially threatening words.
Others have found that mild-to-moderately depressed participants seek out, and
are particularly vigilant and sensitive to, social information (e.g., Gleicher &
Weary, 1991). Also, depression has been found to be associated with an increased
sensitivity to negative interpersonal and/or achievement related experiences
(Cole, 1990), and heightened and reduced anticipation of negative and positive
life events, respectively (MacLeod & Byrne, 1996).
In a more direct test of this proposal, Badcock and Allen (2003) examined
the eﬀect of experimentally induced depressed mood upon reasoning about
social risk through use of a novel version of the Wason card selection task
(Wason, 1966). The response on the Wason selection task acts as a measure of an
individual’s reasoning about the violation of a conditional rule. The tasks
designed by Badcock and Allen required participants to detect violations of rules
that predicted positive social outcomes from taking social risks (i.e., they were
asked to detect the possibility of negative social outcomes). It was found that
participants in an induced depressed mood state reasoned more adequately about
risks related to social competition (i.e., they were more able to detect violation of
the rule “if I invest the resources in competing, then I will be successful”) than
those in a neutral mood state. This mood-facilitation eﬀect was not observed for
reasoning about other types of content. This provides some empirical support for
the notion that depression is associated with inferential reasoning biases that
result in greater sensitivity to (i.e., the likelihood of detection of) social risks.
DEPRESSION AND REDUCED SOCIAL RISK TAKING
An issue that we have explored in more detail in recent studies is the proposal
that depression is associated with a reduction in an individual’s propensity to
take social risks, but does not aﬀect risk propensity for other types of risk, such as
physical or ﬁnancial ones. This hypothesis enjoys some support from a range of
previous research ﬁndings (Forgas, 1995, 2002), for example, has shown that
133
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

while positive aﬀect is linked to conﬁdent and assertive approach behaviours in
interpersonal contexts, negative aﬀect is associated with more avoidant and
defensive social behaviours. Consistent with this view, he has demonstrated that
individuals in a sad mood pay more attention to the requirements of inter-
personal situations, and process their responses in a more careful, bottom-up
fashion (Forgas, 1998, 2002). Further evidence for a link between depression
and reduced social risk taking has been provided by Pietromonaco and Rook
(1987). Administering a range of decision-making scenarios pertaining to a var-
iety of diﬀerent risk domains, they found that “depressed subjects reported less
willingness than did the nondepressed subjects to take actions that might expose
them to social risks (such as embarrassment or conﬂict)” (p. 405).
Another relevant research area is found in studies of the structure of self-
rated mood. Researchers have argued that while high levels of negative aﬀect are
associated with a variety of distressed states, low levels of positive, or appetitive,
emotional states are depression-speciﬁc (Clark & Watson, 1991). Relevant to the
association between depression and risk taking in social contexts, Watson (2000)
has demonstrated that positive aﬀect is strongly associated with the desire to
engage in social activity. Collectively, these ﬁnding provide some support for the
notion that depressed mood is associated with reduced social risk taking. We
have argued, moreover, that this relationship is attributable to the inﬂuence of
depression on levels of positive aﬀect, causing low levels of pleasure and energy,
alongside reductions in an individual’s self-assurance and motivation to engage
in social activities (Allen & Badcock, 2003).
RECENT STUDIES ON DEPRESSION AND RISK PROPENSITY
We recently extended our theoretical work on the eﬀect of depression on social
risk taking in a series of studies (Badcock & Allen, 2006). In the ﬁrst of these, we
compared clinically depressed participants with anxious and non-psychiatric
controls. We have argued that evidence from clinical populations can be used
to test predictions concerning the design of the depression mechanism, but
not those regarding its ecological functions, as we believe that in clinical
manifestations, the depression mechanism operates beyond its range of adaptive
functioning and results in patently maladaptive behaviour (Allen & Badcock,
2003).
In our ﬁrst study, risk propensity was measured using three dichotomous-
response risk propensity measures added to the social risk (Badcock & Allen,
2003) and cheater-detection (Cosmides & Tooby, 1992) Wason selection tasks.
After each task, participants were asked to select which behavioural strategy (i.e.,
“take the risk” vs. “not take the risk”) they would be likely to adopt. Although
there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the risk propensity responses of the
depressed and anxious groups, a signiﬁcantly greater proportion of depressed
participants selected the risk-averse option for both the attachment and social
134
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

competition measures than those in the control group, providing partial support
for the hypothesis. As expected, there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the
depressed versus anxious and depressed versus control groups in terms of
responses for the cheater-detection risk-taking measure, indicating that group
diﬀerences were speciﬁc to risks associated with attachment and social status.
In order to determine whether dimensions of symptomatology, rather than
diagnostic categories alone, were associated with reduced social risk taking, we
also examined relationships between symptom dimensions linked to positive
aﬀect (i.e., high levels of positive emotions such as pride, excitement or joy) and
negative aﬀect (e.g., sadness, fear, irritability) and risk propensity. Analyses
revealed that positive aﬀect signiﬁcantly enhanced prediction for both the
attachment and social competition risk propensity measures, indicating that this
predictor was reliably, negatively and independently associated with participants’
selection of the risk-averse option for both social risk measures. These results
support our hypothesis that participants scoring low on positive aﬀect (a symp-
tom proﬁle uniquely associated with depression; Clark & Watson, 1991) would
be more likely to select the risk-averse option for both the attachment and social
competition risk-taking measures. Finally, neither positive nor negative aﬀect
predicted the risk-averse response for the cheater detection task.
Our ﬁndings suggest that, as participants’ levels of positive aﬀect increased,
they were less likely to select the risk-averse option for both social risk-taking
measures. Also, negative aﬀect did not reliably enhance prediction of partici-
pants’ responses on any of the risk-taking measures, and positive aﬀect was not
signiﬁcantly associated with responses on the cheater-detection measure. Since
low positive aﬀect is a deﬁning feature of depression (e.g., Clark & Watson,
1991), these ﬁndings appear to indicate that depression speciﬁcally reduces an
individual’s propensity to undertake agency- and aﬃliation-oriented risks.
Furthermore, given the absence of a signiﬁcant relationship between negative
aﬀect and risk-averse responses, results suggest that reduced social risk taking is
particular to depressed mood.
A potential limitation, however, arises from the rudimentary measures of
risk propensity added to the selection tasks. Indeed, since these measures were
neither pilot-tested, nor correlated with an alternate measure of risk propensity,
their validity remains uncertain. To address this issue, we conducted a second
study with a larger, non-clinical sample, and more extensive, validated assess-
ments of risk propensity. Moreover, given the argument and evidence that
depression has its roots in social contexts (see Allen & Badcock, 2003), our social
risk hypothesis predicts that low positive aﬀect (as a depression-speciﬁc dimen-
sion of mood) should be associated with a reduced propensity to take social risks,
but should not aﬀect propensities for other types of risk, such as physical or
ﬁnancial ones. To test these hypotheses, our second study investigated relation-
ships between mood and risk taking in a variety of hazard domains, using two
measures of risk propensity that independently assess an individual’s propensity
to take social, ﬁnancial, health- and accident-related risks (see Rohrmann, 2004).
135
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

We found that after controlling for the eﬀects of individual personality
diﬀerences, negative aﬀect and self-esteem, positive aﬀect was signiﬁcantly and
positively related to social risk taking. Also, and as expected, relationships
between positive aﬀect and participants’ responses for the non-social risk-taking
dimensions were non-signiﬁcant and statistically trivial. Once again, given that
low positive aﬀect is a deﬁning feature of depression (e.g., Clark & Watson,
1991), such results also suggest that depressed mood speciﬁcally reduces an
individual’s propensity to exhibit risky social behaviours. It also bears mention-
ing that self-esteem was found to moderate this relationship, such that as partici-
pants’ levels of self-esteem increased, so too did the strength of the relationship
between positive aﬀect and social risk propensity.
Finally, in a third study, we aimed to replicate these ﬁndings by analysing
relationships between participants’ current levels of mood and their social, ﬁnan-
cial, accident- and health-related risk propensities. However, revealing signiﬁcant
relationships among variables does not imply that these relationships are causal.
Accordingly, experimental work is required before causal inferences can be made.
Thus, an additional aim of this study was to test for a causal link between
depression and reduced social risk taking through use of the experimental
manipulation of mood.
In this ﬁnal study, a musical mood induction was used. Here, participants
are exposed to mood-suggestive music, and are asked to employ this music to
assist their own eﬀorts to get into a depressed, elated or neutral mood (Martin,
1990). Thus, the current study tested whether depressed states are causally
associated with reduced social risk taking by exposing participants to one of
two musical mood induction procedures (depressed vs. neutral), followed
by administration of two assessments of domain-speciﬁc risk propensity
(Rohrmann, 2004).
Again, results supported the hypothesis that individual diﬀerences in self-
rated positive aﬀect at the beginning of the experiment were signiﬁcantly, posi-
tively and uniquely associated with participants’ social risk propensities. These
results provided a partial replication of those in the previous study. By contrast,
analyses of the two groups’ mean ratings failed to support the hypothesis that
participants exposed to the depressed mood induction would exhibit signiﬁ-
cantly lower mean scores on measures of social risk taking than those in the
neutral mood condition. Moreover, results of equivalence tests indicated that
eﬀect sizes for all non-social risk propensity scales were non-trivial. In general,
then, results of between-group analyses were inconsistent with our hypotheses,
and render the nature of the causal relationship between depression and social
risk taking somewhat unclear.
A possible explanation, however, is that reduced social risk taking only
results from more stable, naturally occurring depressed mood states, rather than
the sort produced in an artiﬁcial laboratory setting. This might explain why
participants’ mood states prior to experimentation were a reliable predictor of
social risk propensity, whereas induced mood states were not. Expressed another
136
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

way, the depressed mood induced by the musical procedure may not have been
suﬃciently intense or stable to produce the expected results. With this in mind,
experimental mood manipulations may not represent an ideal research avenue
for an empirical test of our model. Another possibility is that future research
requires alternate, more eﬀective mood manipulation procedures, such as mood-
suggestive ﬁlms or stories (Westermann, Spies, Stahl & Hesse, 1996). Clearly,
this is an issue that necessitates further investigation.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter, we have reviewed major approaches to the evolution of the
human capacity for depressed mood, and have speciﬁcally highlighted recent
social cognitive research designed to test one of the central proposals emerging
from our integrative social risk hypothesis of depression (Allen & Badcock,
2003). Taken as a whole, the results of these studies provide consistent support
for our prediction that depressed mood (particularly the down-regulation of
positive mood states associated with depression) is related to a reduction in an
individual’s propensity to take social risks.
The ﬁndings presented in this chapter have a range of implications with
respect to evolutionary conceptions of depression. First, our results do not ﬁt
particularly well with Nettle’s (2004) individual diﬀerence model of clinical
depression. According to Nettle, depressive vulnerability is attributable to exces-
sively high levels of neuroticism. Although we certainly agree with this conten-
tion, a further tenet of his argument is that increasing neuroticism was selected
for in the evolutionary environment because it promotes striving behaviours in
interpersonal contexts, and causes people to seek out desirable social outcomes
and avoid negative ones. On the basis of these arguments, one might expect
neuroticism to be in some way related to risk propensity, particularly in the social
domain. However, regression analyses of relationships between participants’
neuroticism scores derived from the Zuckerman-Kuhlman Personality Test
(Zuckerman, Kuhlman, Joireman, Teta & Kraft, 1993) and their responses for
the social, ﬁnancial, accident- and health-related risk-taking scales failed to indi-
cate a signiﬁcant association between neuroticism and any of these variables.
Notably, while evidence for a connection between low positive aﬀect and
reduced social risk taking points to the centrality of social contexts to depressive
phenomena, and thus lends some support for the attachment view of depression,
our results also conﬂict with some of the predictions emerging from this model.
In particular, our ﬁndings emphasize the previously established link between low
mood and social withdrawal (Goldberg & Huxley, 1992), and are therefore
inconsistent with the notion that depressed mood motivates a person to
re-establish lost relationships or seek out new ones (e.g., Averill, 1968).
On the other hand, the argument that depression represents an adaptive
strategy that reduces risk taking is not new, and is particularly emphasized by the
137
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

resource conservation views (Allen & Badcock, 2003). The ﬁndings presented
above not only provide support for this line of reasoning, but also introduce an
important caveat by suggesting a high level of speciﬁcity between depression (i.e.,
low positive aﬀect) and reduced risk taking in social contexts in particular. Also,
results were partially supportive of the social competition model spearheaded by
Price and colleagues (Price et al., 1994). According to this view, one of the
adaptive operations of the depression mechanism is to inhibit competitive, con-
ﬁdent and/or assertive interpersonal behaviours. From this perspective, our dem-
onstration of a signiﬁcant relationship between low positive aﬀect and reduced
social risk propensity is not surprising. However, an important addendum is
required. As noted above, the social competition view neglects to explicitly exam-
ine the ways in which the proposed rank-oriented strategy has been adapted to
accommodate the full diversity of human social relationships (Haslam, 1994),
and in particular, those not directly related to the negotiation of status hier-
archies. To elaborate, it is worthwhile returning to Wiggins and Trapnell’s
(1996) argument that all forms of interpersonal relatedness are reducible to the
fundamental dimensions of agency (or power) and communion (aﬃliation).
Although the social competition model apparently anticipates reduced social risk
taking amongst depressives in the former domain, the model fails to extend this
prediction to the latter. More speciﬁcally, despite the fact that this perspective
could probably be extended or adapted to accommodate the negotiation and/or
management of aﬃliation-oriented relationships, reduced social risk taking in
this domain is neither directly nor explicitly predicted by the model (Allen &
Badcock, 2003). Conversely, the social risk hypothesis emphasizes that depres-
sive phenomena constitute a defensive psychobiological response to increased
risk within either one of these domains, and as such, should be associated with
reduced risk taking in both (Allen & Badcock, 2003). Since the social risk
propensity items used in our research represented risks associated with either
agency or aﬃliation (e.g., asking someone out on a date vs. applying for a job),
the demonstration of signiﬁcant, positive relationships between positive aﬀect
and participants’ responses for all social risk-taking scales appears to provide
strongest support for our model.
It is worthwhile pointing out that numerous proximate explanations have
been oﬀered for a link between depression and reduced social risk taking.
Pietromonaco and Rook (1987) brieﬂy review these arguments in their own
study. First, they assert that a history of problematic social encounters among
depressives, alongside their reduced sensitivity to the receipt of positive social
feedback, is likely to sensitize them to social risks. Second, such sensitivity is
likely to be exacerbated by realistic self-appraisals of limited social skills (Libert
& Lewinsohn, 1973). Third, depressive sensitivity to, and avoidance of, social
risks may be partly attributable to a self-regulation strategy that protects fragile
feelings of self-worth from additional exposure to embarrassment, rejection or
conﬂict (Pietromonaco & Rook, 1987). That is, depressives are likely to avoid
social risks because they are motivated to protect their low self-esteem.
138
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Such explanations are by no means incompatible with our model. Rather,
while the above represent proximate arguments for reduced social risk taking
among depressives, the social risk hypothesis provides an ultimate explanatory
framework that successfully integrates them. For example, given the proposal
that depressed mood represents an adaptive response to important social disrup-
tions, our social risk hypothesis clearly predicts a past history of problematic
interpersonal encounters amongst depressives. Furthermore, reduced sensitivity
to positive social feedback and a pessimistic, error-avoidant appraisal of limited
social skills are arguably important features of a cautious, risk-minimizing
approach to interpersonal contexts (Allen & Badcock, 2003). Such features are
likely to operate adaptively by contributing to the inhibition of conﬁdent and/or
assertive social behaviours in the face of threats of social exclusion.
Finally, in light of the argument that self-esteem alerts an individual to
threats of social exclusion (Allen & Badcock, 2003; Leary, Tambor, Terdal &
Downs, 1995), the motivation to protect low self-esteem can be readily inter-
preted as the proximate result of an underlying adaptive strategy that promotes
social inclusion (see Leary et al., 1995). It follows, then, that low self-esteem may
act as a leading indicator of the possibility of social exclusion, but reduced social
risk taking only results once the depression mechanism (i.e., low positive aﬀect)
is activated. This conjecture is consistent with our ﬁnding that self-esteem mod-
erates the relationship between positive aﬀect and social risk taking, without
being related to social risk taking directly.
Taken together, the ﬁndings presented herein not only provide empirical
support for some important aspects of the social risk hypothesis, but in a more
general sense, exemplify how evolutionary hypotheses can motivate a program of
research. Indeed, the investigation of relationships between mood and domain-
speciﬁc biases in social reasoning and risk propensity would not have been con-
templated without the social risk hypothesis. Furthermore, whilst our studies
have provided support for some of the speciﬁc predictions derived from our
social risk hypothesis and failed to support others, they will also form a basis for
further empirical studies and, ultimately, important reﬁnements (or the refuta-
tion) of our model.
REFERENCES
Adolphs, R. (2003). Cognitive neuroscience of
human social behaviour. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 4(3), 165–178.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1991). Attachments and
other aﬀectional bonds across the life cycle.
In C. M. Parkes, J. Stevenson-Hinde, & P.
Marris (Eds.), Attachment across the life cycle
(pp. 33–51). London: Routledge.
Allen, N. B., & Badcock, P. B. T. (2003). The
social risk hypothesis of depressed mood:
Evolutionary, 
psychosocial, 
and 
neuro-
biological perspectives. Psychological Bulletin,
129, 887–913.
Allen, N. B., & Badcock, P. B. T. (2006).
Darwinian models of depression: A review
of evolutionary accounts of mood and
mood 
disorders. 
Progress 
in 
Neuro-
Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry,
30, 815–826.
Averill, J. R. (1968). Grief: Its nature and
139
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

signiﬁcance. Psychological Bulletin, 70, 721–
748.
Badcock, P. B. T., & Allen, N. B. (2003). Adap-
tive social reasoning in depressed mood and
depressive 
vulnerability, 
Cognition 
and
Emotion, 17, 647–670.
Badcock, P. B. T., & Allen, N. B. (2006).
Mood, personality, and domains of risk tak-
ing. Manuscript in preparation.
Barkow, J. H. (1989). Darwin, sex and status:
Biological approaches to mind and culture.
Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto
Press.
Baumeister, R., Smart, L., & Boden, J. (1996).
Relation of threatened egotism to violence
and aggression: The dark side of high self-
esteem. Psychological Review, 101, 5–33.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The
need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human
motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–
529.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1.
Attachment. New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A secure base: Parent–child
attachment and healthy human development.
New York: Basic Books.
Brown, G. W., Harris, T. O., & Hepworth C.
(1995). Loss, humiliation and entrapment
among women developing depression: A
patient and non-patient comparison. Psycho-
logical Medicine, 25, 7–21.
Buss, D. M. (1990). The evolution of anxiety
and social exclusion. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 9, 196–201.
Buss, D. M. (1991). Evolutionary personality
psychology. In M. R. Rosenzweig & L. W.
Porter (Eds.), Annual Review of Psychology
(Vol. 42, pp. 459–491). Palo Alto, CA:
Annual Reviews.
Buss, D. M. (1999). Evolutionary psychology:
The new science of the mind. Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Byrne, R. W., & Whiten, A. (1986). Machiavel-
lian intelligence: Social expertise and the evolu-
tion of intellect in monkeys, apes, and humans.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Champion, L. A., & Power, M. J. (1995). Social
and cognitive approaches to depression.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 34,
485–503.
Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (1989). Cognitive
theory and therapy of anxiety and depression.
In P. C. Kendall & D. Watson (Eds.), Anxiety
and depression: Distinctive and overlapping
features. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991). Tripartite
model of anxiety and depression: Psycho-
metric evidence and taxonomic implications.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 316–
336.
Cole, D. A. (1990). Relation of social and aca-
demic competence to depressive symptoms in
childhood. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
99, 422–429.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive
adaptations for social exchange. In L. Cos-
mides, J. Tooby, & J. Barkow (Eds.), The
adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the
generation of culture (pp. 163–228). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1994). Beyond
intuition and instinct blindness: Toward an
evolutionarily rigorous cognitive science.
Cognition, 50, 41–77.
Deaner, R. O., Khera, A. V., & Platt, M. L.
(2005). Monkeys pay per view: Adaptive
value of social images by Rhesus Macaques.
Current Biology, 15, 543–548.
De Waal, F. M. B. (1989). Peacemaking among
primates. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Forgas, J. P. (1995). Mood and judgment: The
aﬀect infusion model (AIM). Psychological
Bulletin, 117, 39–66.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). Happy and mistaken?
Mood eﬀects on the fundamental attribution
error. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 318–331.
Forgas, J. P. (2002). Feeling and doing: Aﬀect-
ive inﬂuences on interpersonal behaviour.
Psychological Inquiry, 13, 1–28.
Frijda, N. H. (1994). Emotions are functional,
most of the time. In P. Ekman & R. David-
son (Eds.), The nature of emotion: Funda-
mental questions (pp. 97–177). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gilbert, P. (1992). Depression: The evolution of
powerlessness. New York: Guilford Press.
Gilbert, P. (1997). The evolution of social
attractiveness and its role in shame, humili-
ation, guilt and therapy. British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 70, 113–147.
Gilbert, P. (2006). Evolution and depression:
issues 
and 
implications. 
Psychological
Medicine, 36, 287–297.
140
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Gilbert, P., & Allan, S. (1998). The role of
defeat and entrapment (arrested ﬂight) in
depression: An exploration of an evolutionary
view. Psychological Medicine, 28, 584–597.
Gilbert, P., Allan, S., & Trent, D. (1995).
Involuntary subordination or dependency
as key dimensions of depressive vulner-
ability. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51,
740–752
Gleicher, F., & Weary, G. (1991). The eﬀect of
depression on the quantity and quality of
social inferences. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 51, 140–148.
Goldberg, D., & Huxley, P. (1992). Common
mental disorders: A bio-social model. London:
Tavistock/Routledge.
Haslam, N. (1994). Categories of social rela-
tionship. Cognition, 53, 59–90.
Humphrey, N. K. (1976). The social function
of intellect. In P. P. G. Bateson & R. A. Hinde
(Eds.), Growing points in ethology (pp. 303–
317). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Ingram, R. E., Miranda, J., & Segal, Z. V.
(1998). Cognitive vulnerability to depression.
New York: Guilford Press.
Joiner, T. E., & Coyne, J. C. (1999). The inter-
actional nature of depression: Advances in
interpersonal approaches. Washington DC:
American Psychological Association.
Joiner, T. E., Jr., & Metalsky, G. I. (2001).
Excessive reassurance seeking: Delineating a
risk factor involved in the development of
depressive symptoms. Psychological Science,
12, 371–378.
Klinger, E. (1975). Consequences of commit-
ment to and disengagement from incentives.
Psychological Review, 82, 1–25.
Leahy, R. L. (1997). Depression and resistance:
An investment model of decision-making.
The Behavior Therapist, 20, 3–6.
Leary, M. R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., &
Downs, D. L. (1995). Self-esteem as an
interpersonal 
monitor: 
The 
sociometer
hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 519–530.
Libert, J., & Lewinsohn, P. M. (1973). The
concept of social skill with special reference
to the behavior of depressed persons. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 40,
304–312.
MacLeod, A. K., & Byrne, A. (1996). Anxiety,
depression, and the anticipation of future
positive and negative experiences. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 105, 286–289.
Martin, M. (1990). On the induction of
mood. Clinical Psychology Review, 10, 669–
697.
Mathews, A., Ridgeway, V., & Williamson, D.
A. (1996). Evidence for attention to threaten-
ing stimuli in depression. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 34, 695–705.
McGuire, M. T., & Troisi, A. (1998). Preva-
lence diﬀerences in depression among males
and females: Are there evolutionary explan-
ations? British Journal of Medical Psychology,
71, 479–491.
McGuire, M. T., Troisi, A., & Raleigh, M. M.
(1997). Depression in evolutionary context.
In S. Baron-Cohen (Ed.), The maladapted
mind (pp. 255–282). Hove, UK: Psychology
Press.
Monroe, S. M., Rohde, P., Seeley, J. R., &
Lewinsohn, P. M. (1999). Life events and
depression in adolescence: Relationship loss
as a prospective risk factor for ﬁrst-onset
of major depressive disorder. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 108, 606–614.
Nesse, R. M. (1990). Evolutionary explanations
of emotions. Human Nature, 1, 261–289.
Nesse, R. M. (1998). Emotional disorders in
evolutionary perspective. British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 71, 397–415.
Nesse, R. M. (2000). Is depression an adapta-
tion? Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 14–
20.
Nettle, D. (2004). Evolutionary origins of
depression: A review and reformulation.
Journal of Aﬀective Disorders, 81, 91–102.
Oatley, K. (1992). Best laid schemes: The
psychology of emotions. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Öhman, A., Dimberg, U., & Öst, L. G. (1985).
Animal and social phobias: Biological con-
straints on learned fear responses. In S. Reiss
& R. R. Bootzin (Eds.), Theoretical issues in
behaviour therapy (pp. 123–175). New York:
Academic Press.
Pietromonaco, P. R., & Rook, K. S. (1987).
Decision style in depression: The contribu-
tion of perceived risks versus beneﬁts. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 399–
408.
Price, J. (1967). The dominance hierarchy and
the evolution of mental illness. Lancet, 7502,
243–246.
141
DEPRESSION AND SOCIAL RISK TAKING

Price, J. (1998). The adaptive function of mood
change. British Journal of Medical Psychology,
71, 465–477.
Price, J. S. (1972). Genetic and phylogenetic
aspects of mood variations. International
Journal of Mental Health, 1, 124–144.
Price, J. S., Sloman, L., Gardner, R., Gilbert, P.,
& Rohde, P. (1994). The social competition
hypothesis of depression. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 164, 309–315.
Rohrmann, B. (2004). Risk Attitude Scales: Con-
cepts and questionnaires. Project Report,
Department of Psychology, University of
Melbourne. Retrieved November 8, 2006,
from 
http://www.rohrmannresearch.net/
pdfs/rohrmann-racreport.pdf
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On
depression development and death. San
Francisco: Freeman.
Wason, P. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss
(Ed.), New horizons in psychology (pp. 135–
151). Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Watson, D. (2000). Mood and temperament.
New York: Guilford Press.
Westermann, R., Spies, K., Stahl, G., & Hesse,
F. W. (1996). Relative eﬀectiveness and
validity of mood induction procedures: A
meta-analysis. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 26, 557–580.
Wiggins, J. S., & Trapnell, P. D. (1996). A
dyadic-interactional perspective on the ﬁve-
factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The ﬁve
factor model of personality (pp. 88–162). New
York: Guilford Press.
Zuckerman, M., Kuhlman, D. M., Joireman, J.,
Teta, P., & Kraft, P. (1993). A comparison of
three structural models for personality: The
Big Three, the Big Five, and the Alternative
Five. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 757–768.
142
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

PARTIII
THE EVOLUTIONARY
PSYCHOLOGY OF MATE
SELECTION


9
Coevolved Cognitive
Mechanisms in Mate Search
Making Decisions in a
Decision-shaped World
PETER M. TODD
Searching for a Space
The Big Picture: Ecological Rationality
Sequential Decision Making in Mate Choice
Strategies for Mutual Mate Search
Summary and Connections
SEARCHING FOR A SPACE
I
magine that you are driving to a movie theater to watch a ﬁlm. You look for
a place to park as you approach the cinema, and show time is coming up.
You feel some time pressure not to miss all the previews, and you are motiv-
ated to try to minimize your total travel time, including driving and then walk-
ing from wherever you park. What is the best strategy to follow in this case?
Should you park in the ﬁrst space you come to? Or should you immediately drive
all the way to the theater, then turn around and take the ﬁrst space you ﬁnd as
you head away again? But what if everyone else driving to the movies does the
same thing? How should you choose a parking space in the face of everyone else’s
choices so as not to have to skip buying Raisinets before the ﬁlm starts?
The search for a parking space did not present much of a concern to our
ancestors in the course of human evolution, but this modern trial illustrates
a common aspect of the situations that challenged our evolving minds: The
problem here and in many other social domains is how to make decisions in
145

environments that are shaped by the decisions of ourselves and others. What
makes such tasks particularly tricky is that whatever decision mechanism we use
must work within some rather stringent bounds. For instance, in this setting, we
have limited time to make the parking choice as we drive along; we have limited
knowledge of what spaces may lie ahead, perhaps some prior expectations and
perhaps we can see a few upcoming spots, but not beyond the next parked SUV;
and we have limited cognitive capacity to put together our current experience of
who is parking where with our past expectations to come up with a decision
about whether to take an empty spot we ﬁnd or to keep driving and hope that a
better one turns up later. And even if we did have Total Information Awareness
satellites to tell us that, indeed, the spot right in front of the theater is still empty
right now, that could change by the time we drove there—so in this dynamic,
uncertain, self-creating environment, more information would not necessarily be
better.
How, and how well, can decision makers operate in the face of such chal-
lenges? In this chapter, I will show how some simple strategies can allow
individuals to behave adaptively even in complex domains, focusing speciﬁcally
on the important adaptive task of choosing a mate. Part of the power of these
decision mechanisms comes from their ﬁt to the structure of information in their
particular environment. But because individuals actually change their environ-
ment—and the environment faced by others—through the decisions they make,
their strategies must be ﬁt to the structure of that changed, individual-
constructed environment. This coadaptation or coevolution of decision
mechanisms and environment structure leads to distinct strategies being most
appropriate for diﬀerent problems. Many of these problems, such as mate choice,
involve strategic interactions where individuals alter the environment of other
individuals in their own social network, putting this topic at the center of social
psychology; and yet, despite the complexity of the interactions involved, simple
decision heuristics can lead to good outcomes, contrary to common assumptions
in social cognition research (e.g., Nisbett & Ross, 1980).
THE BIG PICTURE: ECOLOGICAL RATIONALITY
We will ﬁrst consider the big picture within which this research ﬁts, driven by the
following big question: How can good decisions be made by real minds operat-
ing in an uncertain world? This is a mystery, because humans and other animals
must make decisions within the rather severe bounds that our minds and the
world impose on us. As mentioned earlier, these bounds include the limited time
that we have to make decisions before an opportunity may be gone, the limited
and uncertain information we can access within that time, and the limited ability
we have to process that information, owing to constraints of memory, processing
speed, and the amount of complexity we can deal with.
To work within these bounds and still behave adaptively, agents can rely on
146
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

simple “fast and frugal” heuristics (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996; Gigerenzer,
Todd, & the ABC Research Group, 1999)—decision rules that use a small
amount of time, information, and processing to come up with what are usually
good choices, when they are employed in the proper environments. This use in
appropriate environments is key to the heuristics’ successful application, because
it allows them to exploit the fact that information in the world is typically
structured in useful ways. For example, if you ask what authors, or places, or
products are widely recognized in a given society, you will ﬁnd systematic pat-
terns relating recognition knowledge to the publication rate, or population size,
or prevalence of those things, rather than a random or uniform distribution of
what is recognized (Gigerenzer et al., 1999; Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002). This
structure can then be capitalized on by simple heuristics that employ recognition
as a cue in making choices, for instance what paper to cite or what brand to buy.
In fact, by counting on certain information structures to be present in the
environment, decision heuristics can be correspondingly simpler, eﬀectively
letting the world do some of the work for them.
Using simple heuristics in environments to which they ﬁt can enable deci-
sion-making agents to achieve what Herbert Simon (1990) called bounded
rationality. In contrast to the largely unachievable dream of unbounded rational-
ity, which assumes optimal processing of all available information without con-
cern for computational or informational costs, Simon saw humans as exhibiting
a bounded form of rationality emerging from the interaction of two forces: the
cognitive capabilities of the agent and the structure of the task environment.
These two components should ﬁt together like the two blades of a pair of scissors
for adaptive, or boundedly rational, behavior to be produced—that is, mind
and environment should be closely matched if decision outcomes are to be
useful. This perspective aligns well with that of evolutionary psychology, which
adds the assumption that the close mind–environment ﬁt has been achieved by
evolution honing the former to match the latter. This chapter in turn focuses
on how minds shape their own environments, particularly in social domains, so
that the adaptive forces ﬂow in both directions between the organisms and their
world.
Gigerenzer and colleagues (1999) have taken up the challenge of identifying
the particular decision mechanisms that can produce bounded rationality in the
presence of particular structures of information in the environment. They call
this research program ecological rationality, to emphasize the importance of con-
sidering both environmental information structure and psychological informa-
tion-processing mechanisms, and how the former enables and constrains the
latter to yield adaptive decisions. Their strategy for studying the ecological
rationality of particular decision mechanisms proceeds through a sequence of
steps that largely follows the research plan for evolutionary psychology set out
by Cosmides and Tooby (1987), including analysis of the environment, simula-
tion of proposed heuristic mechanisms, mathematical analysis of the information
structures in which they will and will not work well, and empirical investigation
147
MATE SEARCH

of when people actually use these heuristics (see Todd, 2000, for more
connections).
But so far the focus of this work has been on environments whose structure
could be speciﬁed independently of the decision makers acting in it. This is a
simple starting point, but often the world does not work this way, and does not
oblige us with such independence or stability. In many real situations instead, the
environment is shaped by the decisions of the agents acting in it. This was the
case in the initial example of the parking situation—the pattern of occupied and
free spots, that is, the structure of the environment, is created just through the
action of the decision makers who have arrived before you. Imagine introducing
a burr or bump onto the “agent” blade of Simon’s scissors—over time it will
carve a matching channel in the environment blade, shaping the environment to
ﬁt the agents’ cognitive mechanisms more closely. And in turn the bump on the
cognitive blade will be worn down by the counteracting force of the environment
blade—so both the cognitive system and the environment can coadapt or
coevolve to shape each other. (See Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this
volume, for examples of coadaptation when the cognitive system belongs to a
signal-perceiver and the environment comprises a target signal-producer.)
Examples of the coconstruction of decision mechanism and environment
can be found in diﬀerent classes of heuristics. For instance, repeated recognition-
based decisions, such as when large numbers of scholars choose whom to cite in a
paper or shoppers decide what music to buy based on what they recognize, can
result in some things in the world, such as some authors or bands, becoming
much more recognized, and chosen, than others (Todd & Heuvelink, 2006).
The repeated application of the recognition heuristic can lead the world to
become J-shaped in the sense of a power law describing the rates of choices
among options. This environment structure in turn can aﬀect the eﬃcacy of the
recognition heuristic itself, making it more beneﬁcial to use. Such strategic
interactions have long been the province of game theory, but here we take a more
psychologically-oriented approach to looking at the particular information-
processing mechanisms that interacting individuals may adaptively use. We next
turn to the case of sequential decision heuristics, focusing on the domain of mate
choice, for a particular example of how decision mechanisms can change their
environments, and how those changes can correspondingly inﬂuence which
decision heuristics may function well in the newly-altered environments.
SEQUENTIAL DECISION MAKING IN MATE CHOICE
The task of mate choice can be broadly thought of as incorporating three steps:
ﬁrst, assessing the relevant cues of mate quality of an individual (see Gangestad
& Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume, for several such cues), then processing those
cues somehow into an overall judgment of the individual’s mate quality, and
ﬁnally using that judged quality in the process of searching through a sequence of
148
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

individuals to decide whom to court and whom to pass by. Decision heuristics
involving limited cue processing can be used in the ﬁrst and second steps; here
we will assume that the outcome of these two steps is that all cues have been
collapsed into a single criterion value of mate quality. What heuristics can be
used to guide mate search through a sequence of potential mates with diﬀerent
mate quality values?
The mate choice domain for humans has a particular constellation of fea-
tures, which can vary somewhat from culture to culture, not to mention from
other species. But there are some typical basic underlying commonalities that are
also found in other forms of sequential search (Schotter & Braunstein, 1981). In
many search domains where there is competition for speciﬁc alternatives, such as
searching for a mate, buying unique items like antiques or houses, or looking for
a job or job candidate, once you have passed by an alternative and decided not to
pick it, there may be no chance of changing your mind and returning to that
alternative later, because someone else will have bought the house you rejected or
married the person you spurned. Also in such situations, you probably will not
know the range of possible alternatives ahead of time so that you have to learn
about this distribution as you search.
To ﬁnd out what kind of approach is appropriate for searching in such an
environment, we begin with a problem of this form that has been well-studied in
probability theory, where it is known as the secretary problem in the job search
domain, or the dowry problem in the mate search domain (Ferguson, 1989). As
the dowry problem, it goes like this: A sultan wishes to test the wisdom of his
advisor, who is seeking a wife. The sultan arranges to have 100 women from the
kingdom brought before the advisor in succession, and all the advisor has to do is
to choose the woman with the highest dowry. If he chooses correctly, he gets to
marry that woman and keep his job with the sultan. The advisor can see one
woman at a time and ask her dowry; then he must decide immediately if he
thinks she is the one with the highest dowry out of all 100 women, or else let her
pass by and go on to the next woman. He cannot return to any of the women he
has already seen—once he lets a woman go by, she becomes unavailable. More-
over, the advisor has no idea of the range of dowries before he starts his search.
What strategy can he use to have the greatest chance of selecting the one woman
with the highest dowry?
For such challenging search problems, Simon (1990) suggested the satisﬁc-
ing approach of setting an aspiration level somehow and then searching until an
option is encountered that exceeds it. The optimal way to set an aspiration level
in the dowry problem is to search through the sequence of options for some time
without making any ﬁnal choice, so that enough information can be gathered
about the available values to make a good decision, but not so long that the
highest value is passed by in this initial information-gathering stage. The length
of initial search that optimizes this balance is to look at N/e of the available
alternatives, where N is the number of alternatives and e ≈ 2.718 is the base of
the natural logarithm system, which comes out to 37% of the sequence of
149
MATE SEARCH

alternatives (Ferguson, 1989). In other words, the optimal approach is to follow
the 37% rule: In Phase 1 of search, look at 37% of the alternatives; then set the
aspiration level to equal the highest value seen among all those alternatives; and
then continue search in Phase 2 until an alternative is found that exceeds the
aspiration level. Note that this type of strategy has minimal cognitive and infor-
mation requirements: There is no need to remember a distribution or calculate
statistics over multiple values; in fact, the searcher only needs to remember a
single value as the aspiration level, and make a simple comparison between it and
every currently-perceived value in succession. But this optimal rule, while it is
the best possible under the circumstances, still does not do that well—the chance
of picking the highest dowry is only about 1 in 3, which means there is a good
chance that the sultan’s advisor ends up single and jobless.
Luckily, real human mate choice is seldom like this, and instead our out-
come criteria are usually a bit more lenient—rather than having to ﬁnd the one
best, a more reasonable version of this scenario would say the advisor just has to
live with whatever choice he makes, and so he should aim to maximize the
expected mean value of the dowry he stops at. To do this, he only needs to look
at nine women, rather than 37, and set his aspiration level to the highest among
those nine before stopping search at the next woman who exceeds that aspiration
(Todd & Miller, 1999). If no other dowry exceeds that aspiration, then he settles
with the last woman he encounters. This best performing rule can be seen in the
top line in Figure 9.1, which shows the length of search in Phase 1 before setting
the aspiration level, along the x axis, plotted against the mean dowry value
FIGURE 9.1 Performance in terms of mean mate value selected (out of 100) versus length
of Phase 1 search for two one-sided sequential search rules, one with and one without
competition.
150
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

selected, assuming dowries from 1 to 100, along the y axis. The best performance
reached yields a mean selected value of 92. Searching through less than nine
initial samples does not give enough information to set quite as good an aspir-
ation level, while going through more than nine candidates before turning to the
second phase of search increases the chances of missing a high dowry in the
initial phase.
So setting an aspiration level after seeing just nine options in this scenario is
a strategy that is appropriate for a lone searcher to use, living in the adolescent
male fantasy world of one man and 100 available partners. But of course, real life
is seldom like this simple lone-searcher scenario—other people come along and
mess things up. This leads back to our central question: What happens when the
decisions of others (and oneself) aﬀect the structure of the world? In particular,
we can ask how the best strategy in this scenario changes when competition is
introduced. Now, rather than one wise-man advisor, imagine 100 wise women,
each searching through the same set of 100 male candidates, trying to select the
best one according to some criterion. If every woman was looking for exactly the
same thing in a man, then the best any of them could do would be to take
the ﬁrst man they see, and hope they get lucky—so much direct competition
creates a zero-sum game where the best average payoﬀ comes from making a
random (and fast, if there are time costs) selection. But in real mate choice,
people’s criteria diﬀer to a greater or lesser extent. So to make things somewhat
more realistic and easier for everyone, we can go to the opposite extreme and give
all the women a diﬀerent, independent and uncorrelated, criterion to search for.
Thus wise woman 1 is looking for the man with the bluest eyes, wise woman 2
seeks the man with the longest ears, etc. Hence, while they are all competing for
someone among the same pool of candidates, they are each looking for some-
thing diﬀerent. In this situation of indirect competition, how should each
woman search to maximize the criterion she alone seeks?
In the bottom line in Figure 9.1, we see that even indirect competition
makes things more challenging for the individual searchers: To maximize the
mean value that they select, they have to act more quickly than before when there
was no competition, now checking out only three or four potential mates in
Phase 1 search before setting their aspiration level. If any searcher takes longer
than this, then someone else is more likely to take the candidate that she is most
attracted to. And this competition also means that the searchers’ overall perform-
ance falls—the highest mean value they can hope for is around 80, instead of
around 92 before. Again, in actual mate search, there will certainly be some
correlation among people’s preferences, so a more realistic scenario would fall
between this case and the full direct competition case where everyone has the
same preferences. This indicates that an even shorter Phase 1 search would be
called for.
Thus, as the search problem is made more complex by taking into account
the decisions being made by others, the most appropriate strategy is to use a
satisﬁcing mechanism that sets its aspiration level after shorter amounts of initial
151
MATE SEARCH

Phase 1 search—in fact, less than half as much search as is appropriate for a lone
searcher. While the direction of this strategy change is not surprising, the magni-
tude was unexpected. But even greater, and qualitative, changes in strategy are
called for when we take into account the other half of the decisions made in the
mating domain that have been missing in this scenario.
STRATEGIES FOR MUTUAL MATE SEARCH
Those other decisions are being made not by our competitors, but by those
individuals whom we are searching through. In some evolutionarily-important
search domains, the options that people are searching through have little choice
themselves as to whether or not they will be chosen, such as in habitat choice or
food-patch selection. The challenge in mate choice though is that few of us are
sultans, able to line up a selection of potential mates and one-sidedly declare
which one we will have. For most of us, mate choice is two-sided, and mate
search is mutual, which means that searchers are being searched at the same time.
The empirical manifestations of such a mutual process, as it operates in human
mate choice at least, is that most people ﬁnd a mate who is typically somewhat
matched to them on attractiveness and other dimensions (Kalick & Hamilton,
1986) after a reasonably short search. What simple decision algorithms can
create such outcomes given the decisions that everyone else is making, competitors
and choosy potential mates alike?
To ﬁnd out, we can turn to computer simulations, which allow us to test
how diﬀerent decision strategies would work when employed by a population of
individuals searching for partners. Such simulation studies are useful for testing
the implications of proposed psychological mechanisms and for generating test-
able predictions about the behaviors they would lead to, forming “runnable
thought-experiments” that can bolster our understanding of possible social inter-
actions (as in mutual mate search) that are beyond our intuitive abilities to
predict. We set up a simulation similar to a classroom demonstration called the
Pairing Game (Ellis & Kelley, 1999) in which two sets of individuals with
numbers on their foreheads must wordlessly ﬁnd their numeric match from the
other set (see Fletcher & Overall, chapter 12, this volume, for more details on
this game, and for further consideration of how individuals can ﬁnd, or end up
with, similar partners). In this model (Todd & Miller, 1999), we simulate 100
males and 100 females, each with some attractiveness value drawn from a uni-
form distribution from 0 to 100. As in the Pairing Game and in real life, indi-
viduals do not innately know their own attractiveness value, but they can see the
values of all potential mates they encounter. Individuals meet in male–female
pairs, assess each other, and decide somehow whether or not to make a proposal
to each other. This meeting and assessing process happens in two phases. In the
ﬁrst “adolescent” phase, proposals and rejections do not result in actual pairing.
But they can be used to set or adjust an aspiration level that will determine to
152
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

whom later proposal oﬀers are made. In the following “adult” phase, the aspir-
ation level set during the adolescent phase is ﬁxed and used to make decisions
during the rest of the search. These proposal and rejection decisions are now
“real,” in that mutual proposals result in a pair being made and that couple
leaving the simulation. It is this necessity for mutual agreement that makes this
scenario diﬀerent from the one-sided case described above—the decisions of
potential mates play a critical role here in determining one’s mating fate, so one’s
decision strategy should take this into account. The degree of competition is also
diﬀerent from the one-sided search cases. Here, as before, everyone shares the
same assessment of the attractiveness of others, which is an indication of direct
competition. But because everyone is diﬀerent in terms of their own attractive-
ness, and must ﬁnd a mate who also wants them, everyone’s goals are by deﬁ-
nition diﬀerent—so the level of competition here is somewhere between a direct
and an indirect situation.
How well do diﬀerent search strategies fare in this setting? A simple strategy
that only uses half of the available information, ignoring the decisions made by
potential mates, is the one-sided strategy discussed in the previous section, now
applied in the mutual setting. In this case, each individual goes through the
adolescent period and just sets his or her aspiration level at the highest mate value
seen among the potential mates that he or she meets. What happens when this
“ignorant” strategy is used in the mutual search case is that most everyone
quickly ends up with very high aspiration levels, and thus only those with very
high mate values will ﬁnd willing mates—who must also have very high mate
values. As a consequence, unrealistically very few pairs are formed using this
strategy with anything other than an extremely short Phase 1 search. This is
shown in the bottom line in Figure 9.2, plotting the mean number of pairs
formed in the population against the adolescent learning period of Phase 1 search
used by this ignorant strategy. These pairs are well-matched, in terms of having
small within-pair diﬀerences in mate value, but that is because only the very
high-valued individuals ﬁnd mates. So ignoring the decisions made by others,
and trying to get the best mate possible without regard for one’s own attractive-
ness on the market, results in unrealistically poor outcomes for most searchers.
In contrast, if individuals magically knew their own mate value and used
that as their aspiration level, then most of the population could quickly ﬁnd a
well-matched partner. But as mentioned earlier, the problem here is that indi-
viduals do not have built-in knowledge of their relative ranking in the current
mate market, so if they wanted to use it in their decisions, they must infer it or
learn it. A reasonable approach to this problem could be to use the assessments
that others make about oneself as a cue about one’s own mate value, which, after
all, the others can see. So one could raise one’s self-appraisal, and hence one’s
aspiration level, every time an oﬀer is received and lower it after every rejection.
This also ﬁts with intuitions about how romantic successes and failures can
induce self-esteem to go up and down, which in turn can aﬀect how high or low
people aim in their next romantic endeavors. (Another potential source of
153
MATE SEARCH

information which we do not include here is feedback from, and comparisons to,
one’s competitors.) To specify a decision mechanism in more detail, all indi-
viduals start with an initial aspiration level of 50, which corresponds to assuming
oneself to be just average. Then, during the adolescent learning period, for every
proposal from someone more attractive than one’s current aspiration level, raise
one’s aspiration level to be partway to the other’s attractiveness value. Any pro-
posals from someone less attractive than one’s aspiration level are somewhat to be
expected, and so will not have any eﬀect. Just the reverse happens for rejections:
For every rejection from someone below one’s current aspiration level, lower the
aspiration level toward the other’s attractiveness. As individuals’ aspiration
levels change over the course of the adolescence period, they also inﬂuence
the learning of everyone else’s aspiration levels via the combined eﬀect of the
proposals and rejections made.
With this simple rule, taking into account all of the decisions made by
others, many more pairs are formed, at least if the adolescence period is not too
long (top line, Figure 9.2). The within-pair attractiveness diﬀerence is also
smaller for this rule than for the ignorant rule, meaning closer matches for the
same amount of search. This simple rule’s performance does not exactly meet the
observed realities of human mate search, particularly because too few pairs are
formed (e.g., here only around half of the population ﬁnds a mate). However, it
goes in the right direction, and modiﬁcations of this type of mutual search rule
can come much closer to human behavior (Simão & Todd, 2003).
What forms of empirical evidence can we ﬁnd to assess whether or not
people are actually using such simple sequential search mechanisms when
FIGURE 9.2 Mean number of mated pairs formed (out of 100) versus length of Phase 1
search for two diﬀerent mutual search rules.
154
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

looking for a mate? A variety of indirect evidence is at least consistent with these
aspiration-adjustment mechanisms. For instance, individual self-esteem goes up
and down with dating success or failure, and this could be the basis of an
aspiration level for further search (Kenrick, Groth, Trost, & Sadalla, 1993;
Kirkpatrick & Ellis, 2001). People searching for a match in an online dating
setting want a small set of potential dates to look through (even though they may
profess ahead of time that they want many options—Lenton, Fasolo, & Todd,
2005). In addition, the behavior of these proposed search mechanisms can be
assessed against population-level outcome measures. For instance, demographers
have long puzzled over a frequently-observed skewed bell-shaped pattern in the
distribution of ages at which people ﬁrst get married (Coale, 1971). When we
created an agent-based demographic model of a population of males and females
looking for marriage partners by using the mutual sequential search heuristics
described earlier, we found that the “ages” at which the individuals got married
basically matched the observed demographic data (Todd, Billari, & Simão,
2005).
The most compelling evidence regarding mechanisms being used, though,
would come from direct observation of the sequential mate search process as it
transpires. The challenge is that this search typically takes an extended period of
time, happening over months and years, which would require a detailed longi-
tudinal study. What would be very handy is a way to watch the sequential mate
search process that people go through, somehow distilled down into an easily-
observable sped-up version of reality. Just such an opportunity is aﬀorded by the
phenomenon of speed dating: a commercially-sponsored occasion in which sev-
eral men and women seeking dates sequentially meet and assess each other
within the span of an evening. Researchers have begun using speed dating as a
source of data about the mate choices that people make (Kurzban & Weeden,
2005), and we are using data from events conducted by the FastDating ﬁrm in
Germany to explore the decision mechanisms involved. What happens at these
events is that 20–25 men and an equal number of women gather in a large room
one evening, and all the women sit down at separate tables. Each man then sits
down across from a particular woman, and the pair get to talk for 5 minutes
about whatever they want. At the end of this time, the organizer rings a bell and
all the men and women circle a response on a card they are carrying to indicate
whether or not they would like to interact further with this person they have
been talking to. Then all the men stand up and shift to the next woman in line at
the next table, and the process repeats. After everyone has talked to every mem-
ber of the opposite sex in this way, the organizer compares everyone’s cards to see
which pairs expressed mutual interest in each other, and the members of those
pairs are sent each other’s contact information.
This speed dating setup is quite similar to the sequential mate search situ-
ation we have been exploring, because everyone sees a succession of potential
dates without knowing exactly who is coming later, and must decide after each 5-
minute meeting whether or not they are interested in that person. However,
155
MATE SEARCH

there are also a number of diﬀerences from the dowry-problem scenario (and,
presumably, from much of traditional mate search): Here, the men and women
gathering for the evening’s event actually have some time before it starts to mill
around and meet each other initially, and thus to get an idea of the range of
potential dates that they will be talking to; and the decisions that are made after
talking with someone can be erased and changed later in the evening after
meeting more candidates. (Of course, the other major diﬀerence is that in the
dowry problem, only a single choice can be made, while here, individuals can
indicate interest in as many others as they wish, which will modify the search
mechanism used somewhat.) To address some of these diﬀerences and create a
scenario that is closer to the extended, low-knowledge situation in traditional
mate search, we are developing our own new speed dating setup in which men
and women will be kept isolated from each other until their appointed 5-minute
meeting, and must make their decisions on the spot without the possibility of
changing them later. We also hope to gather data throughout the evening about
how each individual’s aspiration level changes as a consequence of their experi-
ence and feedback in each minidate, to help identify what cognitive mechanisms
are being used to decide on dating interest given the decisions of everyone else.
SUMMARY AND CONNECTIONS
To summarize the above results on how sequential mate search must be adjusted
to take into account the decisions made by others, a solo searcher (who has no
others to account for) looking to maximize his or her mean selected mate value
should set an aspiration level to the highest value seen during an initial short trial
period. When indirect competition is introduced, so that there are multiple
searchers seeking diﬀerent things among the same set of options, each searcher
should adjust for the decisions being made by his or her competitors by making a
quicker choice, shortening the length of the initial trial period. And when
mutual choice is included, so that searchers must also be sought in order to
succeed, searchers should adjust their aspiration level during adolescence toward
the mate value of the successive potential mates they encounter, conditional on
their current aspiration level and on getting a proposal or rejection. In this case,
rather than just switching to a new behavior based on the fact that others are also
making choices, individuals can actually use some of the decisions made by
others to inform and adjust their own decision-making strategies.
The impact of other mutual mate searchers can be seen not only in the
sequential search strategies individuals use, but also in their weighting and pro-
cessing of the separate cues of the quality of potential mates they encounter (the
ﬁrst two steps of the mate choice task indicated earlier). Again, if a solo searcher
had no competition to contend with, he or she could set an aspiration level for
traits such as wealth and status, physical attractiveness, and degree of parental
investment as high as desired. But in mutual mate choice, one’s aspirations must
156
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

be tempered by what one has to oﬀer in return—someone with a portfolio of
only low trait values who nonetheless demands high values in a mate will end up
disappointed and alone. Buston and Emlen (2003) found evidence for exactly
this sort of self-sensitive aspiration setting, in that individuals who had higher
overall self-appraisals (created by summing their self-reported levels on 10 traits
of mate quality) had choosier preferences for mates (again found by summing the
preferred values of the same 10 traits). There is currently some disagreement as to
how the trait values of self and other are ultimately processed to yield an overall
judgment of attractiveness—whether individuals seek mates with the same trait
levels as themselves, as indicated by Buston and Emlen’s questionnaire data, or
seek mates with complementary values such as male status against female
attractiveness, as indicated by evolutionary theory (Buss, 1989) and data from
actual choices made in the speed-dating context described earlier (Todd, Penke,
Fasolo, & Lenton, 2005; see also Fletcher & Overall, chapter 12, this volume,
on what traits people use and how). But in either case, to be successful indi-
viduals must adjust their mate choice strategies to ﬁt with how others are
choosing.
Finally, what of parking? After all, once one has found a mate, and a job,
and a place to live, ﬁnding a good parking place may be one of the most
challenging sequential—and social—choice problems left to tackle. Do any of
the search strategies we may have evolved for use in other domains ﬁnd applica-
tion in this modern task? Parking is not so much like mutual mate search, in that
parking spaces cannot veto our decisions and tell us we cannot park there. But
parking search is similar to the one-sided search situation we described earlier.
Imagine a long road leading to a destination, with cars parked along one side of
it, so that as we drive toward the destination we encounter a sequence of possible
parking spaces. As in other forms of sequential search, we do not know what
opportunities lie ahead, and, while we can turn around and go back to a spot we
passed before, we cannot be certain that it will still be available. One unique
aspect here is that the parking spaces we encounter keep getting better in quality
over time as we drive toward the destination, which is not usually the case for
other forms of search (though it might be, if the search can be focused on more
productive options over time).
So now for the parking search problem, what sorts of rules might be
appropriate, that is, able to ﬁnd spaces close to the destination preferably without
turning around? Our discussion earlier of one-sided search suggests the satisﬁc-
ing approach: Set an aspiration level, and take the next better option
encountered after that. In this case, that means passing by some ﬁxed number of
parking spots, whether they are empty or occupied, and then taking the ﬁrst
available space we come to thereafter. This type of ﬁxed-distance rule is in fact
the optimal approach for an inﬁnite parking lane ﬁlled with a constant density of
spaces (MacQueen & Miller, 1960). But our interest here is in what strategies
work well when the pattern of spaces is not necessarily constant, but rather is
created by the decisions of other drivers parking. To ﬁnd out, we put evolution to
157
MATE SEARCH

work, allowing a variety of parking-search strategies to compete and evolve over
time in a simulated version of the single-lane world described above (Hutchinson,
Fanselow, & Todd, 2005). We used diﬀerent types of distance-based strategies
(such as the ﬁxed-distance satisﬁcing rule) along with density-based ones (such as
rules that take the next available parking space as soon as enough of the last few
spots passed have been occupied). Those strategies that found closer parking
places on one day’s worth of parking were used more often in the population of
drivers on the next parking day, and slight mutations were introduced into the
evolutionary process to allow the full space of strategies to be explored.
After just a few generations of evolving parking strategies, only two rules
emerge as the winners in a mixed equilibrium: the ﬁxed-distance heuristic, used
by about 80% of the population, and a density-based linear-operator heuristic,
used by the rest. Thus, while it is best for everyone to use the same ﬁxed-distance
heuristic if they are all in a static environment that they cannot aﬀect, this is not
the best option when the environment is created by the drivers themselves—in
that case, some individuals do better by using a density-based mechanism, which
can take advantage of the environment structure created by the ﬁxed-distance
users. Whether or not such a mixed strategy is used by real drivers, and whether
it is also appropriate in other domains such as mate search, remains to be
explored.
Many other questions about the decision mechanisms that are best suited to
environments they themselves shape are also open for exploration. In addition to
developing models of such mind–environment coadaptation in other domains
and looking for evidence of the process in operation, the most important ques-
tions center on whether we can develop a theory of the principles underlying
such coadaptation that will allow us to predict when it will occur and what form
it will take in diﬀerent domains. Doing so will require a three-way focus: on the
constraints and structure of the information-processing mechanisms that indi-
viduals bring to bear on the environmental challenges they face, on the con-
straints and structure that the environment imposes on the information available
to individuals, and on the way these two sets of constraints interact with and
shape each other over time.
REFERENCES
Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex diﬀerences in human
mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses
tested in 37 cultures. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 12, 1–49.
Buston, P. M., & Emlen, S. T. (2003). Cogni-
tive processes underlying human mate
choice: The relationship between self-
perception and mate preference in Western
society. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 100, 8805–8810.
Coale, A. J. (1971). Age patterns of marriage.
Population Studies, 25, 193–214.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1987). From evolu-
tion to behavior: Evolutionary psychology as
the missing link. In J. Dupré (Ed.), The latest
on the best: Essays on evolution and optimiza-
tion (pp. 277–306). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press/Bradford Books.
Ellis, B. J., & Kelley, H. H. (1999). The pairing
game: A classroom demonstration of the
158
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

matching phenomenon. Teaching of Psych-
ology, 26, 118–121.
Ferguson, T. S. (1989). Who solved the sec-
retary problem? Statistical Science, 4, 282–
296.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996).
Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models of
bounded rationality. Psychological Review,
103, 650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC
Research Group. (1999). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002).
Models of ecological rationality: The recogni-
tion heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75–
90.
Hutchinson, J., Fanselow, C., & Todd, P. M.
(2005). Car parking as a game between sim-
ple heuristics. In P. M. Todd, G. Gigerenzer,
& the ABC Research Group (Eds.), Ecological
rationality: 
Intelligence 
in 
the 
world.
Manuscript in preparation.
Kalick, S. M., & Hamilton, T. E. (1986). The
matching hypothesis reexamined. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 673–
682.
Kenrick, D. T., Groth, G. E., Trost, M. R., &
Sadalla, E. K. (1993). Integrating evolution-
ary and social exchange perspectives on rela-
tionships: Eﬀects of gender, self-appraisal,
and involvement level on mate selection
criteria. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 64, 951–969.
Kirkpatrick, L. A., & Ellis, B. J. (2001). An
evolutionary-psychological approach to self-
esteem: Multiple domains and multiple func-
tions. In G. Fletcher & M. Clark (Eds.), The
Blackwell handbook of social psychology: Vol. 2.
Interpersonal processes (pp. 411–436). Oxford,
UK: Blackwell.
Kurzban, R., & Weeden, J. (2005). HurryDate:
Mate preferences in action. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 26(3), 227–244.
Lenton, A. P., Fasolo, B., & Todd, P. M. (2005).
When less is more in “shopping” for a mate:
Expectations vs. actual preferences in online
mate choice. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
MacQueen, J., & Miller, R. G., Jr. (1960).
Optimal persistence policies. Operations
Research, 8, 362–380.
Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. (1980). Human infer-
ence: Strategies and shortcomings of social
judgment. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Schotter, A., & Braunstein, Y. M. (1981).
Economic search: An experimental study.
Economic Inquiry, 19, 1–25.
Simão, J., & Todd, P. M. (2003). Emergent pat-
terns of mate choice in human populations.
Artiﬁcial Life, 9, 403–417.
Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants of human
behavior. Annual Review of Psychology, 41,
1–19.
Todd, P. M. (2000). The ecological rationality
of mechanisms evolved to make up minds.
The American Behavioral Scientist, 43(6),
940–956.
Todd, P. M., Billari, F. C., & Simão, J. (2005).
Aggregate age-at-marriage patterns from
individual mate-search heuristics. Dem-
ography, 42(3), 559–574.
Todd, P. M., & Heuvelink, A. (2006). Shaping
social environments with simple recognition
heuristics. In P. Carruthers (Ed.), The innate
mind: Culture and cognition (pp. 165–180).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Todd, P. M., & Miller, G. F. (1999). From
pride and prejudice to persuasion: Satisﬁcing
in mate search. In G. Gigerenzer, P. M.
Todd, & the ABC Research Group (Eds.),
Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp.
287–308). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Todd, P. M., Penke, L., Fasolo, B., & Lenton, A.
P. (2005). What we seek and what we ﬁnd:
Reconsidering the cognitive processes under-
lying human mate choice. Manuscript in
preparation.
159
MATE SEARCH


10
An Evolutionary Account
of Strategic Pluralism in
Human Mating
Changes in Mate Preferences Across the
Ovulatory Cycle
JEFFRY A. SIMPSON
JONATHON LAPAGLIA
Strategic Pluralism and Human Mating: Patterned Changes in
Women’s Mate Preferences Across the Ovulatory Cycle
Basic Evolutionary Concepts
Mating Strategies in Humans
Study 1
Study 2
Broader Theoretical Considerations
STRATEGIC PLURALISM AND HUMAN MATING: PATTERNED
CHANGES IN WOMEN’S MATE PREFERENCES ACROSS THE
OVULATORY CYCLE

esearchers have begun to study how women perceive and evaluate men as
potential mates at diﬀerent points of their reproductive cycle. One of the
reasons behind the rising interest in testing for patterned changes in
women’s mate preferences across the ovulatory cycle is clear. According to evo-
lutionary-based models of mating (e.g., Gangestad & Simpson, 2000), both
sexes should have evolved to enact situationally-contingent mating strategies and
tactics. The fact that women also evolved to conceive during a small window of
161

their monthly reproductive cycle permits the derivation of some speciﬁc and
nonobvious predictions about the kinds of men or male attributes that women
should ﬁnd appealing in short-term versus long-term mates, depending on
whether or not women are ovulating. Indeed, research testing for speciﬁc pat-
terns of mate preferences in diﬀerent interpersonal contexts at diﬀerent points of
the female reproductive cycle provides some of the strongest evidence to date for
evolved psychological adaptations in humans (see Gangestad, Thornhill, &
Garver-Apgar, 2005; Simpson & Campbell, 2005).
In this chapter, we ﬁrst review some basic evolutionary concepts and prin-
ciples associated with mating, including the twin concepts of sexual selection and
adaptations, evolutionary functional analysis, and trade-oﬀs in mating contexts.
We then discuss mating strategies and tactics, the extensive within-sex variation
that exists on various mating measures, the concept of good genes sexual selec-
tion, and the tenets of the Strategic Pluralism Model of mating (SPM; Gangestad
& Simpson, 2000). SPM melds principles of “good provider” and “good genes”
mate selection and speciﬁes some of the personal and environmental conditions
under which women may have evolved to preferentially value and “trade-oﬀ”
evidence of a mate’s investment potential for evidence of his viability (e.g., good
condition and perhaps immune system functioning). After outlining what is
currently known about women’s mate preferences across the ovulatory cycle, we
showcase two recent studies that have examined women’s mate preferences in
response to men’s social behavior depending on where women are in their
ovulatory cycle. Supporting SPM, both studies conﬁrm that certain behavioral
cues displayed by men are diﬀerentially attractive to women, depending on:
(1) whether women are evaluating men as long-term or short-term mates, and
(2) whether or not they are at peak fertility. These highly speciﬁc patterns of
ﬁndings are diﬃcult to derive or anticipate from nonevolutionary models of
human mating. We conclude the chapter by discussing the wider theoretical
implications of these and other recent ﬁndings.
BASIC EVOLUTIONARY CONCEPTS
Sexual Selection and Adaptations
Sexual selection refers to diﬀerences in reproduction in individuals due to diﬀer-
ential advantages in mating, independent of advantages associated with diﬀeren-
tial survival. Sexual selection produces two types of adaptations (Andersson,
1994): intrasexual competitive abilities and intersexual attraction cues (e.g., signals
that most opposite-sex people ﬁnd attractive). In many species, the number of
mates that males attract is closely tied to their ultimate reproductive success,
whereas total mate number has appreciably less impact on the reproductive
success of females given the prolonged gestation and lactation associated with
each birth. Even in most mammals, females are a limited reproductive resource
162
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

over which males usually compete. Accordingly, sexual selection pressures should
have operated more strongly on male intrasexual competitive abilities and male
intersexual attraction cues than vice versa (Cronin, 1991; Trivers, 1972). This
premise has been supported in many diﬀerent species (see Andersson, 1994;
Trivers, 1985).
Theories of intersexual signaling have focused on two clusters of attributes:
(1) signals conveying qualities of a good parent (or “good provider”), and (2)
signals that honestly advertise “good genes” (Cronin, 1991; Gangestad &
Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume). Historically, theories of good parenting have
been fairly uncontroversial, whereas those invoking good genes have been hotly
debated. Within the past decade, modeling studies have conﬁrmed that good-
genes selection may have evolved in several species (Kirkpatrick, 1996; Møller,
1994), even those in which males provide substantial parental care and invest-
ment. This has led researchers to consider whether good-parenting and good-
genes selection processes might have generated “mixed” mating strategies in
human males and females, as Trivers (1972) originally envisioned.
Adaptations are traits or behaviors that conferred a gene-transmitting
advantage to individuals who possessed them over those who had diﬀerent vari-
ants of the traits/behaviors in evolutionary history. Adaptations are revealed by
evidence of their special design features (Andrews, Gangestad, & Matthews,
2002; Williams, 1966). A trait/behavior has special design if it produced speciﬁc
beneﬁcial eﬀects that should have enhanced inclusive ﬁtness during evolutionary
history with a high degree of speciﬁcity, precision, and eﬃciency. Tooby and
Cosmides (1992) have further claimed that adaptive behavioral ﬂexibility should
have been facilitated by the evolution of domain-speciﬁc psychological mechan-
isms. These mechanisms are believed to operate via speciﬁc decision rules that are
evoked by speciﬁc environmental cues and that produce eﬃcient, stable, persist-
ent, and ﬁnely tuned responses (e.g., speciﬁc perceptions or behavioral reactions)
that solved recurrent adaptive problems during evolutionary history (e.g., choos-
ing or attracting a desirable mate). These decision rules need not be conscious or
premeditated, and many may operate outside of awareness.
Evolutionary Functional Analysis and Trade-Offs
Individuals must invest considerable time, eﬀort, and energy to accomplish the
major life-tasks that most directly impact their inclusive ﬁtness. Decisions about
how to invest time, eﬀort, and energy are important not only because they put
individuals at risk, but also because individuals might have used or allocated their
resources diﬀerently. Adaptations, therefore, have opportunity costs, including lost
ﬁtness beneﬁts that might have been gained by using resources in a diﬀerent
manner. Accordingly, beneﬁts must be evaluated in relation to costs to discern
whether and how speciﬁc adaptations could have evolved (Parker & Maynard
Smith, 1991). One objective of evolutionary functional analysis is to identify the
cost–beneﬁt “trade-oﬀs” that motivated people to allocate their time, energy, and
163
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

eﬀort toward activities in ways that typically would have improved their inclusive
ﬁtness.
In many mating contexts, direct trade-oﬀs must be made between the allo-
cation of eﬀort to parenting activities versus mating activities. Trivers (1972), in
fact, deﬁned parental investment as “any investment by the parent in an indi-
vidual oﬀspring that increases the oﬀspring’s chance of surviving (and hence
reproductive success) at the cost of the parent’s ability to invest in other [includ-
ing future] oﬀspring” (p. 139). Thus, although parental investment can increase
the probability that a given oﬀspring will survive and eventually reproduce, it
also carries costs in terms of the lost beneﬁts of alternate investments, including
missed opportunities to invest in diﬀerent or future oﬀspring. Individuals who
allocate high eﬀort to parenting could have pursued other endeavors, such as
devoting more time or eﬀort to ﬁnding and attracting diﬀerent mates (Gross &
Sargent, 1985).
MATING STRATEGIES IN HUMANS
Mating Strategies and Tactics
Mating strategies are integrated sets of cognitive and behavioral adaptations that
organize and guide an individual’s general reproductive eﬀorts (see Lieberman,
2006). They are often conceptualized as implicit decision rules that motivate
individuals to allocate their somatic and reproductive eﬀort in functionally adap-
tive ways (Andersson, 1994). Mating tactics, in contrast, represent the behavioral
“output” of individuals who are pursuing a general mating strategy. The enact-
ment of a particular strategy usually involves the deployment of multiple
behavioral tactics. For example, males in most biparentally investing species
often invest quite heavily in their oﬀspring, yet also remain open to low-cost
mating opportunities with other females. According to Trivers (1972), this repre-
sents a mixed mating strategy, one that entails multiple behavioral tactics. If each
tactic is evoked by speciﬁc environmental stimuli such as the prolonged absence
of a mate, having short-term sex only with mates who have certain attributes, or
seeking short-term sex only when such eﬀorts have worked well in the past, the
strategy is deemed a conditional one.
Given the varied and changing environments in which reproduction
occurred during evolutionary history, selection pressures should not have pro-
duced a single mating strategy or set of tactics for males and females in most
species, especially in humans. Rather, selection should have shaped a small and
ﬂexible set of ecologically-contingent strategies and tactics (see Gross, 1996). One
recent study on humans supports this premise. Li, Bailey, Kenrick, and Linsen-
meier (2002) gave people “mate dollars” that they could spend to increase the
quality of an ideal mate. If their budgets were tight, males invested in the
“necessities” of a healthy, fertile mate, whereas females invested in “necessities”
164
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

associated with acquiring resources. Both sexes shifted to the “luxuries” of mates
who were more creative and talented as budgets increased. This evidence suggests
that individuals appear to utilize ecologically contingent strategies in response to
relevant environmental factors.
Within-Sex Variation in Human Mating Strategies
Until recently, most evolutionary theories focused on the use of diﬀerent mating
strategies by women and men. For example, Wilson (1978) originally proposed
that, given how the sexes reproduce, human males should have evolved to be
uniformly aggressive, hasty, and undiscriminating in mating contexts, whereas
human females should be uniformly coy and should defer mating until the males
who have the “best” genes are identiﬁed. Although there are between-sex diﬀer-
ences in sociosexual attitudes and behaviors (Oliver & Hyde, 1996; Simpson &
Gangestad, 1991), there is considerably more within-sex than between-sex vari-
ation. Roughly 30% of men, for instance, hold less favorable attitudes about
casual sex than the median attitudes of women in North American samples
(Gangestad & Simpson, 2000). What might explain this appreciable within-sex
variation in mating-related attitudes and behaviors?
Genetic Fitness and Sexual Selection
According to good genes selection models, females should have evolved to prefer
males who possessed indicators of viability and good physical condition, includ-
ing adaptive attributes that might be passed on to their oﬀspring via genetic
inheritance. Mildly deleterious alleles and lower pathogen resistance has to be
inferred from phenotypic markers such as physical or social “advertisements”
(Zahavi, 1975). In order to evolve, good genes sexual selection must be based on
“honest” signaling, which explains why only certain features serve as valid cues
of an individual’s physical condition and, potentially, his/her genetic ﬁtness
(Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume; Grafen, 1990). An attribute
can remain an “honest” advertisement if individuals who have deleterious alleles
or less pathogen resistance cannot develop or sustain the attribute without incur-
ring considerable costs. One constellation of attributes that meet this criterion is
those that conditionally “handicap” individuals who have deleterious mutations
or are less pathogen-resistant (Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume).
Mutations (Pomiankowski, Iwasa, & Nee, 1991) and pathogens (Hamilton
& Zuk, 1982) tend to divert or compromise an individual’s energy and
resources. Consequently, honestly advertised traits are energetically costly to
develop and maintain because “handicapped” individuals cannot develop these
traits without diverting valuable resources from other competing demands, such
as sustaining their already burdened immune systems (Folstad & Karter, 1992).
In birds that have extravagant features, costly handicaps include exaggerated
sexual ornaments and colorful plumage (Zuk, Thornhill, Ligon, & Johnson,
165
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

1990). In mammals, they include large size and increased musculature that result
in sexual dimorphism, particularly in polygynous species (Alexander, Hoogland,
Howard, Noonan, & Sherman, 1979).
The Strategic Pluralism Model
Informed by these ideas, Gangestad and Simpson (2000) developed a model of
human mating that blends principles of “good-genes” and “good provider”
models. Although the Strategic Pluralism Model (SPM) applies to both sexes, it
focuses primarily on the mating strategies and tactics of women. According to
SPM, both sexes should have evolved to engage in conditional or “mixed” mat-
ing strategies. Generally speaking, human females should have evolved to value
and selectively “trade-oﬀ” evidence of a mate’s investment potential for evidence
of his viability, contingent on various factors. For example, if a man is perceived
as less investing than other available suitors, he must evince higher viability to be
viewed as a commensurately attractive mate. If, however, he is seen as relatively
more investing than other suitors, he need not be quite as high on viability to be
perceived as attractive.
Decisions about the relative weighting and value of these two sets of attrib-
utes should also be contingent on other factors, one of which ought to be where
women are in their reproductive cycles when making mating decisions. Accord-
ing to SPM, women should have evolved to be more attracted to men who
display attributes that “honestly” signal their greater viability. This should be
especially true in short-term mating contexts when women are ovulating and,
thus, could pass the “good genes” of these mates on to their oﬀspring. The
question then turns to which interpersonal behaviors might be good candidates
to investigate.
Trivers (1972) proposed that intrasexual competitive abilities could have
evolved as valid cues of heritable ﬁtness. Successful intrasexual competition
requires developing costly attributes used in competition (e.g., muscularity,
social dominance, willingness to directly compete with other men) along with
the expenditure of energy during competitions. Because males who have greater
viability should be more capable of withstanding the costs of “handicapping”
traits than less viable males, they should be able to devote greater energy to
developing the physical and interpersonal tools necessary to succeed in most
intrasexual competitions. Females, in turn, should have evolved to attend to the
outcomes of intrasexual competitions to evaluate male ﬁtness.
STUDY 1
Several lines of research have revealed that the criteria women use to evaluate
men’s attractiveness shift across the reproductive cycle. One major line of work
has shown that women prefer the scent of men who have greater developmental
166
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

stability (measured by ﬂuctuating asymmetry), especially during the fertile days
of their cycles (Gangestad & Thornhill, 1998; Rikowski & Grammer, 1999;
Thornhill et al., 2003). Another line of research has conﬁrmed that women
prefer masculine faces more on fertile than on nonfertile days of their cycles
(Johnston, Hagel, Franklin, Fink, & Grammer, 2001; Penton-Voak & Perrett,
2000; Penton-Voak et al., 1999). And other evidence has revealed that women
prefer creativity over wealth (Haselton & Miller, 2006) and deeper voices (Puts,
2005) when they are fertile. Importantly, these shifts in preferences for select
male traits emerge only when women evaluate men as potential short-term
partners.
Collectively, these ﬁndings could reﬂect evolved adaptations for women to
choose mates who are capable of providing genetic beneﬁts to their oﬀspring.
Heightened attraction to men who possess putative indicators of genetic beneﬁts
(e.g., body symmetry, facial masculinity) could increase the likelihood that
women will have sex with these men when fertile, even if such men are not their
primary romantic partners (Jones et al., 2001). This interpretation is bolstered
by the fact that women’s attraction to masculine facial features tends to be
strongest during ovulation when women evaluate men as possible short-term sex
partners, but not when they evaluate men as long-term, stable partners (Penton-
Voak et al., 1999). These preference shifts may also explain why women report
increased sexual attraction to extrapair men, but only when they are fertile and
romantically involved with men who have traits signaling lower genetic beneﬁts
(Gangestad, Thornhill, & Garver, 2002).
Although scent and facial attractiveness aﬀect women’s attraction to men in
important ways, men’s behavior may be an even more critical determinant of
attraction. In general, women prefer men who display self-assurance and who
stand up for themselves vis-à-vis other men, but who also exhibit warmth and
agreeableness (Cunningham, Druen, & Barbee, 1997; Graziano, Jensen-
Campbell, Todd, & Finch, 1997). According to Trivers (1972), the former
attributes, which constitute intrasexual competitiveness, may partly function as
signals of genetic beneﬁts (i.e., heritable condition) that are conveyed by facial
masculinity and developmental stability. The latter attributes, on the other hand,
may be more highly valued in long-term, stable mates. Indeed, men who are
more symmetrical tend to use more direct intrasexual competitive tactics when
interacting with attractive women than do less symmetrical men (Simpson,
Gangestad, Christensen, & Leck, 1999). Moreover, Johnston et al. (2001) have
found that men who have more masculine faces are perceived as more socially
dominant and less investing as fathers than are men who have less masculine
faces.
The purpose of Study 1 was to test whether women’s preferences for men’s
behavioral displays shift depending on women’s fertility status. In this study,
Gangestad, Simpson, Cousins, Garver-Apgar, and Christensen (2004) had
women view videotaped segments of men who had been interviewed for a
possible lunch date. Each man answered a series of questions posed by one of
167
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

two attractive women whom they thought would be choosing them or another
man for the date. Following the interview, each man was asked to tell his
“competitor” why the female interviewer should choose him instead of the
competitor.
Women raters watched the interviews and evaluated each man’s attractive-
ness as both a short-term mate (i.e., a sex or “aﬀair” partner) and a long-term
mate. We then examined whether women’s ratings were associated with variation
in men’s behavioral displays on two dimensions of men’s observer-rated inter-
view behavior: (1) their degree of social presence, and (2) their degree of direct
intrasexual competitiveness. Based on the premise that these behavioral displays
should partially convey (signal) viability in men, we predicted that women would
prefer behavioral displays signaling greater social presence and direct intrasexual
competitiveness in short-term mates, but chieﬂy on days when they were
ovulating (i.e., could potentially conceive).
Conception Risk by Male Behavior by Mating Context
Interaction Effect
The results supported the basic predictions. As shown in Figure 10.1, we found
the predicted three-way interaction between women’s ovulatory status (estimated
from actuarial data), observer ratings of men’s social presence and direct
FIGURE 10.1 Preference for social presence/direct intrasexual competitiveness as a
function of day of the cycle (adjusted for cycle length; points are 3-day moving averages).
Preference reﬂects the mean regression slope of individual women’s ratings regressed on men’s
social presence and direct intrasexual competitiveness, with men’s physical attractiveness
controlled. The ﬁgure illustrates the Conception Risk × Behavioral Display × Mating Context
(short-term vs. long-term) interaction. High fertility days run from about Day 6 to Day 14,
with fertility peaking at Day 12.
168
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

intrasexual competitiveness during the interview, and whether men were evalu-
ated as short-term or long-term mates. Speciﬁcally, women perceived men who
displayed greater social presence and direct competition as more attractive, but
only if they were ovulating and evaluating men as short-term mates. This eﬀect
held when several potential confounds (e.g., independent ratings of each man’s
level of physical attractiveness) were statistically controlled.
Greater social presence and direct competitiveness were also more preferred
in short-term than in long-term mates, which is understandable if these
behavioral displays advertise traits that are “traded-oﬀ” against perceived invest-
ment in a committed relationship. Women also rated men as more attractive
when they were ovulating, a ﬁnding that is consistent with past studies indicating
that sexual desire tends to be slightly higher during ovulation (see Gangestad
et al., 2005, for a review).
These ﬁndings contribute to the growing literature demonstrating system-
atic shifts in mate preferences across the female reproductive cycle. Because
women’s attraction to men may depend on men’s behavioral traits even more
strongly than on men’s scent or facial masculinity, the preference shifts docu-
mented in Study 1 are consequential. The fact that these mate preference shifts
are speciﬁc to women’s evaluations of short-term mates provides further support
for the notion that these results may reﬂect an evolved female adaptation to
garner genetic beneﬁts via extrapair mating.
STUDY 2
If women evolved to enact conditional mating strategies, occasionally engaging
in short-term or extrapair sex to obtain heritable ﬁtness beneﬁts at the risk of
possibly losing or damaging primary relationships, selection could have shaped
women’s mate preferences to be contingent on their fertility status. Indeed,
Study 1 reveals that when evaluating men as short-term mates, women ﬁnd male
behavioral attributes that may “honestly” signal heritable ﬁtness more appealing
during the fertile phase of their reproductive cycles, but less so when they are not
fertile. The logic underlying this prediction is that, because women cannot
beneﬁt from a short-term mate’s heritable ﬁtness when they cannot conceive,
women should value indicators of heritable ﬁtness less when genetic beneﬁts
cannot be gained. When women evaluate long-term mates, however, shifts in
these mate preferences should be minimal or nonexistent.
One appealing feature of this hypothesis is that it makes predictions that are
derived directly from a good genes theoretical position, but are diﬃcult to derive
from other theories. Conﬁrmations of predictions believed to have a low prob-
ability of being correct if the theory that generated them is wrong provide
particularly compelling support for that theory (see Salmon, 1966). Accordingly,
evidence for systematic ovulatory cycle preference shifts constitutes strong sup-
port for the hypothesis that women have evolved preferences for good genes
169
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

indicators in men, particularly when evaluating them as short-term mates
(Simpson & Campbell, 2005).
There is, however, a possible alternate explanation. During evolutionary
history, individuals had competing demands on their time and eﬀort. In addition
to ﬁnding and retaining mates, ancestral women had to perform many other
complex and crucial tasks, such as securing food, caring for and protecting
young, maintaining social alliances, and fending oﬀ aggressive males. Given that
the relative importance of these tasks may have diﬀered depending on speciﬁc
social or environmental circumstances, selection should have shaped women’s
allocation of eﬀort or attention to vary in response to factors that aﬀected the
relative importance of each task, especially as it impacted their likely repro-
ductive ﬁtness. Selection, for example, may have favored an allocation strategy
that motivated women to pay greater attention to the reproductive task of select-
ing a good mate when women were fertile and less attention when they were not.
Consistent with this perspective, Fessler (2003) has found that the appetite of
women tends to be lower during ovulation, despite the fact that women have the
greatest caloric needs at this particular time. Fessler suggests that appetite motiv-
ates the search for food, which might be allotted lower priority at mid-cycle than
immediate reproductive tasks.
This “wiser mate selection” hypothesis suggests that women’s mate prefer-
ences and standards for attractiveness in men should change across their cycles
because women may be more attuned to the general task of ﬁnding a good,
compatible mate when they are fertile. According to this view, women’s stronger
preference for developmental stability, facial masculinity, and displays of social
presence and competitiveness could be due to the fact that women prefer male
features that are generally valued in mates rather than because they place special
emphasis on select male indicators of “good genes.” This alternate view implies
that women should make wiser mate choices in general when they are fertile, but
should not diﬀerentially weigh one type of preferred mate trait or attribute over
others.
In a second study, Gangestad, Garver-Apgar, Simpson, and Cousins (in
press) had normally ovulating women view the same videotapes of men being
interviewed for a possible lunch date that were used in Study 1. After viewing
each man, women rated his attractiveness as both a long-term and a short-term
mate. A diﬀerent sample of women then rated each man’s perceived traits and
characteristics on 10 global mate attribute dimensions that could be preferred in
long-term and/or short-term mates—each man’s inferred intelligence, kindness/
warmth, social inﬂuence (socially respected), capacity to be a good father, sexual
faithfulness, capacity for ﬁnancial success, physical attractiveness, muscularity,
confrontativeness with other men, and arrogance.
We tested two competing models. The fertile-women-favor-good-genes
hypothesis anticipates that women should value and prefer ostensible markers of
genetic beneﬁts most strongly when they are fertile and evaluating men as
conceivable short-term mates. The fertile-women-possess-wiser-preferences
170
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

hypothesis, in contrast, anticipates that women should strongly yet equally prefer
both long-term and short-term male attributes when they are ovulating versus
when they are not ovulating.
Women’s Attractiveness Ratings
Male Attribute × Mating Context Interaction Effects.
As expected, men’s
perceived arrogance, confrontativeness, muscularity, and physical attractiveness
predicted their attractiveness better as short-term mates than as long-term mates.
Conversely, men’s perceived faithfulness, warmth, intelligence, potential to be a
good father, and potential for ﬁnancial success predicted men’s attractiveness
better as long-term than short-term mates.
Conception Risk × Male Attribute × Mating Context Interaction
Effects.
Across the 10 mate attributes, we found several predicted Conception
Risk × Male Attribute × Mating Context interactions. Relative to women low in
conception risk, those high in conception risk preferred as short-term mates men
whom they perceived as more confrontative, arrogant, muscular, socially
respected, and physically attractive. Such women were also more attracted to
men perceived as less faithful as short-term mates. These eﬀects parallel those
previously reported by Penton-Voak et al. (1999), Gangestad et al. (2004), and
Haselton and Miller (2006) in that women’s mate preferences predictably shift
across the reproductive cycle to favor attributes that may signal a man’s “good
genes,” particularly in short-term mating contexts. Similar interactions did not
emerge for attributes valued highly in long-term mates—warmth, intelligence,
potential to be a good father, and potential for ﬁnancial success.
Characterizing the Interaction Effects
The results of Study 2 indicate that women’s standards of attractiveness do not
change across the ovulatory cycle for all kinds of mate attributes. Only standards
associated with particular male attributes systematically change. These results
support the fertile-women-favor-good-genes hypothesis. However, the “good
genes” hypothesis makes an even more speciﬁc prediction about which male
attributes should be most appealing to fertile women. Fertile women should be
especially drawn to men who have attributes typically valued in short-term sex
partners.
Figure 10.2 summarizes these results. It shows that the extent to which male
attributes were preferred in short-term mating contexts strongly predicted the
extent to which this was especially true of fertile women. Additional analyses
revealed a similar pattern of results for the dimensions of good investing mate
qualities and intrasexual competitiveness (see Gangestad et al., in press). This
evidence provides further support for the fertile-women-favor-good-genes
hypothesis.
171
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

Short-Term and Long-Term Mate Preferences
Gangestad et al. (in press) also examined women’s ratings of short-term mate
attractiveness and long-term mate attractiveness separately. Men’s intrasexual
competitiveness strongly and positively predicted their short-term attractiveness,
whereas men’s good investing mate qualities predicted their short-term
attractiveness negatively and much more weakly. As anticipated, intrasexual
competitiveness interacted with conception risk to predict men’s short-term
attractiveness ratings. In particular, with increasing probability of fertility,
women were more attracted to men perceived to have attributes signaling their
greater intrasexual competitiveness. By contrast, there was no evidence that
women preferred good investing mate qualities in short-term mates as a function
of their fertility status, nor was there evidence that women who varied in fertility
status responded diﬀerently to combinations of the two factors. Intrasexual
competitiveness, good investing mate qualities, and their interaction all pre-
dicted long-term mate attractiveness, but there was no evidence that women’s
attraction to these attributes in long-term mates systematically changed across
the ovulatory cycle.
FIGURE 10.2 Eﬀects of the three-way interactions between trait factor, mating context, and
conception risk as a function of the eﬀects of mating context (short-term vs. long-term) on
the trait preferences across the 10 perceived mate attributes. Values on the Y-axis are t-test
values.
172
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Summary
Study 2 provides further evidence—particularly nice discriminant validity evi-
dence—for the fertile-women-favor-good-genes hypothesis. When fertile,
women are more strongly drawn to attributes that tend to be valued in short-
term mates. No parallel preference shifts were found for attributes that typically
are valued more highly in long-term mates. Thus, consistent with earlier research
(e.g., Gangestad et al., 2004; Johnston et al., 2001; Penton-Voak et al., 1999), we
did not ﬁnd general shifts in mate preferences across the reproductive cycle.
Instead, mating context interacted with fertility status to predict women’s spe-
ciﬁc mate preferences. Near ovulation, traits that are likely to be “honest” signals
of greater intrasexual competitiveness, physicality, attractiveness, and arrogance
are viewed as especially attractive in short-term sexual partners.1
BROADER THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
One might wonder how SPM diﬀers for other major models of human mating.
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant alternate model is Sexual Strategies Theory (SST;
Buss & Schmitt, 1993), which also posits that both sexes should have evolved to
engage in long-term and short-term mating strategies. There are some critical
diﬀerences between the two models, however. For instance, although SST
acknowledges that women should have evolved to engage in short-term sexual
relations, it focuses more directly on gender diﬀerences in mating strategies. SST
also does not directly apply good genes sexual selection thinking to explain why
women prefer certain attributes in short-term mates, such as physical attractive-
ness and sex appeal (see Buss & Schmitt, 1993). Moreover, according to SST,
women frequently use short-term mating to attract and evaluate men as possible
long-term mates. Women engage in short-term mating, in other words, to facili-
tate their long-term mating goals and objectives. SPM (Gangestad & Simpson,
2000), by comparison, focuses on the nature and trade-oﬀ dynamics of variation
in mating strategies within each sex. Melding good genes and good provider
principles, SPM proposes that women evolved to engage in short-term mating
selectively to obtain the “good genes” of certain men, independent of women’s
long-term mating goals.
One issue that complicates the testing of mating theories is that men who
have attributes suggestive of “good genes” might have been more capable of
providing more or better beneﬁts and resources to their partners, above and
beyond the genetic beneﬁts they may have conferred. If so, men who have “good
genes” might also be better or more investing long-term mates (Gangestad &
Simpson, 2000). Indeed, even though the intrasexual competitiveness factor did
predict women’s ratings of men’s short-term attractiveness more strongly in
Study 2, the good investing mate qualities factor also independently predicted
women’s short-term attractiveness ratings, albeit more weakly.
173
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

What, then, constrains women from pursuing mates who possess both
desired short-term and long-term attributes? Men who score high on both
dimensions tend to be highly sought after by women and, accordingly, have
many good mating options, making them especially diﬃcult to attract and retain
as mates (Simpson & Gangestad, 1992). Despite this fact, many women should
still ﬁnd such men highly attractive, which is exactly what emerged in Study 2.
That is, men perceived as having higher standing on both good investing mate
qualities and intrasexual competitiveness were unusually attractive to women,
more than would be expected from men’s standing on each mate choice factor
considered alone. Given that such paragons of virtue are very diﬃcult to attract
and retain, women should remain open to ﬂexible, ecologically-contingent
mating strategies, selectively engaging in short-term sex with men who display
evidence of “good genes” (particularly during ovulating), and preferentially
engaging in long-term mating with men who display strong paternal investment
(Gangestad & Simpson, 2000). These ﬁndings support basic tenets of SPM.
Although SPM assumes that female extrapair mating occurred in ancestral
environments, it does not assume that women engaged in extrapair mating fre-
quently or indiscriminately. Along with potential genetic beneﬁts, there should
have been immediate and severe costs associated with engaging in extrapair
mating given that established mates may have harmed or abandoned unfaithful
partners. Most men, in fact, are vigilant of their partners’ whereabouts, particu-
larly when their partners are ovulating (see Gangestad et al., 2002). Hence,
despite the fact that women may be more strongly attracted to men other than
their primary partners during ovulation, most women are not likely to act on
these attractions.
One of the most novel components of SPM is the premise that environment
conditions should inﬂuence how women weigh, evaluate, and make trade-oﬀs
between male viability and male investment. According to the model, ancestral
women should have placed greater weight on investment when local environ-
ments were demanding and required sustained biparental care of children. On
the other hand, women should have placed more weight on viability when local
environments indicated the presence of heavy pathogen load. Provisional
support for these hypotheses at a cross-cultural level has been marshaled by
Gangestad and Buss (1993) and more recently by Schmitt (2005).
Because women’s mating decisions should also be impacted by local
environmental parameters, some of the ovulatory cycle ﬁndings reported above
might be moderated by variation in the need for biparental care or pathogen
presence. For example, the interaction depicted in Figure 10.1 of Study 1 could
be qualiﬁed by the severity of pathogen load in the local environment. When
pathogen load is particularly high, women might place even greater emphasis
on male viability, amplifying the appeal of certain short-term behavioral cues
especially when women are ovulating. When pathogen load is lower, however,
women may put less weight on male viability, perhaps attenuating the eﬀect
reported in Figure 10.1. The crucial point is that the local ecology may amplify
174
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

or attenuate some of the “good genes” interaction eﬀects described in this
chapter.
In conclusion, the studies reviewed in this chapter contribute to the rap-
idly growing literature on ovulatory cycle eﬀects. One of the most unique
aspects of the current set of ﬁndings is their speciﬁcity coupled with the fact
they cannot be easily derived from theories or models other than those suggest-
ing that good genes sexual selection operated on humans. It is important to
reiterate that just because women might have beneﬁted from selective extrapair
mating with certain men, many women in evolutionary history probably did
not do so on a regular basis. Such matings should have been fairly infrequent
and opportunistic, occurring when assorted circumstances—the lower viability
of one’s current partner, the stellar short-term attributes of select extrapair or
short-term partners, the discreetness and conﬁdentiality of the liaison—all
coalesced.
Nevertheless, current empirical evidence now suggests that both sexes prob-
ably evolved to engage in conditional mating strategies, contingent on both
personal factors (e.g., one’s attractiveness, social status, resources, and ovulatory
status in the case of women) and local environmental conditions (e.g., cues
indicating the need for prolonged biparental care, cues signaling the need to
mate with partners who have weathered pathogen-prevalent environments).
Rather than adopting sex-linked or invariant mating strategies, men and women
evolved to be strategic pluralists, adopting ecologically-contingent mating strat-
egies that, on average, enhanced their inclusive ﬁtness in response to varied,
ﬂuctuating, and sometimes uncertain physical and social environments.
NOTE
1. Although information processing was not
the focus of this work, important outcomes of
cognitive processing—including attribute
inferences of men on diﬀerent mating
dimensions and evaluations of men’s appeal
as short-term and long-term mates—were
examined. Future work needs to investigate
how women reason when making trait infer-
ences about certain men and how these
judgments inform women’s evaluation of
men’s attractiveness as short-term and
long-term mates (see Lieberman, 2006).
REFERENCES
Alexander, R. D., Hoogland, J. L., Howard, R.
D., Noonan, K. M., & Sherman, P. W.
(1979). Sexual dimorphism and breeding sys-
tems in pinnipeds, ungulates, primates and
humans. In N. A. Chagnon & W. Irons
(Eds.), Evolutionary biology and human social
behavior: 
An 
anthropological 
perspective.
North Scituate, MA: Duxbury.
Andersson, M. B. (1994). Sexual selection.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Andrews, P. W., Gangestad, S. W., & Matthews,
D. (2002). Adaptationism: How to carry out
an exaptationist program. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 25, 489–553.
Buss, D. M., & Schmitt, D. P. (1993). Sexual
strategies theory: An evolutionary perspective
175
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION

on human mating. Psychological Review, 100,
204–232.
Cronin, H. (1991). The ant and the peacock.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Cunningham, M. R., Druen, P. B., & Barbee,
A. P. (1997). Angels, mentors, and friends:
Trade-oﬀs among evolutionary, social, indi-
vidual variables in physical appearance. In J.
A. Simpson & D. T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evo-
lutionary social psychology (pp. 109–140).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Fessler, D. M. T. (2003). No time to eat: An
adaptationist 
account 
of 
periovulatory
behavioral changes. Quarterly Review of
Biology, 78, 3–21
Folstad, I., & Karter, A. J. (1992). Parasites,
bright males, and the immunocompetence
handicap. The American Naturalist, 139,
603–622.
Gangestad, S. W., & Buss, D. M. (1993).
Pathogen prevalence and human mate prefer-
ences. Ethology and Sociobiology, 14, 89–96.
Gangestad, S. W., Garver-Apgar, C. E., Simp-
son, J. A., & Cousins, A. J. (in press).
Changes in women’s mate preferences across
the ovulatory cycle. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology.
Gangestad, S. W., & Simpson, J. A. (2000).
The evolution of human mating: The role of
trade-oﬀs and strategic pluralism. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 23, 573–587.
Gangestad, S. W., Simpson, J. A., Cousins, A.
J., Garver-Apgar, C. E., & Christensen, P. N.
(2004). Women’s preferences for male
behavioral 
displays 
change 
across 
the
menstrual cycle. Psychological Science, 15,
203–207.
Gangestad, S. W., & Thornhill, R. (1998).
Menstrual cycle variation in women’s prefer-
ence for the scent of symmetrical men. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series
B, 262, 727–733.
Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver, C.
E. (2002). Changes in women’s sexual inter-
ests and their partners’ mate retention tactics
across the menstrual cycle: Evidence for shift-
ing conﬂicts of interest. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B, 269,
975–982.
Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver-
Apgar, C. E. (2005). Adaptations to
ovulation. In D. M. Buss (Ed.), The hand-
book of evolutionary psychology (pp. 68–95).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Grafen, A. (1990). Biological signals as
handicaps. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 144,
517–546.
Graziano, W. G., Jensen-Campbell, L. A.,
Todd, M., & Finch, J. (1997). Interpersonal
attraction from an evolutionary perspective:
Women’s reactions to dominant and proso-
cial men. In J. A. Simpson & D. T. Kenrick
(Eds.), Evolutionary social psychology (pp.
141–167). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Gross, M. R. (1996). Alternative reproductive
strategies and tactics: Diversity within sexes.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 11, 92–98.
Gross, M. R., & Sargent, R. C. (1985). The
evolution of male and female parental care in
ﬁshes. The American Zoologist, 25, 807–822.
Hamilton, W. D., & Zuk, M. (1982). Heritable
true ﬁtness and bright birds: A role for
parasites. Science, 218, 384–387.
Haselton, M. G., & Miller, G. F. (2006).
Women’s fertility across the cycle increases
the short-term attractiveness of creative
intelligence. Human Nature, 18, 50–73.
Johnston, V. S., Hagel, R., Franklin, M., Fink,
B., & Grammer, K. (2001). Male facial
attractiveness: Evidence for hormone medi-
cated adaptive design. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 21, 251–267.
Jones, B. C., Little, A. C., Penton-Voak, I. S.,
Tiddeman, B. P., Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D.
I. (2001). Facial symmetry and judgments of
apparent health: Support for a “good genes”
explanation of the attractiveness-symmetry
relationship. Evolution and Human Behavior,
22, 417–429.
Kirkpatrick, M. (1996). Good genes and direct
selection in the evolution of mating prefer-
ences. Evolution, 50, 2125–2140.
Li, N. P., Bailey, J. M., Kenrick, D. T., & Lin-
senmeier, J. A. W. (2002). The necessities
and luxuries of mate preferences: Testing the
trade-oﬀs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 82, 947–955.
Lieberman, D. (2006). Mate selection: Adap-
tive problems and evolved cognitive pro-
grams. In P. Noller & J. A. Feeney (Eds.),
Close relationships: Functions, forms, and pro-
cesses (pp. 245–266). New York: Psychology
Press.
176
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Møller, A. P. (1994). Sexual selection in the barn
swallow. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Oliver, M. B., & Hyde, J. S. (1996). Gender
diﬀerences in sexuality: A meta-analysis. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 114, 29–51.
Parker, G. A., & Maynard Smith, J. (1991).
Optimality theory in evolutionary biology.
Nature, 348, 27–33.
Penton-Voak, I. S., & Perrett, D. I. (2000).
Female preference for male faces changes
cyclically: Further evidence. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 21, 39–48.
Penton-Voak, I. S., Perrett, D. I., Castles, D.,
Burt, M., Koyabashi, T., & Murray, L. K.
(1999). 
Female 
preference 
for 
male
faces changes cyclically. Nature, 399, 741–
742.
Pomiankowski, A., Iwasa, Y., & Nee, S. (1991).
The evolution of costly mate preferences: I.
Fisher and biased mutation. Evolution, 45,
1422–1430.
Puts, D. (2005). Mating context and menstrual
phase aﬀect women’s preferences for male
voice pitch. Evolution and Human Behavior,
26, 388–397.
Rikowski, A., & Grammer, K. (1999). Human
body odour, symmetry and attractiveness.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
Series B, 266, 869–874.
Salmon, W. C. (1966). The foundations of scien-
tiﬁc inference. Pittsburgh, PA: University of
Pittsburgh Press.
Schmitt, D. P. (2005). Sociosexuality from
Argentina to Zimbabwe: A 48-nation study
of sex, culture, and strategies of human
mating. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28,
247–311.
Simpson, J. A., & Campbell, L. (2005).
Methods of evolutionary sciences. In D. M.
Buss (Ed.), The handbook of evolutionary
psychology (pp. 119–144). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Simpson, J. A., & Gangestad, S. (1991). Indi-
vidual diﬀerences in sociosexuality: Evidence
for convergent and discriminant validity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
60, 870–883.
Simpson, J. A., & Gangestad, S. W. (1992).
Sociosexuality and romantic partner choice.
Journal of Personality, 60, 31–51.
Simpson, J. A., Gangestad, S. W., Christensen,
P. N., & Leck, K. (1999). Fluctuating
asymmetry, sociosexuality, and intrasexual
competitive tactics. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 76, 159–172.
Thornhill, R., Gangestad, S. W., Miller, R.,
Scheyd, G., McCollough, J. K., & Franklin,
M. (2003). Major histocompatibility com-
plex genes, symmetry, and body scent
attractiveness in men and women. Behavioral
Ecology, 14, 668–678.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the
generation of culture (pp. 19–136). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Trivers, R. (1972). Parental investment and sex-
ual selection. In B. Campbell (Eds.), Sexual
selection and the descent of man, 1871–1971
(pp. 136–179). Chicago: Aldine.
Trivers, R. (1985). Social evolution. Menlo Park,
CA: Benjamin/Cummings.
Williams, G. C. (1966). Adaptation and natural
selection. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1978). On human nature.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Zahavi, A. (1975). Mate selection: A selection
for a handicap. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
53, 205–214.
Zuk, M., Thornhill, R., Ligon, J. D., & John-
son, K. (1990). Parasites and mate choice in
red jungle fowl. The American Zoologist, 30,
235–244.
177
MATE PREFERENCES AND OVULATION


11
Aligning Evolutionary
Psychology and Social
Cognition
Inbreeding Avoidance as an Example of
Investigations into Categorization, Decision
Rules, and Emotions
DEBRA LIEBERMAN
Introduction
What is a Computational Theory of Mind and Why Should Social-
Cognitive Scientists Care?
Selection Pressures Guiding the Evolution of Inbreeding Avoidance
Mechanisms
An Information-Processing View of Inbreeding Avoidance: What
Would a Well-Engineered System for Inbreeding Avoidance
Look Like?
Empirical Investigation of Systems for Inbreeding Avoidance
Conclusion
INTRODUCTION
A
s an evolutionary psychologist employing theoretical tools from biology
and cognitive science to study human social behavior, I often ﬁnd I speak
a completely diﬀerent language from those trained in the ﬁeld of social
cognition, despite the similar goals of understanding human sociality. There are
(at least) two reasons why translation between these two frameworks has
been diﬃcult. First, research in social cognition typically has not considered
179

important theoretical contributions from evolutionary biology (e.g., kin selec-
tion, parental investment), principles known to organize cognitive processes and
behavior in nonhuman animals. For example, despite the fact that humans likely
evolved in small kin-based groups and that much of our social interactions would
have been with kin of varying degrees, kinship has been an area largely neglected
within social cognition (Daly, Salmon, & Wilson, 1997). One area of research
that has overlooked the importance of kinship is social categorization and person
perception. Researchers interested in the dimensions into which we categorize
social targets have focused on the big three—sex, age, and race—yet ignored
kinship. Kinship, however, is an important social dimension organizing a variety
of diﬀerent individual and group-level behaviors. For example, tracking kin
relations would have enabled inferences such as who is likely to come to the aid
of another, who is not likely to be a competitor for a particular mate, or who is
likely to band together and form a collective action, among other things. Indeed,
recent empirical ﬁndings indicate that kinship, much like age and sex, is a
dimension implicitly encoded by our psychological architecture (Lieberman,
Oum, & Kurzban, 2006).
A second reason for the language divide is that social-cognitive psycholo-
gists have not fully adopted a computational theory of mind—a tool that has
proved powerful in other areas of cognitive research and, as I hope to demon-
strate, in evolutionary approaches to understanding human behavior. I certainly
do not believe that social cognition is the only ﬁeld in need of updating.
Evolutionary-minded researchers would do well to integrate the robust method-
ologies developed and debugged by social psychologists. This would allow
hypotheses derived from an evolutionary-computational framework to be better
tested and then more easily shared across academic boundaries (von Hippel,
Haselton, & Forgas, chapter 1, this volume). Evolutionary psychologists should
also take note of the phenomena social cognitive psychologists have documented
and ask what clues they provide about our species’ evolution. Nevertheless, I do
see the theoretical contributions ﬂowing primarily from evolutionary science. If
evolution can be used to understand the behavior of every other living organism,
surely it can be used to understand aspects of human cognition, social or
otherwise (Darwin, 1859/2003).
This chapter aims to address these two communication roadblocks separat-
ing the ﬁelds of evolutionary psychology and social cognition. Speciﬁcally, my
goal in this chapter is to (1) demonstrate how evolutionary principles can be used
to study human social cognition and behavior using categorization and decision-
making processes relating to inbreeding avoidance as an example and, in the
process, (2) describe what an evolutionary-computational approach to social
cognition might look like. In the next section, I brieﬂy discuss what is meant by
an evolutionary-computational framework and why it can be of value to the ﬁeld
of social cognition. Then, using my own research on inbreeding avoidance as
an example, I walk through the logic of what an evolutionary-computational
analysis entails. I start with a review of the evolutionary reasons (i.e., selection
180
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

pressures) why inbreeding avoidance mechanisms are hypothesized to exist. Fol-
lowing this, I outline the kinds of information processing procedures (i.e., com-
putational components such as decision rules and categorization processes)
required to achieve inbreeding avoidance. In particular, I focus on: (1) how we
categorize others according to kinship using cues available in the social world (see
Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume for a discussion of cues and
signals), and (2) the emotion of disgust and its role in motivating the sexual
avoidance of family members. Last, I share some recent empirical ﬁndings and
make suggestions for the continued investigation of kinship cues and the
programs regulating kin-directed behaviors.
WHAT IS A COMPUTATIONAL THEORY OF MIND AND WHY
SHOULD SOCIAL-COGNITIVE SCIENTISTS CARE?
A computational theory of mind (CTM) conceives of the mind as an informa-
tion processing system (Fodor, 1983). According to Barrett (2005), “CTM views
thought as computation: the use of algorithmic rules to systematically map
inputs, i.e., information instantiated in neurochemical patterns, onto outputs,
i.e. diﬀerent patterns of information that have been systematically transformed.
What makes the patterns in question information is that they ‘stand for’ some-
thing: that they, in turn, can be mapped onto something in the world or mind.
The mapping operations are computations” (p. 260). This view of the mind
allows for the generation of highly detailed models of the cognitive architecture
underlying a speciﬁc behavior (e.g., the cues/information taken as input, the
procedures that transform this information, and the outputs stored or behavioral
sequences activated; see Barrett & Kurzban (2006) for a thorough discussion of
modularity, a computational view of the mind, and evolution).
An evolutionary approach to the CTM is important because computational
systems are highly improbable orderings of matter and their existence requires
explanation. The only known causal force likely to generate such complex func-
tional design is natural selection (Tooby, Cosmides, & Barrett, 2003). Therefore,
an understanding of the selective forces that shaped our computational archi-
tecture (e.g., why we take certain aspects of the environment as input, why certain
outputs are generated over others, why given outputs eﬀect behavior in the
manner they do) is essential in the investigation of human social cognition.
Without an evolutionary toolbox, computational analyses and neurological
investigations can become haphazard and led astray by our folk intuitions, intu-
itions that might not map directly onto our cognitive architecture. Given their
interests in social perception and decision making, it is surprising that social-
cognitive psychologists have not taken advantage of these tools to discover the
nature of our evolved perceptual systems and the kinds of decision-making
processes evolution shaped to direct social behavior.
To help bridge the gap between evolutionary approaches to psychology and
181
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

the ﬁeld of social cognition, I use the topic of my own research, kin detection
and inbreeding avoidance in humans, as an example of how social perception
and decision making can be investigated using an evolutionary-computational
framework. I start with an analysis of the function of inbreeding avoidance, that
is, why evolution is hypothesized to have selected for information-processing
systems motivating the sexual avoidance of close relatives. Then, I outline
the computational architecture of what a well-designed system for inbreeding
avoidance might look like. First: Why is inbreeding bad?
SELECTION PRESSURES GUIDING THE EVOLUTION OF
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE MECHANISMS
There are sound biological reasons why psychological mechanisms designed to
avoid mating with a close genetic relative are expected to exist. Throughout our
species’ evolutionary history, the selection pressures posed by deleterious reces-
sive mutations (e.g., Bittles & Neel, 1994) and short-generation pathogens (e.g.,
Tooby, 1982) would have severely negatively impacted the health and viability of
oﬀspring of individuals who were close genetic relatives. As a result, individuals
who avoided mating with close genetic relatives and, instead, mated with some-
one who did not share an immediate common ancestor would have enjoyed
greater reproductive success. What follows is a brief discussion of each selection
pressure.
Deleterious Recessive Mutations
Because humans are a diploid species, it is possible for harmful mutations to
“hide out” in the genome. This is because a fully functional gene inherited from
one parent can mask the eﬀects of a dysfunctional and potentially harmful gene
inherited from the other. That is, when the functional gene is dominant an
individual can display a normal phenotype despite the presence of a recessive
deleterious version of the gene. Consequently, deleterious recessives can accumu-
late in the population until they reach relatively high frequencies. For example,
a given deleterious allele, if dominant, might exist in a population at a frequency
of 1 in 1,000,000. This same allele, if recessive, would approach a frequency of 1
in 1000—that is, 1000 times more frequent.
The negative consequences of inbreeding occur when the same recessive
damaged allele is supplied from both the mother and the father to the resulting
oﬀspring. In this case, the deleterious recessive genes are expressed decreasing the
health and viability of the individual. According to Bittles and Neel (1994) “all
of us are thought to carry in the heterozygous condition ‘several’ rare recessive
genes which, if rendered homozygous, would result in a signiﬁcant medical
handicap, ranging from severe defects of vision and hearing to disorders
incompatible with survival beyond childhood” (p. 17). The estimated number of
182
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

rare lethal genes in a genome is termed lethal equivalents (Cavalli-Sforza &
Bodmer, 1971; Crow & Kimura, 1970). Data from a number of studies suggest
that each of us possess, on average, somewhere between two (Bittles & Neel,
1994; Carter, 1967; May, 1979) to six (Kumar, Pai, & Swaminathan, 1967)
lethal equivalents: alleles that, if homozygous, would cause death before an indi-
vidual reached reproductive age (Burnham, 1975; Morton, Crow, & Muller,
1956). We are not dead many times over because at the great majority of these
loci, we are heterozygous, and the damaging gene is masked by an intact gene.
The eﬀects of inbreeding should be apparent: If two close genetic relatives
mate with one another, versus mating with an individual who doesn’t share an
immediate common ancestor, there is a greatly increased chance that the result-
ing oﬀspring will be homozygous for many deleterious recessives, leading to a
decreased chance of survival and reproduction. The more closely related the
parents, the greater the likelihood the oﬀspring will suﬀer a decrease in health
and viability, and the selection pressures become very intense whenever two
parents are siblings, or parent and child. For this reason, deleterious recessive
mutations posed a strong selection pressure against close-kin matings and would
have led to the evolution of mechanisms reducing the probability such matings
occurred.
Pathogens
A second selection pressure that would have led to the evolution of incest avoid-
ance mechanisms is pathogens (O’Brien, Roelke, & Marker, 1985; Tooby,
1982). The presence of disease-causing agents, such as viruses and bacteria, in
and around an organism’s body was a constant feature of our evolutionary past.
Due to their short generation time, pathogens have the ability to become ﬁnely
tuned to the biochemistry of their host. The better adapted a pathogen is to its
host’s microenvironment, the more eﬃcient it becomes at acquiring the
necessary resources, evading cells of the immune system, and replicating. As a
consequence, they can become extremely detrimental to the health of the host.
The recurrent presence of pathogens in our ancestral environments would
have created intense selection pressures for genetic diversity between individuals
in a population (Tooby, 1982). This is because the more genetically homogenous
the sequence of hosts encountered by a parasitic lineage, the faster an infection is
able to spread. Moreover, this selection pressure would have been especially
severe the longer-lived the host species—and, compared to the average garden-
variety bacterium, humans are very long lived. As a result it is hypothesized that
natural selection would have engineered a solution to maintain genetic diversity.
From an evolutionary point of view, the function of sexual reproduction is
to introduce genetic variability into oﬀspring sets, and to make organisms
genetically diﬀerent from their neighbors (Ebert & Hamilton 1996; Hamilton,
Axelrod, & Tanese, 1990; Tooby, 1982). During the process of reproduction,
pathogens are transmitted from parent to oﬀspring. The presence of a unique
183
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

internal environment in the oﬀspring renders pathogens that were well adapted
to a parental internal environment less suited to the oﬀspring’s novel environ-
ment. Mating with a close relative, then, as opposed to a nongenetically related
individual, maintains a more similar microenvironment for pathogens, a condi-
tion favoring the evolution and spread of more harmful pathogen strains. To
the extent that incestuous matings led to an increased genetic uniformity in
ancestral hunter-gatherer groups, then increased parasite load would have been
a second, signiﬁcant factor selecting against potentially fertile incestuous
matings.
In summary, given the selection pressures posed by deleterious recessive
mutations and short-generation pathogens, evolution is hypothesized to have
selected for reliably developing neural circuitry that was well-engineered for
decreasing the probability of close-kin matings. The question is, what would a
system designed for avoiding sexual contact (not necessarily all contact) with
close genetic relatives look like? This topic is taken up in the next section.
AN INFORMATION-PROCESSING VIEW OF INBREEDING
AVOIDANCE: WHAT WOULD A WELL-ENGINEERED SYSTEM
FOR INBREEDING AVOIDANCE LOOK LIKE?
A useful tool for exploring our cognitive architecture is to take the perspective of
an engineer and describe the kinds of information processing programs required
to perform a speciﬁc function. With respect to inbreeding avoidance, what kinds
of programs would be required? This question amounts to a description of the
computational procedures governing inbreeding avoidance in humans and at
ﬁrst glance at least two kinds of procedures would be needed: (1) procedures for
categorizing individuals in the social environment according to genetic related-
ness (i.e., kin detection), and (2) procedures that take as input information
regarding the relatedness of another individual and regulate sexual attraction/
avoidance accordingly (see Lieberman, Tooby, & Cosmides, 2003, for a
discussion of this model). These two procedures are discussed in turn.
Procedures for Categorizing Others by Genetic Relatedness
For an inbreeding avoidance system to be functional there must exist mechan-
isms for discovering who is likely to be a close genetic relative. Categorization
along the dimension of genetic relatedness requires the existence of cues that
correlated with relatedness over our species’ evolutionary history. There are a
number of possible cues kin detection systems might have been designed to take
as input. One potential source of information regarding kinship is linguistic and
cultural input (e.g., during development you are told who counts as a close
genetic relative and how to feel about them). However, these prove problematic
since: (1) Kin terms can be used across genetic boundaries blurring the
184
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

distinction between types of close genetic relatives and between kin and non-kin
(e.g., the term “aunt” or “brother” in the US), (2) there exist asymmetries in
relatedness and thus, individuals may not share common “interests” regarding,
for example, whom to help and when (e.g., a woman with children of diﬀerent
paternity is motivated to treat each one equally, whereas a particular child is more
likely to want to help their full sibling over their half sibling leading to conﬂicts
of interest between parent and oﬀspring; see Trivers, 1974), and (3) systems for
categorizing others according to genetic relatedness exist in many other animal
species and predate the evolution of language and culture (Hepper, 1991). For
these reasons, it is unlikely that evolution used linguistic information as anchor-
points for assessing relatedness. Though kin terms do correlate with relatedness
(Jones, 2004) and individuals do show greater altruism toward those who share
common names (Oates & Wilson, 2002), it is more likely that evolved systems
for categorizing kin pattern linguistic terms rather than vice versa.
Ecologically Valid Cues to Genetic Relatedness
Natural selection, rather than relying on linguistic and cultural input, is hypoth-
esized to have shaped kin categorization mechanisms to take advantage of cues
that reliably correlated with genetic relatedness in the ancestral past. To the extent
that diﬀerent cues reliably correlated with an individual being a particular type of
close genetic relative (e.g., mother, father, oﬀspring, or sibling), diﬀerent categor-
ization mechanisms are expected to exist. For example, because ancestrally a
female always gave birth to her own oﬀspring, she could have relied on the
process of birth and/or the visual and olfactory cues derived from a newborn to
reliably and accurately categorize that child as a close genetic relative (e.g., Porter,
Matochik, & Makin, 1983, 1984). However, due to the fact that males of our
species could not be 100% certain of their paternity, seeing one’s mate give birth
to an oﬀspring would not have solved the problem of assessing degree of related-
ness to that oﬀspring. Rather, for males, assessments of paternity might rely on
cues signaling the sexual ﬁdelity of their mate. Therefore, there may not be a
general kin detection mechanism that relies on the same set of information
for detecting all types of close genetic relatives. Instead, the advantages of kin
selection would accrue most strongly to individuals that possessed specialized
detection systems capable of narrowing in on the small subset of states that
correlated with an individual being a particular kind of kin. These states may not
be signals in the sense that they function to communicate information regarding
kinship (see Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume). Rather, they may
be stable social arrangements that came into existence due to adaptations serving
diﬀerent functions (e.g., parental care) or as by-products of adaptations that
can then be used as anchor-points for kinship categorization. The following
discussion focuses on the cues used to detect a particular class of kin, siblings.
185
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

Cues to Siblingship: Coresidence Duration and Exposure to Early
Maternal Care
What cues could evolution have used for categorizing an individual as a sibling?
The most likely candidates are cues that reliably carved siblings from, for
example, cousins and other individuals that would not have posed as great a
threat to reproductive success. Categorization errors would have been costly in
two diﬀerent ways (e.g., see Haselton & Buss, 2000). Using a cue that cast its net
too widely and included not only siblings but other, more distantly related kin
and non-kin would have excluded potential mating partners. On the other hand,
restricting sibling categorization to those meeting too stringent criteria may have
excluded actual genetic relatives leading to an increased chance of choosing a
genetic relative as a mate and producing oﬀspring that suﬀered from inbreeding
depression. Two cues that appear to walk this ﬁne line are childhood coresidence
duration and exposure to one’s mother caring for an infant.
Coresidence Duration.
In 1891, Edward Westermarck, a Finnish social sci-
entist, made the commonplace observation that siblings rarely ﬁnd one another
sexually attractive. He proposed that the early childhood association, a pattern
typical among siblings, serves as a cue to relatedness and leads to the develop-
ment of a sexual aversion later during adulthood (Westermarck, 1891/1921).
This has come to be known as the Westermarck Hypothesis. Speciﬁcally,
Westermarck stated,
Generally speaking, there is a remarkable absence of erotic feelings between per-
sons living very closely together from childhood. Nay more, in this, as in many
other cases, sexual indiﬀerence is combined with the positive feeling of aversion
when the act is thought of. . . . Persons who have been living together from child-
hood are as a rule near relatives. Hence their aversion to sexual relations with one
another displays itself in custom and law as a prohibition of intercourse between
near kin. (Westermarck, 1891/1921, p. 192)
The cue of coresidence duration is plausible considering our evolutionary his-
tory. The nutritional demands of breastfeeding along with the need for protec-
tion would have meant that children of the same mother were typically reared in
close proximity during early childhood. Also, when hunter-gatherer bands ﬁs-
sioned into smaller units (e.g., due to size or diﬃcult times), nuclear families
(including siblings) would have stayed together as a unit (Chagnon, 1992; Lee &
DeVore, 1968). This means that in ancestral environments, early childhood
would have oﬀered valuable information regarding the relatedness of individuals
in prolonged close association.
A number of researchers have tested the Westermarck Hypothesis (see, e.g.,
Bevc & Silverman, 1993, 2000; Fessler & Navarrete, 2004; Lieberman et al.,
2003; Shepher, 1971, 1983; Williams & Finkelhor, 1995; Wolf, 1995). For
some, the focus of research has been testing the Westermarck Hypothesis in
186
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

populations where genetically unrelated individuals were reared together as
siblings. Most notable are the anthropological reports on Israeli Kibbutzim
(Shepher, 1971, 1983; Spiro, 1958; Talmon, 1964) and on the Taiwanese minor
form of marriage (Wolf, 1995). In these two cases cultural institutions inadvert-
ently created a “natural experiment” where children who were not genetically
related to one another were reared together from very early childhood. As the
Westermarck Hypothesis predicts, lower rates of marriage and sexual interest
were found (for the peer groups in Israeli Kibbutzim; Shepher, 1983) as well as
greater rates of divorce and extramarital aﬀairs and lower rates of fertility (for
Taiwanese marriages where the bride was adopted into her husband’s family as a
child; Wolf, 1995).
These cross-cultural studies provide support for the hypothesis that coresi-
dence duration serves as a cue to relatedness. Empirical investigations that have
gone beyond sociological measures and sought responses from actual living indi-
viduals have also found that longer, uninterrupted periods of childhood coresi-
dence are associated with greater disgust at sexual behavior (Lieberman, Tooby,
& Cosmides, in press), a reduced probability of engaging in sexual behavior
(Bevc & Silverman, 1993, 2000), and greater moral opposition to sibling incest
(Fessler & Naverrete, 2004; Lieberman et al., 2003). However, coresidence dur-
ation may not be the best cue available for detecting siblings and, further, may
not be used as cue for detecting other categories of genetic relatives (e.g., see
Williams & Finkelhor, 1995).
Exposure to Early Maternal Care.
Though coresidence would have done a
good job carving the social world into siblings versus other kin and non-kin,
there may have been an even better cue. The stable association between mother
and newborn that exists due to the demands of breastfeeding and care provides a
reliable cue from which inferences regarding relatedness may be generated. See-
ing one’s mother (i.e., the female from whom one breastfed) breastfeeding
another infant would have meant, under ancestral conditions, that the infant in
question was at least a half sibling (how cues to shared paternity are assessed is a
good question and currently under exploration). Moreover, this cue would have
been valid independent of one’s age. That is, no matter whether one is 3, 13, or
23, seeing one’s mother breastfeeding another child is a good cue to relatedness.
However, this information would only have been accessible to older siblings. For
younger siblings, the arrow of time prevents them from seeing their older sibling
breastfed. Thus, for younger siblings, the best cue available for assessing related-
ness might very well be coresidence duration. This suggests diﬀerent decision
rules might be used to assess siblingship. Indeed, in a recent study by Lieberman
et al. (in press), coresidence duration appears to be used as a cue to kinship only
when information regarding maternal care during infancy (e.g., breastfeeding
information) is absent.
The above discussion shows how an evolutionary analysis can help narrow
the sets of cues or information evolution is likely to have used to solve the
187
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

recurring problem of inbreeding depression. Coresidence duration and exposure
to early maternal care are two cues, among others, that are hypothesized to
govern the categorization of individuals in the social environment into kin versus
non-kin. However, this analysis represents the front end of the system. To eﬀect-
ively avoid inbreeding, kin detection systems need to hook into decision-making
procedures regulating sexual motivation. This is the topic of the next section.
Procedures for Regulating Sexual Avoidance: The Emotion of Disgust
In addition to procedures for categorizing individuals in the social environment
by genetic relatedness, procedures for regulating sexual attraction/avoidance are
required to prevent inbreeding. What would a well-designed system for motivat-
ing sexual avoidance look like? Such a system should have a number of proper-
ties. For example, it should: (i) be eﬃcient at motivating sexual avoidance; (ii)
associate sexual aversions with particular individuals in the social environment
based on cues to kinship; and (iii) be able to output diﬀerent intensities to match
the diﬀerent probabilities individuals have of being a close genetic relative and
the diﬀerent types of kin that exist (e.g., cousins and siblings). Each property is
discussed in turn.
The Motivation of Sexual Avoidance.
Programs that were simply indif-
ferent to sexual relations with close genetic relatives would not have solved the
problem of inbreeding avoidance because family members can have strong
sexual desires and motivations to mate that would not be strongly deterred by
a disinterested disposition (e.g., I can be sexually disinterested in a chair, but
the chair, unlike an animate being, does not have intentions of its own and
thus is unlikely to pursue me sexually). The situation of family members
ﬁnding one another sexual attractive may arise for at least two reasons: (1)
Cues to kinship may not be similar for each individual within a dyad (e.g., the
cues fathers use to assess paternity may be diﬀerent from the cues a child uses
to assess who their father is) leading to the possibility that only one person in
a dyad has categorized the other as kin and developed a sexual aversion, and
(2) depending on the pathogen load of the environment and available mates,
incest may have paid as a mating strategy but asymmetrically so for the sexes
(e.g., incest might have been beneﬁcial under certain circumstances to the
father but still prohibitively costly to the daughter; see Haig, 1999; Tooby,
1977). For these reasons, a program that actively motivated sexual avoidance
would have out-competed one that was simply disinterested in sex with family
members.
The Association to Speciﬁc Individuals.
Kinship is a dimension that needs to
be discovered anew for each individual generation after generation. For this
reason, the program regulating sexual avoidance must be ﬂexible and easily
assigned based on the cues of kinship. That is, a sexual avoidance program
188
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

should accept as input representations of any individual displaying cues to
kinship, information that cannot be speciﬁed in advance.
Variation in Intensity.
The intensity of sexual avoidance should be a function
of genetic relatedness and the consequences of inbreeding. For example, the
intensity of sexual avoidance toward a cousin should be less than the intensity
toward a sibling and the intensity of avoidance toward a half sibling should be
less than the intensity toward a full sibling. Therefore, rather than having a
simple on/oﬀ switch, a well-designed program motivating sexual avoidance
should output a graded response based on estimates of kinship.
Is there a program that meets the above criteria and appears well suited to
perform the function of inbreeding avoidance? Yes—disgust. This is hardly a
new idea as Westermarck himself identiﬁed disgust as the response to incest (as
would any thought experiment involving sex with a parent, for example). Fur-
ther, Westermarck identiﬁes disgust as governing not only incest but other costly
sexual acts.
The objection will perhaps be made that the aversion to sexual intercourse between
persons living very closely together from early youth is too complicated a mental
phenomenon to be a true instinct, acquired through spontaneous variations inten-
siﬁed by natural selection. But there are instincts just as complicated as this feeling,
which, in fact, only implies that disgust is associated with idea of sexual intercourse
between persons who have lived in a long-continued, intimate relationship from a
period of life at which the action of desire is naturally out of the question. This
association is not matter of course, and certainly cannot be explained by the mere
liking for novelty. It has all the characteristics of a real, powerful instinct, and bears
evidently a close resemblance to the aversion to sexual intercourse with individuals
belonging to another species. (Westermarck, 1891/1921, p. 353)
It has been hypothesized that the original function of disgust is to avoid the oral
incorporation of various harmful substances (see, for example, Ekman & David-
son, 1994; Izard, 1993; Rozin & Fallon, 1987). Perhaps more speciﬁcally, the
emotion of disgust evolved to inhibit the ingestion and contact with substances
associated with disease-causing agents (e.g., feces, dead organisms, and spoiled
food; Curtis & Biran, 2001; see also Schaller, chapter 18, this volume). Disgust
could have been co-opted during human evolution to motivate the withdrawal
from sexual relations with a close genetic relative (as well as other sexual partners
imposing a cost on one’s reproductive success). The characteristic trait of disgust
to motivate avoidance means that it can be mobilized to deter an unsolicited
advance by a close family member. Moreover, it can also function to counteract
any sexual desire that may arise due to the fact that one’s close genetic relatives
may be an attractive member of the opposite sex and possess traits (including
accessibility) that feed into sexual attraction systems. Furthermore, disgust varies
in intensity and can be associated with novel stimuli (see Haidt & Bjorklund, in
press) making it a good solution for an inbreeding avoidance system. Last,
189
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

disgust may have been relatively easy to coopt for this new function of sexual
avoidance since it is already associated with sexual behavior: Disgust needs to be
down-regulated before intimate contact (i.e., contact exposing one to the patho-
gens of another) can occur (Angyal, 1941; as an aside, the ratcheting down of
disgust may explain the occurrence of some interesting sexual fetishes). If, instead
of down-regulating disgust, a mutation caused its up-regulation in response to
sexual behavior with speciﬁc individuals, inbreeding avoidance would have
gained a foothold and slowly, over evolutionary time, become reﬁned into a
well-functioning inbreeding avoidance system.
This section illustrated that inbreeding avoidance requires both categoriza-
tion procedures that assess whether an individual has a probability of being a
close genetic relative, and decision rules regulating sexual motivations. The emo-
tion we term disgust is hypothesized to describe, in part, the procedures that take
kinship information as input and adjust sexual motivations according to the
costs (and beneﬁts) such behavior had in ancestral environments. Disgust, then,
is a type of cognitive (i.e., information processing) program (see Oum &
Lieberman, in press, for a detailed discussion of emotions as cognitive programs).
The model of inbreeding avoidance described above is a simpliﬁed version of
what has been recently developed (see Lieberman et al., in press). But even this
simple model has greatly aided empirical investigations of inbreeding avoidance
systems in humans.
EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION OF SYSTEMS FOR
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE
The model of a human inbreeding avoidance system proposed herein provides
an empirical framework within which information hypothesized to serve as
cues to relatedness can be tested. The magnitude of the sexual aversion (or
attraction) associated with a particular individual should be a function of the
exposure to cues correlating with genetic relatedness in our ancestral past. So,
for example, longer durations of childhood coresidence should translate into
greater sexual aversions toward a sibling. It is therefore possible to reverse
engineer the kinds of cues used to detect each type of close genetic relative.
This can be done by quantitatively matching individual variation in oppos-
ition to incest (i.e., sexual disgust) to individual variation in parameters that
may have served as cues to relatedness (e.g., coresidence or maternal perinatal
association). Recently, researchers have employed this method to investigate
the nature of the cues our mind uses to identify siblings (e.g., DeBruine,
2002; Fessler & Navarrete, 2004; Lieberman, 2003; Lieberman et al., 2003; in
press).
Converging lines of evidence for the cues used to categorize individuals as
diﬀerent types of kin can be found by exploring the domain of kin-directed
altruism (see Lieberman et al., in press). Kin selection, like inbreeding avoidance,
190
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

requires procedures for categorizing kin. To the extent that the same procedures
for categorizing kin are used in both domains, cues signaling relatedness are
hypothesized to regulate these disparate systems in parallel. Therefore, strong
evidence that a particular cue is used to detect siblings would be if variations
in this cue predict both sexual aversions and altruistic motivations toward
that sibling. Using this logic, Lieberman et al. (in press) have found that co-
residence duration and exposure to one’s mother caring for a newborn are two
cues to estimate siblingship. That is, both cues were found to regulate sexual
opposition to sibling incest and separately, motivations to help a sibling. Other
cues also might be used to assess siblingship including physical resemblance
(e.g., DeBruine, 2002; Park & Schaller, 2005) and olfactory cues derived from
the catabolism of elements of our immune system (e.g., scents derived from the
major histocompatibility complex; Wedekind, Seebeck, Bettens, & Paepke,
1995).
In addition to the exploration of kinship cues, more research is needed
on the structure of the emotion programs regulating sexual avoidance (for a
discussion on evolution and emotions see Tooby & Cosmides, 1990, 2000).
For example, does sexual disgust activate the same set of physiological and
psychological features (e.g., components of the immune system and memory for
substances ingested) as pathogen-related disgust? Are these systems neurally dis-
sociable? Are there neurological conditions that impair disgust in one domain
but not the other (e.g., work on Huntington’s disease suggests that individuals
are impaired in their ability to detect facial expressions of disgust [Sprengelmeyer
et al., 1996]—whether sexual disgust is impaired to the same extent as pathogen-
related disgust remains an open question). Just as an engineering perspective can
provide a guide-rail for exploring the organization of systems for detecting kin, it
can also aid the investigation of emotion programs that evolved to serve a
particular function.
CONCLUSION
The ﬁelds of evolutionary psychology and social cognition share the similar goal
of understanding the cognitive processes (e.g., categorization and decision-
making procedures) regulating social behavior. Greater progress can be made in
both disciplines by employing an evolutionary theoretical framework—a frame-
work successfully used to investigate the cognitive processes and behaviors in
nonhuman animals. For example, kin selection and parental investment theories
provide sturdy guide-rails for generating hypotheses about our cognitive archi-
tecture. However, as Daly et al. (1997) have noted, evolutionary concepts such as
kinship have been surprisingly absent from the social psychological literature.
Yet, as this chapter has demonstrated, kinship is a strong organizing force regulat-
ing sexual behavior as well as altruism, two large areas of research in social
psychology.
191
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

Greater progress can also be made by adopting a computational view of the
mind. As this chapter has demonstrated, the generation of a detailed model of
what a well-designed system for avoiding inbreeding might look like has led to a
research program for investigating the cues mediating kin detection and the
programs regulating sexual motivations and kin-directed altruism. The same
logic that led to the generation of this model can be used to investigate other
areas of interest in social cognition and social psychology in general. The success
of such investigations will be wide-spread. For example, not only will evolution-
ary-computational models in social cognition allow for more careful investiga-
tions into the neurological correlates of social behavior, they will also provide a
stronger backbone for other ﬁelds, such as clinical and school psychology, that
look to social cognition for models of human cognition.
As scientists, psychologists share the goal of uncovering how the mind
works. Therefore, we would do well to utilize the strengths each discipline in the
behavioral and natural sciences has to oﬀer. This would help clear the lines of
communication between subdisciplines and result in a more uniﬁed science of
the mind.
REFERENCES
Angyal, A. (1941). Disgust and related aver-
sions. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psych-
ology, 36, 393–412.
Barrett, H. C. (2005). Enzymatic computation
and 
cognitive 
modularity. 
Mind 
and
Language, 20, 259–287.
Barrett, H. C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modu-
larity in cognition: Framing the debate.
Psychological Review, 113, 628–647.
Bevc, I., & Silverman, I. (1993). Early proxim-
ity and intimacy between siblings and
incestuous behavior: A test of the Wester-
marck theory. Ethology and Sociobiology, 14,
171–181.
Bevc, I., & Silverman, I. (2000). Early separ-
ation and sibling incest: A test of the revised
Westermarck theory. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 21, 151–161.
Bittles, A. H., & Neel, J. V. (1994). The costs of
human inbreeding and their implications for
variation at the DNA level. Nature Genetics,
8, 117–121.
Burnham, J. T. (1975). Incest avoidance and
social evolution. Mankind, 10, 93–98.
Carter, C. O. (1967). Risk of oﬀspring of
incest. Lancet, 1, 436.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Bodmer, W. F. (1971).
The genetics of human populations. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Chagnon, N. A. (1992). Yanomamo: The last
days of Eden. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace
& Company.
Crow, J. F., & Kimura, M. (1970). An introduc-
tion to population genetics theory. New York:
Harper & Row.
Curtis, V., & Biran, A. (2001). Dirt, disgust,
and disease: Is hygiene in our genes?
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 44,
17–31.
Daly, M., Salmon, C., & Wilson, M. I. (1997)
Kinship: The conceptual hole in psycho-
logical studies of social cognition and close
relationships. In J. A. Simpson & D. Kenrick
(Eds.), Evolutionary social psychology (pp.
265–296). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Darwin, C. (2003). The origin of species. New
York: 
Signet 
Classics. 
(Original 
work
published 1859)
DeBruine, L. M. (2002). Facial resemblance
enhances trust. Proceedings: Biological Sci-
ences, 269, 1307–1312.
Ebert, D., & Hamilton, W. D. (1996). Sex
against virulence: The coevolution of
192
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

parasitic diseases. Trends in Ecology and Evolu-
tion, 11, 79–82.
Ekman, P., & Davidson, R. J. (1994). The
nature of emotion: Fundamental questions.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Fessler, D. M. T., & Navarrete, C. D. (2004).
Third-party attitudes toward sibling incest:
Evidence for Westermarck’s hypotheses. Evo-
lution and Human Behavior, 25, 277–294.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haidt, J., & Bjorklund, F. (in press). Social
intuitionists answer six questions about
moral psychology. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong
(Ed.), Moral psychology.
Haig, D. (1999). Asymmetric relations: Internal
conﬂicts and the horror of incest. Evolution
and Human Behavior, 20, 83–98.
Hamilton, W. D., Axelrod, R., & Tanese, R.
(1990). Sexual reproduction as an adaptation
to resist parasites. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 87, 3566–3573.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error
management theory: A new perspective on
biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 81–91.
Hepper, P. G. (1991). Kin recognition. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Izard, C. E. (1993). Organizational and motiv-
ational functions of discrete emotions. In M.
Lewis & J. M. Haviland (Eds.), Handbook of
emotions (pp. 631–665). New York: Guilford
Press.
Jones, D. (2004). The universal psychology of
kinship: Evidence from language. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8, 211–215.
Kumar, S., Pai, R. A., & Swaminathan, M. S.
(1967). Consanguineous marriages and the
genetic load due to lethal genes in Kerala.
Annals of Human Genetics, 31, 141–145.
Lee, R. B., & DeVore, I. (1968). Man the
hunter. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Lieberman, D. (2003). Mapping the cognitive
architecture of systems for kin detection and
inbreeding 
avoidance: 
The 
Westermarck
hypothesis and the development of sexual
aversions between siblings. UMI Digital
Dissertation, AAT 3103441.
Lieberman, D., Oum, R. E., & Kurzban, R.
(2006). Does the family of fundamental
social categories include kinship? Manuscript
under review.
Lieberman, D., Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L.
(2003). Does morality have a biological basis?
An empirical test of the factors governing
moral sentiments relating to incest. Proceed-
ings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences,
270, 819–826.
Lieberman, D., Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (in
press). The architecture of human kin detec-
tion. Nature.
May, R. M. (1979). When to be incestuous.
Nature, 279, 192–194.
Morton, N. E., Crow, J. F., & Muller, H. J.
(1956). An estimate of mutational damage in
man from data on consanguineous marriages.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
42, 855–863.
Oates, K., & Wilson M. (2002). Nominal kin-
ship cues facilitate altruism. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London, Series B, 269,
105–109.
O’Brien, S. J., Roelke, M. E., & Marker, L.
(1985). Genetic evidence for species vulner-
ability in the cheetah. Science, 227, 1428–
1434.
Oum, R. E., & Lieberman, D. (in press). Emo-
tion as cognition: An information processing
view of the mind. In K. D. Vohs, R. F.
Baumeister, & G. Loewenstein (Eds.), Do
emotions help or hurt decision making? Perspec-
tives from psychology and economics. New
York: Russell Sage.
Park, J. H., & Schaller, M. (2005). Does atti-
tude similarity serve as a heuristic cue for kin-
ship? Evidence of an implicit cognitive
association. Evolution and Human Behavior,
26, 158–170.
Porter, R. H., Matochik, J. A., & Makin, J. W.
(1983). Evidence for phenotype matching
in spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus). Animal
Behavior, 31, 978–984.
Porter, R. H., Matochik, J. A., & Makin, J. W.
(1984). The role of familiarity in the
development of social preferences in spiny
mice. Behavioral Proceedings, 9, 241–254.
Rozin, P., & Fallon, A. E. (1987). A perspective
on disgust. Psychological Review, 94, 23–41.
Shepher, J. (1971). Mate selection among sec-
ond-generation kibbutz adolescents: Incest
avoidance and negative imprinting. Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 1(1), 293–307.
Shepher, J. (1983). Incest: A biosocial view. New
York: Academic Press.
Spiro, M. E. (1958). Children of the Kibbutz.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Press.
193
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE

Sprengelmeyer, R., Young, A. W., Calder, A. J.,
Karnat, A., Lange, H., Hömberg, V., et al.
(1996). Loss of disgust: Perception of faces
and emotion in Huntington’s disease. Brain,
119, 1647–1665.
Talmon, G. Y. (1964). Mate selection in collect-
ive settlements. American Sociological Review,
29, 408–491.
Tooby, J. (1977). Factors governing optimal
inbreeding. Proceedings of the Institute for
Evolutionary Studies, 77(1), 1–54.
Tooby, J. (1982). Pathogens, polymorphism,
and the evolution of sex. Journal of Theor-
etical Biology, 97, 557–576.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past
explains the present: Emotional adaptations
and the structure of ancestral environment.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 11, 375–424.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2000). Evolutionary
psychology and the emotions. In M. Lewis &
J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of
emotions (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford
Press.
Tooby, J., Cosmides, L., & Barrett, H. C.
(2003). The second law of thermodynamics
is the ﬁrst law of psychology: Evolutionary
developmental psychology and the theory of
tandem, coordinated inheritances: Comment
on Lickliter and Honeycutt. Psychological
Bulletin, 129, 858–865.
Trivers, R. E. (1974). Parent–oﬀspring conﬂict.
American Zoology, 14, 249–264.
Wedekind, C., Seebeck, T., Bettens, F., &
Paepke, A. (1995). MHC-dependent mate
preferences in humans. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London: Biological Sciences,
260, 245–249.
Westermarck, E. A. (1921). The history of
human marriage. London: Macmillan. (Ori-
ginal work published 1891)
Williams, L. M., & Finkelhor, D. (1995).
Paternal caregiving and incest: Test of a
biosocial 
model. 
American 
Journal 
of
Orthopsychiatry, 65, 101–113.
Wolf, A. P. (1995) Sexual attraction and child-
hood association: A Chinese brief for Edward
Westermarck. 
Stanford, 
CA: 
Stanford
University Press.
194
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

12
The Self in Intimate
Relationships
A Social Evolutionary Account
GARTH J. O. FLETCHER
NICKOLA C. OVERALL
A Conceptual and Methodological Backdrop
The Role of the Self in Mate Selection
The Self Never Sleeps
Conclusions
I
ntimate sexual relationships are typically composed of two people—the self
and one other individual. In human relationships both men and women
choose their mates, as one would expect given that both men and women
make substantial investments in long-term relationships (consistent with Triv-
er’s, 1972, parental investment theory). However, in humans mate selection
never sleeps and can only be fully understood in relation to mate deselection.
Individuals continue to make decisions and evaluations about their partners and
relationships, up to and including the decision to abandon speciﬁc relationships
(and perhaps start again).
Evolutionary psychologists and social psychologists deal with both the
psychology of mate selection and the psychological processes involved in
ongoing relationships. However, evolutionary psychologists concentrate on the
ﬁrst aspect of relationship development (mate selection), whereas social psychol-
ogists concentrate on the latter domain (the development and maintenance of
intimate relationships). This chapter concerns the role of the self both in terms of
initial mate selection choices and in the context of ongoing intimate relation-
ships. However, the role of the self (vis-à-vis the partner) is more conceptually
and methodologically complex than it appears at ﬁrst sight. Thus, the ﬁrst sec-
tion of the chapter completes some preliminary theoretical and methodological
195

work as a springboard for the chapter. Next, we deal with the role of the self in
mate selection, and consider various explanations that have been proposed for
the phenomenon of assortative mating. In the subsequent section we consider
several ways in which the self continues to play a role in ongoing relationships.
Finally, we oﬀer some conclusions and discuss some central themes in the
chapter.
A CONCEPTUAL AND METHODOLOGICAL BACKDROP
It is important to make some key distinctions (that are sometimes blurred) when
referring to the self and partner in intimate relationships. Let’s consider Mary
and Bill, who are involved in an ongoing sexual relationship. The self and partner
are represented cognitively in the brains (or minds) of Mary and Bill, as lay
theories, cognitions, and beliefs. Social psychologists have carried out much
research using designs in which couples answer questions about one another in
terms of their personality, attractiveness, and so forth. Sometimes they also
measure behavior or obtain outside objective ratings of each partner (for
example, on their facial attractiveness). Measuring these classes of variables can
answer some intriguing questions.
Imagine Mary believes she is only moderately attractive (she thinks she is
too fat), but that Bill is very sensitive and wonderfully kind. Bill, in turn, believes
that Mary is very attractive (she has the perfect body) but that he is inclined to be
insensitive and only moderately kind. The example is not merely apocryphal, but
reﬂects a partner-serving positively-biased pattern repeatedly found in couple-
based research (see Fletcher, Simpson, & Boyes, 2006, for a review). Note that
using the self-judgments as benchmarks in such analyses is a conservative meas-
ure of partner bias, given the evidence that such self-judgments themselves are
likely to be on the rose-tinted side (see Boyes & Fletcher, in press).
Collecting this kind of data (illustrated by Mary and Bill’s thoughts above)
enables diﬀerent kinds of questions to be answered. First, one can measure the
extent to which individuals project or assume that self is similar to partner on the
same traits. Second, the researcher can assess the extent to which couples are
similar using either judgments of self or objective measures (assortative mating
evidence). Third, the researcher can assess accuracy by correlating partner judg-
ments with the relevant self-judgments (or objective measures of the trait). And,
fourth, individual or couple diﬀerences in similarity, projection, positive bias,
and accuracy can be used to predict mate choice, relationship stability, and
satisfaction.
Finally, it is important to note that bias and accuracy can happily coexist. To
take an example adapted from Fletcher (2002), Mary rates herself (accurately) as
very warm, moderately attractive, but as lacking ambition. Bill, her partner, rates
Mary as incredibly warm, very attractive, and moderately ambitious. Bill is, thus,
positively biased (he is consistently more positive than Mary’s self-perceptions)
196
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

but quite accurate (he is tracking her self-perceived qualities accurately across the
three traits, albeit in a positively-inﬂated fashion). Indeed, researchers have often
reported evidence consistent with this example. For example, Sprecher (1999)
reported that those individuals who had ﬂat trajectories of satisfaction over time
tended to recall at a later time that they had steadily improved (a clear example of
positive bias). Nevertheless, the sample overall quite accurately retrospectively
tracked and reported relative increases or decreases in love and satisfaction over
past periods in their relationships.
With this brief analysis in mind, we move into dealing with the role of the
self in mate selection contexts.
THE ROLE OF THE SELF IN MATE SELECTION
A widely replicated ﬁnding is that partners in sexual relationships (dating or
married) tend to be similar across many characteristics. However, the degree of
similarity varies depending on the trait in question. Similarity (assortative) cor-
relations are moderate to high for many traits (from .30 to .80) including age,
height, attractiveness, values and attitudes, smoking behavior, intelligence, and
so forth (see, for example, Luo & Klohnen, 2005; Watson et al., 2004). How-
ever, similarity on personality traits like kindness and conscientiousness is much
lower (from zero to .20) (see, for example, Zentner, 2005). There is no evidence
that such ﬁndings are simply a product of sub-groups of individuals who happen
to be similar (e.g., university students) tending to meet, work, and live near
each other (Watson et al., 2004). Evolutionary and social psychologists have
suggested several substantive explanations, all involving self-perceptions, which
we consider in turn.
Going for the Best Deal
The ﬁrst, and most parsimonious explanation, is that individuals simply attempt
to get the best deal on oﬀer in the mating market (see Todd, chapter 9, this
volume). In a graduate class the ﬁrst author (Garth Fletcher) teaches on the
science of intimate relationships, he starts the year’s work with a demonstration
developed by Ellis and Kelley (1999). The 25 or so students in the class are
randomly given cards with numbers on them, ranging from 1 to 10, that repre-
sent their assigned ﬁctional mating value. These cards are held to their foreheads
in such a way that others can see them, but remain out of sight for the card-
bearer (so that each individual does not know his or her own mate value). The
aim of the game is to get together with the individual with the highest mate value
possible (biological sex is ignored). Once a mate selection is made, the initiator
indicates his selection by attempting to shake hands. If the individual
approached spurns the handshake, then the initiator must look elsewhere. As the
class members mill about, individuals pair oﬀ until a small and disconsolate
197
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS

group is left standing in the middle of the room. Inevitably, this group represents
the dregs of the mating market, but they too ﬁnally pair oﬀ in a crestfallen sort of
way.
The results typically reveal that the mating values of the paired-up partners
are highly correlated (about .70 or so). This demonstration suggests that merely
utilizing the heuristic—get the best deal possible—is enough to produce assorta-
tive mating in situations where both parties exercise choice. This is, of course, a
very stripped down and closed version of real-life settings. In the real-world
individuals believe that similarity is important for successful relationships (Has-
sebrauck & Fehr, 2002) and seem to prefer individuals they believe are similar to
themselves (Klohnen & Luo, 2003). Moreover, it seems likely that from the
onset of adolescence onwards individuals receive copious feedback (rejections
and dating successes), along with a ﬂood of benchmark images and information
in the media, that enable them to accurately assess their own mate value. The
development of self-perceptions of mate value should save time and eﬀort, and
reduce humiliating rejections to the minimum by encouraging the development
of realistic standards (see Todd, chapter 9, this volume).
Some preliminary support for this thesis comes from the class exercise pre-
viously described. One procedure sometimes added is that when a couple is
formed, indicated by a handshake, then each individual ﬁrst guesses his or her
own mate value number, before taking a peek at the assigned value. Correlations
of around .70 between the predicted self-mating values and the actual numbers
assigned are produced. Even the limited information gained from their observa-
tions of others, and their own experiences, in this class exercise allow individuals
to rapidly and accurately assess their own mate value. More substantial evidence
for this thesis will be cited in due course.
Seeking Similarity
The fact that people appear to prefer mates who are similar to themselves has
led to the suggestion by Buss (1999) that such a heuristic helps solve adaptive
problems of compatibility and promotes bonding, relationship satisfaction, and
stability, working oﬀ the assumption that higher similarity in, for example, per-
sonality traits, will produce these kinds of payoﬀs. There is certainly a host of
evidence that people who believe they are more similar to their partners in terms
of their personalities, abilities, attitudes, and so forth, are happier and more
committed to their partners (e.g., Acitelli, Douvan, & Veroﬀ, 1993; Hammond
& Fletcher, 1991). However, although consistent with conventional wisdom, the
research evidence that more similarity confers such beneﬁts is decidedly mixed,
with many null ﬁndings being published (Acitelli. Kenny, & Weiner, 2001;
Robins, Caspi, & Moﬃt, 2000; Watson et al., 2004). The fact is that similarity is
not all it’s cracked up to be, which brings us back to the explanation that
assortative mating eﬀects are by-products of going for the best deal in town. But,
what are people looking for in the mating market? In the next section we discuss
198
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

the standards people use in selecting and evaluating mates, before considering
when and how the self comes back into the picture.
Relationship and Partner Standards
Gangestad and Simpson’s (2000) Strategic Pluralism Model of human mating is
based around three major postulates. First, the model argues that selection
should have generated a small and ﬂexible set of mating strategies and tactics that
should be enacted conditionally according to cues in the social and physical
environment. Second, without gainsaying the importance of gender diﬀerences
in mate selection, its main focus is on explaining the considerable within-sex
variability of sexual attitudes and behavior. Third, the model suggests that
human mating strategies and tactics are a function of two kinds of goals—the
search for the kind of mate who happens to provide good genes and the search
for a mate who would be a good mate and provider (also see Simpson &
LaPaglia, chapter 10, this volume).
Evidence has been steadily building for this model (see Simpson &
LaPaglia, chapter 10, this volume), but of course, it has its limitations. For
example, like most evolutionary models, its central concern is with mate selec-
tion and not what happens after eyes meet across a crowded room or boy meets
girl on the Internet. Nevertheless, social psychologists will immediately recognize
that some key features of the model (principally its focus on the interaction
between goals or tactics and cues in the social environment, and its concern with
within-sex variability) provide an admirable platform on which to develop a
social psychological theory dealing with the proximal-level processes involved in
both mate selection and ongoing relationships.
In this vein, then, Fletcher and Simpson developed a model that is centrally
concerned with the standards that people utilize within the context of sexual
relationships (termed the Ideal Standards Model) (see Simpson, Fletcher, &
Campbell, 2001, for a review). This model was built on ﬁve main interlocking
hypotheses. First, individuals should possess chronically accessible mate and rela-
tionship ideal standards that predate speciﬁc relationships and embody consider-
able within-sex variability. Second, the dimensions on which partners will be
evaluated will be derived from the two main goals speciﬁed by Gangestad and
Simpson (2000), and will not simply represent global mate evaluations. Third,
relationship and partner judgments should be driven by the perceived consist-
ency between ideal standards and accompanying perceptions. Fourth, the func-
tions of the resultant perceived discrepancies revolve around helping individuals
to assess and meet three main goals—relationship evaluation, explanation, and
regulation (in both initial mate selection and ongoing relationship contexts).
Fifth, the levels of accuracy and/or bias in relevant judgments are likely to be
motivated by two independent overarching goals: the drive for accuracy and
truth versus the desire to maintain positively-biased judgments in ongoing
relationships.
199
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS

The broad tenants of the Ideal Standards Model have been increasingly
supported by research evidence. In the ﬁrst published study, Fletcher, Simpson,
Thomas, and Giles (1999) showed in a series of factor analytic studies (both
exploratory and conﬁrmatory) that there exist three major dimensions that indi-
viduals consider when evaluating both prospective and current romantic part-
ners: warmth/trustworthiness, attractiveness/vitality, and status/resources. In
addition, there is substantial within-sex variability in the importance attached to
each trait or dimension. Table 12.1 shows the items for each scale derived from
this work that we have since used successfully in further research. These ﬁndings
are consistent with the argument from the Strategic Pluralism Model that evalu-
ating mates could have promoted the reproductive success of our ancestors via
two distinct routes—either good investment and/or good genes. The possession
of warmth and trustworthiness signals the motivation to invest in the mate and
resulting children, the possession of status and resources (or the drive to obtain
them) signals that the individual has the means to provide good investment, and
the possession of attractiveness and vitality is often held to indicate good genes,
signaling higher fertility and perhaps better long-term health, although this latter
claim remains controversial (for recent reviews see Rhodes, 2006, and Gangestad
& Scheyd, 2005).
In addition, there is good evidence across several studies (both cross-
sectional and longitudinal) that greater perceived consistency between standards
and partner perceptions (for both men and women) is related to (1) higher levels
of relationship satisfaction (Fletcher et al., 1999; Fletcher, Simpson, & Thomas,
2000), (2) lower rates of relationship dissolution (Fletcher et al., 2000), and (3)
weaker desires and attempts to regulate or change the partner (e.g., make them
more attractive or ambitious) (Overall, Fletcher, & Simpson, 2006). Moreover,
in all of these studies, the links between standards/perceptions consistency and
evaluation or regulation operate within each dimension independently; they are
not simply artifacts of halo eﬀects or global evaluations of the relationship.
Finally, to add some further predictive validity, using the scales shown in Table
12.1, we have consistently found the same sex diﬀerences reported in other
research; namely, women give greater importance than men (in long-term rela-
tionships) to warmth/trustworthiness and status/resources, and less importance
to attractiveness/vitality (see, for example, Fletcher, Tither, O’Loughlin, Friesen,
& Overall, 2004).
Table 12.1 Partner Ideal Standard Scales (from Fletcher et al., 1999)
Ideal Dimensions
Short Scale Items
Partner Warmth/Trustworthiness
understanding, supportive, considerate, kind, a good listener, sensitive
Partner Attractiveness/Vitality
adventurous, nice body, outgoing, sexy, attractive, good lover
Partner Status/Resources
good job, ﬁnancially secure, nice house or apartment, successful,
dresses well
200
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

What is the proximal origin of individual within-sex diﬀerences in the
importance attached to mate standards? The answer suggested by our prior
discussion is that the prime determinant is likely to be self-perceptions of mate
value. However, the research and theorizing on the Ideal Standards Model
suggests that such self-perceptions are not likely to operate simply in a global
fashion, but according to the dimensions already found to exist for evaluating
potential or current mates; namely, warmth/trustworthiness, attractiveness/
vitality, and status/resources. Provisional evidence is consistent with this thesis.
Fletcher and Boyes (2004) had 200 individuals rate their own mate value using
the scales developed by Fletcher et al. (1999) to assess the importance attached to
qualities in prospective mates (see Table 12.1). A conﬁrmatory factor analysis
revealed the same tripartite structure for self-mate evaluations as found in prior
research for potential partners. Moreover, correlating the two sets of ratings
showed the expected pattern of discriminant and convergent correlations (see
Table 12.2). More positive self-evaluations on given dimensions were related to
higher importance attached to ideal standards on the same dimensions, but
typically not for the oﬀ-diagonal correlations.
Although this evidence is suggestive it is hardly conclusive, given that the
scales used to assess self-perceived mate value were derived from research speciﬁc-
ally designed to assess individual diﬀerences in the extent to which people attach
importance to diﬀerent characteristics of potential or actual partners. What
comes out of a factor analysis depends on what items go in, it could be reason-
ably argued. Thus, Fletcher, Boyes, Overall, and Kavanagh (2006) recently com-
pleted a series of studies designed to assess self-perceptions of mate value starting
from scratch. In the ﬁrst study, samples of university students and older indi-
viduals (both men and women) wrote down their strengths and weaknesses in
terms of what they could oﬀer in ﬁnding either a desirable mate or maintaining a
successful intimate relationship. These items were then coded, sticking close to
the wording used by respondents, to produce 60 individual items. These items
were then turned into a scale, which could be rated in terms of how accurately
each item describes the self. The next two studies involved diﬀerent samples of
Table 12.2 Convergent/Discriminant Correlations Among Self-Rated Mate Value and
Partner Ideal Standards (from Fletcher, 2002)
Partner Ideal Standards
Self-rated Mate Value
Warmth/
Trustworthiness
Attractiveness/Vitality
Status/Resources
Warmth/Trustworthiness
.53*
.26*
.11*
Attractiveness/Vitality
.04
.54*
.23*
Status/Resources
.10
.29*
.37*
* p < .05, n = 200.
201
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS

200 individuals. Initially using an exploratory factor analysis followed by a con-
ﬁrmatory factor analysis, the same factorial structure was produced across sam-
ples, with primarily the same items loading on each factor. Moreover, this factor
structure replicated across both gender and relationship status.
Table 12.3 shows the three best loading items for each factor, their factor
loadings, and the suggested names for each factor. At face value, ﬁve out of the six
self-perception categories seem to overlap with the scales previously derived to
assess the perceived merits of traits in potential or actual partners in relation-
ships: caring, open, sexy, outgoing, and status. The odd one out is secure. To
establish the case empirically, and to further assess the convergent and discrimin-
ant validity of the scale, we administered the self-perception of mate value scale
to a sample of 200 individuals (100 men and 100 women) along with scales
measuring the importance of ideals standards in partners, self-esteem, the Big
Five personality ratings, attachment, and relationship quality (completed by a
subsample of 100 currently involved in sexual relationships).
The results were very close to what was expected. Of the 66 correlations, all
14 of the predicted convergent correlations were signiﬁcant, ranging from .20 to
.64. Of the remaining 52 discriminant correlations, only ﬁve exceeded .20 and
none exceeded .23. Most importantly (controlling for self-esteem), (1) superior
self-perceptions of caring and openness were associated with more weight given
to warmth/trustworthiness in a potential partner, (2) higher self-perceptions of
being sexy and outgoing were associated with more importance attached to
attractiveness/vitality, and (3) more positive perceptions of status in the self were
associated with more weight given to status/resources. The correlations with the
Big Five were also revealing, showing that the Big Five caught three of the six
mate self-perception categories (caring, outgoing, and stable) but missed three
distinctive categories of mate evaluation (open, status, and sexy). Not
surprisingly, global self-esteem was positively and signiﬁcantly related to all six
self-perception categories. However, when we regressed self-esteem on all six self-
perception categories, only two self-perception categories remained signiﬁcant
positive predictors (for both men and women): sexy and stable (βs from .30 to
.41).
Table 12.3 Factors and Loadings for Self-Perceptions of Mate Value (n = 200)
(from Fletcher, Boyes, Overall, & Kavanagh, 2006)
Dimensions
Items (and Factor Loadings)
Caring
caring (.85), kind (.84), considerate (.81)
Open
talks openly (.79), open (.79), ability to commit (.64)
Sexy
sexy (.87), attractive (.84), nice body (.77)
Outgoing
outgoing (.80), good social skills (.77), funny (.64)
Status
good job (.80), wealthy (.72), ambitious (.54)
Stable
emotionally stable (.87), secure (.84), good self esteem (.75)
202
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

To summarize, these results revealed independent evidence that self-
perceptions of mate value largely mirror the three important categories
previously found for evaluating potential or actual relationship partners, and that
self-perceptions of mate value may undergird the way on which individuals set
their standards for evaluating their mates. In addition, the measurement of self-
perceptions of mate value does not seem to be redundant with existing measures
of the self developed by personality and social psychologists, but includes speciﬁc
categories suggested by the Ideal Standards Model and its evolutionary cousins.
Caveats and Objections
Thus far, we have argued that (mirroring the research on ideal standards) self-
perceptions of mate value operate along independent dimensions. However, this
is somewhat misleading. In all the CFA analyses mentioned, the results actually
show that the separate categories (for both partner ideal standards and self-
perceptions of mate value) are quasi-independent and that the best-ﬁtting
models include second-order factors representing the possession of more global
demanding standards or more positive perceptions of mate value respectively.
These results suggest that the relevant social cognitive modules are stored in both
a simple global form and in terms of more diﬀerentiated structures. Depending
on the demands of the context, and the importance and nature of the decision,
either cognitive model may be accessed and used. For example, rating a potential
date may invoke a quick initial judgment based on the overall impression of the
individual, whereas deciding whether to marry an individual will be likely to
involve a more considered evaluation, analyzing each domain in turn.
Finally, consistent again with Gangestad and Simpson’s (2000) model, there
is no doubt that people frequently engage in trade-oﬀs, taking into account
many factors including their own mate value and that of their potential partner.
However, yet another prediction of the Ideal Standards Model is that such trade-
oﬀs will typically occur across the three dimensions. Li and his colleagues have
argued, with research support, that some features are likely to be necessities and
others may be luxuries (Li, Bailey, Kenrick, & Linsenmeier, 2002). For example,
in long-term relationships they propose that for men partner attractiveness is a
necessity, whereas for women status/resources is a necessity. For both genders, in
contrast, warmth/trustworthiness is a necessity. We do not ﬁnd their arguments
wholly convincing. In Fletcher et al. (2004) we manipulated the extent to which
the familiar three mate selection categories were present in potential mates across
both short-term and long-term relationship contexts. The results suggested that
such choices were the product of a complex interaction between gender, context,
and the traits being traded oﬀ. For example, in long-term relationships most
individuals chose a warm, homely person over a cold, attractive alternative,
whereas for a short-term ﬂing the trade-oﬀs went in the opposite direction.
However signiﬁcant gender diﬀerences were also apparent in both short-term
and long-term settings, with women more consistently choosing a warm, kind
203
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS

individual over a sexy, attractive person. In short, although this pattern of ﬁnd-
ings was consistent with Li et al.’s argument, “necessities” were commonly traded
oﬀ depending on the context.
Two crucial empirical questions remain that potentially sink virtually all
evolutionary and social psychological models of mate selection, including those
presented here; namely, are individuals’ judgments of their own (relevant)
traits and those of potential mates accurate? One cannot assume in advance that
the answers will be in the aﬃrmative. As previously noted, for example, indi-
viduals believe that more similarity between partners produces more happiness,
and happier couples believe they have more similar personalities. However, the
research evidence indicates individuals are largely mistaken on both counts.
Most relevant research has been conducted in relation to two out of the
three pivotal mate selection categories: characteristics such as warmth/trust-
worthiness, extraversion, and attractiveness. The evidence is clear-cut. First, after
minimal observation or interaction, ratings of strangers in terms of both physical
attractiveness and extraversion are reasonably accurate (see, for example,
Albright, Kenny, & Malloy, 1988; Langlois et al., 2000). These conclusions are
based on ﬁndings that examine the extent to which diﬀerent people achieve
consensus about a target and the extent to which self-perceptions of the target are
consistent with either some objective benchmark or the views of observers.
To take one particularly compelling research example, high in ecological
validity, Marcus and Miller (2003) had participants rate their own physical
attractiveness and that of other men and women who were sitting together in
small groups. There was good consensus on the level of attractiveness for speciﬁc
targets, and targets’ self-perceptions generally matched well with how they were
perceived (correlations ranging from .28 to .53). Moreover, individuals’ meta-
perceptions of how they were perceived generally by others were accurate (correl-
ations ranging from .26 to .49). As the authors conclude, “we know who is
handsome or pretty, and those who are attractive know it as well” (p. 344). From
an evolutionary standpoint, one would also expect men to produce particularly
accurate perceptions of women’s attractiveness and women should be on the
money when it comes to judging how they are rated by men. Both predictions
were conﬁrmed. The highest level of consensus was reached by diﬀerent men
rating the same women (41% of the target variance), and the most accurate
meta-awareness was achieved by women rating how they were generally per-
ceived by men (r = .49).
In contrast to physical attractiveness and extraversion, the accuracy in rating
strangers in terms of traits, such as warmth and kindness, is typically abysmal,
but does climb to quite respectable levels as a function of increased closeness and
knowledge of the target (Funder & Colvin, 1988; Letzring, Wells, & Funder,
2006; Thomas, 1999). For example, Thomas (1999) had individuals observe
men and women currently involved in sexual relationships having a 5-minute
discussion of capital punishment, and then rate each partner on the Big Five
traits. Self–other agreement was low for all ﬁve categories when strangers carried
204
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

out the task (from zero to .20; mean r = .10), considerably higher when friends
carried out the same task (from .20 to .45, mean r = .34), and better still when
partners rated each other (from .29 to .48, mean r = .41). Consensus across raters
told the same story, with good agreement across partners and friends when rating
the same targets (from .20 to .42, mean r = .34) and weak consensus across
strangers and either partners and friends (zero to .21; mean r = .09).
The diﬀerence between the accuracy in rating personality traits like emo-
tional stability or conscientiousness versus more immediately observable qualities
(such as attractiveness), when levels of acquaintanceship are low, may explain
why the assortative correlations for the latter traits are much higher than the
former traits (as described previously). People may seek similarity on personality
traits, but their personality judgments are generally initially inaccurate. By the
time individuals get to know their partners better, the inexorable processes of
attraction, falling in love, and bonding (driven by neuropeptides such as oxy-
tocin) are too far advanced to claw back, and the actual similarity between the
partners may become largely irrelevant.
The pivotal and reassuring conclusion to be drawn from this work is that,
although the evidence is partial, both individuals’ self-judgments and their judg-
ments of potential or existing partners seem to be reasonably accurate for both
men and women, speciﬁcally for traits that are pivotal in mate selection contexts.
THE SELF NEVER SLEEPS
Having discussed the pivotal role of the self in mate selection contexts, we move
to brieﬂy consider its fate and fortune in ongoing relationships. An examination
of the research which has directly compared the impact of self to partner judg-
ments gives initial pause to an overenthusiastic endorsement of the role of the self
in ongoing relationships. In brief, the standard research ﬁnding reveals that
partner judgments play a much more powerful role in predicting relationship
satisfaction than self-judgments (e.g., Fletcher & Fincham, 1991; Fletcher &
Thomas, 2000; Friesen, Fletcher, & Overall, 2005; Overall et al., 2006; Sümer
& Cozzarelli, 2004).
Even so, it is clear that the self remains directing traﬃc behind the relation-
ship scenes after relationships are in full swing, and is itself buﬀeted by the
powerful psychological forces at work in intimate relationships. As already
described, the perceived consistency between ideal standards and perceptions is a
fundamental driver of important evaluations and decisions in the development
of intimate relationships, up to and including decisions to leave. And self-
judgments continue to inﬂuence the importance attached to speciﬁc standards.
However, self-judgments are particularly vulnerable to change in intimate rela-
tionships, readily becoming the dependent variable instead of the independent
variable. A recent study by Overall et al. (2006) is a good illustration of this
process.
205
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS

Overall et al. (2006) reported (in two studies) that greater regulation
attempts of the partner were associated with lower consistency between ideal
standards and perceptions, which in turn were related to lower relationship
satisfaction. A longitudinal cross-lagged study conﬁrmed that lower perceived
consistency between standards and perceptions of the partner motivated more
regulation over time, and that more regulation also produced lower levels of
standard/perception consistency (and associated relationship satisfaction) over
time. The latter ﬁnding may seem paradoxical—the aim of regulation is presum-
ably to make relationships better and lower the gap between perceptions and
expectations, yet more regulation seems to make things worse.
In further analyses of their data, Overall et al. (2006) discovered that the key
to these latter ﬁndings was related to what regulation attempts communicate to
the partner. As this (and other research) has suggested, a powerful determinant of
relationship satisfaction is how individuals believe they are viewed by their part-
ners. If Bill is unhappy with Mary’s level of attractiveness, and suggests she lose
weight and join a gym, then, according to the ﬁndings from Overall et al., Mary
is likely to do one or more of the following: (1) develop more negative percep-
tions of her own attractiveness, (2) realize that Bill does not fulsomely accept her
the way she is, and (3) start regulating herself on this dimension. Mary’s relation-
ship satisfaction is also likely to become more negative. Interestingly, consistent
with evolutionary models of mate selection, women tended to regulate their own
levels of attractiveness speciﬁcally in response to their male partners’ regulatory
attempts, whereas men reported trying to change themselves principally in
response to their female partners’ attempts to improve their ambition and status.
The fact that regulation eﬀorts tend to commonly backﬁre, and people
become even unhappier with the relationship, raises questions about the
functions of the relationship monitoring and regulation system. From a distal
evolutionary approach the functions of an adaptation or behavior are deﬁned
in terms of the costs and beneﬁts vis-à-vis reproductive ﬁtness, and do not
necessarily equate to increased happiness.
For example, one reason why humans may have evolved the relationship
monitoring and regulation system was to loosen the powerful bonds of love and
attachment when standards were not being met, thus enabling individuals to
look elsewhere for a new partner and relationship. Alternately, perhaps a princi-
pal function of our ancestral relationship monitoring and regulation system was
indeed to improve relationships, but it fails because the contemporary social and
cultural environment has changed so that it no longer matches the ancestral
environment within which the relevant adaptations developed. For example,
perhaps contemporary Western cultures, with thousands of accessible partners
apparently a mouse-click away, barrages of self-help books and TV shows about
relationships and how to make them better, constant images of attractive alter-
natives, and people apparently having great sex everywhere, have heightened
people’s expectations and standards to the extent that the relationship monitor-
ing and regulation system has been put into overdrive. Thus, the monitoring
206
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

and regulation system has become relatively dysfunctional in the modern
environment.
A critic may argue that the regulation system in intimate relationships is a
by-product of other adaptations, such as the need and means to regulate kin or
perhaps even the physical environment. This is certainly a possibility, but we
would argue that intimate relationships comprise a key fulcrum around which
powerful evolutionary forces and adaptations are likely to be marshaled. Having
the ability and motivation to play the piano or read a book are certainly by-
products of adaptations that were not “designed” by evolution in furtherance of
these particular activities. Possessing the ability and motivation to monitor and
regulate relationships or partners, in contrast, are likely to be evolutionary
adaptations.
CONCLUSIONS
The mate-selection decisions people make seem to be based (in part) on realistic
assessments of their own mate value, and, thus, guide who they are likely to be
able to attract or who to realistically settle for in a long-term (or even short-term)
relationship. Hence, in our view, the major driver of assortative mating correl-
ations is probably the motivation for individuals to obtain the best deal going,
rather than the desire to ﬁnd a similar soul-mate. However, humans have unusual
mating patterns compared to other species, continuing to monitor and regulate
their sexual relationships (often ending and replacing them) over long periods of
time (see Fletcher, 2002). Accordingly, the role of the self does not cease after
mates have been selected but continues throughout the course of speciﬁc
relationships.
We trust this chapter shows at least a glimpse of the theoretical and research
gains that are obtainable when social cognitive and evolutionary approaches join
forces to detail and explain the workings of the intimate relationship mind, and
its links to interpersonal behavior.
REFERENCES
Acitelli, L. K., Douvan, E., & Veroﬀ, J. (1993).
Perceptions of conﬂict in the ﬁrst year of
marriage: How important are similarity and
understanding? Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 10, 5–19.
Acitelli, L. K., Kenny, D. A., & Weiner, D.
(2001). The importance of the similarity and
understanding of partners’ marital ideals to
relationship satisfaction. Personal Relation-
ships, 8, 167–186.
Albright, L., Kenny, D., & Malloy, T. (1988).
Consensus in personality judgments at zero
acquaintance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 55, 387–395.
Boyes, A. D., & Fletcher, G. J. O. (in press).
Meta-awareness of bias in intimate relation-
ships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology.
Buss, D. M. (1999). Evolutionary psychology:
The new science of the mind. Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
Ellis, B. J., & Kelley, H. H. (1999). The pairing
207
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS

game: A classroom demonstration of the
matching phenomenon. Teaching of Psych-
ology, 26, 118–121.
Fletcher, G. J. O. (2002). The new science of
intimate relationships. Malden, MA: Black-
well Publishers.
Fletcher, G. J. O., & Boyes. A. D. (2004). Bias
and accuracy in perceptions of mate value.
Paper presented at the Society for Personality
and Social Psychology, Austin, TX.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Boyes, A. D., Overall, N. C.,
& Kavanagh, P. (2006). Self-perceptions of
mate value. Unpublished manuscript. Uni-
versity of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
Fletcher, G. J. O., & Fincham, F. D. (1991).
Attributional processes in close relationships.
In G. J. O. Fletcher & F. D. Fincham (Eds.),
Cognition in close relationships (pp. 6–34).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Simpson, J. A., & Boyes, A.
D. (2006). Accuracy and bias in romantic
relationships: An evolutionary and social psy-
chological analysis. In M. Schaller, J. A.
Simpson, & D. T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution
and social psychology (pp. 189–210). New
York: Psychology Press.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Simpson, J. A., & Thomas,
G. (2000). Ideals, perceptions, and evalu-
ations in early relationship development.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
79, 933–940.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Simpson, J. A., Thomas, G.,
& Giles, T. (1999). Ideals in intimate rela-
tionships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 76, 72–89.
Fletcher, G. J. O., Tither, J. M., O’Loughlin,
C., Friesen, M. D., & Overall, N. C. (2004).
Warm and homely or cold and beautiful? Sex
diﬀerences in trading oﬀ traits in mate selec-
tion. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 30, 659–672.
Fletcher, G. J. O., & Thomas, G. (2000).
Behavior and on-line cognition in marital
interaction. Personal Relationships, 7, 111–
130.
Friesen, M. D., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Overall,
N. C. (2005). A dyadic assessment of for-
giveness in intimate relationships. Personal
Relationships, 12, 61–77.
Funder, D. C., & Colvin, C. R. (1988). Friends
and strangers: Acquaintanceship, agreement,
and the accuracy of personality judgment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
55, 149–158.
Gangestad, S. W., & Scheyd, G. J. (2005). The
evolution of human physical attractiveness.
Annual 
Review 
of 
Anthropology, 
34,
523–548.
Gangestad, S. W., & Simpson, J. A. (2000).
The evolution of human mating: Trade-oﬀs
and strategic pluralism. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 23, 573–644.
Hammond, J. R., & Fletcher, G. J. O. (1991).
Attachment styles and relationship satisfac-
tion in the development of close relationships.
New Zealand Journal of Psychology, 20, 56–62.
Hassebrauck, M., & Fehr, B. (2002). Dimen-
sions of relationship quality. Personal Rela-
tionships, 9, 253–270.
Klohnen, E. C., & Luo, S. (2003). Inter-
personal attraction and personality: What is
attractive—self similarity, ideal similarity,
complementarity, or attachment security?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
85, 709–722.
Langlois, J. H., Kalakanis, L., Rubenstein, A. J.,
Larson, A., Hallam, M., & Smoot, M.
(2000). Maxims or myths of beauty? A meta-
analytic and theoretical review. Psychological
Bulletin, 126, 390–423.
Letzring, T. D., Wells, S. A., & Funder, D. C.
(2006). Information quantity and quality
aﬀect the realistic accuracy of personality
judgment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 111–123.
Li, N. P., Bailey, J. M., Kenrick, D. T., & Lin-
senmeier, J. A. W. (2002). The necessities
and luxuries of mate preferences: Testing the
tradeoﬀs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 82, 947–955.
Luo, S., & Klohnen, E. C. (2005). Assortative
mating and marital quality in newlyweds: A
couple-centered approach. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 88, 304–326.
Marcus, D. K., & Miller R. S. (2003). Sex
diﬀerences 
in 
judgments 
of 
physical
attractiveness: A social relations analysis. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29,
325–335.
Overall, N, C., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Simpson J.
A. (2006). Regulation processes in intimate
relationships: The role of ideal standards.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
91, 662–685.
208
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Rhodes, G. (2006). The evolutionary psych-
ology of facial beauty. Annual Review of
Psychology, 57, 199–226.
Robins, R. W., Caspi, A., & Moﬃtt, T. E.
(2000). Two personalities, one relationship:
Both partners’ personality traits shape the
quality of their relationship. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 251–
259.
Simpson, J. A., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Campbell,
L. (2001). The structure and function of
ideal standards in close relationships. In G. J.
O. Fletcher & M. Clark (Eds.), Blackwell
handbook of social psychology: Interpersonal
processes 
(pp. 
86–106). 
Oxford, 
UK:
Blackwell.
Sprecher, S. (1999). “I love you more today
than yesterday”: Romantic partners’ percep-
tions of changes in love and related aﬀect
over time. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 76, 46–53.
Sümer, N., & Cozzarelli, C. (2004). The
impact of adult attachment on partner and
self-attributions and relationship quality.
Personal Relationships, 11, 355–371.
Thomas, G. (1999). Accuracy in empathic and
trait judgments: The quest for the good judge,
good target, good trait, and good relationship.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Uni-
versity of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
Trivers, R. (1972). Parental investment and sex-
ual selection. In B. Campbell (Ed.), Sexual
selection and the descent of man 1871–1971
(pp. 136–179). Chicago: Aldine.
Watson, D., Klohnen, E. C., Casillas, A.,
Simms, E. N., Haig, J., & Berry, D. S.
(2004). Match makers and deal breakers:
Analyses of assortative mating in newlywed
couples. Journal of Personality, 72, 1029–
1068.
Zentner, M. R. (2005). Ideal mate personality
concepts and compatibility in close relation-
ships: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 242–
256.
209
THE SELF IN INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS


PARTIV
THE EVOLUTIONARY
PSYCHOLOGY OF
INTERPERSONAL
PROCESSES


13
A Social Cognitive
Evolutionary Approach
to Jealousy
The Automatic Evaluation of One’s
Romantic Rivals
ABRAHAM P. BUUNK
KARLIJN MASSAR
PIETERNEL DIJKSTRA
The Importance of Jealousy
Inventory of Relevant Rival Characteristics
Experimentally Manipulating Rival Characteristics
Body Build
Sexual Versus Emotional Inﬁdelity
Conclusion
THE IMPORTANCE OF JEALOUSY
T
he deﬁning feature of a jealousy-evoking situation is that it involves a
rival who is interested in one’s partner, or in whom one’s partner is
interested. Individuals do not become jealous when their mate ends the
relationship for other reasons, such as when the partner is killed in an automobile
accident, moves to a far away city for work (Mathes, Adams, & Davies, 1985), or
ends the relationship without getting involved with someone else (Parrott,
1991). An illustration of the centrality of a rival for the occurrence of jealousy
was provided by Hupka, Otto, Tarabrina, and Reidl (1993) who found that
individuals in three cultures (Russia, the US, and Germany) agreed that the
213

words “rival” and “sex” were associated strongly with jealousy, but not with
emotions such as anger, envy, and fear. In addition, jealousy should not be
viewed as a basic or speciﬁc emotion (cf. Ellsworth, chapter 5, this volume), but
rather as an evaluative-motivational complex aimed at assessing the threat that a
rival may impose to one’s reproductive interests (e.g., Buunk & Dijkstra, 2000;
Parrott, 1991).
Among human males, the inclination to assess the potential threat of a rival
has a long evolutionary history that is rooted in ﬁghts over the access to females,
behaviors that are found in many species (cf. Barash & Lipton, 2001; Buss,
1994; Buunk, 1986). Moreover, although in many primates males direct special
attention to oﬀspring likely to be their own (Hrdy, 1981), human males invest
much more heavily in their oﬀspring than males of other primate species, and
will therefore be particularly alert to rivals who interfere in the relationship. As
females, more than males, value dominance and status in a mate, supposedly
because these features are related to a man’s ability to provide protection and
resources, a basic assumption in our research is that jealousy in human males is
likely to be inﬂuenced particularly by the rival’s dominance and status. While
intrasexual competition among human males has a long evolutionary history,
intrasexual competition among human females seems an evolutionarily more
novel phenomenon that arose with the advent of pair bonding, due to which
females began to compete over males who would be willing and able to invest
and to protect (cf. Campbell, 2002; see also Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10,
this volume). In the case of a rival vying for her mate’s attention, a major threat
to a woman is that she may have to share her partner’s resources with another
woman, and, even more threatening, that her partner will direct all of his support
to another partner. Because men, more than women, value physical attractive-
ness in a partner, supposedly because this signals women’s reproductive value, in
our research we assumed that women will have evolved a tendency to compete
with other females in this domain, and jealousy in women is likely to be driven
particularly by a rival’s physical attractiveness (e.g., Buss, 1989; Gangestad &
Thornhill, chapter 3, this volume).
INVENTORY OF RELEVANT RIVAL CHARACTERISTICS
Our research program began with examining what individuals spontaneously
mention when asked about those characteristics that would most strongly evoke
feelings of jealousy (Dijkstra & Buunk, 2002). To evoke these characteristics, we
presented participants with the following scenario:
[Y]ou are at a party with your girlfriend and you are talking with some of your
friends. You notice your girlfriend across the room talking to a man you do not
know. You can see from his face that he is very interested in your girlfriend. He is
listening closely to what she is saying and you notice that he casually touches her
214
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

hand. You notice that he is ﬂirting with her. After a minute, your girlfriend also
begins to act ﬂirtatiously. You can tell from the way she is looking at him that she
likes him a great deal. They seem completely absorbed in each other.
With regard to the person their partner was ﬂirting with, participants were
asked what kind of person would make them feel most jealous if this situation
would happen to them. In total, participants mentioned over 600 rival character-
istics. Men more often than women mentioned a rival’s physical dominance,
“smoothness,” and social status as characteristics that would make them jealous.
In contrast, women more often than men mentioned a rival’s sexy appearance
and slenderness as characteristics that would make them jealous. On the basis of
these spontaneously mentioned rival characteristics, a questionnaire was con-
structed that included 56 characteristics. The same scenario as in the previous
study was used with the additional question “When my partner and a diﬀerent
man would ﬂirt with each other, I would feel particularly jealous when that other
man. . . .” In a study among 240 college students a factor analysis on these
characteristics showed ﬁve factors: social dominance, physical attractiveness,
seductive behavior, physical dominance, and social status (Dijkstra & Buunk,
2002). It may be noted that the ﬁrst, second, and ﬁfth factors are in part similar
to those Fletcher and Overall (chapter 12, this volume) found for self-perceived
mate value (i.e., open and outgoing, sexy, and status), underlining the assumption
that rivals are primarily evaluated in terms of their mate value.
Consistent with our expectations, in the student sample men experienced
more jealousy than women when their rival was more socially or physically
dominant or had a higher status than themselves, whereas women experienced
more jealousy than men when their rival was more physically attractive. Men and
women did not diﬀer in the extent to which the seductive behavior of their rival
evoked feelings of jealousy. Next, in a community sample of 144 individuals,
these ﬁndings were replicated, demonstrating that the sex diﬀerences were not
restricted to college students. In the same vein, studies in other cultures (United
States and Korea) have found that women reported more distress to a rival who
surpassed them on facial and bodily attractiveness, whereas men reported more
distress to a rival who had better ﬁnancial and job prospects (Buss, Shackelford,
Choe, Dijkstra, & Buunk, 2000). Finally, we like to mention that, underlining
the importance of social comparison in jealousy, in the community sample, social
comparison orientation (i.e., the dispositional tendency to engage in social com-
parisons; Buunk & Gibbons, 2005) was positively correlated with jealousy in
response to a rival’s social dominance, social status, and physical attractiveness,
and, in men, also with jealousy in response to a rival’s physical dominance
(Dijkstra & Buunk, 2002).
215
JEALOUSY

EXPERIMENTALLY MANIPULATING RIVAL CHARACTERISTICS
As a next step in our research program, we conducted a series of studies in which
these rival characteristics were experimentally manipulated. Only a handful of
studies on jealousy have employed a similar method (e.g., Nadler & Dotan,
1992; Shettel-Neuber, Bryson, & Young, 1978). In our experiments, participants
were presented with the scenario mentioned previously in which the participant’s
current (real or imagined) partner was ﬂirting with an opposite-sex individual.
Next, participants received one of four proﬁles of the individual ﬂirting with
their partner, consisting of a picture and a personality description. The picture
showed an individual of either high or low physical attractiveness, and the per-
sonality description depicted someone who was either high or low in dominance
in terms of characteristics such as being a good judge of character, taking initia-
tive, inﬂuencing people, and livening things up at parties. These are precisely
those characteristics that are, according to van Vugt and Kurzban (chapter 14,
this volume), typical of individuals who emerge as leaders in groups. After they
had read the scenario and the proﬁle, participants were asked how they would
respond to this situation. A ﬁrst study among college students showed that the
hypothesized sex diﬀerence clearly emerged: jealousy in men was in particular
inﬂuenced by the rival’s dominance (especially when the rival was unattractive),
whereas jealousy in women was in particular inﬂuenced by the rival’s physical
attractiveness (Dijkstra & Buunk, 1998).
Nature of the Rival Evaluation Mechanism
Although these last ﬁndings are in line with evolutionary predictions, they may
reﬂect at least two diﬀerent types of adaptive mechanisms. One possibility is that
there are sex-speciﬁc rival oriented mechanisms; that is, as a result of intrasexual
competition, males and females have evolved to be sensitive to sex-speciﬁc rival
characteristics. A second possibility is that males and females possess a general
partner-oriented mechanism, i.e., a sensitivity to what one’s partner and one’s
potential partners may ﬁnd attractive in a mate. A homosexual sample oﬀers the
opportunity to examine the validity of both interpretations, because the two
perspectives lead to diﬀerent predictions. A sex-speciﬁc rival oriented mechanism
would be expected on the basis of the reasoning put forward by Symons (1979)
that homosexuals have the same set of sexual mental mechanisms as do hetero-
sexuals, except for the sex of their sex mates. The notion of modularity (Kenrick,
Keefe, Bryan, Barr, & Brown, 1995) elaborates on Symons’s assumption by
stating that diﬀerent psychological processes involved in reproduction, such as
sexual orientation, mate preferences, and jealousy, are controlled by a number of
independent mechanisms. Therefore, a change in sexual orientation would not
necessarily alter the rival characteristics that evoke jealousy, suggesting that the
same sex diﬀerences in rival characteristics—social dominance being more salient
among men and physical attractiveness being more salient among women—
216
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

would emerge in homosexuals as in heterosexuals. In contrast, a general partner-
oriented mechanism would imply that such sex diﬀerences would depend on
whether individuals are heterosexual or homosexual. That is, diﬀerences between
gay men and lesbian women in the rival characteristics that evoke jealousy would
reﬂect diﬀerences in the characteristics that gay men and lesbian women, respect-
ively, value in a mate. A number of studies have found that gay men’s mate
preferences are in general rather similar to those of heterosexual men (e.g., Bailey,
Gaulin, Agyei, & Gladue, 1994; Kenrick et al., 1995). That is, like heterosexual
men, gay men show little interest in a potential partner’s status but show high
interest in a potential partner’s physical attractiveness (see also Symons, 1979).
However, lesbian women seem to have, compared with heterosexual women,
a more masculine pattern of mating psychology. For instance, compared to
heterosexual women, lesbian women seem more interested in younger partners
(Jankowiak, Hill, & Donovan, 1992), and less concerned with their partner’s
status (Bailey et al., 1994). Given these mate preferences among homosexual
men and women, the existence of a general partner-oriented mechanism would
be supported when jealousy in homosexual men would be evoked more by a
rival’s physical attractiveness than a rival’s dominance, whereas jealousy in les-
bian women would be evoked more by both a rival’s physical attractiveness and a
rival’s dominance.
Using the same paradigm as in the Dijkstra and Buunk (1998) study, a
study showed clear support for the existence of a sex-speciﬁc rival mechanism.
That is, lesbian women, but not gay men, reported more jealousy when they
were exposed to a physically attractive rival as compared to a physically
unattractive rival. Gay men, but not lesbian women, reported more jealousy
when they were exposed to a rival high in dominance as compared to a rival low
in dominance, and, like among heterosexual men, especially when exposed to a
physically unattractive rival. Thus, these ﬁndings strongly suggest that males and
females possess an evolved mechanism through which they respond more or
less automatically to those rival characteristics that have been important in
intrasexual competition in our evolutionary past.
Subliminal Perception of Rival Characteristics
One potential problem with both the correlational and experimental studies we
described here is demand characteristics. That is, participants may have had
theories about research hypotheses and may have responded accordingly. In
order to circumvent this problem, we have conducted a new series of experi-
ments in which we presented participants subliminally with rival characteristics.
Given the importance of rival evaluation for reproductive success, it seems plaus-
ible that sensitivity to rival characteristics has evolved in such a way that these
characteristics may be perceived even outside of conscious awareness. The social
cognition literature suggests that unobtrusively presenting participants with cer-
tain cues may nonconsciously inﬂuence their evaluations of others (e.g., Wegner
217
JEALOUSY

& Bargh, 1998; see also Kenrick, Delton, Robertson, Vaughn Becker, &
Neuberg, chapter 4, this volume, for examples of social cognitive approaches of
mating and related phenomena). Directly relevant to the present issue, recent
research suggests that people may make social comparisons with these targets
that are presented subliminally either in the form of photographs of well-known
people (e.g., Stapel & Blanton, 2004), or in the form of names of well-known
people (e.g., Mussweiler, Ruter, & Epstude, 2004). Applying such ﬁndings to
rival evaluation, we hypothesized that the mere exposure to rival characteristics
through subliminal priming would induce comparison between oneself and the
rival literally in the blink of an eye, and that the degree of jealousy would be
based on the outcome of this comparison.
In the ﬁrst study using subliminal priming (Massar & Buunk, 2005a),
participants were asked to indicate as quickly as possible whether two neutral
words presented on the screen were related to each other by pressing one of two
colored keys on the keyboard. The words in this “association task” had no
relation to rival characteristics, but were neutral words like “house” and “garden”.
In between these two neutral words, participants were subliminally exposed to
rival characteristics. To ensure that participants would relate the rival character-
istics to another individual, and not to themselves, each word was preceded by an
implicitly presented personal pronoun, “he” for the men and “she” for the
women. The rival characteristics were those that were in a preliminary study
most often mentioned when men and women were asked to generate words
relating to attractiveness and social dominance. For the attractiveness condition,
these were “pretty,” “beautiful,” “slender,” and “sexy” (these are imperfect transla-
tions of Dutch words that apply equally to men and women), and for the social
dominance condition, “tough,” “money,” “power,” and “success.” Each word was
presented ﬁve times, making a total of 20 trials. A trial would consist of a neutral
word (presented for 1.5 s), a personal pronoun (17 ms), a rival characteristic
(17 ms), and then another neutral word (1.5 s). After completing the association
task, participants read a shortened version of the jealousy scenario used in the
studies described above, and were asked how jealous they would be in such a
situation.
The results showed that subliminal priming in this context clearly had the
hypothesized eﬀects, albeit only for individuals with a high mate value. These
participants obviously diﬀerentiated between the rival characteristics: Women
reported more jealousy following exposure to attractiveness words than to social
dominance words, and men reported more jealousy following exposure to social
dominance words than to attractiveness words. Participants with a low mate
value reported more overall jealousy, independently of the characteristics of the
rival. From an evolutionary point of view, this seems adaptive, because indi-
viduals with a low mate value have fewer options on the mating market, and they
may easily be surpassed by even a relatively unattractive rival. In contrast, people
with a high mate value will not feel threatened by an undesirable rival, but only
by a rival who is better than they are (e.g., more physically attractive for women
218
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

and more socially dominant for men). Thus, this study established for the ﬁrst
time that it is possible to induce jealousy in participants through subliminal
presentation of sex-speciﬁc rival characteristics. Our ﬁndings suggest that
unconsciously linking certain features to a third person may lead to “projecting”
these characteristics onto a rival that is described without any characteristics in a
scenario.
Inﬂuence of the Ovulatory Cycle
In a subsequent experiment, using the same paradigm, we examined the extent to
which the jealousy evoking eﬀects of rival characteristics depended on the ovula-
tory cycle of the woman. During the fertile period of a woman’s cycle, the
presence of a physically attractive rival might be an especially large threat to the
relationship for women as in this period they would desire the exclusive sexual
and emotional attention of their mate. Previous research has indeed established
that during the time of high fertility risk, women tend to be more prone to
feelings of jealousy, and are especially sensitive to cues of emotional inﬁdelity
(e.g., Gaulin, Silverman, Phillips, & Reiber, 1997; see also Simpson & LaPaglia,
chapter 10, this volume). Moreover, for men the cycle of their mates matters as
well: They tend to be more attentive and proprietary during the fertile phases
of their girlfriends’ ovulatory cycle (Gangestad, Thornhill, & Garver, 2002).
Therefore, it can be expected that, for men, the presence of a socially dominant
rival would be especially threatening during the fertile phases of their partner’s
ovulatory cycle.
The results from this study, which employed the same paradigm as the
previous study (e.g., participants were subliminally primed with words relating
to rival characteristics), showed that women in the fertile phase of their cycle did
indeed report more jealousy than women in the nonfertile phase of their cycle,
and did report especially more jealousy after exposure to a physically attractive
rival than after exposure to a socially dominant rival. We also found some pre-
liminary evidence that men whose girlfriends were in the fertile phase of their
menstrual cycle at the time of the experiment reported more jealousy after
exposure to a socially dominant rival than after exposure to a physically attractive
rival (Massar & Buunk, 2005b). Thus, these results show that ovulatory cycle
apparently has a strong eﬀect on the sensitivity to intrasexual competition
as it aﬀects how men and women respond to subliminally presented rival
characteristics.
BODY BUILD
Not only facial attractiveness, but also body attractiveness may be an important
cue individuals pay attention to when confronted with a rival. Indeed, Dijkstra
and Buunk (2002) found that features like more beautiful legs, a better ﬁgure, a
219
JEALOUSY

more attractive body, more beautiful hips, and a lighter and more slender body
build were spontaneously mentioned by participants as quite important rival
characteristics. Many studies have shown that the body is at least as an important
determinant of physical attractiveness as the face, particularly when individuals
are observed from a distance (e.g., Alicke, Smith, & Klotz, 1986). A low waist-
to-hip ratio (WHR) is a particularly important feature of female attractiveness
that is independent of weight (e.g., Singh, 1993). The ultimate reason that a low
WHR is perceived as attractive is that it is actually associated with health and
fertility (but see, for example, Wetsman & Marlowe, 1999, for contrary
evidence).
Given the importance of WHR for female attractiveness, we expected that,
especially among women, rivals with a favorable WHR would evoke more jeal-
ousy than rivals with an unfavorable WHR. We used the stimuli developed by
Singh (1993) that manipulate the rival’s WHR by varying the size of the waist.
However, with this procedure, one unintentionally manipulates a rival’s degree
of body taper as well: As the waist narrows, not only does the WHR decrease, but
also the body taper seems to increase. This is quite relevant as there is consider-
able evidence that body taper is a more important determinant of male than of
female physical attractiveness (e.g., Franzoi & Herzog, 1987), presumably
because it reﬂects a man’s level of physical dominance, a feature highly valued by
women, but not by men in a mate. There is indeed evidence that the pelvic-to-
shoulder ratio correlates positively with beta-lipoproteins, hormones that are
related to testosterone levels and muscle development in men (e.g., Evans, 1972).
We manipulated body taper by varying the shoulder-to-hip ratio (SHR). While
we expected rivals with lower WHRs to evoke relatively more jealousy in females
than in males, we expected rivals with higher SHRs to evoke relatively more
jealousy in males than in females. We also asked participants which body parts
they had paid attention to while evaluating the rivals.
In a ﬁrst study with this paradigm (Dijkstra & Buunk, 2001), we presented
a sample of students with line drawings (derived from the work by Singh, 1993)
of individuals of the same sex as themselves. The drawings had identical facial
and bodily features and only diﬀered in the size of their WHR and SHR. The
results showed that rivals with a low as opposed to a high WHR evoked indeed
more jealousy in women than in men. In contrast, rivals with a high as opposed
to low SHR evoked more jealousy in men than in women, particularly when the
rival had a high WHR. In evaluating the rivals, women indicated that they had
paid more attention to the rivals’ waist, hips, and legs, and men indicated that
they had paid more attention to the rivals’ shoulders, chest, and belly.
Role of Life History
According to life history theory, men may follow two important strategies to
achieve reproductive success (e.g., Hill & Hurtado, 1996): a strategy of physical
dominance—an elevated social rank achieved by physical competition—or a
220
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

strategy of eminence—an elevated rank achieved through socially approved
accomplishments (Kemper, 1990). Physical dominance contributes especially to
the mate value of young men who are at their peak with regard to health and
ﬁtness, whereas eminence will peak as men get older. Because men most often
will be confronted with rivals of approximately the same age (due to women’s
preference for males who are only slightly older than themselves; Kenrick &
Keefe, 1992), it was expected that as men get older, a rival’s SHR will play a less
important role in evoking jealousy. In contrast, it was expected that a rival’s
WHR will continue to evoke jealousy among women as they get older, particu-
larly because, regardless of age, men tend to prefer women who signal health,
youth, and fertility (e.g., Buunk, Dijkstra, Kenrick, & Warntjes, 2001; Kenrick
& Keefe, 1992). In a study in a community sample in which we used the same
method as in the previous study among students (Buunk & Dijkstra, 2005), we
found that, as predicted, as men were older, the SHR of the rival was a less
important factor in evoking jealousy, whereas among women jealousy in
response to the rival’s WHR was not aﬀected by age. Moreover, the rival’s SHR
was also a more important determinant of perceptions of social and physical
dominance as men were younger. Remarkably, among men, the low WHR–low
SHR rival, that is, the rival with a linear and slender body build, evoked the
highest level of jealousy and was perceived as the most attractive and the most
socially dominant of all rivals, probably because this type of rival is perceived by
adult men as having the highest level of eminence. Indeed, there is some evidence
that men with a linear and slender body build attain a higher occupational level
(Deabler, Hartl, & Willis, 1975), and that an athletic and muscular body build is
associated with lower impulse control and higher competitive aggressiveness,
which may not be conducive to attaining a high position in the societal hierarchy
(for a review see Kemper, 1990).
Subliminal Perception of Body Build
The previous studies used a within-subjects design in which participants viewed
the various ﬁgures simultaneously, which may have evoked demand character-
istics as participants may have had theories about the research hypotheses and
may respond accordingly. Therefore, in a subsequent experiment (Massar &
Buunk, 2005b), we examined whether individuals may perceive the ﬁgure of the
rival automatically and unconsciously. In this experiment, a parafoveal priming
procedure was used, whereby the primes were presented in the periphery of the
attended region (Bargh & Chartrand, 2000). The primes were for male partici-
pants a ﬁgure with either a high shoulder-to-hip ratio (e.g., an attractive body
shape, indicating social dominance), or a low shoulder-to-hip ratio (an
unattractive body shape), and for female participants a ﬁgure with either a low
WHR (a physically attractive body shape), or a high WHR (unattractive body
shape). They were told to focus on the “X” in the centre of the screen and to
indicate as fast as possible on which side of the “X” they saw a ﬂash by pressing a
221
JEALOUSY

key on the keyboard. The prime (the line drawing) was randomly presented for
60 ms in one of the four parafoveal regions, and was then immediately masked. A
random delay between the primes was inserted to avoid an anticipated response
by participants. Moreover, the primes were alternated with neutral pictures of
geometrical shapes. All in all, participants were exposed to 64 trials, 16 of which
consisted of the primes. After the priming procedure, the shortened version of
the jealousy evoking scenario was presented to the participants and jealousy was
measured with a slider on the computer screen.
The results from this experiment were in line with the results from the
Dijkstra and Buunk (2001) study: Males reported signiﬁcantly more jealousy
after subliminal exposure to the ﬁgure with the attractive body shape (high SHR)
than after exposure to the ﬁgure with the unattractive body shape (low SHR).
Apparently, the men in this study were able to detect another man’s body shape
without being aware of it. We did not ﬁnd an eﬀect among females. These
ﬁndings suggest that assessing the body shape of one’s rival is a more automatic
mechanism for males than for females, which may be due to the evolutionarily
more ancient, and therefore more automatic nature of male jealousy.
SEXUAL VERSUS EMOTIONAL INFIDELITY
One might argue that even automatic gender diﬀerences in the importance
attached to the dominance and attractiveness of rivals do not necessarily reﬂect
evolved diﬀerences, but may simply be due to cultural learning. The validity of
an evolutionary perspective would be particularly strengthened if we could
deﬁne on the basis of such a perspective conditions under which the opposite sex
diﬀerence would occur. An evolutionary approach may make very speciﬁc pre-
dictions concerning the way in which sex diﬀerences may depend on the context,
in the present case the type of threat implied by the inﬁdelity. Because men, but
not women, have faced in the course of evolution the problem of uncertainty
with regard to their genetic relation to their oﬀspring, male jealousy may have
evolved primarily as a mechanism to prevent one’s partner’s sexual involvement
with another man (Buss, Larsen, Westen, & Semmelroth, 1992; Wilson & Daly,
1992). In contrast, because for women, more than for men, their partner’s
inﬁdelity might imply the risk of losing the partner’s investment and resources,
female jealousy may have evolved primarily as a mechanism to prevent one’s
partner emotional involvement with another woman (Buss et al., 1992).
A series of studies in the United States, the Netherlands, China, Germany,
Korea, Sweden, and Japan has found that when asked to choose what they ﬁnd
most upsetting, more men than women do indeed ﬁnd sexual inﬁdelity of their
partner more upsetting, whereas more women than men ﬁnd emotional inﬁdel-
ity of their partner more upsetting (e.g., Bailey et al., 1994; Buss et al., 1992;
Buunk, Angleitner, Oubaid, & Buss, 1996; Harris & Christenfeld, 1996). In
addition, participants are also more physiologically upset, as measured by heart
222
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

rate, electrodermal response, and corrugator supercilii contraction, in line with
the predicted gender diﬀerence (see also Pietrzak, Laird, Stevens, & Thompson,
2002), although these physiological data could not later be replicated by either
Grice and Seely (2000) or by Harris (2000). It must be noted, however, that the
gender diﬀerence may not occur when rating scales instead of a forced-choice
paradigm are used, when personal experiences with a partner’s actual inﬁdelity
are recalled, when individuals are under cognitive constraint, or when indi-
viduals do have experience with inﬁdelity (e.g., DeSteno, Bartlett, Braverman, &
Salovey, 2002; Sagarin, Becker, & Guadagno, 2003). Furthermore, men are
mostly equally split when it comes to choosing which type of inﬁdelity they ﬁnd
the most upsetting.
Type of Inﬁdelity and Rival Characteristics
Despite these empirical inconsistencies, we reasoned that sexual and emotional
inﬁdelity will evoke qualitatively diﬀerent types of aﬀective responses (e.g., Par-
rot & Smith, 1993). That is, in the case of a partner’s emotional inﬁdelity,
anxiety and insecurity due to a threat to the primary relationship will become
salient (Buunk, 1997), whereas in the case that extradyadic sex has already
occurred, individuals will tend to respond with anger and betrayal to an extrady-
adic aﬀair of one’s partner, in particular when the inﬁdelity is perceived as
undeserved or unfair (Buunk, 1995; Parrot, 1991). More importantly, we
assumed that the type of inﬁdelity may determine which rival characteristics will
most strongly aﬀect these emotional responses. Under conditions of “pure” emo-
tional inﬁdelity, rivals will be evaluated more as potential threats to the relation-
ship, and the jealousy-evoking eﬀect of rival characteristics may strongly reﬂect
the importance of long-term partner preferences. However, when confronted
with unequivocal sexual inﬁdelity without the potential of the development of an
emotional attachment, gender diﬀerences in the characteristics that evoke jeal-
ousy may be quite diﬀerent, and even the opposite. Ultimate motivations for
why women engage in extradyadic sex include the acquisition of “good genes”
that would increase oﬀspring quality, and the acquisition of “sexy sons” genes
that would increase a son’s chance of reproductive success (e.g., Barash & Lip-
ton, 2001; Gangestad, Simpson, Cousins, Garver-Apgar, & Christensen, 2004).
All of these potential beneﬁts would be served by having sex with physically
attractive men because a man’s physical appearance is the only quick way to
assess the quality of his genes (e.g., Buss, 1994). Therefore, in the case of “pure”
sexual inﬁdelity, men will be particularly attentive to the attractiveness of the
rival rather than to his social dominance or status. Because for women sexual
inﬁdelity as such does from an evolutionary point of view not pose a threat to a
woman’s reproductive success, for them it is relatively unimportant who the rival
is in a purely sexual ﬂing of their partners.
In our study (Buunk & Dijkstra, 2004), we exposed men and women to the
scenario used in our previous studies. However, the scenario was expanded in
223
JEALOUSY

that it indicated that one lost track of one’s partner, and that the next day the
partner indicated to have had a very intense and special sexual experience (sexual
inﬁdelity condition), or unique and special communication and connection
(emotional inﬁdelity). The results showed indeed that jealousy evoked by emo-
tional inﬁdelity was primarily characterized by feelings of threat, and jealousy
evoked by sexual inﬁdelity was primarily characterized by feelings of betrayal and
anger (cf. Ellsworth, chapter 5, this volume). More importantly, and as pre-
dicted, following emotional inﬁdelity, in men a rival’s dominance, and in women
a rival’s physical attractiveness, evoked feelings of threat (but not of anger-
betrayal). In contrast, after sexual inﬁdelity, in men, but not in women, a rival’s
physical attractiveness evoked feelings of betrayal-anger (but not of anxiety or
suspicion). Thus, this study showed that the gender diﬀerences found in many of
our studies are conﬁned to “pure” emotional inﬁdelity, and that in the case of
“pure” sexual inﬁdelity, the sex diﬀerence is in part reversed, with men, and not
women, responding with more jealousy to physically attractive rivals. This latter
ﬁnding reﬂects the importance of physical attractiveness as an attribute for
women in the context of casual sexual aﬀairs (Barash & Lipton, 2001; Gangestad
et al., 2004).
Subliminal Activation of Context
In a related experiment, we examined whether subliminally presenting sex-
related versus intimacy-related words would aﬀect responses to diﬀerent types of
rivals, and whether this would depend on one’s sex drive. We reasoned that for
individuals with a high sex drive, activating sex-related constructs will make
intrasexual competition particularly salient, whereas for individuals with a low
sex drive, activating intimacy-related constructs will make intrasexual competi-
tion particularly salient. That is, someone with a high sex drive will be more
oriented to having various sex partners, whereas someone with a low sex drive
will be more oriented toward developing a committed intimate relationship with
a single partner.
In this experiment, participants were subliminally primed with words
related either to sex (sex, passion, making out, and aroused) or with words relating
to intimacy (warmth, intimate, attached, and committed). After the priming pro-
cedure, they were told to imagine their partner coming home one day and telling
them “I found someone else.” Next, they indicated, among others, how upset
they would be if this “other person” had better career prospects than they had
and was more attractive than they were. The results showed that males and
females with a high sex drive reported feeling more upset than men with a low
sex drive over the rival, but only when they had been primed with sex. These
results suggest that individuals with a high sex drive are more prone to engage in
intrasexual competition, especially when they are confronted with the sexual
inﬁdelity of their partner (Massar & Buunk, 2006).
224
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

CONCLUSION
Although some people like to believe that, despite their biological diﬀerences,
men and women are essentially the same, according to evolutionary psychology
men and women do not only have diﬀerent bodies, they also have diﬀerent
minds. This is in particular due to the fact that, during their life, women produce
only a limited amount of eggs, whereas men produce billions of sperms. This has
led men and women to make essentially diﬀerent investments in their oﬀspring,
producing diﬀerent adaptive problems for men and women (Buss, 1994; Miller,
2000). In this chapter we presented a series of results from our program that
examined the consequences from these diﬀerent adaptive problems for intra-
sexual competition. Using both descriptive and experimental methods as well as
various kinds of stimuli material, our ﬁndings show that there are consistent
gender diﬀerences in the jealousy-evoking eﬀect of particular rival characteristics.
Most of our ﬁndings sing a single song; that is, whereas jealousy in women is
evoked more than in men by a rival’s physical attractiveness, jealousy in men
more than in women is evoked by a rival’s status and dominance related features.
This type of gender diﬀerence was found when physical attractiveness was
deﬁned as general attractiveness, facial attractiveness, and waist-to-hip ratio, and
when status- and dominance-related features were deﬁned as social dominance,
physical dominance, shoulder-to-hip ratio, and social status. The ﬁnding that
women are particularly sensitive to the physical attractiveness of the rival may
also help explain why Kenrick et al. (chapter 4, this volume) found that primarily
women who were involved in committed relationships overestimated the num-
ber of attractive women. Of course, one might argue that such sex diﬀerences
mainly reﬂect culturally learned norms concerning what is appropriate for each
sex. However, this explanation appears to fall short in explaining an increasing
and diverse number of ﬁndings. First, among lesbian women and gay men the
same sex diﬀerences were found, suggesting that, overall, males and females
possess an evolved mechanism through which they respond more or less auto-
matically to those rival characteristics that have been important in sexual selec-
tion in our evolutionary past, even when, as in the case of homosexuals, this
mechanism does not parallel those characteristics that, given the mate prefer-
ences of their partners, constitute the largest threat. Second, we found in line
with evolutionary reasoning, for males a reversal of the importance of dominance
versus physical attractiveness as an important rival characteristic in the case of
sexual inﬁdelity. That is, when confronted with an intense single sexual contact
of one’s partner with a rival, males responded with more jealousy to a physically
attractive rather than to a socially dominant rival, paralleling precisely what
women ﬁnd important in short-term mating. Third, we are now obtaining
increasing evidence that men and women respond diﬀerently to subliminal cues
of rival characteristics, and do so in a similar way as to explicit descriptions of
rival characteristics. Our ﬁndings seem to suggest that the evaluation of rivals
in a romantic jealousy situation is a basic mechanism that may function
225
JEALOUSY

unconsciously and automatically, and is aﬀected by factors that are relevant from
an evolutionary perspective, such as mate value and fertility of the female. In
conclusion, our research program is unraveling in more and more detail how the
male and female minds are made up to pay attention in diﬀerent ways to speciﬁc
rival characteristics.
REFERENCES
Alicke, M. D., Smith, R. H., & Klotz, M. L.
(1986). Judgements of physical attractive-
ness: The role of faces and bodies. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 12, 381–389.
Bailey, J. M., Gaulin, S., Agyei, Y., & Gladue,
B. A. (1994). Eﬀects of gender and sexual
orientation on evolutionary relevant aspects
of human mating. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 66, 1081–1093.
Barash, D. P., & Lipton, J. E. (2001). The myth
of monogamy: Fidelity and inﬁdelity in animals
and people. New York: Freeman.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The
mind in the middle. A practical guide to
priming and automaticity research. In H. T.
Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of
research methods in social and personality
psychology (pp. 253–285). New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex diﬀerences in human
mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses
tested in 37 cultures. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 12, 1–49.
Buss, D. M. (1994). The evolution of desire:
Strategies of human mating. New York: Basic
Books.
Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., &
Semmelroth, J. (1992). Sex diﬀerences in
jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and psych-
ology. Psychological Science, 3, 251–255.
Buss, D. M., Shackelford, T. K., Choe, J., Dijk-
stra, P., & Buunk, B. P. (2000). Distress
about mating rivals. Personal Relationships, 7,
235–243.
Buunk, B. P. (1986). Husband’s jealousy. In R.
A. Lewis & R. E. Salt (Eds.), Men in families
(pp. 97–114). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Buunk, B. P. (1995). Sex, self-esteem, depend-
ency and extradyadic sexual experiences as
related to jealousy responses. Journal of Social
and Personal Relationships, 12, 147–153.
Buunk, B. P. (1997). Personality, birth order
and attachment styles as related to various
types of jealousy. Personality and Individual
Diﬀerences, 23, 997–1006.
Buunk, B. P., Angleitner, A., Oubaid, V., &
Buss, D. M. (1996). Sex diﬀerences in jeal-
ousy in evolutionary and cultural perspective:
Test from the Netherlands, Germany, and the
United States. Psychological Science, 7, 359–
363.
Buunk, B. P., & Dijkstra, P. (2000). Extradyadic
relationships and jealousy. In C. Hendrick &
S. S. Hendrick (Eds.), Close relationships: A
sourcebook (pp. 317–329). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Buunk, B. P., & Dijkstra, P. (2001). Evidence
from a homosexual sample for a sex-speciﬁc
rival-oriented mechanism: Jealousy as a func-
tion of a rival’s physical attractiveness and
dominance. Personal Relationships, 8, 391–406.
Buunk, B. P., & Dijkstra, P. (2004). Gender
diﬀerences in rival characteristics that evoke
jealousy in response to emotional versus sex-
ual inﬁdelity. Personal Relationships, 11, 395–
408.
Buunk, B. P., & Dijkstra, P. (2005). A narrow
waist versus broad shoulders: Sex and age dif-
ferences in the jealousy-evoking character-
istics of a rival’s body build. Personality and
Individual Diﬀerences, 39, 379–389.
Buunk, B. P., Dijkstra, P., Kenrick, D. T., &
Warntjes, A. (2001). Age preferences for
mates as related to gender, own age and
involvement level. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 22, 241–250.
Buunk, A. P. & Gibbons, F. X. (2005). Social
comparison orientation: A new perspective
on those who do, and those who don’t com-
pare with others. In S. Guimond (Ed.), Social
comparison and social psychology: Understand-
ing cognition, intergroup relations and culture
(pp. 15–32). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
226
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Campbell, A. (2002). A mind of her own: The
evolutionary psychology of women. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Deabler, H. L., Hartl, E. M., & Willis, C. A.
(1975). Physique and personality: Somato-
type and vocational interest. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 41, 382.
DeSteno, D. A., Bartlett, M. Y., Braverman, J.,
& Salovey, P. (2002). Sex diﬀerences in jeal-
ousy: Evolutionary mechanism or artifact of
measurement? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83, 1103–1116.
Dijkstra, P., & Buunk, B. P. (1998). Jealousy as
a function of rival characteristics: An evo-
lutionary perspective. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 24, 1158–1166.
Dijkstra, P., & Buunk, B. P. (2001). Gender
diﬀerences in the jealousy-evoking nature of
a rival’s body build. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 22, 335–341.
Dijkstra, P., & Buunk, B. P. (2002). Sex diﬀer-
ences in the jealousy-evoking eﬀect of rival
characteristics. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 32, 829–852.
Evans, R. B. (1972). Physical and biochemical
characteristics of homosexual men. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 39, 140–
147.
Franzoi, S. L., & Herzog, M. E. (1987). Judg-
ing physical attractiveness: What body
aspects do we use? Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 13, 19–33.
Gangestad, S. W., Simpson, J. A., Cousins, A.
J., Garver-Apgar, C. E., & Christensen, P. N.
(2004). Women’s preferences for male be-
havioral displays change across the menstrual
cycle. Psychological Science, 15, 203–207
Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver, C.
E. (2002). Changes in women’s sexual inter-
ests and their partners’ mate retention tactics
across the menstrual cycle: Evidence for shift-
ing conﬂicts of interest. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, Series B, 269, 975–
982.
Gaulin, S. J. C., Silverman, I., Phillips, K., &
Reiber, C. (1997). Activational hormone
inﬂuences on abilities and attitudes: Implica-
tions for evolutionary theory. Evolution and
Cognition, 3, 191–199.
Grice, J. W., & Seely, E. (2000). The evolution
of sex diﬀerences in jealousy: Failure to repli-
cate previous results. Journal of Research in
Personality, 34(3), 348–356.
Harris, C. R. (2002). Sexual and romantic jeal-
ousy in heterosexual and homosexual adults.
Psychological Science, 13, 7–12.
Harris, C. R., & Christenfeld, N. (1996). Jeal-
ousy and rational responses to inﬁdelity
across gender and culture. Psychological
Science, 7, 378–379.
Hill, K., & Hurtado, A. M. (1996). Ache life
history. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Hrdy, S. B. (1981). The woman that never
evolved. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Hupka, R. B., Otto, J., Tarabrina, N. V., &
Reidl, L. (1993). Cross-cultural comparisons
of nouns associated with jealousy and the
related emotions of envy, anger, and fear.
Cross Cultural Research: The Journal of
Comparative Social Science, 27, 181–211.
Jankowiak, W. R., Hill, E. M., & Donovan, J.
M. (1992). The eﬀect of sex and sexual
orientation on attractiveness judgements: An
evolutionary interpretation. Ethology and
Sociobiology, 13, 73–85.
Kemper, D. (1990). Social structure and tes-
tosterone. London: Rutger University Press.
Kenrick, D. T., & Keefe, R. C. (1992). Age
preferences in mates reﬂect sex diﬀerences in
human reproductive strategies. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 15, 75–133.
Kenrick, D. T., Keefe, R. C., Bryan, A., Barr,
A., & Brown, S. (1995). Age preferences and
mate choice among homosexuals and hetero-
sexuals. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 1166–1172.
Massar, K., & Buunk, B. P. (2005a). Jaloezie
vanuit een evolutionair perspectief: onbe-
wuste waarneming van rivaalkenmerken
[Jealousy from an evolutionary perspective:
Unconscious perception of rival character-
istics]. Tijdschrift voor Criminologie, 47, 188–
192.
Massar, K., & Buunk, A. P. (2005b, June).
Subliminal rivals: Unconscious processes in
jealousy and rival evaluation. Paper presented
at the annual meeting of the Human
Behavior and Evolution Society (HBES),
Austin, TX.
Massar, K., & Buunk, A. P. (2006, June). Sex
drive, inﬁdelity type and intrasexual competi-
tion: A subliminal priming paradigm. Poster
presented at the annual meeting of the
Human Behavior and Evolution Society
(HBES), Philadelphia, PA.
227
JEALOUSY

Mathes, E. W., Adams, H. E., & Davies, R. M.
(1985). Jealousy: Loss of relationship
rewards, loss of self-esteem, depression,
anxiety, and anger. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 48, 1552–1561.
Miller, G. (2000). The mating mind: How sexual
choice shaped the evolution of human nature.
London: Heinemann.
Mussweiler, T., Ruter, K., & Epstude, K.
(2004). The man who wasn’t there: Sub-
liminal social comparison standards inﬂuence
self-evaluation. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 40, 689–696.
Nadler, A., & Dotan, I. (1992). Commitment
and rival attractiveness: Their eﬀects on male
and female reactions to jealousy arousing
situations. Sex Roles, 26, 293–310.
Parrot, W. G. (1991). The emotional experience
of envy and jealousy. In P. Salovey (Ed.), The
psychology of jealousy and envy (pp. 3–30).
New York: Guilford Press.
Parrot, W. G., & Smith, R. H. (1993). Dis-
tinguishing the experiences of envy and
jealousy. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 64, 906–920.
Pietrzak, R. H., Laird, J. D., Stevens, D. A.,
& Thompson, N. S. (2002). Sex diﬀerences
in human jealousy: A coordinated study of
forced-choice, continuous rating-scale, and
physiological responses on the same sub-
jects. Evolution and Human Behavior, 23,
83–94.
Sagarin, B. J., Becker, D. V., & Guadagno, R.
E. (2003). Sex diﬀerences (and similarities) in
jealousy: The moderating inﬂuence of inﬁdel-
ity experience and sexual orientation of the
inﬁdelity. Evolution and Human Behavior, 24,
17–23.
Shettel-Neuber, J., Bryson, J. B., & Young, L.
E. (1978). Physical attractiveness of the
“other person” and jealousy. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 44, 612–615.
Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive signiﬁcance of
female physical attractiveness: Role of waist-
to-hip-ratio. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 293–307.
Stapel, D. A., & Blanton, H. (2004). From see-
ing to being: Subliminal social comparisons
aﬀect implicit and explicit self-evaluations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
87, 468–481.
Symons, D. (1979). The evolution of human
sexuality. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Wegner, D., & Bargh, J. A. (1998). Control and
automaticity in social life. In D. T. Gilbert, S.
T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook
of social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 446–496).
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Wetsman, A., & Marlowe, F. (1999). How uni-
versal are preferences for female waist-to-hip
ratios? Evidence from the Hadza of Tanzania.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 20, 219–
228.
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1992). The man who
mistook his wife for chattel. In J. Barkow, L.
Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 289–322). New York:
Oxford University Press.
228
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

14
Cognitive and Social
Adaptations for Leadership
and Followership
Evolutionary Game Theory and
Group Dynamics
MARK VAN VUGT
ROB KURZBAN
Leadership and Followership in an Evolutionary Framework
An Evolutionary Game Analysis of Leadership
Non-human Evidence for Leadership
Leadership in Humans
Discussion
A
nthropologists have identiﬁed leadership as a human universal (Boehm,
1999; Brown, 1991). In his analysis of the anthropological evidence for a
 range of universal human social behaviours, Brown (1991)—using his
ﬁctitious Universal People (UP) as a vehicle—says that:
[t]he UP have leaders, though they may be ephemeral or situational. The UP
admire, or profess to admire, generosity and this is particularly desired in a leader.
No leader of the UP ever has complete power lodged in himself alone. UP leaders
go beyond the limits of UP reason and morality. Since the UP never have complete
democracy, and never have complete autocracy, they always have a de facto
oligarchy. (p. 138)
This description resonates with the literature in social psychology, which
suggests that whenever individuals come together to form a group, a leadership
229

structure quickly emerges (Bass, 1954; van Vugt, 2006). However, despite lead-
ership’s crucial role in social groups and the enormity of the research directed at
understanding it, there exists no overarching theoretical structure that organizes
the wealth of thought and empirical evidence gathered on this topic (Chemers,
2000; Yukl, 1989). As Hogan and Kaiser (2005) note:
The academic tradition [in the study of leadership] is a collection of dependable
empirical nuggets, but it is also a collection of decontextualized facts that do not
add up to a persuasive account of leadership. (p. 171)
Here, we present a set of ideas grounded in the theory of evolution (Darwin,
1859) in a tentative attempt to integrate the massive body of empirical data into
a coherent conceptual framework. (For a set of related ideas and a more thorough
review, see van Vugt, 2006.)
LEADERSHIP AND FOLLOWERSHIP IN AN
EVOLUTIONARY FRAMEWORK
Leadership and followership have been deﬁned in a great many ways in the
literature (Bass, 1990). Two common construals of leadership are, ﬁrst, as an
individual diﬀerence variable (Stogdill, 1974) and, second, the outcome of stra-
tegic interactions among rational actors (Hollander, 1985). With deference to
the thought that has gone into the research traditions from which these deﬁ-
nitions emerge, we introduce here a set of deﬁnitions that diverge from these and
are, unlike their predecessors, decidedly adaptationist in nature. In particular, we
take leadership and follower behaviour to be the product of cognitive adaptations
designed to solve adaptive problems humans faced throughout evolutionary
history. In this case, these problems are associated with particular features of
humans’ social and physical environment (Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume;
Kenrick, Delton, Robertson, Vaughn Becker & Neuberg, chapter 4, this volume;
Tooby & Cosmides, 1992).
Leadership is deﬁned here as design for inducing others to coordinate their
actions or goals with those of the individual, the leader, to foster the leader’s proximate
goals. Followership is deﬁned as design to coordinate one’s actions or goals with those
of another individual—the leader—in order to foster the leader’s proximate goals.
There are a few important aspects to these deﬁnitions. First, because we
deﬁne leadership and followership in terms of design, cases in which individuals
accidentally coordinate their actions with one another are not included in the
deﬁnition. For example, a broken-down car blocking the road forces other drivers
to take a diﬀerent route, but this is not leadership. The focus on design rather
than behaviour correctly excludes “accidental” coordination and emphasizes that
evidence for leadership and followership will be in the form of evidence of special
design of the associated cognitive adaptations (cf. Tooby & Cosmides, 1992).
230
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Second, rather than being a generic source of social inﬂuence like status,
prestige or social dominance (Buunk, Massar & Dijkstra, chapter 13, this vol-
ume; Henrich & Gil-White, 2001; Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10, this vol-
ume), leadership involves speciﬁcally the solution to a coordination problem
(Cartwright & Zander, 1968; Schelling, 1960; van Vugt, 2006). To illustrate,
by virtue of his contributions, Charles Darwin is a person of great esteem,
yet it would stretch our deﬁnition past its limits to suggest that his
scientiﬁc endeavours were driven by adaptations designed to coordinate others’
behaviour.
Finally, the deﬁnition of followership suggests that there are adaptations
designed to cause followers to adopt the goals of the leader. This can be as simple
as, for example, following the leader to his or her preferred location. This does
not, of course, mean that a follower is not executing a strategy that furthers that
organism’s ultimate or proximate goals as well. Although many deﬁnitions from
the psychological literature embody the assumption that the goals of leaders and
followers necessarily converge into a single group goal (Chemers, 2000; Hogg,
2001), we include the possibility that organisms can simultaneously pursue mul-
tiple proximate goals. By furthering a leader’s proximate goals, followers can be
fostering their own as well. This idea is clariﬁed in the discussion of leadership
using simple two-player coordination games, below.
In certain respects, what is puzzling from an evolutionary perspective is
followership. It has been argued that adaptations for striving to lead—to cause
others to coordinate their actions with one’s goals—can evolve because there
may be clear advantages associated with leading (van Vugt, 2006). Yet, given what
is known about the process of evolution through natural selection, adaptations
designed to adopt another organism’s goals stand in need of special explanation.
Understanding followership adaptations is of as much, if not greater, theoretical
interest than those surrounding leadership. It is, then, in some sense surprising
that questions about the origins of followership are not normally posed in the
psychological literature.
AN EVOLUTIONARY GAME ANALYSIS OF LEADERSHIP
If leadership and followership adaptations evolved for the purpose of solving
coordination problems amongst organisms, we should be able to model the
evolution of these traits. Evolutionary game theory provides a useful tool
(Maynard-Smith, 1982; see also Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this vol-
ume). Evolutionary game theory models social interactions as games in which
strategies compete in a Darwinian fashion. In evolutionary game theory, the
agents are genes which embody strategies that over the course of evolution are
tested against alternative strategies and copies of themselves. Strategies (genes)
spread through a population by virtue of the eﬀect they have on their own
replication rate as a result of their strategic interactions with other agents
231
LEADERSHIP

(Dawkins, 1976). If we can model leadership and followership as strategies in a
coordination game, then we should be able to examine how well they fare in
terms of relative ﬁtness.
The simplest strategic interaction in this context is a coordination game
involving two organisms, 1 and 2, who must decide between two alternatives. To
make this concrete, consider the case in which the organisms must decide
whether to go to waterhole A or B. Each organism is indiﬀerent between the two
waterholes, but both prefer to go to the same waterhole as the other. This co-
ordination problem is characteristic of many social species that need to stay close
to each other for safety (Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume). The pay-oﬀ structure
of this game is depicted in Table 14.1. There are four cells in this game, each with
two pay-oﬀs representing the ﬁtness outcomes of Players 1 and 2, respectively. If 1
and 2 go to Hole A or B together, they receive a pay-oﬀ of one unit. If they end
up at diﬀerent holes, they receive a zero pay-oﬀ.
Selection will favour adaptations designed to execute equilibrium strategies
(DeScioli & Kurzban, in press; Maynard Smith, 1982), and this game illustrates
how followership adaptations might emerge. If the game is played sequentially,
the ﬁrst player chooses randomly and the second player’s best response is to
choose the hole that the ﬁrst player selected.1 The game is, in eﬀect, sequential if
organisms can signal their intentions to each other (see Gangestad & Thornhill,
chapter 3, this volume); in this case, adaptations can be designed to reach the
equilibrium outcomes. This situation selects for followership because it is in
the interest of the organism to follow whoever moves ﬁrst, adopting the goal of
the ﬁrst mover (i.e., which hole to go to), regardless of the hole that individual
chooses.
Note that this model makes no commitment regarding certain details of the
leader/follower adaptations. In this example, it is easy to imagine that the leader/
follower role is adopted facultatively. That is, in some cases, an organism might
ﬁnd itself in a position to be the ﬁrst mover in such a coordination game, and in
other cases, might ﬁnd itself better oﬀ being the follower in such a game. This is
consistent with conditional strategies models (Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10,
this volume; West-Eberhard, 2003), which assume that leader and follower roles
are adopted ﬂexibly by the same organisms.
Table 14.1 Coordinating Leadership. A simple coordination game in which pay-offs (in
reproductive success) are for Players 1 and 2 respectively. Equilibria are indicated
with asterisks
Player 2
Hole A
Hole B
Player 1
Hole A
1,1*
0,0
Hole B
0,0
1,1*
232
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

It is, by the same token, not implausible that there might be adaptations in
which pure strategies are coded in relatively static fashion, with the population
reaching an equilibrium of varying frequencies of individuals, each of whom
plays a pure strategy, sustained through frequency-dependent selection (May-
nard-Smith, 1982; Wilson, Near & Miller, 1996). This distinction between
conditional and pure strategies (the latter maintained via frequency-dependent
selection) is analogous to the distinction in the psychological literature between
state and trait accounts of leadership (van Vugt, 2006).
A slightly more complex coordination game is depicted in Table 14.2. The
pay-oﬀ structure resembles the game of Leader, one of four classic 2 × 2 games
identiﬁed by Rapoport (1967). In this game, Players 1 and 2 beneﬁt from going
to the same waterhole, but Player 1 beneﬁts more than Player 2 if they go to Hole
A. Such an asymmetry in the coordination beneﬁts can derive from any number
of causes. For example, Player 1 could know the way to Hole A better than Hole
B (Couzin, Krause, Franks & Levin, 2005). In any case, as in the pure co-
ordination game, both players prefer to go to the same hole as the other player.
However, each has a preference for a diﬀerent hole.
Unlike the ﬁrst game, there is now an advantage to being the ﬁrst mover. By
taking the initiative, a player creates the incentive for the other player to adopt
the ﬁrst mover’s preferred hole. Once the ﬁrst player has committed to one hole,
the follower’s best response is to coordinate. The second mover proﬁts from co-
ordination, but not as much as the leader does. Moving ﬁrst induces an iterated
dominance game in which the second mover chooses the best outcome possible
given the choice of the ﬁrst (DeScioli & Kurzban, in press).
As circumstances change, the ability of organisms to take the initiative and
move ﬁrst might vary. However, there might be stable diﬀerences between players
that might make it more likely that pairs end up at Hole A in a series of
interactions over time. For example, there might be individual diﬀerences in
activity or energy levels, knowledge, size, power or dominance that might make
one individual be more likely to emerge as leader in a given context (Couzin et
al., 2005; see also Buunk et al., chapter 13, this volume).
There is another possibility for the emergence of followership in this situ-
ation, suggested by multi-level selection theory (Sober & Wilson, 1998).
Table 14.2 Strategic Leadership. The Leader Game, in which pay-offs (in reproductive
success) are for Players 1 and 2 respectively. Equilibria are indicated with asterisks
Player 2
Hole A
Hole B
Player 1
Hole A
3,1*
0,0
Hole B
0,0
1,3*
233
LEADERSHIP

Although followers do less well than leaders in the Leader Game, it is also clear
that aggregate pay-oﬀs are higher in the Leader Game when there is co-
ordination. Groups with a leader–follower structure (i.e., where the pair ends up
coordinating at the same hole) have higher aggregate ﬁtness (i.e., where the pair
ends up at a diﬀerent hole). Thus, there could, plausibly, be a between-group
selection pressure. Under the right conditions—discussed at length elsewhere
(Sober & Wilson, 1998)—it is plausible that between group ﬁtness diﬀerentials
would constitute pressure against which natural selection could act. We take no
strong position on this issue, but merely point out that gains from coordination
lead to potentially interesting multi-level selection dynamics (see Kurzban &
Aktipis, 2006, for a brief discussion of ﬁnding evidence for the action of
multi-level selection).
Finally, consider the game depicted in Table 14.3. For Player 1, choosing
Hole A is a dominant strategy because the pay-oﬀs associated with Hole A are
always higher, independent of Player 2’s choice. Because of this pay-oﬀ structure,
Player 2 cannot change Player 1’s incentive such that Player 1’s best response
will be to choose Hole B. Player 2’s best response, therefore, is to “make the
best of a bad situation” (Dawkins, 1976; Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10, this
volume), and choose Hole A. In this game, moving ﬁrst or communicating
one’s intentions does not matter. The dominant individual (Player 1)
always emerges as leader and the non-dominant as follower. This kind of leader-
ship matches our deﬁnition in the sense that the dominant individual induces
the subordinates to adopt the goals of the leader by following them wherever
they go.
These games are obviously simpliﬁed versions of any real-world situation,
and are intended to give a sense of plausible incentive structures that shaped
human cognitive adaptations surrounding leadership and followership. In
humans, because of the ability to coordinate actions in groups of larger than
size two, leadership can involve multi-party coalitions. In such groups, one
individual can lead a group of people. The sketch here is intended as
a heuristic tool for understanding leadership in dyads. We look forward to
additional theoretical work generalizing from groups of size two to groups of
size N.
Table 14.3 Leadership and Dominance. The Dominance Game, in which pay-offs (in
reproductive success) are for Players 1 and 2 respectively. A/A is an equilibrium
Player 2
Hole A
Hole B
Player 1
Hole A
3,1*
2,0
Hole B
0,0
1,3
234
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

NON-HUMAN EVIDENCE FOR LEADERSHIP
Evolutionary biologists have historically reserved the term leadership for
behaviours that determine the type, timing and duration of group activity
(Wilson, 1975). In any species an important set of adaptive problems revolve
around deciding what to do, when and where. For animals living in social
groups, a further complication is the presence of conspeciﬁcs (see, in this vol-
ume, Dunbar, chapter 2; Kenrick et al., chapter 4; Ybarra et al., chapter 16). As
mentioned above, it is often safer to move together as a unit, forage as part of a
group and sleep at a communal site. This favours some coordination of activity
(Krause & Ruxton, 2002). This problem could be solved by one or several
individuals taking the initiative and others in the group acquiescing and
following. These sorts of problems are likely to have paved the way for the emer-
gence of leadership and followership in many social species, including humans.
There are many examples of putative leadership in the animal behaviour
literature. The waggle-dance of the honey bee that recruits hive members to visit
food resources has been construed as a kind of leadership; the aerial formations
of certain bird species and the swimming patterns of schools of ﬁsh are also often
cited as examples of leader–follower patterns (Couzin et al., 2005; Krause &
Ruxton, 2002; Lamprecht, 1996).
Because individuals hold diﬀerent preferences about the type and timing of
group activities, some individuals stand to beneﬁt more than others from group
coordination, and therefore have an incentive to get others to adopt their prefer-
ences. Further, individuals’ preferences are likely to diﬀer systematically. For
example, some organisms might simply consume more energy and digest their
food more quickly. Because they get hungry sooner, they decide the timing of the
group movement, inducing others to follow them (Couzin et al., 2005).
Leading by taking the initiative is not automatically going to be eﬀective, as
the game being played is not always as simple as the ones sketched above. An
interesting example is found among the nomadic Hamadryas baboons (Dunbar,
chapter 2, this volume; Kummer, 1968). When they decide upon which sleeping
site to move to on a given night, one individual might make a move in a
particular direction. Sometimes they are followed by the rest, but sometimes they
are not, in which case the individual is forced to return to the group and the
decision process is repeated. Individual recognition makes it possible that some
individuals are more likely to be followed, based on such factors as age and
knowledge.
Dominant individuals also sometimes take on leadership functions in
groups, being supported in this role by the rest of the group. De Waal (1996)
observed an example when the dominant (alpha) male in a troop of chimpanzees
that he studied at Arnhem Zoo intervened in a ﬁght: “A quarrel between Mama
and Spin got out of hand and ended in ﬁghting and biting. Numerous apes
rushed up to the two warring females and joined in the fray. A huge knot of
ﬁghting, screaming apes rolled around in the sand, until Luit [the alpha male]
235
LEADERSHIP

leapt in and literally beat them apart. He did not choose sides in the conﬂict, like
others; instead anyone who continued to act received a blow from him” (p. 129).
De Waal argued that this control role is only eﬀective if it is endorsed by the
majority of the group, thus constituting an example of leadership.
Boehm (1999) observed an instance of leadership displayed by the alpha
male in the chimpanzee colony at Gombe. When members of this colony
encountered the members of a diﬀerent troop, the alpha charged towards them
and the rest followed his example, until the enemy slowly retreated into their
home range. Finally, there is evidence for dominant leadership among other
social mammals (lions and wolves), suggesting that dominant individuals emerge
as leaders more frequently in chasing prey or chasing away intruders (Heinsohn
& Packer, 1995; Wilson, 1975). In these instances, dominant individuals make
the ﬁrst move in initiating group action. Once a leader commits to a course of
action, the best move on the part of others is often to follow (see Table 14.3).
LEADERSHIP IN HUMANS
Obviously, selection pressures that created leadership in other social species
might not be the same as those observed in humans (cf. Kurzban & Leary, 2001).
The above analysis suggests that in humans, the concept of “leadership” might be
best understood as a constellation of adaptations designed to solve two qualita-
tively diﬀerent types of group problems. Note that these adaptations are ﬂexible
in the sense that behaviours producing leadership and followership are only
elicited in speciﬁc environments that resemble the ones in which these roles were
originally displayed and selected for (Cosmides & Tooby, 1992). Which are these
situations?
Coordinating Leadership
In some cases, individuals are playing relatively simple coordination games.
That is, people care less about which speciﬁc action is taken than about co-
ordinating on one action. Such cases require coordination and, hence, a
coordinating leader. Real-world examples have been discussed at length by
Schelling (1960).
This type of leadership ties well with the literature on task-oriented leader-
ship, which is the most common form of leadership displayed in human groups
(Cartwright & Zander, 1968; Hemphill, 1950). Task leaders display activities to
promote task completion, such as the coordination of group activities, assign-
ment of sub-tasks and performance monitoring (Fiedler, 1967). Leadership as
coordination is also seen in highly cohesive groups in which members have very
similar preferences. Cohesive groups actually do better with a randomly chan-
ging leader than a permanent leader, presumably because structural leadership
creates power diﬀerences between members, which undermines group cohesion
236
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

(Haslam et al., 1998; Hogg, 2001). Finally, in pure coordination problems,
groups might choose one individual to make a decision on behalf of the entire
group, paving the way for a highly directive, autocratic leader (Peterson, 1999).
Interestingly, in pure coordination situations, leadership does not have to
be granted to a person. Groups might converge on a coordination point by all
following the same social norm (e.g., driving on the left; wearing a tie) or
adhering to the same vision (e.g., religion, political belief, corporate strategy, etc.;
see Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume). Again, Schelling (1960) is an excellent
source for discussions of problems of this type.
Strategic Leadership
Strategic leadership emerges when one individual can change the pay-oﬀs of
others’ actions so that they are induced to assume the leader’s proximate goals,
even if these do not, globally, maximize the followers’ outcomes. Table 14.2
illustrates such a case: In such situations, there is an incentive for individuals to
move ﬁrst and seize the initiative.
Real-world examples are not always so clean. Clearly, there are cases in
which potential followers must be persuaded that coordinating on the leader’s
goal is more beneﬁcial than not doing so (Bass, 1990). This idea touches the
broad literature on relational-style leadership. Relational leaders’ primary con-
cern is to build up good relations with followers (Cartwright & Zander, 1968;
Hemphill, 1950). One form of persuasion is to be fair and generous to followers
so that they expect to get what they have been promised (Boehm, 1999; de
Cremer & van Vugt, 2002; Hardy & van Vugt, 2006; Tyler & Lind, 1992).
Another strategy is to develop a unique skill or competency that attracts follow-
ers. Apparently, members of task groups are very good at recognizing the
strengths and weaknesses of each other (Littlepage, Robinson & Reddington,
1997). In these cases, potential followers are persuaded about the beneﬁts of
relevant choices; this stands in contrast to purely coordinating leadership, in
which a leader need not worry about persuasion as it is to others’ advantage to
coordinate on the selected act.
The concept of strategic leadership is of potential value in understanding
interesting correlations between leadership and traits like ambition, intelligence,
self-esteem, extraversion, sociability, empathy and Machiavellianism (Lord,
DeVader & Alliger, 1986; van Vugt, 2006). To emerge as leaders, individuals
must think and behave strategically to inﬂuence potential followers. Having the
ability to put oneself in other people’s shoes (empathy) as well as having excellent
communication skills fosters leadership. Research suggests that leadership in ad
hoc groups is granted to the most talkative group member, regardless of what
they have to say (babble hypothesis; Sorentino & Boutillier, 1975). Also, coming
across as intelligent—Machiavellianists are particularly good at this (Wilson et
al., 1996)—might persuade others to give up their preferred option, following
the leader instead.
237
LEADERSHIP

Of course, not all forms of strategic interactions are equal. One way to
change potential followers’ pay-oﬀs is to use coercion or the threat of coercion. It
is not clear the extent to which pure coercion is used as strategic leadership in
humans. To achieve important adaptive goals, such as food gathering and self-
protection, humans depend upon other humans (Kenrick et al., chapter 4, this
volume; Kenrick, Li & Butner, 2003). Human leaders often cannot achieve their
goals without the voluntary support of followers. Further, comparative research
suggests that human hierarchies—particularly in non-industrialized societies—
are often ﬂatter than the non-human primates, where examples of dominant
leadership have been obtained (Boehm, 1999; de Waal, 1996; Dunbar, 2004). In
humans, if followers disagree with their leaders, they have strategies to deal with
them (Boehm, 1999). Humans also form unusually large coalitions (Dunbar,
chapter 2, this volume; Kurzban, Tooby & Cosmides, 2001; Navarete, Kurzban,
Fessler & Kirkpatrick, 2004), which makes it diﬃcult for any one individual to
dominate an entire group.
The psychological literature suggests that there is a weak correlation
between dominance and leadership in humans (van Vugt, 2006). It seems that
people do not want to be dominated by others. If they are, they either form a
coalition to turn against their leader (Boehm, 1999) or simply leave the group
(van Vugt, Jepson, Hart & de Cremer, 2004). The importance of cooperation,
combined with the availability of exit and voice strategies, often prevents leaders
from turning into dictators (cf. Vehrencamp, 1983). This is not to say that
leaders are not tempted to dominate followers. One might expect that there
would be a tendency in leaders to try to dominate followers (van Vugt, Hogan &
Kaiser, 2006). However, this is likely to be counteracted by subversive tactics
among followers through gossip, disobedience and open rebellion (Boehm,
1999; Dunbar, 2004; van Vugt et al., 2006). In short, while there is no doubt
that human history is replete with examples of coercive strategic leadership, it is
not clear the extent to which this has been typical of human social groupings.
DISCUSSION
In this chapter, we have oﬀered an evolutionary perspective on leadership. To
understand leadership, it is important to ask the previous question surrounding
why individuals might have come to be designed to follow a leader. In particular,
we suggested that followership adaptations emerged in order to reap the beneﬁts
of coordination in response to problems that many group-living species face (see
the other chapters in this volume).
Evolutionary Game Analysis
Our analysis of leadership heavily relies on evolutionary game theory. The evo-
lutionary game analysis enabled us to model the evolution of leader and follower
238
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

traits through identifying problems (games) that could be solved through leader-
ship. Without attempting to be exhaustive, our analysis identiﬁed two basic
forms of leadership, coordinating and strategic leadership. We ﬁrst reviewed the
animal literature and found some support for this distinction. Subsequently,
we reviewed the human (psychological) literature to illuminate some of the
conditions under which each of these leader types might develop.
Leadership and Social Cognition
We can oﬀer a few speculations to make concrete our ideas surrounding the
cognitive adaptations designed for leadership and followership. First, it seems
plausible that there are specialized mechanisms designed to identify situations as
coordination problems. It is not clear, as yet, what these adaptations would look
like, but certainly such skills might look like facets of what has come to be
understood under the broad umbrella of intelligence (Dunbar, 2004). Not sur-
prisingly, psychological research shows that leadership in humans is consistently
linked with intelligence (van Vugt, 2006).
Second, cognitive mechanisms associated with timing would have been
instrumental for the development of leadership. Our game theoretical analysis
suggests that any trait that enabled an individual to pre-empt a move would have
increased the chances of them emerging as leaders. Not surprisingly, the
literature shows a strong correlation between leadership and traits associated
with initiative taking such as boldness, extraversion, impatience, risk taking and
self-esteem (van Vugt, 2006).
Third and related, the emergence of leadership is tightly bound to the
ability to predict others’ actions and intentions (Ybarra et al., chapter 16, this
volume). This idea has close connections with belief/desire-psychology, or what
Dennett (1987) has termed the Intentional Stance. The broad literatures on
theory of mind and, obviously, language, are relevant for understanding how
humans came to coordinate actions (Dunbar, 2004). Mind-reading abilities,
supported by language, would have enabled individuals to coordinate their
actions in larger, dispersed groups, which opened up new opportunities for
leadership. Indeed, leadership is correlated with superior mind-reading and
communication skills such as empathy and verbal giftedness (van Vugt, 2006).
Finally, leader–follower relationships would be smoothed if individuals
were able to recognize those in the group with a particular skill, ability, or piece
of information that could help them achieve a desired goal such as solving a
coordination problem. Perhaps this is the underlying reason that task ability is
considered to be highly important for qualifying as leader (Palmer, 1962).
Furthermore, given enough experience working together, people can easily rank
one another in terms of skills and knowledge (Littlepage et al., 1997).
Thus, cognitive traits associated with problem recognition, timing, mind-
reading, language and social competence recognition would have all contributed
to the emergence of leadership in humans. However, whether these modules
239
LEADERSHIP

were speciﬁcally designed to solve group coordination problems remains an
empirical issue.
Implications
One implication of the approach sketched here is that leadership is tightly bound
to the need to coordinate (Kurzban, 2001). To the extent that individuals are
able to determine when they are in such a context, one would expect leader/
follower adaptations to be diﬀerentially activated. Second, the distinction we
draw in terms of types of leadership implies that diﬀerent types of leadership
might be more appropriate under diﬀerent conditions. Pure coordination games
should be solved best by coordinating leaders, whereas other types of game
might be better suited to strategic leadership, as illustrated by the example of
chimpanzees. As a corollary to this, our analysis suggests that an individual’s style
of leadership—whether oriented towards coordinating or strategic—might be
a crucial determinant of the success of groups and their members (Sober &
Wilson, 1998).
Our analysis suggests various new directions for research on leadership. One
straightforward prediction is that leadership emerges more quickly when groups
are under threat and there is an urgent need for coordination. Studies could also
investigate the emergence of diﬀerent forms of leadership in response to diﬀerent
kinds of threats such as an intra-group conﬂict or inter-group aggression (de
Cremer & van Vugt, 2002; Kenrick et al., chapter 4, this volume; Schaller &
Duncan, chapter 18, this volume; van Vugt & de Cremer, 1999). More research
is needed to study the beneﬁts of leadership for groups. Multi-level selection
theory suggests that leadership might have evolved as group-level adaptation
(Boehm, 1999). One way to test this idea would be to show that groups with a
functioning leader–follower structure fare better than groups without this struc-
ture, thus creating variations between groups on which selection could have
operated in the past.
Perhaps more generally, the leadership ﬁeld could beneﬁt from developing a
more integrated research agenda involving eﬀorts from many behavioural science
disciplines. In addition, this analysis suggests that the light of inquiry should
shine more brightly on followership. Though this topic has important historical
roots (e.g., Freud, 1922; Fromm, 1941), it has received far less attention than
leadership. Examining the conditions under which people choose to coordinate
their actions to help leaders achieve their—or the group’s—goals holds the
promise of balancing the vast research on leadership with the other side of
the equation, the mechanisms that underpin a potentially well-elaborated
psychology of followership.
240
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

NOTE
1. In the one-shot, simultaneous version of this
game, there are equilibria in pure strategies
in which each chooses the same hole and an
additional equilibrium in mixed strategies in
which each player chooses each watering
hole with probability. 5. In the third equi-
librium, they reach the non-zero pay-oﬀs
only half the time. For standard game theor-
etical discussions, which typically do not
include sequential play, see Rapoport
(1967). We use these games, and include the
possibility of sequential play, simply to illus-
trate our broader points about leadership
and followership.
REFERENCES
Bass, B. M. (1954). The leaderless group discus-
sion. Psychological Bulletin, 51, 465–492.
Bass, B. M. (1990). Bass and Stogdill’s handbook
of leadership: Theory, research, and managerial
applications (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press.
Boehm, C. (1999). Hierarchy in the forest.
London: Harvard University Press.
Brown, D. (1991). Human universals. Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Cartwright, D., & Zander, A. (1968). Group
dynamics: Research and theory. Evanston, IL:
Row Peterson.
Chemers, M. M. (2000). Leadership research
and theory: A functional integration. Group
Dynamics, 4, 37–43.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive
adaptations for social exchange. In J. Barkow
et al. (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture (pp.
163–128). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Couzin, I. D., Krause, J., Franks, N. R., &
Levin, S. A. (2005). Eﬀective leadership and
decision-making in animal groups on the
move. Nature, 434, 513–516.
Darwin, C. (1859). The origins of species. Lon-
don: Murray.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selﬁsh gene. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
De Cremer, D., & van Vugt, M. (2002). Intra
and intergroup dynamics of leadership in
social dilemmas: A relational model of
cooperation. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 38, 126–136.
Dennett, D. C. (1987). The intentional stance.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
DeScioli, P., & Kurzban, R. (in press). The
game people play. In S. Gangestad & J. Simp-
son (Eds.), Evolution of mind: Fundamental
questions and controversies. New York: Guil-
ford Press.
De Waal, F. (1996). Good natured: The origins of
right and wrong in humans and other animals.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dunbar, R. M. (2004). Gossip, grooming, and
the evolution of language. London: Faber &
Faber.
Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A theory of leadership
eﬀectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Freud, S. (1922). Group psychology and the
analysis of the ego. New York: Liveright.
Fromm, E. (1941). Escape from freedom. New
York: Holt.
Hardy, C. L., & van Vugt, M. (2006). Nice
guys ﬁnish ﬁrst: The competitive altruism
hypothesis. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 32, 1402–1413.
Haslam, A., McGarthy, C., Brown, P., Eggins,
R., Morrison, B., & Reynolds, K. (1998).
Inspecting the emperor’s clothes: Evidence
that random selection of leaders can enhance
group performance. Group Dynamics, 2,
168–184.
Heinsohn, R., & Packer, C. (1995). Complex
cooperative strategies in group-territorial
African lions. Science, 269, 1260–1262.
Hemphill, J. K. (1950). Leader behaviour
description. Columbus, OH: Ohio State
University
Henrich, J., & Gil-White, F. (2001). The evolu-
tion of prestige: Freely conferred deference as
a mechanism for enhancing the beneﬁts of
cultural transmission. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 22, 165–196.
Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. (2005). What we
know about leadership. Review of General
Psychology, 9, 169–180.
Hogg, M. A. (2001). A social identity theory of
241
LEADERSHIP

leadership. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 5, 184–200.
Hollander, E. P. (1985). Leadership and power.
In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), The
handbook of social psychology (pp. 485–537).
New York: Random House.
Kenrick, D., Li, N. P., & Butner, J. (2003).
Dynamical evolutionary psychology: Indi-
vidual decision rules and emergent social
norms. Psychological Review, 110, 3–28.
Krause, J., & Ruxton, G. D. (2002). Living in
groups. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Kummer, H. (1968). Social organization of
hamadryas baboons. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kurzban, R. (2001). The social psychophysics
of cooperation: Nonverbal communication
in a public goods game. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 25(4), 241–259.
Kurzban, R., & Aktipis, C. A. (2006). Modular
minds, multiple motives. In M. Schaller, J.
Simpson, & D. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and
social psychology (pp. 39–54). New York:
Psychology Press
Kurzban, R., Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2001).
Can race be erased? Coalitional computation
and social categorization. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 98(26), 15387–
15392.
Kurzban, R. K., & Leary, M. (2001). Evo-
lutionary origins of stigmatization: The
functions of social exclusion. Psychological
Bulletin, 127, 187–208.
Lamprecht, J. (1996). What makes an
individual the leader of its group? An evo-
lutionary concept of distance regulation and
leadership. Social Sciences Information, 35,
595–617.
Littlepage, G. E., Robinson, W., & Red-
dington, K. (1997). Eﬀects of task experience
and group experience on group performance,
member ability, and recognition of expertise.
Organizational 
Behaviour 
and 
Human
Decision Processes, 69, 133–147.
Lord, R. G., DeVader, C. L., & Alliger, G. M.
(1986). A meta-analysis of the relation
between personality traits and leadership
perceptions: An application of validity
generalization procedures. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 71, 402–410.
Maynard-Smith, J. (1982). Evolution and the
theory of games. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Navarete, C., Kurzban, R., Fessler, D., &
Kirkpatrick, 
L. 
(2004). 
Anxiety 
and
worldview defense: Terror-management or
coalitional psychology? Group Processes and
Intergroup Relations, 7(4), 370–397.
Palmer, G. J. (1962). Task ability and eﬀective
leadership. Psychological Reports, 10, 863–
866.
Peterson, R. S. (1999). Can you have too much
of a good thing? The limits of voice for
improving satisfaction with leaders. Personal-
ity and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 313–
324.
Rapoport, A. (1967). Exploiter, leader, hero,
and martyr: The four archetypes of the 2×2
game. Behavioral Science, 12, 81–84.
Schelling, T. (1960). The strategy of conﬂict.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sober, E., & Wilson, D. S. (1998). Unto others:
The evolution and psychology of unselﬁsh
behaviour. 
Cambridge, 
MA: 
Harvard
University Press.
Sorrentino, R. M., & Boutillier, R. G. (1975).
The eﬀect of quantity and quality of verbal
interaction on ratings of leadership ability.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 11,
403–411.
Stogdill, R. M. (1974). Handbook of leadership.
New York: Free Press.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). Psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. Barkow et
al. (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary
psychology and the generation of culture (pp.
19–136). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Tyler, T. R., & Lind, E. A. (1992). A relational
model of authority in groups. In M. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psych-
ology (Vol. 25, pp. 115–191). New York:
Academic Press.
Van Vugt., M. (2006). Evolutionary origins of
leadership and followership. Personality and
Social Psychology Review.
Van Vugt, M., & de Cremer, D. (1999). Lead-
ership in social dilemmas: The eﬀects of
group identiﬁcation on collective actions to
provide public goods. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 76, 587–599.
Van Vugt, M., Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. (2006).
What evolution teaches us about leadership.
Unpublished manuscript.
Van Vugt, M., Jepson, S. F., Hart, C. M., & de
Cremer, D. (2004). Autocratic leadership in
242
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

social dilemmas: A threat to group stability.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40,
1–13.
Vehrencamp, S. L. (1983). A model for the evo-
lution of despotic versus egalitarian societies.
Animal Behaviour, 31, 667–682.
West-Eberhard, M. J. (2003). Developmental
plasticity and evolution. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Wilson, D. S., Near, D., & Miller, R. R.
(1996). Machiavellianism: A synthesis of the
evolutionary and psychological literatures.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 285–299.
Wilson, E. O. (1975). Sociobiology: The new
synthesis. Harvard, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Yukl, G. A. (1989). Leadership in organizations.
Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
243
LEADERSHIP


15
Proximate and Ultimate
Origins of a Bias for
Prototypical Faces
An Evolutionary Social
Cognitive Account
JAMIN HALBERSTADT
The Prototypicality Bias as an Adaptation
Domain Speciﬁcity of the Prototypicality Bias
The Prototypicality Bias as a Side-Eﬀect
Conclusion
T
he use of evolutionary reasoning has been sometimes fruitful, and
equally often controversial. Skeptics rightly criticize sometimes-sloppy
or seemingly unfalsiﬁable adaptive stories that are all-too-easy to muster
as support for otherwise weak theoretical positions. Meanwhile evolutionary
psychologists tout the ﬁeld as the critical link between psychology and the natural
sciences, sometimes condemning the unconvinced as unscientiﬁc, or even intel-
lectually backward (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). Ketelaar and Ellis (2000) have
argued that evolutionary psychology itself is not a theory subject to falsiﬁcation,
but a “metatheory” to be judged on its success in organizing empirical ﬁndings.
This perspective echoes similar arguments for the primacy of ultimate explan-
ations based on their ability to constrain research: evolutionary theory deﬁnes the
space of plausible proximate psychological mechanisms, and therefore must be
considered before exploring those mechanisms. Evolutionary psychologists ask,
in eﬀect: How can we understand how a psychological process works without
knowing what it is designed to do? Thus, there exists a tension between a belief,
fostered by evolutionary psychologists, that an evolutionary approach is necessary
245

to scientiﬁc psychological progress, and the often legitimate sense that particular
evolutionary accounts of psychological phenomena are untested and untestable.
In this chapter I try to relieve this tension by examining a speciﬁc and
potentially important attractiveness phenomenon as a test case for a hybrid
approach to social psychological explanation. The phenomenon is this: Faces
that have been digitally averaged, made more similar to a prototypical face, or
simply independently rated as highly “face-like”, are generally judged as more
attractive than mathematically or subjectively distinctive faces. The eﬀect, ﬁrst
reported in the modern literature by Langois and Roggman (1990), and illus-
trated in Figure 15.1, has been replicated many times (e.g., Langlois, Roggman,
& Musselman, 1994; Rhodes, Sumich, & Byatt, 1999; Rhodes & Tremewan,
1996), in same- and other-race faces (Jones & Hill, 1993; Light, Hollander, &
Kayra-Stuart, 1981; Rhodes & Tremewan, 1996; Rhodes et al., 1999), and in
both adult and child raters (Rubenstein, Kalakanis, & Langlois, 1999). In the
process, a number of correlates and confounds of the averaging process, such as
blurriness, symmetry, and youthfulness (attractive in and of themselves), have
been ruled out (Langois et al., 1994; Rhodes et al., 1999; Rhodes et al., 2004;
Rubenstein, Langois, & Roggman, 2002). Over and above these factors, faces are
generally more attractive as a positive function of their prototypicality. Herein, I
refer to this phenomenon as the “prototypicality bias.”
In this chapter I use evolutionary reasoning to generate functional explan-
ations of the prototypicality bias, whose plausibility are then evaluated with
social cognitive data and research paradigms. Thus, unlike evolutionary research
that looks to archival, historical, or even prehistorical evidence (or speculation)
to reconstruct the adaptive pressures in our evolutionary past, this approach
examines proximate causes and correlates of attractiveness to deduce likely ori-
gins of the prototypicality bias. As will be seen, the results not only provide
insight into the nature of facial attractiveness, but also expose more general, and
arguably more important, associations between category structure and aﬀect, as
well as interesting distinctions between natural and artiﬁcial categories. Hope-
fully, they also provide some insight into the potential for a successful integration
of evolutionary and social cognitive explanation.
FIGURE 15.1 Illustration of the prototypicality bias. A face becomes increasingly attractive
when it is part of a 2-face, 4-face, 8-face, 16-face, and 32-face composite (from left to right).
246
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

THE PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS AS AN ADAPTATION
The ﬁrst thing to acknowledge when searching for the adaptive function of any
psychological phenomenon is that there might not be one. Adaptations are
speciﬁc mechanisms that evolved to solve speciﬁc and recurring reproductive
problems. However, there are other, arguably more frequent products of natural
selection: side-eﬀects, which are features associated with adaptations that may or
may not be functional themselves; and noise, which is random genetic, environ-
mental, or developmental variability with no adaptive signiﬁcance.
Thus, the ﬁrst substantive question to ask in any evolutionary psychological
inquiry is not whether a particular mechanism is functional, but whether it
evolved because it was functional. This is not a trivial or merely technical distinc-
tion. Identifying the ultimate origin of a psychological mechanism is, according
to evolutionary psychologists at least, a necessary ﬁrst step in studying it, because
it constrains the possible research space by identifying plausible moderators and
mediators. Whether or not this strong view of the primacy of evolutionary
psychology is correct, it seems clear that if, for example, we assume prototypical-
ity to be an evolved cue to mate choice when it has nothing whatsoever to do
with mate choice (because it is a coincident side-eﬀect of some more general
cognitive mechanism perhaps), this error is likely to impede research progress.
So, are humans attracted to prototypical faces because that attraction con-
ferred a reproductive advantage in the past? Possibly, if we make the controversial
assumption that mates with prototypical faces are more genetically ﬁt (as well as
the somewhat tautological assumption that we tend to mate with individuals to
whom we are attracted). From this perspective, prototypicality is simply a
signal of reproductive ﬁtness (see Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3, this
volume, for discussion of the evolution of signaling systems). The goal of the
researcher would then be to verify that people with prototypical faces are indeed
genetically ﬁt.
Indeed, evolutionary psychologists studying distinctive (i.e., atypical)
attractive features generally take this approach (e.g., Cunningham, 1986; Cun-
ningham, Barbee, & Pike, 1990; Penton-Voak & Perrett, 2001; Rhodes, Hick-
ford, & Jeﬀrey, 2000; Thornhill & Gangestad, 1999; Zebrowitz, 1997). For
example Cunningham (1986; Cunningham, Roberts, Wu, Barbee, & Druen,
1995) used men’s ratings of beauty pageant contestants to identify both neot-
onous features such as large eyes and pupils (see Zebrowitz, 1997, for a review of
the literature on “babyfacedness”) and sexually mature features, such as promin-
ent cheekbones and narrow cheeks, associated with attractiveness in women.
Perrett et al. (1998) increased attractiveness in both sexes by enhancing their
“feminine” features, which the researchers found to be associated with positive
personality characteristics such as warmth and honesty. More controversially,
some studies have also found extreme “masculine” traits to be attractive in men
(Cunningham et al., 1990; but see Penton-Voak et al., 1999; Perrett et al., 1998;
Rhodes et al., 2000). Intriguingly, a woman’s attraction to such traits depends on
247
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

the stage in her ovulatory cycle and the type of mate (short vs. long term) she is
rating (Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10, this volume).
Although this research associates distinctive features with presumably
reproductively beneﬁcial traits, evolutionary psychologists have explained attrac-
tion to prototypicality—eﬀectively the absence of distinctive features—using the
same logic. Such hypotheses are generally of two types: So-called “good genes”
hypotheses link prototypicality to features that are positively predictive of repro-
ductive ﬁtness, such as current health or fertility, developmental stability
(Thornhill & Møller, 1997), or resistance to parasites (Gangestad & Buss, 1993;
Thornhill & Gangestad, 1993). “Bad genes” hypotheses, on the other hand,
propose relationships between deviations from prototypicality and ﬁtness
impairments, such as some genetic disorders. The two accounts of course are not
incompatible, and in fact both rely on the same logic, namely that prototypical-
ity is a signal of an individual’s reproductive ﬁtness, and attraction a mechanism
for identifying such individuals.
Though controversial and limited, there is some recent evidence for the
relationship between prototypicality and reproductive ﬁtness. Rhodes et al.
(2000) found evidence for the good genes hypothesis in correlations between
facial prototypicality and current (for women) and childhood (for men) health
(in contrast to a number of prior studies reporting weak or absent relationships;
cf. Kalick, Zebrowitz, Langois, & Johnson, 1998; see Rubenstein et al., 2002, for
review). Thornhill and Møller (1997) provide some evidence for the “bad genes”
hypothesis by identifying facial distortions associated with some conditions, such
as Down’s syndrome, autism, and learning disabilities, which are presumably
associated with decreased reproductive ﬁtness.
DOMAIN SPECIFICITY OF THE PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS
Of course, even a strong relationship between prototypicality and reproductive
ﬁtness is no guarantee that humans ﬁnd prototypical faces attractive because of
this relationship—in other words, that the prototypicality bias is an adaptation.
How else might the adaptation hypothesis be evaluated? Well, one characteristic
of adaptations, touted by many (but not all) evolutionary psychologists, is
“domain speciﬁcity.” Psychological mechanisms, like biological ones, evolved to
solve very speciﬁc problems, and therefore to operate in the very narrow range of
input deﬁned by those problems. For example, humans do not have a single
organ for “perception,” but rather very speciﬁc organs for processing visual
auditory, olfactory, tactile, and gustatory stimuli, each itself tuned only to a
narrow range of input (presumably the range most useful for our survival and
reproduction). Similarly, we (arguably) do not have an evolved mechanism for
“logic,” but rather speciﬁc logical abilities in domains that matter, such as the
detection of cheaters or the evaluation of social contracts (Tooby & Cosmides,
1992). Is the prototypicality bias domain-speciﬁc, limited to the particular class
248
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

of input (i.e., human faces, and perhaps bodies) relevant to mate selection? Or do
humans simply prefer prototypes of any category, reproductively relevant or not?
Surprisingly, despite its seemingly central importance in the study of cogni-
tion and aﬀect, this question has rarely been asked (for isolated exceptions see
Martindale & Moore, 1988; Repp, 1997; Smith & Melara, 1990; Whitﬁeld &
Slatter, 1979), and never systematically studied. Therefore in a series of correl-
ational and experimental studies Gillian Rhodes and I examined the relationship
between prototypicality and attractiveness in a variety of natural and artiﬁcial
categories (Halberstadt, 2006; Halberstadt & Rhodes, 2000, 2003). In one
study, for example (Halberstadt & Rhodes, 2000), participants rated the
attractiveness of 50 dogs of diﬀerent breeds, while an independent group of
participants rated how prototypical each dog was (speciﬁcally, how similar each
dog was to their image of a “typical” dog). The ratings, averaged across partici-
pants (interrater reliability was high in almost all cases reported in this chapter),
revealed that the most attractive dog (an American Eskimo) was judged the ninth
most prototypical, whereas the least attractive dog (a Bedlington Terrier) was also
judged least prototypical. Overall, attractiveness and prototypicality correlated
.69, approximately as strongly as in faces, e.g., r(24) = .73 for female European
faces in our research. In fact, replications on all manner of animal and artifact
stimuli (see Table 15.1 for examples), from monkeys and horses, to wristwatches
and handguns, to Chinese ideographs and random dot patterns, reveal correl-
ations between prototypicality and attractiveness, almost always strong and
positive (the strongest so far was found, curiously, for eyeglasses, r[50] = .98).
The relationship also holds when prototypicality is manipulated rather than
Table 15.1 The Prototypicality Bias in Various Natural and Artiﬁcial Categories (Data
from Halberstadt, 2006; Halberstadt & Rhodes, 2000, 2003)
Category
r (Prototypicality,
Attractiveness)
r (Familiarity,
Attractiveness)
Partial r (Prototypicality,
Attractiveness)
Birds
.50
.20
.47
Butterﬂies
.34*
.23
.31*
Dogs
.69
.47
.58
Eyeglasses
.98
.98
.08
Handguns
.87
.89
.24
Rings
.30*
.25
.19
Roses
.32*
.33
.00
Spiders
.20
.12
.22
Watches
.65
.69
.13
Passerines (N = 98)
.94
.93
.46
Fish (N = 63)
.75
.46
.69
Cars (N = 63)
.54
.74
.01
Note: Partial correlations between prototypicality and attractiveness are controlling for familiarity. All correlations in bold are
signiﬁcant at p < .001, except those marked by an asterisk, which are signiﬁcant at p < .05. N = 50 for each category unless
otherwise noted.
249
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

measured, using methods modeled on morphing techniques used to manipulate
prototypicality in faces (e.g., Langlois & Roggman, 1990; Rhodes & Tremewan,
1996). For example, the attractiveness of New Zealand resident passerines (the
largest family of birds) varies linearly with their manipulated distance from a
prototype (a morphed average of all stimuli used in the study; Halberstadt &
Rhodes, 2003; see Figure 15.2).
THE PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS AS A SIDE-EFFECT
Thus, far from being domain speciﬁc, people’s preference for prototypes appears
very general: in nonhuman, natural and artiﬁcial, positive and negative, manipu-
lated and naturally varying categories, people generally prefer good category
exemplars over poor ones. This ﬁnding does not preclude the possibility that a
preference for prototypical faces is an evolutionary adaptation for identifying
reproductively ﬁt mates—nonfaces could be attractive for some other reason(s),
perhaps unrelated to the bias in faces. However the prospect of multiple,
independent adaptations, though possible, is theoretically awkward: Parsimony
demands that we ﬁrst assume that very similar looking eﬀects are the result of a
single cognitive mechanism, and only abandon this null hypothesis in favor of a
more complex account if the evidence requires it.
So, if people’s attraction to prototypical faces is a product of evolution (as it
FIGURE 15.2 Average prototypicality and attractiveness ratings of original, caricatured,
and anticaricatured New Zealand passerines (from Halberstadt & Rhodes, 2003). The
example stimulus set shown is based on the native Tui.
250
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

must be); and if the only two substantive products of evolution are adaptations
and their side-eﬀects; and if, due to its generality, the prototypicality bias is
unlikely to be an adaptation (i.e., a domain-speciﬁc mate selection mechanism),
then the most likely explanation is that it is a side-eﬀect (or a side-eﬀect of a
side-eﬀect) of another adaptation. Next, I consider some plausibly functional
cognitive mechanisms of which an attraction to average faces could be a
side-eﬀect.
Generalization of Category-Level Affect
The categorization process itself is often claimed to be critical to cognitive func-
tioning. Kunda’s (1999) portrayal of the situation in terms of social cognition is
typical:
Without concepts, our world would make little sense. We would be unable to
extract meaning from the huge amount of information that surrounds us, unable
to generalize from one experience to another, and unable to communicate eﬀect-
ively with each other. (p. 17)
Extracting meaning, generalizing, communicating: These are critical social
tasks if ever there were ones, and at least plausible adaptive problems (i.e.,
impacting on reproductive ﬁtness). The formation and use of categories, if they
indeed solve these problems, may be a genuine adaptation, and the aﬀect associ-
ated with category members merely an incidental (though perhaps functional)
consequence of the fact that some categories are liked better than others.
However, theories that assume that aﬀect is a concomitant of categorization
can explain why individuals might respond positively toward a face once it is
categorized as such (on the assumption that faces are a generally positive stimulus
class), but not why their response should vary with the prototypicality of the
face. In fact, social cognitive theories of person perception and stereotyping
generally do not allow for aﬀective responses proportional to category ﬁt (Fiske’s,
1982 theory of “schema-triggered aﬀect” is a notable exception): Theoretically
(if somewhat implausibly) someone who likes liberals (for example) likes any
individual they categorize as “liberal,” regardless of how liberal the individual is
(i.e., how well they ﬁt the perceiver’s prototype).
However, even allowing for graded aﬀective responses to category members
(and such a parameter would be relatively easy to incorporate into theories of
stereotyping), such theories cannot explain the positive response to prototypes of
negatively valenced categories. If aﬀect is merely a side-eﬀect of categorization,
then good examples of positive categories should be especially liked, and good
examples of negative categories should be especially disliked. However, there is
little evidence in our data that category valence moderates the prototypicality
bias. In fact, one of the strongest correlations in our data exists for handguns (r =
.87), which are judged by participants living in handgun-free New Zealand as a
251
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

very negative stimulus. Thus, mere generalization of category-level aﬀect cannot
provide a general answer to the question of why category prototypes are
attractive.
Fluency
Although positive responses to prototypes are thus unlikely to be simply exten-
sions of category-level aﬀect to category members, the process of categorization
itself produces aﬀective responses. Cognitive ﬂuency—the ease with which a
stimulus can be identiﬁed as a member of its category, as quantiﬁed by speeded
classiﬁcation time—varies with the prototypicality of the stimulus: the closer to
the prototype, the more quickly a stimulus can be processed (Posner & Keele,
1968). More important, the more ﬂuent a stimulus, the more positively it is
judged (e.g., Reber, Winkielman, & Schwartz, 1998), either because the experi-
ence of ﬂuent processing is itself positive, or because the experience is interpreted
as a signal of something positive about the stimulus. In evolutionary psycho-
logical terms, the attractiveness of prototypical faces, like the attractiveness of
other prototypes, could be simply a side-eﬀect of the ease with which they can be
processed.
My colleagues and I recently reported results that lend initial plausibility to
this account (Winkielman, Halberstadt, Fazendeiro, & Catty, 2006). In two
studies, either meaningful (squares and diamonds) or meaningless (random dot
patterns) prototypes were distorted to diﬀerent degrees using a probabilistic
algorithm (Posner, Goldsmith, & Welton, 1967). Participants rated the
attractiveness of the stimuli and, in a separate experimental phase, categorized
them according to the prototype from which they were distorted. For both
types of stimuli, prototypicality (i.e., stimulus distortion) predicted both
attractiveness and categorization speed, which were themselves correlated. More
importantly, in both studies, partialling out the eﬀect of ﬂuency signiﬁcantly
reduced the prototypicality–attractiveness relationship, although prototypicality
accounted for additional, unique variance in attractiveness. A third study used
facial electromyography to verify that participants’ attractiveness ratings
reﬂected genuine positive aﬀective reactions (as opposed to “cold” judgments,
such as distance from the prototype, for which “attractiveness” might have
served as a judgment proxy). Results conﬁrmed that “prepared” prototypes
(i.e., novel stimuli, distortions of which had been previously seen) elicited more
activity in the zygomaticus major muscle region (the “cheek” muscle associated
with smiling), and higher explicit liking ratings, than unprepared prototypes.
Together, the results of this research suggest that prototypical stimuli are
attractive at least in part because the ease with which they are processed elicits
positive aﬀective reactions. However, ﬂuency cannot provide a complete
account of the appeal of prototypes, and the role of ﬂuency in the appeal of
average faces in particular is still unknown, the subject of current research in
our laboratory.
252
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Prior Exposure
Another source of aﬀect associated with prototypes comes from their relation-
ship to previously seen stimuli (Zajonc, 1968). Stimuli to which individuals
have been exposed are judged more positively than novel stimuli on a variety
of dimensions, including attractiveness, likeability, and semantic meaning (the
“mere exposure eﬀect”; see Bornstein, 1989, for review). Arguably, a bias
toward the previously encountered could be functional, perhaps even an adap-
tation for identifying “safe” stimuli (Garcia-Marquez & Mackie, 2000; Smith,
2000), since anything a living organism has previously encountered has by
deﬁnition been nonlethal in the past. Such a mechanism would be particu-
larly useful in the absence of conscious stimulus recognition (Zajonc, 1980),
and indeed the mere exposure eﬀect appears to be more powerful when
stimulus exposure is subliminal (Bornstein, 1989). However, the role of prior
exposure on the attractiveness of prototypical faces has not been born out in
our research: Although participants in some cases found facial composites
more likeable when they had been exposed to the individual faces from
which the composites were created, they usually failed to generalize
attractiveness to these composites (Halberstadt, Rhodes, & Catty, 2003; Rhodes,
Halberstadt, & Brajkovich, 2001; Rhodes, Halberstadt, Jeﬀrey, & Palermo,
2005).
However, theoretically independent of whether a face has been in fact seen
before is the feeling that the face has been seen before, what Halberstadt et al.
(2003) call subjective familiarity (in contrast to objective familiarity, one’s actual
prior exposure to a stimulus). Subjective familiarity typically covaries with
objective familiarity, but not always, as evidenced by manipulations, such
enhancing stimulus clarity, that increase subjective familiarity independent of
actual exposure (e.g., Whittlesea, Jacoby, & Girard, 1990). More important for
the present purposes, prototypes are subjectively familiar, even when they are
objectively novel (Gordon & Holyoak, 1983) and subjective familiarity predicts
positive aﬀect (Reber et al., 1998). Therefore, in evolutionary psychological
terms, the appeal of prototypical faces could be a side-eﬀect of their familiarity, a
speciﬁc case of a more general cognitive mechanism linking subjective familiarity
and positive aﬀect.
To examine this hypothesis we partialled out subjective familiarity, averaged
across new sets of independent participants, from the prototypicality–
attractiveness relationship for each stimulus category in Table 15.1. The results
provide some unexpected insights: As expected, familiarity was highly correlated
with attractiveness in all categories, but unexpectedly it fully mediated the proto-
typicality–attractiveness relationship only in artifact categories. An informal
meta-analysis conﬁrmed a case of moderated mediation of the prototypicality
bias by familiarity, depending on category type (natural vs. artiﬁcial): the
attractiveness of artifact categories such as eyeglasses and handguns can be
entirely explained by their subjective familiarity (overall partial r = .08, ns), but
253
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

prototypes of natural categories are attractive above and beyond their familiarity
(overall partial r = .43, p < .001).
Prototypicality as a Cue to Quality
Thus, the evidence so far is most consistent with a dual-origin account of the
prototypicality bias. The attractiveness of prototypical artifacts, and possibly
natural but nonanimal kinds, can be explained entirely by their subjective famil-
iarity: prototypes feel more familiar than unusual exemplars, and perceivers
prefer the subjectively familiar, either for speciﬁc functional reasons or as a
side-eﬀect of yet another psychological adaptation. In animals, however, proto-
typicality makes an independent contribution to attractiveness beyond subjective
familiarity, and therefore a diﬀerent or supplementary mechanism is required.
One possibility is that prototypicality is associated with something
important to know about animals generally, and the aﬀect associated with
prototypicality is a mechanism for bringing organisms closer to things that are
ﬁtness-promoting (see, for other examples of emotions’ functionality, contribu-
tions in this volume by Badcock & Allen, chapter 8; Buck, chapter 6; Forgas,
chapter 7; Lieberman, chapter 11; and Schaller & Duncan, chapter 18). For
example, prototypicality might be associated with the health of an organism, and
accurate assessment of health would be valuable across species, though for diﬀer-
ent reasons. In the context of human face perception, this information would be
useful for evaluating the reproductive ﬁtness of potential mates. In other species,
however, health information might be useful for establishing an organism’s value
as food or prey or its risk as a predator. As noted above, prototypicality has
tentatively been associated with both current and childhood health (Rhodes et
al., 2000) in humans. Is there evidence that prototypicality could be a useful
heuristic more generally?
As an initial examination of this question, independent participants rated
the prototypicality and “dangerousness” of a number of plant and animal cat-
egories (berries, ﬁsh, frogs, mushrooms, snakes, and spiders; N = 50 in each case)
whose consumption, contact, or attack was either harmless, injurious, or lethal.
The results, which appear in Table 15.2, do not support a general link between
prototypicality and objective danger, which signiﬁcantly correlated in the pre-
dicted direction only in two cases (prototypical berries and frogs tend to be
safer), and in fact correlated in the opposite direction in one case (prototypical
spiders are more dangerous). Even in these two cases, prototypicality failed to
mediate the accuracy of danger judgments (i.e., the correlation between judged
and actual dangerousness of the individual members of a category). Interestingly,
prototypicality correlated strongly with perceived danger in all categories, except
for spiders, where the relationship was reversed (i.e., prototypical spiders were
judged as more dangerous, r = .36). Thus, at least in this limited sample of
animal categories, prototypicality does not consistently predict the dangerous-
ness of particular category members, although participants may believe it does,
254
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

which may partially account for the generally low accuracy of their danger judg-
ments. Therefore, the hypothesis that a general prototypicality bias evolved as a
heuristic tool for inferring reproductively-relevant information about animals
(including conspeciﬁcs) is tentatively rejected, although additional research
examining other functional correlates of prototypicality is obviously needed to
evaluate the hypothesis fully.
Stimulus Generalization
Even if an attraction to prototypical animals is not ultimately functional in every
case, it is possible that it represents an adaptation in some cases but not in others,
or even that the latter are a consequence of the former. Give the theoretical and
empirical relationships between prototypicality and reproductive ﬁtness in
human faces, a particularly intriguing possibility is that the prototypicality bias
evolved as a functional mechanism for identifying quality mates, and has since
generalized to the evaluation of other animals.
Research on stimulus generalization is nearly as old as psychology itself (see
Ghirlanda & Enquist, 2003, for a recent review), and the idea that responses to
novel stimuli vary as some function of their similarity to previously encountered
stimuli is a well-established principle among behavioral, cognitive, develop-
mental, social, clinical, and ethological researchers, among others (e.g., Buss,
Murray, & Buss, 1968; Guttman & Kalish, 1954; Nosofsky, 1987; Rescorla,
1976; Shepard, 1987; Siegel, Hearst, George, & O’Neal, 1968). Although the-
ory and research are more limited, there is also precedent for explaining social
perceptual phenomena as generalizations or overgeneralizations of otherwise
functional evolutionary mechanisms (Zebrowitz, Fellous, Mignault, & Andreo-
letti, 2003). For example, individuals’ avoidance of, and negative emotions
toward, disabled others have been interpreted as an overgeneralization of an
otherwise functional “disease-avoidance” mechanism (Schaller & Duncan, chap-
ter 18, this volume). Conversely, and more relevant to the current chapter,
Table 15.2 Correlations Between Prototypicality and Actual and Perceived
Dangerousness, for Six Natural Categories
Category
r (Prototypicality,
Dangerousness)
r (Prototypicality, Perceived
Dangerousness)
Berries
−.49
−.72
Fish
−.15
−.72
Frogs
−.50
−.90
Mushrooms
.27
−.77
Snakes
.21
−.60
Spiders
.44**
.36*
Note: All correlations in bold are signiﬁcant at p < .001, except those marked by an asterisk, which are signiﬁcant at p < .05, or
two asterisks, which are signiﬁcant at p < .01. N = 50 for each category.
255
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

Keating, Randall, Kendrick, and Gutshall (2003) found that adults with “baby-
ish” features received more help than adults with more mature features, a phe-
nomenon the researchers attribute to overgeneralization of help-eliciting facial
cues that are otherwise functional in actual babies (Berry & MacArthur, 1986;
Zebrowitz, 1997).
If, analogously, the prototypicality bias represents an overgeneralization of
an otherwise functional mechanism to identify reproductively ﬁt mates, then
theories of stimulus generalization predict a generalization gradient, such that
the correlation between prototypicality and attractiveness in any given ani-
mal category is a positive monotonic function of that animal’s actual or per-
ceived similarity to humans. Indeed, although there is no evidence of such a
relationship when considering all of the categories in Table 15.1, when only
nonmanipulated animal data are considered, the magnitude of the prototypical-
ity bias for a particular animal appears to map well onto that animal’s phylo-
genetic similarity to humans: Dogs show the strongest association, followed by
birds, butterﬂies, and spiders.
To examine the generalization hypothesis more formally, a new group of
participants judged natural stimuli representing ﬁve qualitative levels of similar-
ity to humans: monkeys; dogs and horses; birds and ﬁsh; butterﬂies, beetles,
spiders, and jellyﬁsh; and mushrooms. Male and female, Caucasian and Japanese
faces were also included for comparison, for a total of 14 categories (N = 24
exemplars per category). Participants rated all stimuli in random order, blocked
by category, on either attractiveness or prototypicality, as well as (for nonhuman
categories) their similarity to human beings. Results, shown in Table 15.3,
Table 15.3 Ordinal Phylogenetic Similarity to Humans, Judged Similarity to Humans,
and Prototypicality−Attractiveness Correlations for 14 Stimulus Categories
Category (Ns = 24)
Phylogenetic Similarity
to Humans
Judged Similarity to
Humans
r(Prototypicality−
Attractiveness)
Asian females
1
—
.65
Asian males
1
—
.49
European females
1
—
.72
European males
1
—
.69
Chimpanzees
2
8.18
.70
Horses
3
5.22
.79
Dogs
3
5.65
.51
Birds
4
3.90
.29
Fish
4
2.90
.22
Butterﬂies
5
2.23
.26
Beetles
5
2.12
.16
Spiders
5
2.10
.05
Jellyﬁsh
5
1.75
.16
Mushrooms
6
1.50
.10
Note: Smaller numbers indicate a closer phylogenetic similarity in column 2, and less judged similarity in column 3, to
humans. Correlations in bold are signiﬁcant at p < .05 or less.
256
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

conﬁrm that the more similar a category is to humans, the better the prototypi-
cality of its members predicts their attractiveness. While the correlation for faces
was approximately .70 and .57 for Caucasian and Japanese faces, respectively, the
correlations in the ﬁve groups of nonhuman stimuli averaged .70, .65, .26, .16,
and .10. Overall the relationship between perceived similarity to humans of the
10 animal categories (which correlated .96 with their level of phylogenetic simi-
larity) and the prototypicality bias was .89.
The size of this relationship is surprising—almost 80% of the variance in
the prototypicality bias can be accounted for by a species’ perceived (and actual)
similarity to human beings—and lends some support to the hypothesis that the
use of prototypicality was “designed” for humans but is used to evaluate other
animals when preference judgments are required. Nevertheless, even such strong
data are ultimately limited by the fact that similarity and species are eﬀectively
confounded. That is, it is not clear that perceived similarity per se moderates the
prototypicality bias, rather than another variable associated with similarity, such
as the variability, formal structure, or familiarity of a category. Ideally, the proto-
typicality bias should be evaluated in identical stimuli that vary only in their
perceived similarity to human beings.
As an initial study utilizing this experimental logic, a new set of participants
rated 50 digitally constructed faces that diﬀered in their “human-ness.” Speciﬁc-
ally, the faces, which were created using feature-based face composite software
(“Faces”, InterQuest, Inc., 1988; see Figure 15.3 for examples), were described as
police sketches of suspects in either “criminal” or “alien” abductions. All partici-
pants judged the prototypicality, attractiveness, and familiarity, of all 50 faces,
which diﬀered (between participants) only in their purported genetic relation-
ship to human beings. The results showed that humans were more attractive (Ms
= 3.83 vs. 3.41), as well as more familiar (5.10 vs. 4.21), than aliens, and that the
prototypicality bias was stronger for humans than aliens, r (50) = .81 versus .55.
Most intriguingly, when familiarity (which correlated strongly with both proto-
typicality and attractiveness in both conditions) was partialled out of the proto-
typicality bias, the correlation remained highly signiﬁcant in the human face
condition (partial r = .63), but dropped to zero in the alien face condition
(partial r = .07). Thus, as was observed in comparisons between animal and
FIGURE 15.3 Examples of faces described as “human” or “alien”.
257
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

nonanimal categories, prototypicality makes an independent contribution to
attractiveness (i.e., over and above subjective familiarity) in “human” faces, but
not when the very same faces are believed to be nonhuman. In this set of stimuli,
then, diﬀerences in the relationships among the variables cannot be due to
diﬀerences in their formal features or category structure (which were identical
between conditions), but are more consistent with the strategic use of prototypi-
cality to assess mate quality, a domain-speciﬁc psychological mechanism elicited
most strongly by human faces.
CONCLUSION
The goal of this volume is to explore both the theoretical and working relation-
ships between social cognition and evolutionary psychology—two extremely
inﬂuential, nonmutually exclusive, yet largely incommunicado approaches to
social psychological inquiry. The goal of the current chapter in particular is to
use the prototypicality bias as a test case for a hybridized investigative strategy.
After all, the bias, discovered entirely independent of evolutionary consider-
ations, is nonetheless a product of evolution, and as such is either an adaptation
itself—a mechanism evolved speciﬁcally to solve a recurring reproductive prob-
lem, most likely related to the identiﬁcation of quality mates—or a side-eﬀect of
an adaptation. Yet the plausibility of various functional mechanisms, it is argued,
can be best evaluated with proximate social cognitive data.
Taking this intellectual approach, I initially discounted an account of the
prototypicality bias as a domain-speciﬁc mate selection mechanism, on the basis
that, as it turns out, people ﬁnd prototypical exemplars of almost everything
attractive. Instead, I considered a number of more general cognitive mechanisms
related to categorization as potential primary adaptations of which the proto-
typicality bias could be a side-eﬀect. Of these, the link between prototypicality
subjective familiarity was most theoretically and empirically promising, but with
a critical and unexpected qualiﬁcation. In categories such as eyeglasses, wrist-
watches, and handguns, deﬁned largely by a common function, category proto-
types may be preferred simply because they feel more familiar (even if they are
objectively novel), and familiar things are preferred. However, in animal categor-
ies, organized around a common and often strong formal structure, prototypes
are attractive above and beyond their familiarity. I explored two plausible
hypotheses accounting for the generality of the prototypicality bias in animals:
(1) Prototypicality is a cue to a characteristic, such as health, that is relevant to a
number of diﬀerent evaluations of diﬀerent animal categories; or (2) prototypi-
cality is a mate-assessment mechanism that generalized to evaluations of other
animals in other contexts. The data, preliminary though they are, support the
generalization hypothesis: Prototypicality failed to predict at least one useful fact
about animals—whether or not they can kill you—while the magnitude of the
prototypicality bias varied linearly with the similarity of an animal category to
258
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

humans. Perhaps most interestingly, the bias appears tuned to human faces in
particular and is moderated by perceivers’ beliefs about how human a given
stimulus is.
Thus, our investigations have come full circle. Although the generality of
the prototypicality bias was initially seen as cause for rejection of a simple mate
choice account, when the nature and magnitude of the bias in diﬀerent categor-
ies are considered, the most logical conclusion is that human faces are indeed the
origin of the bias in animals, and that prototypical faces themselves are preferred
because they signal reproductive ﬁtness in a potential mate. It is noteworthy that
this conclusion is the result of a genuine and bi-directional interaction of social
cognitive and evolutionary approaches, a series of empirical and falsiﬁable studies
on proximate mechanisms that were informed by evolutionary principles.
It is also noteworthy, however, that contrary to some bolder evolutionary
psychological claims, the current research was not obviously constrained by these
principles. In part this is because not enough is known, or perhaps will ever be
known, about the relationship between cognitive processes and reproductive
ﬁtness. While a good adaptive case can be made for some psychologically and
neurologically speciﬁc processes, such as language and face recognition, in many
others, including categorization and its associated eﬀects, the arguments are
more speculative. Indeed, one could argue that it is proximate cognitive data
such as those reported here that constrain the plausibility of adaptive problems in
our evolutionary past, not the other way around. At a minimum, it seems that
any insights gleaned from the current research were the result of a vigorous
interaction between proximate and ultimate considerations. Such a symbiotic
approach, rather than a hierarchical one, may prove to be more productive for
both evolutionary and nonevolutionary psychologists.
REFERENCES
Berry, D. S., & McArthur, L. A. (1986).
Perceiving character in faces: The impact of
age-related craniofacial changes on social
perception. 
Psychological 
Bulletin, 
100,
3–18.
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and aﬀect:
Overview and meta-analysis of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 106, 265–289.
Buss, A. H., Murray, E. N., & Buss, E. (1968).
Stimulus generalization and fear of snakes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
10, 134–141.
Cunningham, M. R. (1986). Measuring the
physical in physical attractiveness: Quasi-
experiments on the sociobiology of female
facial beauty. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 50, 925–935.
Cunningham, M. R., Barbee, A. P., & Pike, C.
L. (1990). What do women want? Facial met-
ric assessment of multiple motives in the
perception of male facial physical attractive-
ness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59, 61–72.
Cunningham, M. R., Roberts, A. R., Wu, C.,
Barbee, A. P., & Druen, P. B. (1995). “Their
ideas of beauty are, on the whole, the same as
ours”: Consistency and variability in the
cross-cultural perception of female physical
attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 261–279.
Fiske, S. T. (1982). Schema-triggered aﬀect:
Applications to social perception. In M. S.
Clark & S. T. Fiske (Eds.), Aﬀect and
cognition: The seventeenth annual Carnegie
259
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

Symposium on Cognition (p. 66). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gangestad, S. W., & Buss, D. M. (1993).
Pathogen prevalence and human mate
preferences. Ethology and Sociobiology, 14,
89–96.
Garcia-Marquez, T., & Mackie, D. M. (2000).
The positive feeling of familiarity: Mood as
an information processing regulation mech-
anism. In H. Bless & J. P. Forgas (Eds.), The
message within: The role of subjective experience
in social cognition and behavior (pp. 240–
261). Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Ghirlanda, S., & Enquist, M. (2003). A century
of generalization. Animal Behaviour, 66,
15–36.
Gordon, P. C., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983).
Implicit learning and generalization of the
“mere exposure” eﬀect. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 45(3), 492–500.
Guttman, N., & Kalish, H. I. (1956). Dis-
criminability and stimulus generalization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51,
79–88.
Halberstadt, J., & Rhodes, G. (2003). It’s not
just average faces that are attractive: Com-
puter-manipulated averageness makes birds,
ﬁsh and automobiles attractive. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 10(1), 149–156.
Halberstadt, J., Rhodes, G., & Catty, S. R.
(2003). Subjective and objective familiarity as
explanations for the attraction to average
faces. In F. Columbus (Ed.), Advances in
psychology research (pp. 91–106). New York:
Nova Science Publishers.
Halberstadt, J. B. (2006). The generality and
ultimate origins of the attractiveness of
prototypes. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 10, 166–183.
Halberstadt, J. B., & Rhodes, G. (2000). The
attractiveness of non-face averages: Implica-
tions for an evolutionary explanation of the
attractiveness of average faces. Psychological
Science, 11, 289–293.
InterQuest, Inc. (1988). Faces: The Ultimate
Composite Picture [Computer software].
Quebec, Canada: Author.
Jones, D., & Hill, K. (1993). Criteria of
attractiveness in ﬁve populations. Human
Nature, 4, 271–296.
Kalick, S. M., Zebrowitz, L. A., Langlois, J. H.,
& Johnson, R. M. (1998). Does human facial
attractiveness honestly advertise health?
Longitudinal data on an evolutionary
question. Psychological Science, 9, 8–13.
Keating, C. F., Randall, D. W., Kendrick, T., &
Gutshall, K. A. (2003). Do babyfaced adults
receive more help? The (cross-cultural) case
of the lost resume. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 27, 89–109.
Ketelaar, T., & Ellis, B. J. (2000). Are evo-
lutionary explanations unfalsiﬁable? Evo-
lutionary psychology and the Lakatosian
philosophy of science. Psychological Inquiry,
11, 1–21.
Kunda, Z. (1999). Social cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Langois, J. H., & Roggman, L. A. (1990).
Attractive faces are only average. Psychological
Science, 1, 115–121.
Langois, J. H., Roggman, L. A., & Musselman,
L. (1994). What is average and what is not
average about attractive faces? Psychological
Science, 5, 214–220.
Light, L. L., Hollander, S., & Kayra-Stuart, F.
(1981). Why attractive people are harder to
remember. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 7, 269–276.
Martindale, C., & Moore, K. (1988). Priming,
prototypicality, and preference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 14, 661–670.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1987). Attention and learning
processes in the identiﬁcation and categoriza-
tion of integral stimuli. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13, 87–108.
Penton-Voak, I. S., & Perrett, D. I. (2001).
Male facial attractiveness: Perceived personal-
ity and shifting female preferences for male
traits across the menstrual cycle. In P. J.
Slater, & J. S. Rosenblatt (Eds.), Advances in
the study of behavior (pp. 219–259). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Penton-Voak, I. S., Perrett, D., Castles, D.,
Burt, M., Koyabashi, T., & Murray, L. K.
(1999). Female preferences for male faces
change cyclically. Nature, 399, 741–742.
Perrett, D. I., Lee, K. J., Penton-Voak, I., Row-
land, D., Yoshikawa, S., Burt, D. M., et al.
(1998). Eﬀects of sexual dimorphism on
facial attractiveness. Nature, 394, 884–887.
Posner, M. I., Goldsmith, R., & Welton, K. E.,
Jr. (1967). Perceived distance and the classiﬁ-
cation of distorted patterns. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 73(1), 28–38.
260
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the
genesis of abstract ideas. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 77, 155–158.
Reber, R., Winkielman, P., & Schwarz, N.
(1998). Eﬀects of perceptual ﬂuency on
aﬀective judgments. Psychological Science, 9,
45–48.
Repp, B. H. (1997). The aesthetic quality of a
quantitatively average music performance:
Two preliminary experiments. Music Percep-
tion, 14, 419–444.
Rescorla, R. A. (1976). Stimulus generalization:
Some predictions from a model of Pavlovian
conditioning. 
Journal 
of 
Experimental
Psychology, 2, 88–96.
Rhodes, G., Halberstadt, J., & Brajkovich, G.
(2001). Generalization of mere exposure
eﬀects to averaged composite faces. Social
Cognition, 19, 57–70.
Rhodes, G., Halberstadt, J. B., Jeﬀrey, L., &
Palermo, R. (2005). The attractiveness of
average faces is not a generalized mere
exposure 
eﬀect. 
Social 
Cognition, 
23,
205–217.
Rhodes, G., Hickford, C., & Jeﬀrey, L. (2000).
Sex-typicality and attractiveness: Are super-
male and superfemale faces super-attractive?
British Journal of Psychology, 91, 125–140.
Rhodes, G., Sumich, A., & Byatt, G. (1999).
Are average facial conﬁgurations attractive
only because of their symmetry? Psychological
Science, 10, 52–58.
Rhodes, G., & Tremewan, T. (1996). Average-
ness, exaggeration and facial attractiveness.
Psychological Science, 7, 105–110.
Rhodes, G., Yoshikawa, S., Palermo, R., Sim-
mons, L. W., Peters, M., Lee, K., et al.
(2004). The contribution of familiarity and
perceived health to the appeal of average
faces. Unpublished data.
Rubenstein, A. J., Kalakanis, L., & Langlois, J.
H. (1999). Infant preferences for attractive
faces: A cognitive explanation. Developmental
Psychology, 15, 848–855.
Rubenstein, A. J., Langois, J. H., & Roggman,
L. A. (2002). What makes a face attractive
and why: The role of averageness in deﬁning
facial beauty. In G. Rhodes & L. A. Zebrow-
itz (Eds.), Advances in visual cognition: Vol. 1.
Facial attractiveness: Evolutionary, cognitive,
and social perspectives (pp. 1–33). Westport,
CT: Ablex Publishing.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law
of generalization for psychological science.
Science, 237, 1317–1323.
Siegel, S., Hearst, E., George, N., & O’Neal, E.
(1968). Generalization gradients obtained
from individual subjects following classical
conditioning. 
Journal 
of 
Experimental
Psychology, 78, 171–174.
Smith, D. J., & Melara, R. J. (1990). Aesthetic
preference and syntactic prototypicality in
music: ’Tis the gift to be simple. Cognition,
34, 279–298.
Smith, E. R. (2000). Subjective experience of
familiarity: Functional basis in connectionist
memory. In H. Bless & J. P. Forgas (Eds.),
The message within: The role of subjective
experience in social cognition and behavior
(pp. 109–124). Philadelphia: Psychology
Press.
Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (1993).Human
facial beauty: Averageness, symmetry, and
parasite resistance. Human Nature, 4,
237–269.
Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (1999).
Facial attractiveness. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 3, 452–460.
Thornhill, R., & Møller, A. P. (1997). Devel-
opmental stability, disease and medicine.
Biological Reviews, 72, 497–548.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. H.
Barkow & L. Cosmides (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 19–136). London:
Oxford University Press.
Whitﬁeld, T. W., & Slatter, P. E. (1979). The
eﬀects of categorization and prototypicality
on aesthetic choice in a furniture selection
task. British Journal of Psychology, 70, 65–75.
Whittlesea, B. W., Jacoby, L. L., & Girard, K.
(1990). Illusions of immediate memory: Evi-
dence of an attributional basis for feelings of
familiarity and perceptual quality. Journal of
Memory and Language, 29, 716–732.
Winkielman, P., Halberstadt, J. B., Fazendeiro,
T., & Catty, S. (2006). Faces are attractive
because they are easy on the mind. Psycho-
logical Science, 17, 799–806.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal eﬀects of
mere exposure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 9(Suppl. 2, Pt. 2).
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking:
Preferences need no inferences. The American
Psychologist, 35, 151–175.
261
PROTOTYPICALITY BIAS

Zebrowitz, L. A. (1997). Reading faces: Window
to the soul? Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Zebrowitz, L. A., Fellous, J, Mignault, A., &
Andreoletti, C. (2003). Trait impressions as
overgeneralized responses to adaptively sig-
niﬁcant facial qualities: Evidence from con-
nectionist modelling. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 7, 194–215.
262
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

16
The Social Prediction
Dynamic
A Legacy of Cognition and
Mixed Motives
OSCAR YBARRA
MATTHEW C. KELLER
EMILY CHAN
ANDREW S. BARON
JEFFREY HUTSLER
STEPHEN M. GARCIA
JEFFREY SANCHEZ-BURKS
KIMBERLY RIOS MORRISON
Social Pressures on Cognitive Evolution
On Social Scientists Trying to Predict People
The Averseness of Being the Target of Prediction
The Social Prediction Dynamic: Delineating the Theoretical
Framework
Situational Factors Moderate the Need to be Unpredictable
Conclusion
W
hat does evolutionary psychology have to do with social cognition?
A lot. Following in the footsteps of other scholars, we argue that
cognition should be calibrated to the tasks and challenges that
confront a species on a recurring basis (e.g., in this volume, Kenrick, Delton,
Robertson, Becker, & Neuberg, chapter 4; Lieberman, chapter 11; and also
Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). Although some researchers have proposed that for
many species, including humans, such challenges have been ecological in nature
(e.g., Clutton-Brock & Harvey, 1980; Gibson, 1986), for example, needing to
263

exploit the environment, a recurring set of challenges for humans is intrinsically
tied to group life (cf. Dunbar, 1992; Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume; Humphrey,
1976; Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). Thus, despite the various ecological problems
humans and their ancestors have faced over millennia, which by the way have
likely varied as a function of niche and geography, the perpetual challenge for all
humans, regardless of what niche they have inhabited, has been having to
navigate the social sphere and to live in groups. One consequence of this is that
cognition, shaped by evolutionary processes, is at its core attuned to the social
world.
SOCIAL PRESSURES ON COGNITIVE EVOLUTION
Being attuned to the social world can mean various things, but a basic social
cognitive process (call it a fundamental social motive) for all people is the need to
understand and predict other people’s behavior; this is what we all do, not just
social scientists. By knowing others’ mental states, such as their intentions and
desires, we can anticipate others’ actions. Thus, “good enough” guesses of others’
mental states should facilitate social interaction (e.g., Asch, 1952; Heider, 1958;
Tagiuri, 1958). However, smooth and coordinated social interaction is an out-
come people should want from their interactions with kin, friends, and other
trusted individuals. But the mental transparency that facilitates coordinated
interaction is not something people should want from their interactions with
unknown or contentious parties who could potentially predict a person’s
behaviors to the detriment of the predicted.
The concern people should have with predicting others, and, as we will
argue, with having others predict them, may be an outcome of primate brain
evolution. As noted already, in contrast to the idea that primate intelligence and
primate brains evolved in response to ecological pressures, other research indi-
cates that many brain characteristics can be better explained in terms of features
of the social environment (e.g., Dunbar, 1992). This should be expected given
the potential for beneﬁts but also costs associated with group living (Humphrey,
1976).
Consistent with this perspective, studies have shown that across various
primate species the typical group size for a species correlates with neocortex size,
such that larger brains are associated with living in larger groups (Barton &
Dunbar, 1997; Dunbar, 1992; Sawaguchi & Kudo, 1990). This suggests that
social complexity (e.g., tracking others, triadic awareness, etc.) was an important
force in brain evolution (Barton & Dunbar, 1997; de Waal, 1998). Moreover,
recent research has shown that the degree of deception displayed by various
primate species is highly related to neocortex size (Byrne & Corp, 2004).
The above ﬁndings suggest that although theory of mind and our social
perception apparatus allows for some ability to predict others, which should
prove advantageous in social domains, the ﬁndings on deception in primates
264
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

suggest that with social prediction also comes the ability to manipulate and to
keep from being predicted (cf. Humphrey, 1976), which should in itself be
advantageous under speciﬁc circumstances. It does not make sense that everyone
under all circumstances would have the ability to predict and thus manipulate
everyone else’s behaviors. Under some circumstances, individual advantage
would accrue not only to those good at social prediction (e.g., able to read
minds), but also those better able to keep their own minds from being known
and their behavior from being predicted (Miller, 1997; also see Krebs &
Dawkins, 1984). We propose that such easily activated reactions in people,
especially when confronted with unfamiliar, uncertain, or threatening circum-
stances, contribute to the diﬃculty social psychologists and social scientists more
generally have in predicting and chasing this social animal.
Before delineating our theoretical framework further and describing some
initial studies from our lab, we will review approaches taken by social scientists
over the last few decades to predict their reticent and less than cooperative
human participants. In addition, we will review various ﬁndings in a subsequent
section that detail some reactions people experience at the prospect of being
predicted and ﬁgured out.
ON SOCIAL SCIENTISTS TRYING TO PREDICT PEOPLE
Social scientists often lament that human behavior is less predictable than the
topics studied by the “harder” sciences, ostensibly because many factors go into
determining why people do the things they do. Normally, this unpredictability is
treated as the “noise” or measurement error of social science studies. However, as
some investigators have pointed out, such noise may reﬂect meaningful behavior
in complex systems (Gilden, 2001) and has actually been modeled and used to
inform theory in the physical and biological sciences (Miller, 1997). Applying
our perspective to this issue, we argue that the trouble with predicting human
behavior, the noise, may be due in part to the fact that many social science
studies trigger people’s need to be opaque, unpredictable, and to remain
unknown.
What People Say and Do
Social psychologists have long regarded people’s attitudes and beliefs and their
reports on them as central to predicting social behavior. However, it was not long
before they discovered that the road from such reports to corresponding behavior
was not straightforward. The extent to which attitudes predict behavior is
regarded as one of the most important controversies in attitude research (cf.
Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Kraus, 1995; Wicker, 1969).
Early ﬁndings by LaPiere (1934) showing a lack of correspondence between
prejudiced attitudes and prejudiced behavior served as the impetus for much
265
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION

research aimed at determining the factors that augment the attitude/behavior
correlation. Some of these factors are psychometric in nature and deal with
equivalence in measurement (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1977). Others include the sta-
bility of the attitude over time (Kraus, 1995), the strength and importance of the
attitude (e.g., Krosnick, Boninger, Chuang, Berent, & Carnot, 1993), attitude
accessibility (e.g., Fazio, Chen, McDonel, & Sherman, 1982), and whether or
not the attitude is formed through direct experience (e.g., Regan & Fazio, 1977)
(for a meta-analysis see Kraus, 1995). In addition, factors other than the attitude
itself, such as the norms surrounding the performance of certain behaviors, also
impact the relationship (e.g., Ajzen, 1991; Ybarra & Traﬁmow, 1998).
As the catalog of factors above suggests, researchers have made great strides
in uncovering the many conditions that aﬀect an attitude’s inﬂuence on
behavior. However, given the diversity of approaches to this issue, with no one
approach applying broadly and robustly, we are left with the feeling that predict-
ing people’s behavior from their attitudes requires considerable knowledge of the
nature of attitudes, knowledge of various situational factors and the person’s state
of mind, and so on. To be cognizant of all these factors should amount to an
overwhelming task for the most expert researchers, let alone the lay person.
Predicting people’s behavior is diﬃcult not only because behavior is deter-
mined by many factors and situational cues, but also because, as we argue, at a
fundamental level people do not want to be sized up and do not want their
behavior predicted. Thus, people either do not provide accurate information on
their attitudes and intentions or they intentionally behave in ways that are incon-
sistent with their attitudes. Given the trouble with predicting people’s behavior
from their expressed beliefs and attitudes, it makes much sense that researchers
have attempted to assess the content of people’s minds in ways that preclude
people’s tendency not to be predicted.
The Bogus Pipeline
One ﬁrst attempt to assess people’s attitudes indirectly was carried out by Jones
and Sigall (1971). These researchers created the bogus pipeline, an impressive
contraption made up of a pile of electronic hardware with dials the experimenter
could secretly manipulate. The machine was presented to participants as a type
of lie detector, whereas participants in the control condition were simply asked to
indicate their attitudes on a paper and pencil measure. In one study, for example,
Sigall and Page (1971) found that students readily expressed more racial preju-
dice in the presence of the bogus pipeline than the control condition (for a
review of similar ﬁndings, see Roese & Jamieson, 1993).
Research eﬀorts have moved beyond the bogus pipeline to trying to assess
people’s mental contents in a manner that minimizes participant control, such as
using measures of implicit cognition and techniques that allow researchers to
assess brain activity. We review these trends next.
266
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Implicit Measures of Cognition and Brain Activity
There has been an explosion of research on implicit attitudes and cognition and
their measurement (e.g., Dovidio, Kawakami, Johnson, Johnson, & Howard,
1997; Fazio & Olson, 2003; Greenwald & Banaji, 1995; Wilson, Lindsey, &
Schooler, 2000). Implicit attitude assessment usually rests on people’s response
latencies to a stimulus of interest. For example, after activating a stereotype of a
social group in memory outside conscious awareness (e.g., by subliminally pre-
senting race-relevant words such as white or black), a question of interest might
be whether people are subsequently faster at identifying words that are positive or
negative in valence, the assumption being that faster recognition for the former
represents an implicit positive White bias (e.g., Wittenbrink, Judd, & Park,
1997).
According to research on implicit attitudes, attitudes may be implicit for
various reasons (for a review see Wilson & Dunn, 2004), and there are important
theoretical reasons for undertaking such approaches to their measurement. For
example, as both philosophers and psychologists have mused, human behavior is
many times prompted and directed by cues in the environment of which the
person has little knowledge or awareness (Bargh, 1996; Dennett, 1991). But,
regardless of the assessment technique used or the theoretical approach taken, we
believe there are potentially other reasons for these research eﬀorts: Researchers
may believe that by doing so they are better able to excavate and make their way
to the true nature of people’s minds. An interest in implicit cognition may be
deemed necessary because the people being studied many times do not want to
be known and predicted.
Research in social neuroscience and neuroscience more generally, which
many times relies on brain imaging techniques (e.g., PET, fMRI), may similarly
serve the unacknowledged purpose of measuring people’s minds more directly by
bypassing people’s social and communicative processes. These diﬀerent tech-
niques have become of great interest to psychologists because they provide a
sense that it is possible to assess participants’ responses in a manner that pre-
cludes the various problems associated with gaining valid information from
people. By examining people’s implicit responses or peering straight into the
brain structures themselves (assuming there is good consensus as to what those
structures do), researchers may gain conﬁdence that they are assessing “true”
responses.
We oﬀer our proposals as informed speculation. Researchers may go to great
lengths to study cognition in the ways described above because it cannot be
studied by asking the participants themselves. And one reason they cannot rely
on participants’ responses is that people many times do not want to be known
and predicted (whether consciously or not).
267
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION

THE AVERSENESS OF BEING THE TARGET OF PREDICTION
We argue that in general people should ﬁnd the prospect of being the object of
prediction aversive. Thus, at times, they may want to avoid these unpleasant
states or circumstances by being unpredictable, a hypothesis we test in studies to
be reviewed subsequently. At this point, our aim is to review several ﬁndings
from the literature to show across various paradigms that people are prone to feel
scrutinized and as if they are being watched by others. These various reactions
make sense in the context of our framework, in that such aversive feelings may
signal to people that they should exit such situations or enact responses that will
foil others’ social prediction attempts.
Day-to-Day Paranoia
One such phenomenon is referred to as paranoid cognition (e.g., Kramer, 1994),
which relates to a person’s beliefs, for example, that they are being persecuted (cf.
Colby, 1981). More recently researchers have explored the social and situational
aspects of paranoid cognition instead of focusing on individual pathology (e.g.,
Fenigstein & Vanable, 1992; Zimbardo, Andersen, & Kabat, 1981).
Such research suggests that people in many social situations, especially novel
ones, may be prone to feelings of uncertainty about what others think of them
(cf. Festinger, 1954). Hence, people are apt to be sensitive to various social cues
and to ruminate about them (Colby, 1981). Although this can be regarded as a
normal process, certain situational factors and reactions can transform these
cognitions into more dysfunctional forms, such as greater self-consciousness and
the feeling that one is being scrutinized (Lord & Saenz, 1985). Social uncertainty
can also increase people’s misinterpretation of events (and elaboration of such
misinterpretations), which can result in feelings of discomfort in the presence of
others. Social uncertainty can also lead to judgments that others are not open to
them and can give rise to distrust (as reported in Kramer & Wei, 1999).
Uncertain social situations can prompt people to feel as if they are being
scrutinized. But it is also interesting to consider the possibility that people,
regardless of the circumstances, are generally inclined to such thinking. For
example, in one sample of 324 college students, researchers found that 47% of
those participants had had some experience of paranoia (Ellet, Lopes, & Chad-
wick, 2003). In a diﬀerent study, Fenigstein and Vanable (1992, Study 1) con-
structed and validated a measure of paranoia. In this study paranoid responses
were highly and negatively correlated with social desirability, meaning people
seemed aware of the potential for social disapproval from endorsing such items.
Nevertheless, many respondents felt that some of the paranoid experiences
described in the items applied to them.
The above ﬁndings suggest that even people from nonclinical samples may
be apt to feel on occasion that they are being watched, that there is a need to
be suspicious, and to potentially assume ill will on the part of others. Other
268
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

phenomena to be reviewed presently further corroborate the idea that people
often do feel scrutinized, and as we suggest, feel that they are being subjected
to other’s prediction eﬀorts. Below we discuss these reactions, namely the
“spotlight” eﬀect and the “illusion of transparency.”
Spotlight Effect.
The “spotlight” refers to an eﬀect in which people over-
estimate the degree to which their actions and appearance are noticed and evalu-
ated by others (Gilovich, Medvec, & Savitsky, 2000; Gilovich & Savitsky, 1999).
Interestingly, the feelings that others are taking special notice and that one is
being watched are thought of as classical indicators of paranoid ideology (e.g.,
Magaro, 1980; Millon, 1981). Fenigstein and Vanable (1992, Study 2) showed,
for example, that the more people were predisposed toward having paranoid
thoughts, the more they felt they were being observed.
In two studies on the “spotlight” eﬀect, participants were asked to wear a
t-shirt with a potentially embarrassing or ﬂattering image (Gilovich et al., 2000,
Studies 1 and 2). In these studies participants overestimated the number of
people who would be able to remember the images on the shirts. Thus, partici-
pants felt that they stood out and that others were scrutinizing them much more
so than was actually the case. Feeling as if one is in the spotlight thus represents
one way in which most people can feel as if others are taking notice and
scrutinizing the self.
Feeling Transparent.
The feelings of transparency studied by Gilovich and
colleagues (e.g., Gilovich & Savitsky, 1999; Vorauer & Ross, 1999) may be
slightly diﬀerent manifestations of the same reactions underlying the spotlight
eﬀect and paranoid cognition more generally. According to Gilovich and col-
leagues, to feel transparent is for a person to feel as if their thoughts, feelings, and
reactions are leaking out for all to see.
Evidence for the transparency eﬀect comes from various sources. For
example, Barr and Kleck (1995) had participants watch a video and then judge
how expressive they had been during the viewing. The results showed that the
participants rated themselves as more expressive than a group of observers judged
them to be. The researchers then had the participants watch the covertly
recorded videos. The participants actually expressed surprise as to how inexpres-
sive they seemed in the video recordings. This study nicely illustrates that people
are prone to think that they are being explicitly analyzed, and that their internal
states are readily available to others.
Due to diﬀerent factors, the above review suggests that people are pre-
disposed to assume some form of paranoid thinking, which usually coincides
with overgeneralization of scrutiny and the unpleasant feelings of self-
consciousness (Fenigstein & Vanable, 1992). We suggest that such states should
be unpleasant to people because they serve as a signal that the situation they
are in is one in which others are potentially keen on ﬁguring them out and
predicting their behavior.
269
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION

THE SOCIAL PREDICTION DYNAMIC: DELINEATING THE
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
In describing the eﬀorts of social scientists to ﬁnd better ways to ascertain valid
information from their participants we have aimed to highlight the person per-
ception or prediction side of the social prediction dynamic. Our discussion of
people’s readiness to feel scrutinized speaks to the responses of the person as the
object of prediction. Up to this point, we have thus focused on the form the
social prediction dynamic takes when people ﬁnd themselves in uncertain, con-
tentious, or unfamiliar social circumstances. But social prediction and people’s
responses to prediction are dynamic in that people should be sensitive not only
to the negative and threatening aspects of social situations but also their positive
and propitious characteristics as well. Thus, it is important to consider the social
interaction factors that may highlight people’s need to be predicted in some
situations but not others.
Cooperation, Competition, and the Beneﬁts and Costs of
Group Living
Group living creates beneﬁts but also potential costs for individuals (Barash,
1977; Humphrey, 1976). For example, group living brings together potential
mates but also increases competition for them. Social living is beneﬁcial in the
acquisition of food, but competition surfaces when resources are scarce. Living
with others aids in the defense against predators or other groups, but costs
include the problem of free-riders. Thus, group living is and was likely to be a
complex and ever shifting mix of both competitive and cooperative scenarios. At
the same time, while being able to predict another’s behavior was probably
adaptive regardless of the situation, the adaptive beneﬁt of being predicted was
probably contextual, depending on whether the situation was cooperative or
competitive. We propose that reactions to others’ attempts to predict the self
have been shaped by natural selection to be sensitive to the cooperative (safe,
favorable) or competitive (threatening, unfavorable) nature of the immediate
situation.
Cooperative and safe contexts should shift one toward lessened discomfort
at the prospect of being known and predicted. In such situations, beneﬁts
should result from mutual prediction by known and trusted others. Many activ-
ities throughout human and primate evolution have required coordinated
responses and rest on the individual’s ability to build and maintain coalitions for
mutual protection against enemies or individuals who abuse power within the
group (Boehm, 1997; de Waal, 1998). Hunting and food-gathering activities
can also require high levels of coordination. The beneﬁts of mutual “mind
reading” between members of such cooperative groups should not require
elaboration.
270
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

In addition, members of a group must be transparent enough to members
of the opposite sex for courting and reproduction to take place. Although there is
much uncertainty in the courting of a mate, there will be no oﬀspring and
protection of those oﬀspring if some transparency of intentions, desires, and
needs fails to be established between the courting parties and, eventually, their
oﬀspring. In essence, we predict transparency and predictability to increase to
the degree that fates are shared between predictors and the targets of prediction.
Importantly, such a shift should have at least as much to do with the situation as
it does the people involved; a desire to be transparent to someone in one context
(e.g., hunting) does not necessarily transfer to a desire to be transparent to the
same person in a diﬀerent context (e.g., coalition building).
Competitive contexts should do the opposite: people should strive to be
opaque and unpredictable to unfamiliar or potentially contentious parties (cf.
Miller, 1997). The adaptive response to many situations throughout human and
primate evolution, involving both “ingroup” and “outgroup” members, should
have depended on the individual’s ability to keep oneself from being known,
sized-up, and predicted by others when this information could be used to one’s
detriment. Considerations of signal detection theory as applied to human cogni-
tive evolution (Haselton & Buss, 2003; Nesse, 2001) would predict a cognitive
system that commits fewer of the costliest errors at the expense of committing
more of the less costly errors. Thus, we might expect that the occasional event of
being predicted by a competitor would be more costly than the occasional event
of being unpredictable to a friend, which should incline humans, as a default, to
be unpredictable, opaque, and diﬃcult to “ﬁgure out.”
Some of the beneﬁts (or reduction in costs) of being unknown and
unpredictable in competitive situations would include not being harmed,
betrayed, or taken advantage of. Avoiding such negative outcomes should have
proven useful in winning competitions, conﬂict resolution, securing resources
and perhaps mates, and maintaining a given role or rank within a group. Some of
the costs of being unknown and unpredictable when the situation was truly
cooperative might be that one would be distrusted, disliked, or ostracized
by potential cooperative partners. Thus, for uncertain or contentious social
circumstances, we predict that people should want to be opaque and
unpredictable.
In the next section we test some implications of our model, which suggest
that people’s reactions to being sized up and predicted should be responsive to
the contentious or cooperative (threatening or safe) nature of the social
interaction. Although people may generally be biased toward being unpredict-
able, our perspective holds that people should relax these tendencies when
circumstances prove to be cooperative or more generally safe and favorable.
271
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION

SITUATIONAL FACTORS MODERATE THE NEED TO BE
UNPREDICTABLE
Evidence for Changes in Self-Reported Behavioral Orientations
In two pretests (n = 366) (Ybarra, Keller, Baron, Chan, Garcia, & Sanchez-
Burks, 2006), we created and validated measures that assessed three behavioral
orientations reﬂecting unpredictability and not wanting to be known. These
included: Unpredictability, which assessed the degree to which participants felt
they were complex, diﬃcult to understand, and inconsistent from situation
to situation; unwillingness to self-disclose, which measured reticence and an
unwillingness to open up to others; and deceptiveness, which reﬂected a
willingness to use deception in dealing with people.
In validating the dependent measures we treated social distrust as a measure
of competition and as the predictor variable and then ran multivariate regressions
on the three subscales. We predicted that people who viewed their social world as
more competitive would report a greater degree of these behavioral orientations.
The regression analyses were consistent with expectations. In both surveys, the
more people tended to see the world as competitive, the more they judged
themselves as unpredictable, less willing to self-disclose, and as more deceptive.
Having validated the dependent measures above, we conducted an experi-
ment in which we led participants to believe they would interact with another
participant in a competitive or cooperative situation (Ybarra et al., 2006, Study
1). We also included a control group of participants who did not expect to be
involved in any interaction. Regardless of condition the participants blindly
selected a colored badge from a bag at the beginning of the session and pinned
the badge to their shirts. Participants were then asked to ﬁnd their “opponent”
(competition condition) or “partner” (cooperation condition) with the same
badge color and sit across from them.
The participants were told they and the person sitting across from them
would go to another room to play a game called “Matching Wits.” We manipu-
lated the participants’ expectations of competition or cooperation by describing
this game diﬀerently depending on condition. Prior to going forward with the
game, we asked participants to ﬁll out some personality questionnaires for a
second, unrelated study. Embedded in the battery were the three subscales valid-
ated in the pretests above. We expected that participants who anticipated to
compete in the upcoming game would report being more unpredictable,
less willing to disclose information about themselves, and more deceptive than
participants who anticipated to cooperate in the upcoming interaction.
Based on our analysis, the default for people is to express tendencies toward
unpredictability. So, we did not expect the control condition to diﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly from the two experimental conditions. This was indeed the case, although
it did produce results that descriptively lay between the two experimental condi-
tions (Figure 16.1). The main focus in this study was on the two experimental
272
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

conditions, which we expected to diﬀer from each other, with competition parti-
cipants reporting being more unpredictable, less willing to disclose, and more
deceptive than participants who expected to cooperate.
In testing our speciﬁc prediction, the contrast comparing the competition
versus cooperation condition was signiﬁcant (p < .01). The univariate contrasts
conducted on each dependent measure separately were signiﬁcant for unwilling-
ness to self-disclose (p < .01) and unpredictability (p < .01), and marginally so for
deceptiveness (p = .06). Thus, consistent with expectations, participants’
behavioral tendencies were modiﬁed depending upon whether they thought they
were going to compete or cooperate.
Evidence that Behavior Changes Toward Greater or Lesser
Predictability
In the above studies participants reported on behavioral tendencies that had to
do with being unpredictable, not wanting to be known, and being deceptive. But
the limitation of these data is that they only inform us about how people judged
or deﬁned themselves, not how they actually behaved as a function of their
interpersonal expectations. In the next experiment (Ybarra et al., 2006, Study 2),
we wanted to examine people’s behavior more directly. This study, although
supposedly measuring how people describe themselves, actually provides a
behavioral measure of unpredictability, as determined by people’s use of the
survey instrument itself.
How can we infer a shift in behavior toward more or less predictability?
Well, surveys can be created to show this. On a standard semantic diﬀerential
scale, participants choose between two bipolar or opposing trait adjectives, such
as “interesting” on one end and “boring” at the other end, and the intervening
intervals are delineated so that the midpoint represents no endorsement of
FIGURE 16.1 The three measures (+/− 1 standard error) as a function of experimental
condition.
273
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION

“interesting” or “boring.” However, what we did in this experiment was give
participants a modiﬁed semantic diﬀerential scale in which they had to choose
one of two bipolar traits or they had the option of choosing “both” or “neither” if
they felt both traits captured what they were like or if they did not feel either of
the traits was self-descriptive, respectively.
We argue that the use of the “both” response serves as a marker of
behavioral unpredictability, as the person is ambiguating what they are like by
indicating they can assume either of the opposing dispositional qualities, in
addition to being cagey. The critical question we examined in this study was
whether a subtle experimental intervention aimed at shifting people’s inter-
personal expectations could create changes in the use of these survey responses.
We expected that people with negative interpersonal expectations (to be
described presently) would choose the “both” option to a greater extent than
people with positive interpersonal expectations.
In this study (Ybarra et al., 2006, Study 2) we induced interpersonal expec-
tations by having people in the ﬁrst part of two, ostensibly unrelated studies bring
to mind and write about a person they knew. In the negative interpersonal
expectancies condition the participants were asked to bring to mind the image of
a person they disliked. In the positive interpersonal expectations condition parti-
cipants were asked to bring to mind the image of a person they liked. After
completing this part of the experiment, the participants were presented with the
second, unrelated study in which they were asked to endorse from a list those
traits that described them. The traits were presented as pairs (n pairs = 21) on a
horizontal line. Participants had to choose one of the traits or if they wanted they
could choose “both” or “neither.”
The main results for the study are presented in Table 16.1. “Neither”
responses were infrequent and thus were not analyzed. The results are presented
as an interaction of the two factors for ease of comprehension. However, given
the correlated nature of the scale responses (i.e., if participants select a trait they
will not select “both” or vice versa), we conducted the analysis on participants’
diﬀerence scores (no. of “both” responses—no. of selected traits) as a function of
condition, which yields the exact same result (p < .05). As indicated in Table
16.1, participants who brought to mind an image of a person they did not like
Table 16.1 The Mean Number of Times Speciﬁc Traits and the “Both” Option were
Selected as a Function of Experimental Condition
Condition
Recall Liked Other
Recall Disliked Other
(n = 18)
(n = 17)
No. of Traits
11.28 (3.49)
8.47 (4.23)
No. of “Both”
9.28 (3.61)
11.65 (3.99)
274
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

chose “both” more often than participants who recalled a liked other, who in
turn chose more speciﬁc traits than participants who recalled the disliked other.
The ﬁndings from this experiment thus show that by simply having partici-
pants bring to mind the image of a liked or disliked other, we impacted their
survey responses. More speciﬁcally, the use of the “both” option in the survey
provided people with the opportunity to be unpredictable and hide the self. As
predicted by our model and consistent with the results from the previous
experiment, this tendency toward not wanting to be known and to be unpredict-
able was more likely when the interpersonal context was negative or threatening
than positive or safe.
CONCLUSION
Our general purpose in this chapter has been to put forth a theoretical frame-
work that emphasizes not only the prediction side of social perception but also
how the object of prediction, many times a moving target, responds to the
prospect of being predicted. We argue that our behavioral tendencies carry the
imprint of our ancestral social past, with a sensitivity to the threatening or safe
nature of interpersonal situations. We believe the analysis has broad implications
for other variables that aﬀect the tenor of social interactions or relationships, for
example, the relative power between parties, whether the interaction is one-shot
or long term, or other factors that inﬂuence trust or approachability more gener-
ally. But, given the frequency with which people are likely to ﬁnd themselves in
uncertain social situations in modern times, it may be that we have inherited
mechanisms that predispose us too easily and too often toward not wanting to be
known and toward unpredictability. It is such reactions that may many times lay
the foundation for the trouble with predicting human behavior and the lament
of the social scientist. Hence, the present analysis reveals the value in predicting
human behavior in unpredictable ways.
REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned
behavior. 
Organizational 
Behavior 
and
Human Decision Processes, 50, 179–211.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1977). Attitude–
behavior relations: A theoretical analysis and
review of empirical research. Psychological
Bulletin, 84, 888–918.
Asch, S. E. (1952). Social psychology. New York:
Prentice Hall.
Barash, D. P. (1977). Sociobiology and behavior.
New York: Elsevier.
Bargh, J. A. (1996). Automaticity in social
psychology. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Krug-
lanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of
basic principles (pp. 169–183). New York:
Guilford Press.
Barr, C. L., & Kleck, R. E. (1995). Self–other
perception of the intensity of facial expres-
sions of emotion: Do we know what we
show? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 608–618.
Barton, R. A., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (1997).
Evolution of the social brain. In A. Whiten &
R. E. Byrne (Eds.), Machiavellian intelligence
275
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION

II: Extensions and evaluations (pp. 240–263).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Boehm, C. (1997). Egalitarian behaviour and
the evolution of political intelligence. In A.
Whiten & R. E. Byrne (Eds.), Machiavellian
intelligence II: Extensions and evaluations
(pp. 341–364). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Byrne, R. W., & Corp, N. (2004). Neocortex
size predicts deception rate in primates. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society, London, 271,
1693–1699.
Clutton-Brock, T. H., & Harvey, P. H. (1980).
Primates, brains and ecology. Journal of
Zoology, 207, 151–169.
Colby, K. M. (1981). Modeling a paranoid
mind. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4,
515–560.
Dennet, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained.
Boston: Little, Brown.
De Waal, F. (1998). Chimpanzee politics. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Dovidio, J. F., Kawakami, K., Johnson, C.,
Johnson, B., & Howard, A. (1997). On the
nature of prejudice: Automatic and con-
trolled processes. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 33, 510–540.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a
constraint on group size in primates. Journal
of Human Evolution, 20, 469–493.
Ellet, L., Lopes, B., & Chadwick, P. (2003).
Paranoia in a nonclinical population of col-
lege students. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 191, 425–430.
Fazio, R. H., Chen, J., McDonel, E. C., &
Sherman, S. J. (1982). Attitude accessibility,
attitude–behavior 
consistency, 
and 
the
strength of the object–evaluation association.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
18, 339–357.
Fazio, R. H., & Olson, M. A. (2003). Implicit
measures in social cognition research: Their
meaning and uses. Annual Review of Psych-
ology, 54, 297–327.
Fenigstein, A., & Vanable, P. A. (1992). Per-
secutory ideation and self-consciousness.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 129–138.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social
comparison processes, Human Relations, 7,
117–140.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, atti-
tude, intention and behaviour: An introduction
to theory and research. Reading, UK: Addison-
Wesley.
Gibson, K. R. (1986). Cognition, brain size,
and the extraction of embedded food
resources. In J. G. Else & P. C. Lee (Eds.),
Primate ontogeny, cognitive and social behavior
(pp. 93–105). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Gilden, D. L. (2001). Cognitive emissions of
1/f noise. Psychological Review, 108, 33–56.
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Savitsky, K.
(2000). The spotlight eﬀect in social judg-
ment: An egocentric bias in estimates of the
salience of one’s own actions and appearance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
78, 211–222.
Gilovich, T., & Savitsky, K. (1999). The spot-
light eﬀect and the illusion of transparency:
Egocentric assessments of how we are seen by
others. Current Directions in Psychological Sci-
ence, 8, 165–168.
Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (1995).
Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-
esteem, and stereotypes. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 102, 4–27.
Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2003). Biases
in social judgment: Design ﬂaws or design
features? In J. Forgas, K. Williams, & B. von
Hippel (Eds.), Responding to the social world:
Implicit and explicit processes in social judg-
ments and decisions (pp. 21–43). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. New York: Wiley.
Humphrey, N. K. (1976). The social function
of intellect. In P. P. G. Bateson & R. A. Hinde
(Eds.), Growing points in ethology (pp. 303–
317). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Jones, E. E., & Sigall, H. (1971). The bogus
pipeline: A new paradigm for measuring
aﬀect and attitude. Psychological Bulletin, 76,
349–364.
Kramer, R. M. (1994). The sinister attribution
error: Paranoid cognition and distrust in
organizations. Motivation and Emotion, 18,
199–230.
Kramer, R. M., & Wei, J. (1999). Social
uncertainty and the problem of trust in social
groups: The social self in doubt. In T. R.
Tyler, O. P. John, & R. M. Kramer (Eds.),
The psychology of the social self (pp. 145–170).
276
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Kraus, S. J. (1995). Attitudes and the prediction
of behavior: A meta-analysis of the empirical
literature. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 21, 58–75.
Krebs, J. R., & Dawkins, R. (1984). Animal
signals: Mindreading and manipulation. In
J. R. Krebs & N. B. Davies (Eds.), Behavioral
ecology: An evolutionary approach (pp. 380–
402). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientiﬁc.
Krosnick, J. A., Boninger, C. S., Chuang, Y. C.,
Berent, M. K., & Carnot, C. G. (1993). Atti-
tude strength: One construct or many related
constructs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 1132–1151.
LaPiere, R. T. (1934). Attitudes versus actions.
Social Forces, 13, 230–237.
Lord, C. G., & Saenz, D. S. (1985). Memory
deﬁcits and memory surfeits: Diﬀerential cog-
nitive consequences of tokenism for tokens
and observer. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 49, 918–926.
Magaro, P. A. (1980). Cognition in schizophrenia
and paranoia: The interpretation of cognitive
processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Miller, G. F. (1997). Protean primates: The evo-
lution of adaptive unpredictability in com-
petition and courtship. In A. Whiten & R.
W. Byrne (Eds.), Machiavellian intelligence II:
Extensions and evaluations (pp. 312–340).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Millon, T. H. (1981). Disorders of personality.
New York: Wiley.
Nesse, R. M. (2001). The smoke detector prin-
ciple: Natural selection and the regulation of
defenses. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 935, 75–85.
Regan, D. T., & Fazio, R. (1977). On the con-
sistency between attitudes and behavior:
Look to the method of attitude formation.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13,
28–45.
Roese, N. J., & Jamieson, D. W. (1993).
Twenty years of bogus pipeline research:
A critical review and meta-analysis. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 114, 363–375.
Sawaguchi, T., & Kudo, H. (1990). Neocortical
development and social structure in primates.
Primates, 31, 283–290.
Sigall, H., & Page, R. (1971). Current stereo-
types: A little fading, a little faking. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 18, 247–255.
Tagiuri, R. (1958). Introduction. In R. Tagiuri
& L. Petrullo (Eds.), Person perception and
interpersonal behavior (pp. 9–16). Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 19–136). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Vorauer, J. D., & Ross, M. (1999). Self-
awareness and feeling transparent: Failing to
suppress one’s self. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 35, 415–440.
Wicker, A. W. (1969). Attitudes versus actions:
The relationship of verbal and overt
behavioral responses to attitude objects.
Journal of Social Issues, 25, 41–78.
Wilson, T. D., & Dunn, E. W. (2004). Self-
knowledge: its limits, value, and potential for
improvement. Annual Review of Psychology,
55, 493–518.
Wilson, T. D., Lindsey, S., & Schooler, T. Y.
(2000). A model of dual attitudes. Psycho-
logical Review, 107, 101–126.
Wittenbrink, B., Judd, C., & Park, B. (1997).
Evidence for racial prejudice at the implicit
level and its relationship with questionnaire
measures. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 72, 262–274.
Ybarra, O., Keller, M. C., Baron, A. S., Chan,
E., Garcia, S. M., & Sanchez-Burks, J.
(2006). Predicting human unpredictability:
The eﬀect of cooperative and competitive
social 
circumstances. 
Manuscript 
under
review.
Ybarra, O., & Traﬁmow, D. (1998). How prim-
ing the private self or collective self aﬀects the
relative weights of attitudes and subjective
norms. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 24, 362–370.
Zimbardo, P. G., Andersen, S. M., & Kabat,
L. G. (1981). Induced hearing deﬁcit
generates experimental paranoia. Science,
212, 1529–1531.
277
RESPONSES TO SOCIAL PREDICTION


17
The Evolution of an Ostracism
Detection System
JENNIFER R. SPOOR
KIPLING D. WILLIAMS
Introduction
The Evolutionary Importance of Inclusion in Groups
Model of Ostracism Detection
Experimental Tests of the Ostracism Detection System
The Indiscriminate Ostracism Detection System
Implications and Conclusions
INTRODUCTION
For animals, ostracism from the group is often the ﬁrst step toward starvation
and early death (Goodall, 1986). Ostracism, exclusion and rejection by others
(Williams, 2001), is a ubiquitous phenomenon among humans, occurring
around the world and throughout history. In this chapter, we suggest that evo-
lutionary pressures favoring group and cooperative living shaped an ostracism
detection system that is sensitive to rejection from groups and close others. As
such, humans are acutely sensitive to actual and threatened rejection. After ostra-
cism has occurred, the system works to cope with the rejection and, in many
situations, obtain reacceptance into the group.
Drawing on Williams’s (1997, 2001, 2007) model of ostracism detection,
we elaborate some of the evolutionary bases of the model. We ﬁrst outline
some general principles in evolutionary psychology that provide a framework
for understanding the adaptive signiﬁcance of an ostracism detection system.
We then review aspects of Williams’s model and discuss illustrative research
where appropriate. We conclude with a discussion of the implications of an
279

evolutionary perspective for research on ostracism, an illustrative study, and
some directions for future research.
THE EVOLUTIONARY IMPORTANCE OF INCLUSION IN GROUPS
It is clear that humans are social animals (Aronson, 1999; Caporael, 2001; see all
chapters in this volume). In early evolutionary development, individuals
depended upon each other and group interaction to complete necessary survival
functions (Buss & Kenrick, 1998; Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume). Thus, early
humans’ survival and propagation of their genetic line was directly tied to their
group’s survival, and early humans faced a recurring adaptive problem of moni-
toring and maintaining their inclusion in groups. Theoretically, individuals who
quickly detected and responded to threats to inclusion (i.e., actual or threatened
ostracism) would have had a ﬁtness advantage over those who did not. Evidence
that an ostracism detection system responds to such threats with relative eﬃ-
ciency and economy provides evidence that the system is a domain-speciﬁc
adaptation (Andrews, Gangestad, & Matthews, 2002; see also Simpson &
LaPaglia, chapter 10, this volume) that may meet the requirements for special
design (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992).
Another example of a domain-speciﬁc psychological mechanism tied to
group living is reasoning about social exchange. Cosmides and Tooby (Cos-
mides, 1989; Cosmides & Tooby, 2005) argue that as early group interactions
expanded to involve social exchange with individuals beyond immediate kin, a
new problem arose: Some individuals may opt to cheat and fail to reciprocate
their obligation. Thus, they argue that humans developed a cognitive module to
reason about social exchange and cheater detection. Supportive evidence is pro-
vided in studies using a modiﬁed version of the Wason selection task (e.g.,
Cosmides, 1989; see also Badcock & Allen, chapter 8, this volume). Participants
are asked to test whether a given rule has been violated, and performance on the
original version is abysmal: Fewer than 30% of participants select the logically
correct responses. However, when modiﬁed so that participants test whether a
target has paid the cost for taking a beneﬁt, performance improves to around
70% correct responses. Improved performance is also found on unfamiliar,
abstract versions of the social contract, and performance on an unfamiliar
switched version of the task is in a direction predicted by the adaptive logic of
detecting cheaters. Thus, although humans’ logical reasoning may be ﬂawed in
many domains, humans reason about cooperation and social dilemmas in an
eﬃcient, eﬀective, and adaptive manner.
The ostracism detection system may be adaptive for selﬁsh individuals, but
it may also facilitate the coordination and behaviors of groups, reinforcing the
system’s development and maintenance. Brewer and Caporael (Brewer, 1997;
Caporael, 1997; Caporael & Brewer, 1991) argue that because early humans’
interactions with the physical environment were mediated by the group
280
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

environment, a primary adaptive problem was coordinating group activities to
maintain safe and eﬀective functioning. Several strategies may have developed to
improve coordination of group activity, including aﬀective inﬂuences in groups
(Spoor & Kelly, 2004), mimicry (Lakin, Jeﬀeris, Cheng, & Chartrand, 2003),
and leadership (van Vugt & Kurzban, chapter 14, this volume).
Ostracism and ostracism detection may also improve group coordination
and predictability. Ostracism allows the group to exert control and maintain
cooperation within the group (Ouwerkerk, Kerr, Gallucci, & van Lange, 2005),
and may protect the group against targets with disease and poor ﬁtness potential
(Schaller & Duncan, chapter 18, this volume). Ostracism detection, in contrast,
signals threats to inclusion and may prompt aﬃliation with the group. Because
ostracism threatens group membership, which was fundamental for survival,
individuals may be more sensitive to ostracism than other types of aversive social
interaction.
In the following sections, we review evidence suggesting that the ostracism
detection system is an adaptive response to a recurring evolutionary problem. We
also review evidence that the system helps to coordinate group activities and
maintain smoother interactions
MODEL OF OSTRACISM DETECTION
We are guided by Williams’s (Williams, 1997, 2001, 2007; Williams & Zadro,
2005) model of how targets respond to social ostracism, and extensive reviews of
the model can be found elsewhere (e.g., Williams, 1997, 2001, 2007). For the
present purposes, we focus on how targets immediately respond to ostracism,
reﬂecting an adaptive response to evolutionary pressures. While also aﬀected by
evolutionary pressures, more intermediate responses are more likely to be
mediated by social cognitive processes.
Immediate Reactions to Ostracism
As discussed above, we assume that ostracism, or other threats to inclusion in
groups, was a recurring adaptive problem, such that humans (and other social
animals) would beneﬁt from quickly and eﬃciently detecting such threats.
Indeed, research in which ostracism is induced in the lab suggests that targets
immediately react to perceived ostracism in an automatic, reﬂexive, and nearly
universal way. Ostracized targets report pain, hurt feelings, and depressed mood
after only brief (e.g., less than 5 minutes) exposure to ostracism (see Williams,
2007; Williams & Zadro, 2005).
The immediate feelings of pain may be crucial in signaling ostracism
threats. In humans, physical pain signals threats or problems in the environment
(MacDonald & Leary, 2005), whereas social pain refers to the emotional reaction
resulting from the realization that one is being excluded from important
281
OSTRACISM DETECTION

relationships or groups. Social pain may also be manifested via mild depression
(Badcock & Allen, chapter 8, this volume). Ostracism produces social pain, and
pain aﬀect in particular. Pain aﬀect (Price, 2000) draws attention to the injury or
experience as unpleasant, and also elicits emotional reactions that motivate
actions to end the negative experience.
Ostracism also triggers both the neurological and physiological mechanisms
for responding to social pain. Using fMRI technology, Eisenberger, Lieberman,
and Williams (2003) found that individuals who had been excluded showed
increased activity in the area of the brain associated with both physical and social
pain. Ostracism also triggers a generalized threat response system (MacDonald,
Kingsbury, & Shaw, 2005), producing an analgesic eﬀect of increased pain toler-
ance that allows one to temporarily ignore the pain and eﬀectively react.
McDonald et al. review research that this analgesic eﬀect occurs in both animals
and humans who experience isolation and ostracism. Simply remembering
instances of being ostracized also results in presently-experienced pain levels
exceeding dental pain, and on par with back pain and labor pain (Williams,
Fitness, Newton, & Cheng, 2006).
As discussed in more detail below (see “The Indiscriminate Ostracism
Detection System” section), numerous studies have attempted to delineate mini-
mal conditions in which exclusion will not aﬀect targets. However, the cumula-
tive evidence suggests that the ostracism detection system reacts indiscriminately
to ostracism of all sorts. This system may at times overreact, mistakenly labeling
a benign situation as ostracism. Ostracism detection may be a case in which the
costs of errors are asymmetrical. Drawing on error management theory (Hasel-
ton & Buss, 2000; Haselton & Nettle, 2006), failing to detect ostracism may be
incredibly costly in terms of ﬁtness, while mistakenly perceiving ostracism that
has not actually occurred may have relatively minimal costs.
Intermediate Responses to Ostracism
After the immediate response to ostracism, targets move into an intermediate,
reﬂective stage, in which the target’s responses are mediated by cognitive
appraisal of how ostracism has threatened various needs. According to Williams
(2001), ostracism potentially threatens four core needs:
•
belonging
•
self-esteem
•
control
•
meaningful existence.
Each of these core needs is tied to inclusion in groups, reinforcing the develop-
ment of the system over time. Ostracism may threaten only some or all of the
core needs simultaneously, and the speciﬁc needs that are threatened may
be critical in elucidating the target’s cognitive responses to ostracism, their
282
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

short-term coping, and the behaviors enacted. We discuss these diﬀerential reac-
tions in the section on “Short-Term Coping with Ostracism”, and only brieﬂy
outline the general importance of each need next.
There is clear evidence that interpersonal rejection, including ostracism,
negatively impacts the need to belong (e.g., Leary, 2005; Williams & Zadro,
2005). The need to belong (Baumeister & Leary, 1995) contributes to indi-
viduals’ physical and mental well-being and functioning (see also Buck, chapter
6, this volume). Although belonging needs may be met by acceptance by a few
important others (Baumeister & Leary, 1995), the importance of group living in
evolutionary history suggests that even ostracism by a group of strangers will
threaten belonging needs. There is also evidence that ostracism threatens belong-
ing needs more strongly than other types of unpleasant interaction, such as
verbal disagreement (Zadro, Williams, & Richardson, 2005).
Ostracism may also threaten self-esteem, particularly social self-esteem, or
how we perceive that others view our goodness and worth (Leary & Baumeister,
2000). Self-esteem serves as a proxy for belonging because it gauges one’s relative
inclusion and worth within a group. Ostracism may be especially threatening to
self-esteem because targets of ostracism are rarely given an explicit reason for the
ostracism (Williams & Zadro, 2005). Instead, they are left to imagine the
perhaps myriad reasons why their own actions may have incited the exclusion.
Ostracism may also threaten the need for control over the environment
(Seligman, 1975). In the ancestral environment, living in groups necessarily
required a level of control and predictability (Brewer, 1997), thus ostracism
threatens both adaptive inclusion in the group, as well as the sense of control and
predictability oﬀered by the group. After being ostracized, one has little control
or inﬂuence over the course of an interaction or how the group members will
react. Particularly if it is not obvious what oﬀense was committed, the ostracized
target may not even have a sense of how to go about regaining control.
Finally, ostracism may threaten the need for meaningful existence. Accord-
ing to terror management theory (Greenberg, Pyszczynski, & Solomon, 1986),
humans are strongly motivated to buﬀer the terror and fear of their own death
and insigniﬁcance. In many tribes, social ostracism is one of the most severe
forms of punishment (Case & Williams, 2004), and many terms for ostracism
translate to a form of social death. Ostracism may increase mortality salience,
prompting ostracized targets to imagine what the world would be like if they did
not exist.
EXPERIMENTAL TESTS OF THE OSTRACISM DETECTION SYSTEM
In this section we elaborate on some ways that ostracism has been studied using
experimental methods, elucidating how targets respond in both the immediate
and intermediate stages. We brieﬂy review two commonly used methods of
manipulating ostracism, the ball-toss paradigm and Cyberball, and then review
283
OSTRACISM DETECTION

research examining how people cope with ostracism in both the short- and long-
term.
Ball-Toss Paradigm and Cyberball
Experimental studies of ostracism have demonstrated that targets respond
quickly and powerfully to relatively minor instances of ostracism. For example,
in early studies (e.g., Williams, 1997; Williams & Sommer, 1997) one real
participant engaged in a ball-toss game with two confederates. Participants were
randomly assigned to either be included (i.e., tossed the ball about one-third of
the time), or excluded (i.e., tossed the ball a few times during the beginning
of the game). The manipulation lasted for only 5 minutes and involved no
other interaction among the players. Ostracized participants were visibly and
negatively aﬀected by only brief ostracism by two strangers.
More recently, Williams, Cheung, and Choi (2000) developed Cyberball,
an Internet version of the ball-toss game, which was designed to add more
experimental control and further minimize any social cues present in the ball-
toss game. Participants logged onto an Internet website ostensibly to participate
in a study of mental visualization, including a virtual game of ball toss with
players at other locations. The other “players” were computer generated, and
participants were randomly assigned to be included or ostracized. Even though
participants had no direct contact with the other players, no shared history, nor
any prospect of future interaction, the experience of ostracism was quite aversive.
More recently, Cyberball has been used in laboratory studies with experiment
participants (Williams & Jarvis, 2006), and being ostracized in the lab version
results in similarly negative reactions as the ball-toss and Internet version of
Cyberball.
It should be noted that the negative eﬀects of ostracism occur because of
being excluded and not from knowing that others are being included. Smith and
Williams (2004) conducted a study using cell phone text messages, in which
excluded participants initially received messages and then did not receive any
additional messages. Thus, participants could only imagine that they were being
ostracized and could not determine whether the other participants were com-
municating with each other. Ostracized participants again reported depressed
mood and reductions in the four needs consistent with other ostracism
manipulations.
The above examples demonstrate that the ostracism detection system is
sensitive to subtle and relatively minor instances of ostracism. Although the
actual ostracism episodes described above were typically brief and perpetrated by
strangers, it was clear that the experience had powerful negative consequences.
The impact of these relatively stripped-down manipulations also supports our
contention that the ostracism detection system is acutely sensitive to any threat
to inclusion.
284
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Short-Term Coping with Ostracism
According to the model, individuals respond to the immediate pain of ostracism
by attempting to fortify the core needs. From an evolutionary perspective, the
most adaptive response may often be to attempt to gain readmittance into a
group, and there is some evidence that some individuals do respond to ostracism
by attempting to aﬃliate. For example, Williams and Sommer (1997) had parti-
cipants complete the ball-toss game and then work either collectively or co-
actively on a brainstorming task. Women who previously had been included
tended to loaf when working collectively. However, women who previously had
been excluded actually contributed more on the collective task. Presumably,
these women were attempting to gain approval from the group by demonstrating
that they were indeed “good” group members. Similar results were obtained in a
study in which targets believed that they were playing Cyberball with two mem-
bers of an ingroup, two members of an outgroup, or a mixed group (Williams et
al., 2000). On a perceptual judgment task, ostracized participants were more
likely to conform to an obviously incorrect response, especially after being ostra-
cized by at least one ingroup member. Thus, ostracized targets often respond in
ways that will help them regain acceptance and inclusion in a group.
There is also some evidence that participants’ attempts to regain inclusion
may occur automatically and without conscious awareness (Lakin & Chartrand,
2005). Lakin and Chartrand found that participants who were ostracized during
Cyberball were more likely to nonconsciously mimic an interaction partner than
those who had been included. Because mimicry is associated with a desire to
aﬃliate with an interaction partner and also increases liking and rapport during
the interaction (Lakin & Chartrand, 2003), they argued that the ostracized
participants’ increased mimicry served the goal of reducing their own negative
aﬀective state, but also increased aﬃliation with the interaction partner.
Targets of ostracism do not always respond with positive and aﬃliative
behaviors, and some targets of ostracism have reacted with negative and aggres-
sive behaviors (e.g., Twenge, Baumeister, Tice, & Stucke, 2001). Targets may be
more likely to use aggression when control and meaningful existence needs are
threatened (Warburton & Williams, 2005; Warburton, Williams, & Cairns,
2006; Williams, 2001). For example, Warburton et al. (2006) excluded or
included participants using a variation of the ball-toss paradigm. Half of the
participants were given the opportunity to restore control; the other half received
a manipulation that further diminished their control. Later in the experiment,
only ostracized participants in the diminished control condition were aggressive
toward another participant.
The intermediate response to ostracism may require more elaborate cogni-
tive processing of the situation. Such processing may require a cost–beneﬁt
analysis of each reaction, as well as perspective taking at higher orders of inten-
tionality (see Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume) to determine what the perpetrators
intended to achieve by using ostracism. From an evolutionary perspective, the
285
OSTRACISM DETECTION

substantial survival beneﬁts of remaining in a group should increase the likeli-
hood of prosocial behaviors aimed at aﬃliation and inclusion. There is some
evidence that aﬃliation behaviors are more likely when the behavior is public
and observable (Warburton & Williams, 2005), again suggesting that targets are
sensitive to how their behaviors will be viewed by others. However, it is plausible
that in some situations, aggression and antisocial behaviors may be a predictable
and adaptive response. For example, cognitive appraisal of the costs and beneﬁts
of an aggressive versus a prosocial response may lead to aggression aimed at
increasing control and predictability in the situation. Targets may also perceive
that aggression will serve as retaliation, especially if the ostracism is perceived as
unjustiﬁed. Aggressive responses may also deter the perpetrators from using
ostracism in the future (i.e., the potential costs of aggression toward the group
outweigh the costs of the target’s oﬀense).
THE INDISCRIMINATE OSTRACISM DETECTION SYSTEM
A number of studies have attempted to ﬁnd moderators of the eﬀects of ostra-
cism, but these studies suggest that the ostracism detection system appears to
react immediately and indiscriminately to ostracism of all sorts, even in those
(perhaps rare) situations in which being ostracized may actually be beneﬁcial for
the target. For example, Gonsalkorale and Williams (in press) led participants to
believe that they were playing Cyberball with members of either an ingroup,
a rival outgroup, or a despised group (the Ku Klux Klan) and found that
participants reacted negatively even when ostracized by members of a despised
outgroup.
Recent studies have also explored potential moderators by varying the
meaning behind the ball tossing. In one variation on Cyberball, participants
virtually tossed a bomb and responded negatively even when excluded from
being tossed the bomb (van Beest & Williams, 2006). Although only symbolic,
it suggests that individuals may actually feel bad being excluded from a game of
Russian Roulette. Additionally, van Beest and Williams found that, when receiv-
ing the ball meant that money was deducted from one’s account, participants
responded negatively. Thus, being ostracized meant that while the other players
ended up with no money, the ostracized participant ended up with the maxi-
mum amount of money. Despite the relative monetary gain of being ostracized,
ostracized participants felt bad.
Finally, participants respond negatively to ostracism in the Cyberball para-
digm, even when explicitly informed that they are playing the game with two
computer-generated players or that the inclusion/exclusion is a scripted part of
the experiment (Zadro, Williams, & Richardson, 2004). It may be that ostracism
eﬀects occur to the extent that participants construe the situation in social terms,
thinking about other people as volitional agents (Law & Williams, 2006). Law
and Williams have found preliminary evidence that using geometric forms
286
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

(squares and spheres) rather than traditional Cyberball icons and ball, combined
with giving participants no instructions to mentally visualize the animated
screen, results in no impact on the four needs. However, simply instructing
participants to create a story around what they are viewing on the screen is
suﬃcient to reduce the four needs and to increase sadness and anger.
From an evolutionary perspective, it is not surprising that the ostracism
detection system immediately responds to even mild (or mislabeled) instances of
ostracism. The accumulation of evidence to date indicates that the system reacts
similarly to any environmental cue of exclusion from a social/group situation.
This ﬁnely tuned response is stable, persistent, and eﬃcient, suggesting that it is
a domain-speciﬁc adaptation (Andrews et al., 2002) resulting in a domain-
speciﬁc psychological mechanism (Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). Additionally, the
asymmetric costs of failing to detect true ostracism versus falsely detecting ostra-
cism (Haselton & Buss, 2000; Haselton & Nettle, 2006) reinforce the use of the
system across time.
Ostracism and Biological Fitness
Humans are acutely sensitive to ostracism, which we argue derives from the
ﬁtness beneﬁts of avoiding the dire consequences of exclusion from groups.
However, other factors inﬂuence one’s ﬁtness potential, including the ﬁtness of
one’s partner (or group). In other words, some relationships are highly desirable
and have high ﬁtness potential (e.g., physically attractive partners), while other
relationships may actually be detrimental to ﬁtness (e.g., diseased partners). It is
possible that the ostracism detection system will distinguish and react diﬀerently
to ostracism depending upon the relative ﬁtness potential of the lost relationship.
Sher, Vujic, Locke, and Williams (2006) tested this notion in two studies
that examined immediate reactions to Cyberball-induced ostracism. In Study 1,
participants were either ostracized or included by two other individuals who were
either normally or highly physically attractive, where physical attractiveness
served as a proxy for biological ﬁtness. Consistent with previous studies, how-
ever, only a main eﬀect for ostracism emerged. In Study 2, participants were
ostracized or included by two individuals with or without a facial deformity,
where the facial deformity served as a proxy for nonﬁtness (see Schaller & Dun-
can, chapter 18, this volume). Again, ostracism was distressing, regardless of the
source. However, the pattern of means suggests that ostracism by individuals
with the facial deformity was somewhat less distressing than ostracism by indi-
viduals without the facial deformity, especially in terms of meaningful existence.
There was also some evidence that participants were sensitive to biological ﬁtness
when they had been included. Speciﬁcally, participants reported lower satisfac-
tion levels of their needs when included by facially deformed individuals (but
still higher than when ostracized). These studies suggest that the ostracism detec-
tion system functions to immediately detect and respond to any threat of ostra-
cism, even in the face of other evolutionarily adaptive responses. Inclusion in a
287
OSTRACISM DETECTION

group was so fundamental to early survival (Dunbar, chapter 2, this volume),
that it may be more important to be included in any group, even one whose
members have minimal ﬁtness potential. The results of Study 2 are in line with
this possibility, suggesting that reactions to factors related to biological ﬁtness
may reside in relatively safe inclusion circumstances rather than danger-signaling
ostracism circumstances.
IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Reviewing the literature on ostracism and social exclusion, we conclude that
there is good evidence that an ostracism detection system is an evolutionarily
adaptive system that responds to protect organisms from threats to inclusion.
Because ostracism signals potential death, and lost opportunities to reproduce, it
would be evolutionarily adaptive for humans (or any social animal) to readily
detect signs of ostracism. Thus, it is best to feel pain ﬁrst, and ask questions later.
This is demonstrated in the numerous studies that found that the immediate,
automatic, and nearly universal response to ostracism is pain and hurt feelings.
Additionally, as discussed in the previous section, ostracism may signal a more
immediate danger, trumping signals of other forms of biological ﬁtness.
In the short term, the pain of ostracism can direct coping responses that can
help individuals rehabilitate their behaviors to either gain readmittance into the
ostracizing group, or become attractive for new groups. Thus, following ostra-
cism, individuals have been shown to become more socially attentive (see Pickett
& Gardner, 2005), hard-working (Williams & Sommer, 1997), conforming
(Williams et al., 2000), and even gullible (Carter & Williams, 2005; Wheaton,
2001). They also engage in more nonconscious (Lakin & Chartrand, 2005) and
strategic mimicry (Ouwerkerk et al., 2005).
However, ostracism can also prompt seemingly dysfunctional reactions that
may actually increase the probability of more ostracism. Under certain circum-
stances, ostracized individuals lose the ability to self-regulate (Baumeister,
DeWall, Ciarocco, & Twenge, 2006), become cognitively impaired (Baumeister,
Twenge, & Nuss, 2002), and lash out at the ostracizers and even naive others
who had nothing to do with the ostracism (Twenge et al., 2001). From an
evolutionary perspective, the prosocial response is probably more adaptive for
most of the population. However, some researchers have argued that certain
forms of aggression may have persisted because they were adaptive for a few (e.g.,
Wilson & Daly, 1996); thus, a few individuals may have beneﬁted from respond-
ing aggressively to ostracism. Our hunch is that antisocial reactions occur only
when ostracism (or social exclusion) is paired with a severe loss of control,
when rehabilitative responses would appear to be fruitless. Thus, if the target is
oﬀered a genuine alternative to aggression (e.g., inclusion in another group or
an alternative form of self-aﬃrmation), antisocial responses may be avoided
altogether.
288
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

Future research should be directed toward understanding more long-term
coping with ostracism. Drawing on an evolutionary perspective, these more
reﬂective and cognitively-mediated responses may be inﬂuenced by other ﬁtness
concerns. For example, individuals may react diﬀerently if the inclusion scen-
arios are clearly related to mating. Ostracism in a mating scenario may threaten
diﬀerent core needs than in a nonmating scenario because some needs, such as
self-esteem and belonging, may be fulﬁlled via other group memberships. Rejec-
tion during mating, however, may threaten meaningful existence and control
because, biologically speaking, organisms exist to propagate their genetic line.
Thus, few hits at eHarmony (an online dating service) and no responses after
speed dating may elicit diﬀerent reactions than being rejected from a social club
or at a party. Intermediate reactions to ostracism may also be aﬀected by the
target’s own fecundity. For example, women may be more sensitive to ostracism
by males other than their partner while they are ovulating, but more sensitive to
ostracism from their partner during other times of the cycle. We may also
observe gender and developmental patterns in responses to ostracism by roman-
tic partners. While women’s fertility decreases with age, men potentially can
reproduce well into old age. Thus, men and women may react diﬀerently to
ostracism at diﬀerent points in their lives as they can seek out diﬀerent routes to
fortify their core needs.
An evolutionary framework helps elucidate why ostracism continues to
be such a ubiquitous phenomenon, and why individuals have quick and uni-
versal responses to even minor incidents of ostracism. The framework also
prompts interesting questions and directions for future research. While indi-
viduals face a myriad of challenges each day, monitoring inclusion appears to be a
fundamental and constant task, with powerful implications for short- and long-
term coping.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This chapter was supported by National Science Foundation grant 0519209-BCS and an Australian
Research Council Discovery Grant awarded to K. Williams.
REFERENCES
Andrews, P. W., Gangestad, S. W., & Matthews,
D. (2002). Adaptationism: How to carry out
an exaptationist program. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 25, 489–553.
Aronson, E. (1999). The social animal (8th ed.).
New York: Freeman.
Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., Ciarocco, N.
L., & Twenge, J. M. (2006). Social exclusion
impairs self-regulation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 88, 589–604.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The
need to belong: Desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human
motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–
529.
Baumeister, R. F., Twenge, J. M., & Nuss, C. K.
289
OSTRACISM DETECTION

(2002). Eﬀects of social exclusion on cogni-
tive processes: Anticipated aloneness reduces
intelligent thought. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83, 817–827.
Brewer, M. B. (1997). On the social origins of
human nature. In C. McGarty & S. A.
Haslam (Eds.), The message of social psychology
(pp. 54–62). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Buss, D. M., & Kenrick, D. T. (1998). Evo-
lutionary social psychology. In D. T. Gilbert,
S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The
handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp.
982–1026). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Caporael, L. R. (1997). The evolution of truly
social cognition: The core conﬁgurations
model. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 1, 276–298.
Caporael, L. R. (2001). Parts and wholes: The
evolutionary importance of groups. In C.
Sedikides & M. B. Brewer (Eds.), Individual
self, relational self, collective self (pp. 241–
258). New York: Psychology Press.
Caporael, L. R., & Brewer, M. B. (1991).
Reviving evolutionary psychology: Biology
meets society. Journal of Social Issues, 47,
187–195.
Carter, A. R., & Williams, K. D. (2005, May).
Eﬀects of ostracism on social susceptibility.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Midwestern 
Psychological 
Association,
Chicago.
Case, T. I., & Williams, K. D. (2004). Ostra-
cism: A metaphor for death. In S. L. Green-
berg, S. L. Koole, & T. Pyszczynski (Eds.),
Handbook of experimental existential psych-
ology (pp. 336–351). New York: Guilford
Press.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social
exchange: Has natural selection shaped how
humans reason? Studies with the Wason
selection task. Cognition, 31, 187–276.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2005). Neurocogni-
tive adaptations designed for social exchange.
In D. M. Buss (Ed.), Evolutionary psychology
handbook 
(pp. 
584–627). 
New 
York:
Wiley.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Wil-
liams, K. D. (2003). Does rejection hurt? An
fMRI study of social exclusion. Science, 302,
290–292.
Gonsalkorale, K., & Williams, K. D. (in press).
The KKK won’t let me play: Ostracism by a
despised outgroup hurts. European Journal of
Social Psychology.
Goodall, J. (1986). Social rejection, exclusion,
and shunning among the Gombe chimpan-
zees. Ethology and Sociobiology, 7, 227–236.
Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S.
(1986). The causes and consequences of the
need for self-esteem: A terror management
theory. In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Public self
and private self (pp. 189–212). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Haselton M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error
management theory: A new perspective on
biases in cross-sex mind reading. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 81–
91.
Haselton, M. G., & Nettle, D. (2006). The
paranoid optimist: An integrative evolution-
ary model of cognitive biases. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 10, 47–66.
Lakin, J. L., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Using
nonconscious behavioral mimicry to create
aﬃliation and rapport. Psychological Science,
14, 334–339.
Lakin, J. L., & Chartrand, T. L. (2005). Exclu-
sion and nonconscious behavioral mimicry.
In K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W. von
Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast: Ostracism,
social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp.
279–296). New York: Psychology Press.
Lakin, J. L., Jeﬀeris, V. E., Cheng, C. M., &
Chartrand, T. L. (2003). The chameleon
eﬀect as social glue: Evidence for the evo-
lutionary 
signiﬁcance 
of 
nonconscious
mimicry. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 27,
145–162.
Law, A. T., & Williams, K. D. (2006). The mini-
mal conditions necessary to perceive ostracism.
Working paper, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN.
Leary, M. R. (2005). Varieties of interpersonal
rejection. In K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, &
W. von Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast:
Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bully-
ing (pp. 35–52). New York: Psychology Press.
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The
nature and function of self-esteem: Socio-
meter theory. In M. R. Leary (Ed.), Inter-
personal rejection (pp. 3–20). New York:
Oxford University Press.
MacDonald, G., Kingsbury, R., & Shaw, S.
(2005). Adding insult to injury: Social pain
theory and response to social exclusion. In
290
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W. von
Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast: Ostracism,
social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp.
77–90). New York: Psychology Press.
MacDonald, G., & Leary, M. R. (2005). Why
does social exclusion hurt? The relationship
between social and physical pain. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 131, 202–223.
Ouwerkerk, J. W., Kerr, N. L., Gallucci, M., &
van Lange, P. A. M. (2005). Avoiding the
social death penalty: Ostracism and cooper-
ation in social dilemmas. In K. D. Williams,
J. P. Forgas, & W. von Hippel (Eds.), The
social outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejec-
tion, and bullying (pp. 321–332). New York:
Psychology Press.
Pickett, C. L., & Gardner, W. L. (2005). The
social monitoring system: Enhanced sensitiv-
ity to social clues as an adaptive response to
social exclusion. In K. D. Williams, J. P.
Forgas, & W. von Hippel, The social outcast:
Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bully-
ing (pp. 213–226). New York: Psychology
Press.
Price, D. D. (2000). Psychological and neural
mechanisms of the aﬀective dimension of
pain. Science, 288, 1769–1772.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On
depression, development, and death. San
Francisco: Freeman.
Sher, T., Vujic, T., Locke, V., & Williams, K. D.
(2006). The eﬀects of signals of biological ﬁtness
on reactions to ostracism and inclusion.
Unpublished manuscript, University of
Western Australia, Perth.
Smith, A., & Williams, K. D. (2004). R U
there? Ostracism by cell phone text messages.
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research and Prac-
tice, 8, 291–301.
Spoor, J. R., & Kelly, J. R. (2004). The evo-
lutionary signiﬁcance of aﬀect in groups:
Communication and group bonding. Group
Processes and Intergroup Relations, 7, 398–
416.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psycho-
logical foundations of culture. In J. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the gener-
ation of culture (pp. 19–136). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M.,
& Stucke, T. S. (2001). If you can’t join
them, beat them: Eﬀects of social exclusion
on aggressive behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81, 1058–1069.
Van Beest, I., & Williams, K. D. (2006). When
inclusion costs and ostracism pays, ostracism
still hurts. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 218–228.
Warburton, W. A., & Williams, K. D. (2005).
Ostracism: When competing motivations
collide. In J. P. Forgas, K. D. Williams, &
S. M. Laham (Eds.), Social motivation: Con-
scious and unconscious processes (pp. 294–
313). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Warburton, W. A., Williams, K. D., & Cairns,
D. R. (2006). When ostracism leads to
aggression: The moderating eﬀects of control
deprivation. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 42, 213–220.
Wheaton, A. (2001). Ostracism and susceptibility
to the overtures of socially deviant groups and
individuals. Unpublished Honours thesis,
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.
Williams, K. D. (1997). Social ostracism. In
R. M. Kowalski (Ed.), Aversive interpersonal
behaviors (pp. 133–170). New York: Plenum.
Williams, K. D. (2001). Ostracism: The power of
silence. New York: Guilford Press.
Williams, K. D. (2007). Ostracism. In Annual
Review of Psychology (Vol. 58). New York:
Annual Reviews, Inc.
Williams, K. D., Cheung, C. K. T., & Choi, W.
(2000). CyberOstracism: Eﬀects of being
ignored over the Internet. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 79, 748–762.
Williams, K. D., Fitness, J., Newton, N., &
Cheng, Z. (2006). When hurt won’t heal:
Exploring the capacity to relive social and
physical pain. Manuscript under review.
Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball:
A program for use in research on ostracism
and 
interpersonal 
acceptance. 
Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Com-
puters, 38, 174–180.
Williams, K. D., & Sommer, K. (1997). Social
ostracism by one’s coworkers: Does rejection
lead to loaﬁng or compensation. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 693–706.
Williams, K. D., & Zadro, L. (2005). Ostra-
cism: The indiscriminate early detection
system. In K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, &
W. von Hippel (Eds.), The social outcast:
Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and
bullying (pp. 19–34). New York: Psychology
Press.
291
OSTRACISM DETECTION

Wilson, M. I., & Daly, M. (1996). Male sexual
proprietariness and violence against wives.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5,
2–7.
Zadro, L., Williams, K. D., & Richardson, R.
(2004). How low can you go? Ostracism by a
computer is suﬃcient to lower self-reported
levels of belonging, control, self-esteem, and
meaningful existence. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 40, 560–567.
Zadro, L., Williams, K. D., & Richardson, R.
(2005). Riding the “O” train: Comparing the
eﬀects of ostracism and verbal dispute on
targets and sources. Group Processes and
Intergroup Relations, 8, 125–143.
292
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

18
The Behavioral Immune
System
Its Evolution and Social
Psychological Implications
MARK SCHALLER
LESLEY A. DUNCAN
The Past
The Present
The Future
N
ovember 27, 1966. For one of the authors (Mark Schaller) that was a
bad day. It was his fourth birthday and his parents threw him a party,
with balloons and ice cream and birthday party games. This wasn’t
easy because the family was living on the Serengeti plains of Tanzania, where
neither balloons nor ice cream (nor very many other young children for that
matter) were readily available. Despite his parents’ intrepid eﬀorts, the day was a
disaster. Mark’s balloon popped. He dropped his ice cream into the dirt. He
cried and cried and cried.
Meanwhile, elsewhere in Tanzania, on exactly the same day, a fellow named
McGregor was also having a bad day—a really bad day. Indeed, the minor
setbacks of Mark’s birthday party are trivial in comparison to the truly tragic
events that befell McGregor that day.
McGregor lived on the eastern edge of Lake Tanganyika, in an area that is
now Gombe National Park. McGregor was a chimpanzee. Chimpanzees are, like
people, a highly social species. Chimps typically stay in very close contact with
their fellow group members. Their health and reproductive success depend on it.
They may spend several hours each day grooming each other—removing ﬂeas,
mites, and other ectoparasites from each other’s fur. For most of McGregor’s life,
293

his social experiences were not unusual. But, in 1966, a polio epidemic struck the
Gombe chimpanzees, and McGregor fell victim. The consequences are described
in detail by Goodall (1986). McGregor lost the use of his legs, forcing him to
drag his body backwards with his arms, or to attempt a series of bizarre somer-
saults as a crude means of locomotion. He lost control of his bladder, and so his
awkward movements were accompanied constantly by a buzzing swarm of ﬂies.
And, as if that wasn’t painful enough, McGregor’s physical privations precipi-
tated near-complete social rejection—as indicated by observations recorded on
November 27, 1966:
Of the total number of 32 adult and adolescent chimpanzees who visited camp at
the time, 17 approached the crippled male. . . . Only nine adults approached
closely . . . and of these only four actually touched him (two aggressively). . . .
Humphrey [possibly his biological nephew] was the only chimpanzee who some-
times slept within 20 meters of the stricken male. . . . Perhaps the most striking
aspect was the fact that not once in the 24 hours was [he] involved in a session of
social grooming. (Goodall, 1986, pp. 233–234)
Behavioral avoidance and social rejection of diseased individuals are observed
not only in chimpanzees, but in many other species too. Mice avoid mating with
mice that are infected with parasitic viruses, protozoa, and larval nematodes (e.g.,
Kavaliers, Colwell, Braun, & Choleris, 2003). Bullfrog tadpoles avoid swimming
in proximity to tadpoles infected with debilitating intestinal parasites (Kiesecker,
Skelly, Beard, & Preisser, 1999). Closer to home, human beings prefer to main-
tain distance from others who are described as diseased, especially if the alleged
disease is perceived to be contagious (Crandall & Moriarty, 1995).
Why is this? To some extent, the explanation is straightforward. Goodall
(1986, p. 234) suggested that “avoidance of conspeciﬁcs showing abnormal
behavior may be highly adaptive since it reduces the risk of spreading contagious
disease.” More broadly, it has been suggested that many animals, including
humans, have an evolved capacity to detect symptoms of parasitic infection in
others, and to respond with behaviors—such as behavioral avoidance and social
rejection—that reduce the likelihood of contracting that infection oneself
(Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1979; Kurzban & Leary, 2001; Schaller, Park, & Faulkner,
2003).
Although that explanation is straightforward and perhaps even obvious, it
has many additional implications that are more complex and a lot less obvious. A
deeper consideration of how such an evolved process might operate yields a large
number of novel implications for human social cognition and interpersonal
behavior more generally. Evolved mechanisms designed to inhibit contact with
disease-carrying conspeciﬁcs are likely to promote speciﬁc kinds of aversive reac-
tions toward many speciﬁc kinds of people who are, in fact, perfectly healthy.
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss some of these implications. But
ﬁrst, we need to consider carefully the selection pressures that presumably led to
294
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

the evolution of these psychological mechanisms in the ﬁrst place. We must
spend a bit of time in the past.
THE PAST
Evolution of the Behavioral Immune System
Parasites are an enduring part of human history. Infectious bacteria and viruses
have existed on the planet far longer than people and other primates have; and as
long as animals have had guts, those guts have been infected with helminths and
worms (Brothwell & Sandison, 1967; Ewald, 1993; van Blerkom, 2003).
Not all parasites are harmful, but many are. The European plague outbreak
in the Middle Ages killed millions of people (Lippi & Conti, 2002). Bacterial
diseases wiped out up to 90% of the native populations in the Americas
(Guerra, 1993). These are relatively recent events, but the dangers posed by
parasites are hardly recent phenomena. The very fact that humans and other
animals have evolved extraordinarily sophisticated immune systems attests to the
antiquity of parasitic infections, to the enormous selection pressures that para-
sitic infections have exerted on animal populations, and to the ﬁtness-conferring
beneﬁts associated with any adaptation that contributes to an antiparasite
defense system.
The immune system is just one kind of antiparasite defense system, and,
although eﬀective in many ways, it has its downsides too. The mobilization of
immunological defenses often consumes substantial metabolic resources, rob-
bing individuals of energy that might be devoted to other ﬁtness-enhancing tasks
(Brown, 2003; Klein & Nelson, 1999). Speciﬁc features of immunological
defense, such as fever, may be even further debilitating. Organisms are well-
served by the existence of an immune system, but they are best served when that
immune system is engaged as infrequently as possible.
In addition, the immune system is limited by the boundaries of physical
anatomy. The immune system is designed to combat infectious agents only after
they are detected upon contact with the individual’s body. It cannot prevent
contact in the ﬁrst place.
Therefore, it is entirely plausible that selection pressures posed by parasites
led to the evolution of an additional antiparasite defense system as well, one
designed to inhibit contact with infectious agents in the ﬁrst place. This system is
comprised of a set of mechanisms that allow individuals to detect the potential
presence of parasites in the objects and individuals around them, and to engage
in behaviors that prevent contact with those objects and individuals. This has
been called the behavioral immune system (Schaller, 2006).
The operation of some sort of evolved behavioral immune system is impli-
cated by abundant evidence—across many species—pertaining to foraging and
feeding behavior. Sheep selectively avoid grazing on grasses contaminated with
295
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

their own fecal waste (Cooper, Gordon, & Pike, 2000). People too show a
disgust reaction and behavioral rejection toward foods that are potentially con-
taminated by parasites (Rozin, Millman, & Nemeroﬀ, 1986). Of course, it’s not
just foods and other inanimate objects that host potentially-dangerous parasites.
Other individuals do as well. So it’s no surprise that the behavioral immune
system also compels avoidance, and even outright rejection, of conspeciﬁcs (like
poor McGregor) that demonstrate symptoms of physical illness.
How It Works: Cue Detection and Response
Any eﬀective defense system requires the coordinated operation of at least two
kinds of underlying mechanism: mechanisms designed to detect cues signaling
threat, and other mechanisms that respond to those cues by mobilizing some sort
of defensive response. This is the case for the “real” immune system. Speciﬁc
mechanisms distinguish the diﬀerence between organic entities that belong in
the body and those—like viruses—that don’t. When pathogenic intruders are
detected, other mechanisms within the system are triggered that attempt to repel
those pathogens through a variety of physiological means. In an analogous
fashion, the behavioral immune system also is comprised of mechanisms
designed for detection and response.
The detection mechanisms employ the organism’s ordinary sensory organs
as a means of recognizing parasite-connoting cues at a distance. Frogs use speciﬁc
kinds of chemical signals for this purpose (Kiesecker et al., 1999). Many mam-
mals use olfactory cues of some sort (Kavaliers et al., 2003), and surely people do
too. In addition, given our highly-developed visual systems—which allow us to
detect many diﬀerent kinds of ﬁtness-connoting signals from a distance—our
parasite-detection mechanisms are sensitized to detect visual cues signaling pos-
sible parasitic infection. This makes sense, of course, given that the symptoms of
many parasitic infections are manifest in individual’s superﬁcial appearance or
behavior (e.g., skin lesions, rashes, coughing spasms).
The behavioral immune system also includes mechanisms designed to
respond in functionally-useful (i.e., ﬁtness-enhancing) ways once a parasite-
connoting cue has been detected. Behavioral avoidance is the functionally-
relevant “goal” for which these mechanisms are designed. But behavior doesn’t
just happen; it is the product of underlying psychological activity. In humans,
this activity involves both aﬀective and cognitive mechanisms.
Emotions are instrumental in motivating immediate behavioral reactions
(see, in this volume, Buck, chapter 6; Ellsworth, chapter 5; Forgas, chapter 7;
Lieberman, chapter 11). Both fear and disgust motivate behavioral avoidance.
Disgust in particular seems likely to be an important part of the behavioral
immune system. The capacity for disgust may have arisen originally to protect
individuals from the ingestion of toxins and other food-based contaminants
(Rozin & Fallon, 1987), but the mechanisms involved in the disgust experience
appear to have evolved to serve a parasite-defense function as well. Disgust is
296
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

triggered by the visual perception of skin lesions, runny noses, and other obvious
symptoms of parasitic infection (Curtis, Aunger, & Rabie, 2004; Curtis & Biran,
2001).
Disgust may motivate an immediate and impulsive avoidant response, but
that’s it. The emotional experience alone cannot compel wariness about future
interactions, nor can disgust alone precipitate more planful actions (such as
coordinated eﬀorts at quarantine and social exclusion) that help to eliminate the
long-term threat posed by possibly parasitized individuals. To facilitate these
kinds of ﬁtness-relevant behaviors, various cognitive processes must be engaged
as well. In humans the detection of any parasite-connoting cue may have
immediate implications on higher-order cognitive processes involved in infer-
ence and memory, which may then inﬂuence the speciﬁc nature of attitudes and
other enduring social knowledge structures. These, in turn, are likely to have
consequent eﬀects on social decision making and behavior.
If the behavioral immune system inﬂuenced reactions only to truly diseased
individuals, it would still constitute a worthwhile topic of scientiﬁc inquiry, but
would perhaps be of limited relevance to the broader range of social psycho-
logical phenomena. In fact, however, the behavioral immune system appears to
operate in such a way that it often precipitates aversive reactions to individuals
who are perfectly healthy. Consequently, it has direct implications for many
phenomena that lie squarely in the center of the social psychological literature—
including interpersonal attraction, intergroup prejudice, and social stigmas
of various kinds. To understand why, it is useful to apply the logic of signal
detection.
The Signal Detection Problem and its Solution: Oversensitivity and
Overgeneralization
The behavioral immune system is designed not to respond to the presence of
parasites, per se, but rather to the perceived presence of parasites as indicated by
superﬁcial sensory signals. Many of these cues, presumably, are probabilistically
predictive of the presence of parasites. But even the most diagnostic of symptoms
is highly imperfect. (Some healthy people cough, and some sick people don’t.)
The result is a classic signal-detection problem, with the potential to make both
false-positive errors (a healthy person is erroneously perceived to be sick) and
false-negative errors (a sick person is erroneously perceived to be healthy). Any
general tendency toward avoiding false positives leads to an increase in the rate of
false negatives, and vice versa. Evolutionary logic indicates that this dilemma will
be resolved in favor of minimizing the error that poses the greatest costs to an
individual’s ﬁtness, even if that results in an increased rate of making the other
kind of error (Haselton & Nettle, 2006; Nesse, 2005; for a broader discussion of
signaling and signal-detection systems see Gangestad & Thornhill, chapter 3,
this volume). In this case, as with most evolved systems designed for self-
protection, the ﬁtness costs associated with false negatives are considerably
297
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

greater than those associated with false positives. The adaptive resolution is clear:
The behavioral immune system errs on the side of false positives (Kurzban &
Leary, 2001). Thus, we are hypervigilant for signs of sickness, and any such
signal (whether it’s a tubercular cough or merely some innocuous guttural
tic, whether it’s a rash of infectious pox or merely some superﬁcial allergic
inﬂammation) is liable to trigger aversive emotional, cognitive, and behavioral
reactions.
It is unlikely that there was a ﬁnite and stable set of symptoms associated
with parasitic infections in ancestral environments. Diﬀerent kinds of parasite
would have produced diﬀerent infectious symptoms. (The rash diseases—such as
measles, mumps, and scarlet fever—are all evolutionarily ancient, as is tubercu-
losis, and all are associated with somewhat diﬀerent speciﬁc symptoms.) Diﬀer-
ent individuals are likely to have responded diﬀerently to the same kind of
parasitic infection (the rhinovirus may manifest in a cough, or in a runny nose,
or both, or neither). And parasitic species themselves—especially bacteria and
viruses—evolve at an exceptionally rapid pace, an evolution that is reﬂected in
the highly variable nature of infectious symptoms over time (Ewald, 1993). A
behavioral immune system that was calibrated too tightly to speciﬁc perceptual
cues would have resulted, over time, in many costly false-negative errors. More
adaptive would be a system that responded to a broader, more crudely-deﬁned
range of cues. This suggests that the behavioral immune system errs not merely
on the side of oversensitivity, but also on the side of overgeneralization: Any gross
deviation from the species-typical norms in morphology and motor behavior
may be implicitly interpreted as symptomatic of a parasitic infection, and so may
trigger the behavioral immune response (Kurzban & Leary, 2001; Zebrowitz &
Montepare, 2006).
Thus, the behavioral immune system operates in a manner analogous to the
real immune system. Just as the antipathogen defense system provided by the real
immune system is hypersensitive to intrusion, and may be mobilized in response
to organic matter that is entirely benign (or even beneﬁcial, as in the case of
organ transplants), the behavioral immune system too responds in a hypersensi-
tive and overgeneral way to the perceived presence of parasites in the sensory
environment. This has far-reaching implications for social perception and
behavior: Simply because people may display some superﬁcial form of non-
normality, we may respond to them—even if they are perfectly healthy—as
though they are carriers of some contagious disease.
The Cost–Beneﬁt Problem and Its Solution: Functional Flexibility
Antiparasite defense systems confer adaptive beneﬁts, but they also incur costs
whenever they are triggered. We have already mentioned the physiological costs
associated with the mobilization of the real immune system. There are analogous
costs associated with the operation of the behavioral immune system. The emo-
tional, cognitive, and behavioral responses triggered by the behavioral immune
298
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

system all consume metabolic resources. And because of the ﬁnite resources
available to an individual at any moment, the activation of the behavioral
immune system limits the extent to which other adaptive behaviors might be
engaged (e.g., disgust and behavioral avoidance are typically incommensurate
with mating motives; for additional discussions of evolutionary cost–beneﬁt
analyses and their implications, see Simpson & LaPaglia, chapter 10, and Todd,
chapter 9, both in this volume). Therefore, like many adaptive psychological
systems, the operation of the behavioral immune system is likely to have evolved
so as to be functionally ﬂexible and responsive to regulatory cues (Schaller, Park,
& Kenrick, 2007; see also Kenrick et al., chapter 4, this volume). Aversive
responses to potentially-parasitized others are most likely to be triggered when
additional cues in the immediate environment indicate that the functional
beneﬁts of these responses are especially likely to outweigh the functional costs.
Some regulatory cues lie in chronic individual diﬀerences in attitudes, traits,
and temperament. People diﬀer in the extent to which they are vulnerable (or,
perhaps more importantly, perceive themselves to be vulnerable) to the transmis-
sion of contagious diseases. Other regulatory cues lie in temporary features of the
immediate situation. Information present in any speciﬁc context may make
germs and their potential transmission especially salient for a short period of
time. Still other cues lie in chronic features of the local ecology. In some geo-
graphical contexts, parasitic diseases have posed an especially strong threat to
individual ﬁtness, with persistent consequences on local rituals and norms per-
taining to hygiene, food preparation, and so on. Regardless of the locus of these
regulatory cues—whether chronic or temporary, and whether rooted in the
external environment or a perceiver’s own idiosyncratic knowledge structures—
the information they provide is likely to moderate the activation of the
behavioral immune system. If one is unaware of (or feels invulnerable to) the
threat of disease, the activation of the system is likely to be muted. On the other
hand, if the threat of disease is highly salient (or if one feels highly vulnerable),
the reactivity of the system is likely to be more pronounced.
THE PRESENT
These speculations about the evolution of the behavioral immune system make
sense within the adaptive framework of evolutionary psychology. Ideally, this
kind of conjecture should not simply be sensible; it should also be useful—even
to scholars who care nothing about the evolutionary past. In fact, the principles
of adaptive overgeneralization and functional ﬂexibility imply a broad range of
eﬀects on contemporary social cognition and behavior. Some of these implica-
tions have been empirically tested in recent years. The results highlight the
operation of the behavioral immune system in a wide range of contemporary
social psychological phenomena.
299
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

Aversive Responses to Superﬁcial Disﬁgurements and Disabilities
There is now a substantial body of work documenting aversive responses to
people displaying non-normative morphological cues of various kinds, including
superﬁcial facial anomalies and physically disabling conditions. These aversive
responses may result from a variety of conceptually distinct psychological pro-
cesses, many of which have nothing to do with parasite avoidance at all (for
reviews, see Heatherton, Kleck, Hebl, & Hull, 2000). Is there reason to suppose
that, in addition to these other processes, the speciﬁc mechanisms implicated in
the behavioral immune system also play a substantial role? Yes. Evidence in favor
of that assertion emerges from studies that do at least one of two things. They
take measures that assess the speciﬁc kinds of semantic information that are
cognitively associated with morphologically anomalous individuals. Or they test
the extent to which aversive responses are facilitated under circumstances in
which perceivers feel more vulnerable to the potential spread of contagious dis-
ease. Or they do both. These studies not only implicate the role of the behavioral
immune system in reactions toward a variety of objectively noncontagious
peoples, they also document novel phenomena whereby these reactions vary
under predictable circumstances.
Park, Faulkner, and Schaller (2003) reported a pair of studies that implicate
the behavioral immune system in aversive responses to individuals who are physi-
cally disabled. There is a large literature documenting the fact that people are
uncomfortable around others who are disabled, and often attempt to behavior-
ally avoid close contact with these others (e.g., Snyder, Kleck, Strenta, &
Mentzer, 1979). If this prejudice results in part from the heuristic operation of
the behavioral immune system, it follows that behavioral avoidance might be
especially strong among individuals who are chronically concerned about the
spread of contagious diseases. Consistent with this hypothesis, Park et al. (2003)
found that individuals who score highly on measure of “perceived vulnerability
to disease” (PVD) were less likely to report having friends or acquaintances with
disabilities. In addition, Park et al. employed reaction time methods to assess the
extent to which disabled individuals (compared to morphologically normal indi-
viduals) were implicitly linked to semantic information connoting disease.
Results revealed that, not only were disabled individuals more likely than non-
disabled individuals to be associated with disease, this eﬀect was stronger among
perceivers who scored more highly on either the PVD measure or on a measure
assessing sensitivity to disgust.
In this implicit association study, the disabled target individuals were
described in such a way that, by any objective standard, they posed no realistic
disease threat whatsoever. The results are therefore consistent with the conjecture
that the behavioral immune system responds automatically to visual cues of
morphological anomaly, even when rational appraisal indicates the absence of
any realistic threat. Duncan (2005) conducted a strong test of the alleged auto-
maticity of this response. Participants were provided with brief biographical
300
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

sketches of two men, and each biographical sketch was accompanied by a facial
photograph. One man had a very noticeable “port wine stain” birthmark on his
face, but this birthmark was explicitly described as superﬁcial and the man
himself was described as strong and healthy. The other man looked just ﬁne, but
was described as suﬀering from a strain of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Partici-
pants then responded to a computer-based reaction time task, designed to assess
which of the two men was more strongly associated with the semantic concept
“disease.” Results showed that, across all participants, there was a general ten-
dency to associate disease with the facially-disﬁgured man (who was known to be
healthy) more strongly than the man who was actually known to suﬀer from a
contagious disease (but who looked normal). In short, even when processes of
rational appraisal explicitly indicate otherwise, facial disﬁgurements may
implicitly connote the threat of contagious disease.
Antifat Attitudes
Previous research has suggested that negative attitudes toward fat people are
rooted, in part, in personal ideologies and cultural value systems that prescribe
hard work, self-denial, and willpower (Crandall, 1994; Crandall & Martinez,
1996). Consistent with this perspective, fat people are commonly stereotyped as
lazy, and are more strongly stigmatized when their obesity is attributed to per-
sonally-controllable causes (e.g., Teachman, Gapinski, Brownell, Rawlins, &
Jeyaram, 2003). But fat people are also commonly stereotyped as dirty or smelly,
and images of fat people tend to arouse disgust (Harvey, Troop, Treasure, &
Murphy, 2002)—observations hinting at the possibility that antifat attitudes
may also be rooted in the operation of the behavioral immune system.
This possibility is entirely plausible, given our speculations about how the
behavioral immune system operates. If the system is sensitive to any gross devi-
ation from morphological norms, then it’s likely to react aversively to individuals
with bodies that are either skeletally thin or hugely obese. There has been very
little research examining aversive reactions to super-skinny people, but some
recent studies explicitly examined whether the heuristic operation of the
behavioral immune system might contribute to antifat attitudes.
Park, Schaller, and Crandall (2006) examined whether antifat attitudes were
predicted by individual diﬀerences in perceived vulnerability to disease—
focusing speciﬁcally on a subscale that assesses wariness of germs and their
transmission. Results indicated that these individual diﬀerences did indeed pre-
dict antifat attitudes: People who were chronically more concerned about germs
also expressed a stronger dislike of fat people. This eﬀect was especially strong
when antifat attitudes were measured immediately after the visual perception of
speciﬁc obese individuals—a result consistent with the idea that the behavioral
immune system is hypersensitive to visual cues. It’s worth noting also that the
eﬀect on antifat attitudes was statistically independent of the predictive eﬀect
of separate measures assessing attributions about willpower. This suggests that
301
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

ideological processes and parasite-defense processes both contribute to antifat
attitudes, but in diﬀerent ways.
This last conclusion is further substantiated by another study reported by
Park et al. (2006). This experiment assessed cognitions implicitly associated with
obese individuals, and examined the impact of a manipulation designed to make
speciﬁc concerns temporarily salient. Results revealed that the implicit associ-
ation linking fat people (compared to nonfat people) with disease was ampliﬁed
following a manipulation that made infectious pathogens especially salient. The
amplifying eﬀect of the pathogen-salience manipulation emerged only on
implicit associations linking fat people to disease; it did not increase associations
linking fat people with unpleasant concepts in general. In contrast, a manipula-
tion that made ideological concerns salient led to an increased implicit associ-
ation between fat people and unpleasantness, but had minimal impact on the
fat–disease association.
These results not only have implications for understanding contemporary
prejudices toward obese individuals, they also have unique implications for
understanding the operation of the behavioral immune system itself. It might be
logical to perceive dramatically underweight individuals as potential parasite
carriers (given that many parasitic infections do result in substantial weight loss),
but there is little logical basis to associate obesity with contagious parasites. Nor
is there much reason to assume that truly obese individuals were evident in the
ancestral environments during which the behavioral immune system presumably
evolved. The results of Park et al. (2006) therefore highlight the heuristic (non-
rational) operation of the behavioral immune system, and they highlight its
adaptive overgeneralization. The behavioral immune system responds not merely
to speciﬁc cues that were evident in ancestral environments; it appears to have
evolved so as to respond to any kind of apparent morphological deviation from
population norms.
Responses to Physically Attractive and Unattractive Others
The behavioral immune system may be sensitive not only to gross deviations
from morphological norms, but may also be attuned to some relatively subtle
deviations—at least in the realm of facial physiognomy.
Human visual systems are highly attuned to facial features. We have special-
ized neurological equipment dedicated to the visual perception of faces
(Kanwisher, 2000). Our subjective impressions of another’s attractiveness are
inﬂuenced by speciﬁc aspects of facial physiognomy (such as bilateral symmetry,
and the extent to which the size of speciﬁc facial features match population
prototypes) that we appear to process implicitly and without conscious awareness
(e.g., Langlois & Roggman, 1990; see also Halberstadt, chapter 15, this volume).
It has been argued that these sorts of subtle morphological variables are predict-
ive of an individual’s health status and future health outcomes (Fink & Penton-
Voak, 2002; Thornhill & Gangestad, 1999). Consistent with this argument,
302
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

evidence reveals that not only are substantially anomalous faces judged to be less
healthy, but so too are faces that are simply perceived to be subjectively less
attractive (Zebrowitz, Fellous, Mignault, & Andreoletti, 2003; Zebrowitz &
Rhodes, 2004).
Gangestad and Buss (1993; see also Gangestad, Haselton, & Buss, 2006)
report a particularly interesting ﬁnding bearing on the link between physical
attractiveness and the presence of parasites. Employing a cross-cultural method-
ology to test a hypothesis about functional ﬂexibility, they found physical
attractiveness was an especially prized attribute in a mate within societies that
historically had a high prevalence of infectious parasites.
This evidence has been interpreted as indicating that a subjective assess-
ment of another’s facial attractiveness serves as an indicator of that individual’s
genetic ﬁtness. However, the same evidence is consistent with a process whereby
individuals use facial attractiveness (or rather, unattractiveness) as an heuristic
indicating the actual presence of potentially-contagious parasites. Is there any
special empirical reason to suppose that unattractiveness really does trigger the
behavioral immune system? Possibly. If attractiveness was simply a clue to gen-
etic ﬁtness, one might expect the impact of physical (un)attractiveness to be
rather constrained in scope—exerting eﬀects primarily in the domain of mating
relations, but of limited impact in other domains of social life. In fact, however,
physical attractiveness is valued—and physical unattractiveness compels aversive
responses—across a broad range of social inferences and interactions (Biddle &
Hamermesh, 1998; Eagly, Ashmore, Makhijani, & Longo, 1991; Matter &
Matter, 1989). In addition, if attractiveness was merely a cue to genetic ﬁtness,
then one might expect the eﬀects of pathogen prevalence, described above, to
be especially strong among female perceivers (because women are especially
attentive to indicators of genetic ﬁtness). In fact, however, the results of Ganges-
tad et al. (2006) show the opposite eﬀect: The moderating impact of pathogen
prevalence was stronger among men than among women. These results don’t
argue against the hypothesis that attractiveness serves as an heuristic cue for
genetic ﬁtness, but they do suggest that something else might be going on as
well. That something else may be the operation of the behavioral immune
system.
Xenophobia and Ethnocentrism
In human populations, the behavioral immune system may be responsive not
only to morphological cues, but also to a broader set of cues indicating that
another individual is foreign to the local population. There are at least two
plausible reasons why. First, contact with individuals from previously-
unencountered populations is associated with an increased risk of contracting
contagious diseases to which one has no acquired immunity. Second, foreign
peoples are likely to be unaware of, and more likely to violate, local customs
(such as those pertaining to food preparation and personal hygiene) that serve as
303
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

barriers to the transmission of disease. Thus, in contemporary social ecologies,
the mechanisms that deﬁne the behavioral immune system may generalize
beyond the tendency to respond to cues signaling morphological anomaly; they
may respond to cues signaling cultural foreignness as well. Regardless of their
local social environment, individuals may be especially adept at learning to detect
a wide range of inferential cues that discriminate between familiar and foreign
peoples. And when those cues are detected, they may promote the familiar
emotional, cognitive, and behavioral responses associated with the behavioral
immune system.
Consistent with this reasoning, Schiefenhövel (1997) observed that people
often display disgust reactions when speaking about ethnic outgroups, and
Rozin, Haidt, McCauley, and Imada (1997, p. 73) suggested that “disgust in
humans serves as an ethnic or outgroup marker.” To more rigorously test this
conjecture, Faulkner, Schaller, Park, and Duncan (2004) conducted a series of
studies that exploited the logic of functional ﬂexibility.
In one set of studies, Faulkner et al. (2004) tested whether chronic concerns
of vulnerability to parasitic infections—as measured by the “perceived vulner-
ability to disease” (PVD) scale—predicted attitudes towards immigrants from
various geographical regions. Results revealed that higher levels of PVD pre-
dicted stronger anti-immigrant attitudes—but only toward immigrants from
subjectively foreign locations. There was no such eﬀect on attitudes toward
culturally familiar immigrant populations.
The contribution of the behavioral immune system to xenophobic attitudes
was also implicated in a pair of experiments reported by Faulkner et al. (2004).
In both experiments, participants were ﬁrst exposed to a brief slide show that
either made salient the potential dangers posed by germs and germ transmission,
or (in a control condition) made salient other dangers that were irrelevant to
disease (e.g., electrocution). Results from both experiments revealed more
strongly xenophobic attitudes after germs (rather than disease-irrelevant threats)
were made salient. For instance, in one of these experiments, participants in
Vancouver were told about a government program designed to recruit new
immigrants to Canada, and were asked to indicate how much money should be
spent to recruit immigrants from a variety of diﬀerent countries that had been
prerated as either culturally familiar (e.g., Taiwan, Poland) or unfamiliar (e.g.,
Mongolia, Brazil). Participants who had been exposed to the control slide show
allocated roughly equal amounts of money to recruit immigrants from both
familiar and unfamiliar places, but those for whom germ transmission had been
made salient were much more likely to allocate money to recruit immigrants
from familiar rather than unfamiliar places.
These ﬁndings are complemented by more recent work by Navarrete and
Fessler (2006). In one study they observed that not only does perceived
vulnerability to disease predict more negative attitudes toward foreign peoples
(xenophobia), it also predicts more positive attitudes toward one’s own
cultural ingroup (ethnocentrism). In another study, they found that another
304
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

disease-relevant individual diﬀerence variable—sensitivity to disgust—also pre-
dicts both xenophobia and ethnocentrism.
These results do not diminish the importance of the many other psycho-
logical processes that contribute to xenophobia and ethnocentrism. There is no
doubt that these phenomena are multiply-determined; they are inﬂuenced also
by processes pertaining to fear, mistrust, conﬂict, social identity, and mere cat-
egorization. But the fact of those well-known processes should not blind us to
the apparent role of a less obvious process that also contributes to xenophobia
and ethnocentrism: The hypersensitive and overgeneralized operation of a
psychological system designed to protect our bodies from contact with parasites.
THE FUTURE
The results reviewed above suggest that the behavioral immune system has
implications for a broad range of psychological responses to people who, in fact,
may be completely healthy. In future research, it will be worthwhile to examine
additional implications, perhaps particularly in the realm of actual interpersonal
behavior. The subtle operation of the behavioral immune system may contrib-
ute, for instance, to many speciﬁc acts of aggression and social ostracism (e.g., see
Spoor & Williams, chapter 17, this volume).
It will also be worthwhile to consider implications that exist not merely at
the individual level of analysis, but at the societal level of analysis. The behavioral
immune system may play an important role in shaping the collective belief
systems that deﬁne a culture (Schaller, 2006). One route is through inter-
personal communication. Cultural norms are sculpted, often unintention-
ally, through communication processes (Schaller, 2001). People may be
especially likely to communicate about things that seem relevant to disease and
disease transmission—as indicated perhaps by the ﬁnding that disgust-arousing
stories are especially likely to be communicated, and to become culturally popu-
lar (Heath, Bell, & Sternberg, 2001). Moreover, disease-relevant arguments and
rhetorical devices may be especially persuasive in sculpting popular opinion and
public policy. (The abundance of parasite-relevant imagery in Nazi propaganda
oﬀers one sobering historical example.) The intriguing upshot, still largely
unexplored, is that the evolution of the behavioral immune system may not only
exert a pervasive inﬂuence on human social cognition; it may also, as a
consequence, inﬂuence human culture.
REFERENCES
Biddle, J. E., & Hamermesh, D. S. (1998).
Beauty, productivity, and discrimination:
Lawyers’ looks and lucre. Journal of Labor
Economics, 16, 172–201.
Brothwell, D., & Sandison, A. T. (1967).
Diseases 
in 
antiquity. 
Springﬁeld, 
IL:
Thomas.
Brown, J. K. M. (2003). A cost of disease-
305
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

resistance: Paradigm or peculiarity. Trends in
Genetics, 19, 667–671.
Cooper, J., Gordon, I. J., & Pike, A. W. (2000).
Strategies for the avoidance of faeces by graz-
ing sheep. Applied Animal Behaviour Science,
69, 15–33.
Crandall, C. S. (1994). Prejudice against fat
people: Ideology and self-interest. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 882–
894.
Crandall, C. S., & Martinez, R. (1996). Cul-
ture, ideology, and antifat attitudes. Personal-
ity and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22,
1165–1176.
Crandall, C. S., & Moriarty, D. (1995). Phys-
ical illness stigma and social rejection. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 34, 67–83.
Curtis, V., Aunger, R., & Rabie, T. (2004). Evi-
dence that disgust evolved to protect from
risk of disease. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Series B, 271, S131–S133.
Curtis, V., & Biran, A. (2001). Dirt, disgust,
and disease: Is hygiene in our genes? Perspec-
tives in Biology and Medicine, 44, 17–31.
Duncan, L. A. (2005). Heuristic cues automatic-
ally activate disease cognitions despite rational
knowledge to the contrary. Unpublished mas-
ter’s thesis, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Eagly, A. H., Ashmore, R. D., Makhijani, M.
G., & Longo, L. C. (1991). What is beautiful
is good, but . . .: A meta-analytic review
of research on the physical attractiveness
stereotype. Psychological Bulletin, 110, 109–
128.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1979). The biology of peace
and war. New York: Viking.
Ewald, P. W. (1993). Evolution of infectious dis-
ease. New York: Oxford University Press.
Faulkner, J., Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Dun-
can, L. A. (2004). Evolved disease-avoidance
mechanisms and contemporary xenophobic
attitudes. Group Processes and Intergroup
Behavior, 7, 333–353.
Fink, B., & Penton-Voak, I. (2002). Evolution-
ary psychology of facial attractiveness. Cur-
rent Directions in Psychological Science, 11,
154–158.
Gangestad, S. W., & Buss, D. M. (1993).
Pathogen prevalence and human mate prefer-
ences. Ethology and Sociobiology, 14, 89–96.
Gangestad, S. W., Haselton, M. G., & Buss,
D. M. (2006). Evolutionary foundations of
cultural variation: Evoked culture and mate
preferences. Psychological Inquiry, 17, 75–95.
Goodall, J. (1986). Social rejection, exclusion,
and shunning among the Gombe chimpan-
zees. Ethology and Sociobiology, 7, 227–239.
Guerra, F. (1993). The European-American
exchange. History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences, 15, 313–327.
Harvey, T., Troop, N. A., Treasure, J. L., &
Murphy, T. (2002). Fear, disgust, and
abnormal eating attitudes: A preliminary
study. International Journal of Eating Dis-
orders, 32, 213–218.
Haselton, M. G., & Nettle, D. (2006). The
paranoid optimist: An integrative evolution-
ary model of cognitive biases. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 10, 47–66.
Heath, C., Bell, C., & Sternberg, E. (2001).
Emotional selection in memes: The case of
urban legends. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81, 1028–1041.
Heatherton, T. F., Kleck, R. E., Hebl, M. R., &
Hull, J. G. (2000). The social psychology of
stigma. New York: Guilford Press.
Kanwisher, N. (2000). Domain speciﬁcity in
face perception. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 759–
763.
Kavaliers, M., Colwell, D. D., Braun, W. J., &
Choleris, E. (2003). Brief exposure to the
odour of a parasitized male alters the sub-
sequent mate odour responses of female
mice. Animal Behaviour, 65, 59–68.
Kiesecker, J. M., Skelly, D. K., Beard, K. H., &
Preisser, E. (1999). Behavioral reduction of
infection risk. Proceeding of the National
Academy of Sciences, 96, 9165–9168.
Klein, S. L., & Nelson, R. J. (1999). Inﬂuence
of social factors on immune function and
reproduction. Reviews of Reproduction, 4,
168–178.
Kurzban, R., & Leary, M. R. (2001). Evo-
lutionary origins of stigmatization: The
functions of social exclusion. Psychological
Bulletin, 127, 187–208.
Langlois, J. H., & Roggman, L. A. (1990).
Attractive faces are only average. Psychological
Science, 1, 115–121.
Lippi, D., & Conti, A. A. (2002). Plague, pol-
icy, saints and terrorists: A historical survey.
Journal of Infection, 44, 226–228.
Matter, D. E., & Matter, R. M. (1989). If beau-
tiful is good, then ugly must be . . .: Con-
fronting discrimination against the physically
306
EVOLUTION AND THE SOCIAL MIND

unattractive child. Elementary School Guid-
ance and Counseling, 24, 146–152.
Navarrete, C. D., & Fessler, D. M. T. (2006).
Disease avoidance and ethnocentrism: The
eﬀects of disease vulnerability and disgust
sensitivity on intergroup attitudes. Evolution
and Human Behavior, 27, 270–282.
Nesse, R. M. (2005). Natural selection and the
regulation of defenses: A signal detection
analysis of the smoke detector principle. Evo-
lution and Human Behavior, 26, 88–105.
Park, J. H., Faulkner, J., & Schaller, M. (2003).
Evolved disease-avoidance processes and con-
temporary anti-social behavior: Prejudicial
attitudes and avoidance of people with
physical disabilities. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 27, 65–87.
Park, J. H., Schaller, M., & Crandall, C. S.
(2006). Psychological disease-avoidance mech-
anisms and stigmatization of fat people.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Gro-
ningen, The Netherlands.
Rozin, P., & Fallon, A. E. (1987). A perspective
on disgust. Psychological Review, 94, 23–41.
Rozin, P., Haidt, J., McCauley, C., & Imada, S.
(1997). Disgust: Preadaptation and the cul-
tural evolution of a food-based emotion. In
H. MacBeth (Ed.), Food preferences and taste
(pp. 65–82). Providence, RI: Berghahn.
Rozin, P., Millman, L., & Nemeroﬀ, C. (1986).
Operation of the laws of sympathetic magic
in disgust and other domains. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 50, 703–712.
Schaller, M. (2001). Unintended inﬂuence:
Social-evolutionary processes in the construc-
tion and change of culturally-shared beliefs.
In J. P. Forgas & K. D. Williams (Eds.), Social
inﬂuence: Direct and indirect processes (pp.
79–93). Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Schaller, M. (2006). Parasites, behavioral
defenses, and the social psychological mech-
anisms through which cultures are evoked.
Psychological Inquiry, 17, 96–101.
Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Faulkner, J. (2003).
Prehistoric dangers and contemporary preju-
dices. European Review of Social Psychology,
14, 105–137.
Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Kenrick, D. T.
(2007). Human evolution and social cogni-
tion. In R. I. M. Dunbar & L. Barrett (Eds.),
Oxford handbook of evolutionary psychology
(pp. 491–504). Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Schiefenhövel, W. (1997). Good tastes and bad
tastes: Preferences and aversions as biological
principles. In H. MacBeth (Ed.), Food prefer-
ences and taste (pp. 55–64). Providence, RI:
Berghahn.
Snyder, M. L., Kleck, R. E., Strenta, A., &
Mentzer, S. J. (1979). Avoidance of the
handicapped: An attributional ambiguity
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 2297–2306.
Teachman, B. A., Gapinski, K. D., Brownell,
K. D., Rawlins, M., & Jeyaram, S. (2003).
Demonstrations of implicit anti-fat bias: The
impact of providing causal information and
evoking empathy. Health Psychology, 22, 68–
78.
Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (1999).
Facial attractiveness. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 3, 452–460.
Van Blerkom, L. M. (2003). Role of viruses
in human evolution. Yearbook of Physical
Anthropology, 46, 14–46.
Zebrowitz, L. A., Fellous, J. M., Mignault, A.,
& Andreoletti, C. (2003). Trait impressions
as overgeneralized responses to adaptively
signiﬁcant facial qualities: Evidence from
connectionist modeling. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 7, 194–215.
Zebrowitz, L. A., & Montepare, J. (2006). The
ecological approach to person perception:
Evolutionary roots and contemporary oﬀ-
shoots. In M. Schaller, J. A. Simpson, & D.
T. Kenrick (Eds.), Evolution and social psych-
ology (pp. 81–113). New York: Psychology
Press.
Zebrowitz, L. A., & Rhodes, G. (2004). Sensi-
tivity to “bad genes” and the anomalous face
overgeneralization eﬀect: Cue validity, cue
utilization, and accuracy in judging intelli-
gence and health. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 28, 167–185.
307
THE BEHAVIORAL IMMUNE SYSTEM

Author Index
Acitelli, L. K., 198, 207
Ackerman, J. M., 58, 60, 66
Adams, H. E., 213, 227
Adolphs, R., 109, 122, 127, 139
Agyei, Y., 217, 226
Ainsworth, M. D. S., 129, 139
Ajzen, I., 265, 266, 275, 276
Aktipis, C. A., 234, 242
Albright, L., 204, 207
Alexander, M. G., 7, 16
Alexander, R. D., 40, 47, 166, 175
Alicke, M. D., 220, 226
Allan, S., 128, 130, 141
Allee, W. C., 95, 103
Allen, N. B., 3, 14, 65, 108, 125, 126,
130–135, 137–140, 254, 280, 282
Alliger, G. M., 237, 242
Alter, A., 121, 122
Ambady, N., 111, 122
Andersen, S. M., 268, 277
Anderson, J. L., 40, 46
Andersson, M. B., 162–164, 175
Andreoletti, C., 255, 262, 303, 307, 308
Andrews, P. W., 39, 46, 163, 175, 280,
287, 289
Angleitner, A., 222, 226
Angyal, A., 190, 192
Arendt, H., 100, 103
Aristotle, 118, 123
Arnold, M., 71, 77, 86
Aronson, E., 242, 280, 289
Asch, S. E., 4, 16, 264, 275
Ashmore, R. D., 303, 307
Astington, J. W., 23, 30
Atkinson, R. C., 50, 66
Aunger, R., 297, 307
Averill, J. R., 130, 137, 139
Axelrod, R., 183, 193
Badcock, P. B. T., 3, 14, 65, 108, 125, 126,
130, 131–135, 137–140, 254, 280, 282
Bailey, J. M., 61, 68, 164, 176, 203, 208,
217, 222, 226
Baird, J., 40, 48
Banaji, M. R., 267, 276
Barash, D. P., 214, 223, 224, 226, 270,
275
Barbee, A. P., 167, 176, 247, 259
Bargh, J. A., 218, 221, 226, 228, 267, 275
Barkow, J. H., 2, 16, 31, 67, 68, 124, 128,
140, 177, 228, 241, 242, 261, 277, 291
Baron, A. S., 263, 272, 277
Barr, A., 216, 227
Barr, C. L., 269, 275
Barrett, H. C., 72, 79, 83, 85, 86, 181,
192, 194
Barrett, L., 23, 26, 29, 30, 73, 76, 86, 307
Bartlett, M. Y., 223, 226
Barton, R. A., 25, 30, 264, 275
Bass, B. M., 230, 237, 241
Bassler, B. L., 96, 97, 105
Baumeister, R. F., 91, 103, 129, 132, 140,
193, 283, 285, 288–291
Beard, H. K., 294, 307
Beauchamp, G. K., 40, 48
Beck, A. T., 126, 140
Becker, D. V., 3, 17, 49, 51, 55, 56, 58,
59, 66, 68, 218, 223, 228, 230, 263
Becker, I., 95, 103
Bell, C., 305, 307
Ben-Jacob, E., 95, 103
Bentall, R., 23, 24, 27, 31
308

Berent, M. K., 266, 277
Berry, D. S., 209, 256, 259
Bettens, F., 40, 48, 191, 194
Bevc, I., 186, 187, 192
Biddle, J. E., 303, 305
Billari, F. C., 155, 159
Biran, A., 189, 192, 297, 306, 307
Bittles, A. H., 182, 183, 192
Bjorklund, F., 189, 193
Blanton, H., 218, 228
Blascovich, J., 109, 122
Bleske, A. L., 5, 16
Bless, H., 110, 111, 112, 118, 119, 122,
123, 260, 261
Boden, J., 129, 140
Bodmer, W. F., 183, 192
Boehm, C., 229, 236, 237, 238, 240, 241,
270, 276
Boesch, C., 41, 46
Bonanno, G. A., 76, 86
Boninger, C. S., 266, 277
Boone, R. T., 103
Bootzin, R. R., 141
Bornstein, R. F., 253, 259
Boutillier, R. G., 237, 242
Bower, G. H., 58, 67, 109, 110, 114, 122,
123
Bowlby, J., 99, 103, 129, 140
Boyd, R., 3, 16
Boyes, A. D., 50, 67, 196, 201, 202, 207,
208
Boyse, E. A., 40, 48
Brajkovich, G., 253, 261
Braun, W. J., 294, 306, 307
Braunstein, Y. M., 149, 159
Braverman, J., 223, 226
Brennan, P., 47
Brewer, M. B., 7, 16, 280, 283, 290
Bronstad, P. M., 42, 47
Brooks, R., 36, 37, 46, 47
Brothwell, D., 295, 305
Brown J. K. M., 295, 305
Brown, D., 229, 241
Brown, G. W., 130, 140
Brown, P., 241
Brown, R., 58, 66
Brown, S., 216, 227
Brownell, K., 301, 308
Brozinsky, C., 50, 68
Bryan, A., 216, 227
Bryne, R. E., 275, 276
Bryson, J. B., 216, 228
Buck, R., 3, 14, 89–93, 98–100, 102, 103,
108, 254, 283, 296
Buckling, A., 95, 104
Burnham, J. T., 183, 192
Burt, D. M., 38, 47, 176, 177, 260
Buss, A. H., 255, 259
Buss, D. M., 2, 4–6, 8, 16, 44, 46, 51, 67,
128, 129, 131, 140, 157, 158,
173–177, 185, 186, 193, 198, 207,
214, 215, 222, 223, 225, 226, 248,
260, 271, 276, 280, 282, 287, 290,
303, 306
Buston, P. M., 157, 158
Butner, J., 51, 67, 238, 242
Buunk, A. P., 3, 6, 12, 15, 61, 66, 100,
102, 104, 213–224, 226, 227, 231, 233
Byatt, G., 246, 261
Byrne, A., 141
Byrne, R. W., 25, 30, 130, 133, 140, 264,
276, 277
Cacioppo, J., 109, 123
Cairns, D. R., 285, 291
Calder, A. J., 194
Campbell, A., 214, 226
Campbell, B., 17, 177
Campbell, L., 162, 170, 199, 207
Caporael, L. R., 280, 290
Carnot, C. G., 266, 277
Caro, T. M., 40, 46
Carrasco, M., 64, 67
Carruthers, P., 159
Carter, A. R., 290
Carter, C. O., 183, 192
Cartwright, D., 231, 236, 237, 241
Case, T. I., 283, 290
Casillas, A., 209
Caspi, A., 198, 209
Castles, D., 177, 260
Catt, K. J., 99, 105
Catty, S. R., 252, 253, 260, 261
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., 183, 192
Chadwick, P., 268, 276
Chagnon, N. A., 175, 186, 192
AUTHOR INDEX
309

Champion, L. A., 127, 140
Chan, E., 263, 272, 277
Chan, N., xix
Chandramani, S. P., 47
Chartrand, T. L., 221, 226, 281, 285, 288,
290
Chemers, M. M., 230, 231, 241
Chen, J., 266, 276
Cheng, Z., 281, 282, 290, 291
Cheung, C. K. T., 291, 284
Chiappe, D., 83, 86
Choe, J., 215, 226
Choi, W., 284, 291
Choleris, E., 294, 307
Christenfeld, N., 222, 227
Christensen, P. N., 167, 176, 177, 223,
227
Chuang, Y. C., 266, 277
Cialdini, R., 51, 67
Ciarocco, N. L., 288, 289
Ciarrochi, J. V., 108, 122
Clark, D. A., 126, 140
Clark, L. A., 134–136, 140
Clark, M. S., 103, 108, 110, 122, 159,
209, 259
Clark, R. D., 61, 67
Clarke, C. H., 97, 104
Clore, G. L., 109, 124
Clutton-Brock, T. H., 263, 276
Coale, A. J., 155, 158
Cohen, M. X., 50, 68
Colby, K. M., 268, 276
Cole, D. A., 133, 140
Collins, A., 109, 124
Colvin, C. R., 204, 209
Colwell, D. D., 294, 307
Conti, A. A., 295, 307
Conway, L. G., III, 5, 16
Cooper, J., 294, 307
Cooper, L., 118, 120, 123
Corp, N., 25, 30, 264, 276
Cosmides, L., 2, 4, 8, 16, 23, 31, 62, 63,
66–68, 71–73, 75–79, 82, 83, 85, 86,
88, 110, 122, 124, 126, 134, 140, 147,
158, 163, 177, 181, 184, 187, 191,
193, 194, 228, 230, 236, 238, 241,
242, 245, 248, 261, 263, 264, 277,
280, 290, 291
Cousins, A., 167, 170, 176, 223, 227
Couzin, I. D., 233, 235, 241
Cowan, N., 50, 67
Coyan, J. C., 131, 141
Cozzarelli, C., 205, 209
Craik, F. I., 50, 67
Crandall, C. S., 294, 300, 307, 308
Cronin, H., 163, 176
Crow, J. F., 183, 192, 193
Cunningham, M. R., 167, 176, 247, 259
Curran, M., 40, 48
Curtis, V., 189, 192, 297, 307
Daly, M., 7, 16, 180, 191, 192, 222, 228,
288, 292
Damasio, A. R., 71, 86, 109, 122, 123
Darwin, C., 2, 16, 33, 46, 73, 87, 93, 94,
104, 109, 123, 126, 128, 180, 192,
230, 231, 241
Davidson, J. R., 87, 193
Davies, N, B., 104, 277
Davies, R. M., 115, 213, 227
Dawkins, R., 43, 46, 94, 95, 97, 98, 104,
232, 234, 241, 265, 277
De Waal, F. M. B., 128, 140, 235, 236,
238, 241, 264, 270
De Wall, C. N., 276, 288, 289
Deabler, H. L., 221, 226
Deaner, R. O., 129, 140
DeBruine, L. M., 190–192
DeCremer, D., 237, 238, 240–242
Delton, A. W., 3, 49, 68, 218, 230, 263
Dennett, D. C., 239, 241, 267, 276
DePaulo, B. M., 114, 224
Deschner, T., 41
DeScioli, P., 232, 233, 241
DeSteno, D., 111, 124, 223, 226
DeVader, C. L., 237, 242
DeVore, I., 186, 193
Dijkstra, P., 3, 61, 66, 102, 213–217,
219–223, 226, 227, 231
Dimberg, U., 126, 141
Dobkin, D. S., 62, 67
Domb, L. G., 41, 46
Donovan, J. M., 217, 227
Dotan, I., 216, 228
Douvan, E., 198, 207
Dovidio, J. F., 267, 276
AUTHOR INDEX
310

Downs, D. L., 139, 141
Dragoin, W. B., 62, 68
Druen, P. B., 167, 176, 247, 259
Dunbar, R. I. M., xvii, 3, 4, 6, 7, 14, 21,
23–31, 99, 104, 127, 230, 232, 235,
237–239, 241, 263, 275, 276, 280,
285, 288, 308
Duncan, L. A., 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 15, 16, 65,
67, 240, 254, 255, 281, 287, 293, 300,
304, 307
Duncan, N., 28, 30
Dunn, E. N., 267, 277
Dupré, J., 158
Eagly A. H., 303, 307
Eals, M., 66, 68
East, R., xix, 112, 114, 123
Eberhard, A., 96, 104
Eberhard, C., 104
Ebert, D., 183, 192
Ehrlich, P. R., 62, 67
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I., 97, 104, 294, 307
Eisenberger, N. I., 4, 16, 65, 67, 91, 104,
282, 290
Ekman, P., 73–75, 87, 113, 123, 140, 189,
193
Ellet, L., 276
Ellis, B. J., 122, 124, 152, 155, 158, 159,
197, 207, 245, 260
Ellison, P. T., 38, 46
Ellsworth, P. C., 3, 14, 71, 72, 76–78, 80,
87, 214, 224, 296
Emlen, S. T., 36, 46, 157, 158
Engebrecht, J., 96, 104
Engelhardt, A., 42, 46
Enquist, M., 255, 260
Epstude, K., 218, 227
Eriksson, C. J. P., 47
Evans, R. B., 220, 227
Ewald, P. W., 298, 307
Fallon, A. E., 72, 87, 189, 193, 296, 308
Fanselow, C., 158, 159
Fasolo, B., 155, 157, 159
Faulkner, J., 7, 16, 17, 65, 67, 294, 300,
304, 307, 308
Fazendeiro, T., 261
Fazio, R. H., 266, 267, 276, 277
Feeney, J. A., 176
Fehr, B., 198, 208
Fell, C., xix
Fellous, J., 255, 262, 302, 308
Fenigstein, A., 268, 269, 276
Ferguson, T. S., 149, 150, 158
Ferrer, R., 103
Ferstl, R., 47
Feshbach, S., 109, 123
Fessler, D. M. T., 170, 176, 186, 187, 190,
193, 238, 242, 304, 308
Festinger, L., 276
Fetchenhauer, D., 61, 66
Fiedler, F. E., 236, 241
Fiedler, K., 110, 111, 112, 118, 119, 122,
123
Finch, J., 167, 176
Fincham, F. D., 205, 208
Fink, B., 35, 46, 167, 176, 302, 307
Finkelhor, D., 186, 187, 194
Fishbein, M., 265, 266, 275, 276
Fiske, S. T., 251, 228, 259, 290
Fitness, J., 282, 291
Fletcher, G. J. O., 3, 15, 50, 67, 152, 157,
159, 195–202, 203, 205, 207–209, 215
Fodor, J. A., 72, 81, 85, 181, 193
Folstad, I., 165, 176
Forgas, J. P., xiii, xx, 1, 3, 14, 16, 50, 58,
67, 104–112, 114–124, 133, 134, 180,
254, 260, 261, 276, 290, 291, 296, 307
Frank, R. H., 39, 46
Franklin, M., 167, 176, 177
Franks, N. R., 233, 241
Franzoi, S. L., 220, 227
Freud, S., 108, 240, 241
Friesen, M. D., 200, 205, 208
Frijda, N. H., 76, 77, 87, 109, 123, 130,
140
Fromm, E., 240, 241
Funder, D. C., 204, 208
Fuqua, C., 96, 104
Gallio, M., 96, 104
Gallucci, M., 281, 291
Galperin, A., 46, 49
Gangestad, S. W., 3, 8, 9, 14, 33, 35,
41–43, 53, 61, 93, 95, 148, 161–163,
165–167, 169–174, 181, 185, 199,
AUTHOR INDEX
311

200, 203, 214, 219, 223, 224, 231,
232, 247, 248, 297, 302, 303, 307, 308
Gapinski, K. D., 301, 308
Garcia, S., 263, 272, 277
Garcia-Marquez, T., 253, 260
Gardner, R., 128, 142
Gardner, W. L., 288, 291
Garver, C. E., 43, 46, 61, 67, 167, 176,
219, 227
Garver-Apgar, C. E., 162, 167, 170, 176,
223, 227
Gaulin, S. J. C., 39, 47, 217, 219, 226,
227
George, J. M., 108, 111, 120, 121, 123
George, N., 255, 261
Getty, T., 36, 46
Ghirlanda, S., 255, 260
Ghiselin, M. T., 2, 16
Gibbons, F. X., 100, 104, 215, 226
Gibson, K. R., 263, 276
Gigerenzer, G., 147, 159
Gilbert, D. T., 114, 115, 123, 228, 290
Gilbert, P., 125, 127–130, 140–142
Gilden, D. L., 265, 276
Giles, T., 200, 208
Gillath, O., 99, 105
Gilovich, T., 269, 276
Gil-White, F. E., 231, 241
Ginsburg, B., 98, 102, 103
Girard, K., 253, 261
Gladue, B. A., 217, 226
Gleicher, F., 133, 141
Goldberg, D., 137, 141
Goldsmith, R., 252, 260
Goldstein, D. G., 147, 159
Gonsalkorale, K., 65, 67, 286, 290
Gonzaga, G., 39, 40, 46
Goodall, J., 279, 290, 294, 307
Gordon, I. J., 294, 307
Gordon, P. C., 253, 260
Gottleib, G., 93, 104
Grafen, A., 36, 46, 165, 176
Grammer, K., 35, 38, 46, 48, 167, 176,
177
Gray, H. M., 111, 122
Graziano, W. G., 167, 176
Greenberg, E. P., 96, 104
Greenberg, J., 283
Greenberg, S. L., 290
Greenwald, A. G., 267, 276
Grice, J. W., 223, 227
Griﬃn, A. S., 95, 104
Gross, M. R., 164, 176
Groth, G. E., 155, 158, 159
Guadagno, R. E., 223, 228
Guerin, S., 51, 66
Guerra, F., 295, 307
Guimond, S., 104
Gürerk, O., 21, 31
Gutshall, K. A., 256, 260
Guttman, N, 255, 260
Hagel, R., 167, 176
Hagen, E. H., 9, 16
Haidt, J., 189, 193, 304, 308
Haig, D., 188, 193
Haig, J., 209
Halberstadt, J., 3, 4, 13, 14, 15, 109, 121,
124, 245, 249, 250, 252, 253, 260,
261, 302
Hallam, M., 208
Hamermesh, D. S., 303, 305
Hamilton, T. E., 152, 159
Hamilton, W. D., 165, 176, 183, 192, 193
Hammond, J. R., 198, 208
Hardy, C. L., 237, 241
Harrer, H., 64, 67
Harris, C. R., 222, 223, 227
Harris, T. O., 130, 140
Harris, V. A., 115, 123
Harris-Warrick, R. M., 98, 105
Hart, C. M., 238, 242
Hartl, E. M., 221, 226
Harvey P. H., 263, 276
Harvey, T., 301, 306, 307
Haselton, M. G., xx, 1, 5, 6, 8, 16, 39, 40,
43, 44, 46, 47, 51, 67, 110, 167, 171,
176, 180, 185, 186, 193, 271, 276,
282, 287, 290, 297, 303, 306
Haslam, A., 237, 241, 290
Haslam, N., 130, 138, 141
Hassebrauck, M., 198, 208
Hastorf, A. H., 123
Hatﬁeld, E., 67
Hauser, M. D., 94, 104
Haviland-Jones, J., 86, 87, 194
AUTHOR INDEX
312

Hearst, E., 255, 261
Heath, C., 305, 307
Heatherton, T. F., 300, 307
Hebl, M. R., 290, 307
Heider, F., 114, 123, 264, 276
Heinsohn, R., 236, 251
Heistermann, M., 41, 42, 46
Hellingwerf, K. J., 95, 104
Hemphill, J. K., 236, 237, 241
Hendrick, C., 226
Hendrick, S. S., 226
Henrick, J., 231, 241
Henzi, S. P., 23, 30
Hepper, P. G., 185, 193
Hepworth, C., 130, 140
Herrmann, R. K., 7, 16
Herzog, M. E., 220, 226
Hesse, F. W., 137, 142
Heuvelink, A., 148, 159
Hickford, C., 247, 261
Higgins, E. T., 124, 275
Hilgard, E. R., 107, 108, 123
Hill, E. M., 217, 220, 227
Hill, K., 227, 246, 260
Hill, R. A., 26, 27, 31
Hinde, R. A., 141
Hirschfeld, L. A., 63, 67
Hodges, K., 41, 46
Hofer, B., 16, 68
Hogan, R., 230, 238, 241, 242
Hogg, M. A., 231, 237, 241
Holland, B., 42, 47
Hollander, E. P., 230, 242
Hollander, S., 246, 260
Holyoak, K. J., 253, 260
Hömberg, V., 194
Hoogland, J. L., 166, 175
Houle, D., 35, 47
Houston, A. I., 36, 47
Howard, A., 267, 276
Howard, R. D., 166, 175
Hrdy, S. B., 214, 227
Hull, J. G., 300, 307
Humphrey, N. K., 127, 140, 264, 265,
270, 276
Hupka, R. B., 213, 227
Hurtado, A. M., 220, 227
Hutchinson, G. E., 84, 87
Hutchinson, J., 158, 159
Hutsler, J., 263, 272
Huxley, P., 137, 141
Hyde, J. S., 165, 177
Imada, S., 304, 308
Ingram, R. E., 129, 130, 141
Irlenbusch, B., 21, 31
Irons, W., 175
Isen, A. M., 108, 110, 122, 123
Ito, T., 109, 123
Iwasa, Y., 165, 177
Izard, C. E., 73, 87, 189, 193
Jacoby, L. L., 253, 261
James, W., 4, 16, 86, 87
Jamieson, D. W., 266, 277
Jarvis, B., 284, 291
Jasienska, G., 46
Jeﬀrey, L., 247, 253, 260
Jennions, M. D., 37, 46
Jensen-Campbell, L. A., 167, 176
Jepson, S. F., 238, 242
Jerison, H. J., 25, 31
Jeyaram, S., 301, 308
Joﬀe, T. H., 31
John, O. P., 276
Johnson, B., 267, 276
Johnson, C., 267, 276
Johnson, K., 165, 177, 248
Johnston, V. S., 167, 173, 176
Joiner, T. E., 131, 141
Joireman, J., 137, 142
Jones, B. C., 38, 47, 167, 176
Jones, D., 185, 193, 246, 260
Jones, E. E., 115, 123, 266, 276
Judd, C. M., 226, 267, 277
Jurgens, U., 93, 104
Kabat, L. G., 277
Kaiser, D., 97, 105
Kaiser, R., 230, 238, 241, 242
Kalakanis, L., 208, 246, 261
Kalick, S. M., 152, 159, 248, 260
Kalish, H. I., 255, 260
Kanwisher, N., 302, 306
Kappeler, P., 30, 41, 48
Karnat, A., 194
AUTHOR INDEX
313

Karter, A. J., 165, 176
Kavaliers, M., 294, 296, 306
Kavanagh, P., 201, 202, 208
Kawakami, K., 267, 276
Kayabashi, T., 177, 260
Kayra-Stuart, F., 246, 260
Keating, C. F., 256, 260
Keefe, R. C., 62, 67, 216, 221, 227
Keele, S. W., 252, 261
Keller, M. C., xi, xv, 263, 272, 277
Kelley, H. H., 152, 158, 197, 207
Kelly, J. R., iii, 281, 291, 294, 306
Keltner, D., iii, 74, 76, 86, 87, 110, 124
Kendall, P. C., 140
Kendrick, T., 256, 260
Kenny, D. A., 198, 204
Kenrick, D. T., iii, viii, xv, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,
11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 49, 51, 61, 62, 66,
67, 68, 155, 159, 164, 176, 192, 203,
208, 216, 217, 218, 221, 225, 226,
227, 230, 235, 238, 240, 242, 263,
280, 290, 299, 307
Kenyon, C. L., 104
Kerr, N. L., ii, iii, 27, 31, 281, 291
Ketelaar, T., iii, 122, 124, 245, 260
Khera, A. V., 129, 140
Kiesecker, J. M., 294, 296, 306
Kimura, M., 183, 192
Kinderman, P., 23, 24, 31
Kirby, L. D., ii, iii, 109, 124
Kirkpatrick, L. A., 155, 159, 238, 242
Kirkpatrick, M., 37, 46, 163, 176
Kleck, R. E., 269, 275, 300, 306, 307
Klein, S. L., 295, 306
Kleinginna, A. M., 90, 104
Kleinginna, P. R., 90, 104
Klinger, E., 127, 141
Klohnen, E. C., 197, 198, 208, 209
Klotz, M. L., 220, 226
Kokko, H., 36, 37, 44, 46, 47
Koskela, E., 47
Kraft, P., 137, 142
Kral, P. A., 62, 68
Kramer, R. M., 268, 276
Krauel, K., 47
Kraus, S. J., 265, 266, 277
Krause, J., 233, 235, 241, 242
Kravitz, E. A., 99, 105
Krebs, D. L., 67
Krebs, J. R., 43, 46, 94, 95, 104, 265, 277
Kreft, J. U., 95, 97, 105
Krosnick, J. A., 266, 277
Kudo, H., 25, 31, 264, 277
Kuhlman, D. M., 137, 142
Kulik, J., 58, 66
Kumar, S., 183, 193
Kummer, H., 235, 242
Kunda, Z., 251, 260
Kurzban, R., x, xv, 3, 6, 7, 15, 17, 65, 72,
79, 82, 83, 85, 86, 155, 159, 180, 181,
192, 193, 216, 229, 232, 233, 234,
236, 238, 240, 241, 242, 281, 294,
298, 306
Kuukasjarvi, S., 42, 47
Kylsten, P., 96, 104
Lacey, J. J., 76, 87
Lackie, J. M., 97, 104, 105
Laham, S. M., iii, 65, 67, 116, 123, 291
Laird, J. D., 223, 228
Laird, K., 40, 46
Lakin, J. L., iii, 281, 285, 288, 290
Lamprecht, J., 235, 242
Lane, J. D., 114, 124
Lange, H., 194
Langlois, J. H., 204, 208, 246, 250, 260,
261, 302, 306
LaPaglia, J., ix, 3, 5, 15, 43, 161, 199, 214,
219, 231, 232, 234, 248, 280, 299
LaPiere, R. T., 265, 277
Larsen, R. J., 222, 226
Law, A. T., 286, 290
Lazarus, R., 71, 79, 87
Leahy, R. L., 127, 141
Leary, M. R., ii, iii, 7, 17, 91, 103, 12,
139, 140, 141, 236, 242, 281, 283,
289, 290, 291, 294, 298, 306
LeDoux, J. E., 71, 87
Lee, K. J., 260, 261
Lee, P. C., 276
Lee, R. B., 186, 193
Leinders-Zufall, T., 40, 47
Lenton, A. P., 155, 157, 159
Lerner, J. S., 110, 124
Letzring, T. D., 204, 208
Levenson, R. W., 73, 87
AUTHOR INDEX
314

Levick, W. R., 63, 67
Levin, S. A., 233, 241
Levine, H., 95, 103
Levinson, S., 16
Lewinsohn, P. M., 130, 138, 141
Lewis, K., 25, 31
Lewis, M., 86, 87, 193, 194
Lewis, R. A., 226
Li, N. P., 51, 61, 67, 68, 164, 176, 203,
204, 208, 242
Libert, J., 138, 141
Lieberman, D., ii, ix, xv, 3, 4, 6, 16, 63,
65, 67, 68, 72, 91, 104, 164, 175, 176,
179, 180, 184, 186, 187, 190, 191,
193, 254, 263, 282, 290, 296
Light, L. L., 246, 260
Ligon, J. D., 165, 177
Lind, E. A., 237, 242
Lindsey, S., 267, 277
Lindzey, G., 228, 242, 290
Linsenmeier, J. A., 61, 68, 164, 176, 203,
208
Lippi, D., 295, 306
Lipson, S. F., 38, 46
Lipton, J. E., 214, 223, 224, 226
Little, A. C., 38, 47
Littlepage, G. E., 237, 242
Livingstone, M. S., 98, 105
Locke, V., 287, 291
Loewenstein, G., 193
Longo, L. C., 303, 306
Lopes, B., 268, 276
Lord, C. G., 268, 277
Lord, R. G., 237, 242
Losick, R., 97, 105
Loumaye, E., 99, 105
Low, B. S., 40, 47,
Lowen, C. B., 25, 31
Luo, S., 197, 198, 208
Lycett, J. E., 26, 30
MacBeth, H., 307
MacDonald, G., iii, 83, 281, 282, 290,
291
Mack, A., 64, 68
Mackie, D. M., ii, 253, 260
MacLoed, A. K., 133, 141
MacQueen, J., 157, 159
Magaro, P. A., 269, 277
Makhijani, M. G., 303, 306
Makin, J. W., 185, 193
Malone, P. S., 114, 115, 123
Maner, J. K., 6, 17, 51, 53, 55, 58, 66, 68
Manusov, V., 103
Mappes, T., 47
Marcus, D. K., 204, 208
Mark, M. M., 111, 124
Marker, L., 183, 193
Marlowe, F., 117, 220, 228
Martin, L. L., 122, 124
Martin, M., 136, 141
Martindale, C., 249, 260
Martinez, R., 301, 306
Massar, K., x, xv, 3, 102, 213, 218, 219,
221, 224, 227, 231
Mathes, E. W., 213, 227
Mathews, A., 133, 141
Matochik, J. A., 185, 193
Matsumoto, D., 74, 87
Matter, R. M., 303, 306
Matthews, D., 163, 175, 280, 289
Maul-Pavicic, A., 47
May, R. M., 183, 193
Mayer, J., 108, 122
Maynard Smith, J., 163, 177, 231, 232,
233, 242
McArthur, L. A., 259
McCauley, C., 304, 307
McCollough, J. K., 48, 177
McDonald, K. B., 83, 86
McDonel, E. C., 266, 276
McGuire, M. T., ii, 125, 126, 141
McNamara, J. M., 36, 41
Medvec, V. H., 269, 276
Melara, R. J., 249, 261
Mendes, W. B., 109, 122
Mentzer, S. J., 300, 307
Metalsky, G. I., 131, 141
Mignault, A., 255, 262, 303, 307
Mikulincer, M., ii, 99, 105, 205
Milgram, S., 4, 17
Miller, E. M., 41, 47.
Miller, G. F., 150, 152, 159, 167, 171,
176, 225, 227, 265, 271, 277
Miller, R. G. Jr., 157, 159
Miller, R. R., 233, 243
AUTHOR INDEX
315

Miller, R. S., 48, 177, 204, 208
Millman, Z., 296, 307
Millon, T. H., 269, 277
Miranda, J., 129, 141
Mitchell, P., 23, 31
Moﬃtt, T. E., 209
Møller, A. P., 248, 261
Monroe, S. M., 130, 131, 141
Montepare, J., 298, 307
Moore, K., 249, 260
Moriarty, D., 294, 306
Morrison, B., 241
Morton, N. E., 183, 193
Moylan, S. J., ii, 114, 115, 123
Muller, H. J., 183, 193
Müller-Ruchholtz, W., 47
Murphy, T., 301, 306
Murray, E. N., 255, 259
Murray, L. K., 260
Musselman, L., 246, 260
Mussen, P., 105
Mussweiler, T., ii, 218, 227
Nadler, A., 216, 228
Nakamura, M., 100, 103
Navarrete, C. D., 186, 190, 193, 304, 307
Nealson, K. H., 96, 104
Near, D., 233, 243
Nee, S., 165, 177
Neel, J. V., 182, 183, 192
Nemeroﬀ, C., 296, 307
Nesse, R., 71, 76, 77, 78, 79, 84, 85, 86,
87, 126, 127, 141, 271, 277, 297, 307
Nettle, D., 8, 16, 28, 30, 31, 137, 141,
282, 287, 290, 297, 306
Neuberg, S. L., iii, viii, xvi, 3, 6, 17, 49,
51, 66, 67, 68, 218, 230, 263
Newton, N., 282, 291
Nicastle, L. D., 61, 67
Niedenthal, P., ii, 109, 124
Nisbett, R., 146, 159
Nissinen, K., 47
Nitzberg, R. A., 99, 105
Noller, P., 176
Noonan, K. M., 40, 47, 166, 175
Nosofsky, R. M., 255, 260
Nowicki, S., 34, 35, 40, 44, 47
Nunn, C. L., 41, 48
Nuss, C. K., 288, 289
O’Brien, S. J., 183, 193
O’Neal, E., 255, 261
O’Sullivan, M., 74, 87
Oates, K., 185, 193
Oatley, K., 126, 141
Öhman, A., 126, 141
Oliver, M. B., 165, 177
Olson, M. A., 267, 276
Oppenheimer, N. J., 104
Ortony, A., 74, 87, 109, 124
Öst, L. G., 126, 141
Otto, J., 213, 227
Oubaid, V., 222, 226
Oum, R. E., 180, 190, 193
Overall, N. C., 195, 200, 201, 202, 205,
206, 208
Packer, C., 236, 241
Paepke, A., 40, 48, 191, 194
Page, R., 266, 277
Pagel, M., 41, 46, 47
Pai, R. A., 183, 193
Palermo, R., 253, 261
Palmer, G. J., 239, 242
Panksepp, J., 73, 87, 91, 105
Park, B., 267, 277
Park, J. H., 7, 16, 17, 65, 67, 68, 191,
193, 294, 299, 300, 301, 302, 304,
306, 307
Parker, G. A., 177
Parrot, W. G., 111, 124, 213, 214, 223,
228
Patterson, M., 103
Pause, B. M., 40, 47
Pawlowski, B. P., 31
Penke, L., 157, 159
Penn, D. J., 40, 47
Penton-Voak, I. S., 38, 47, 167, 171, 173,
176, 177, 247, 260, 302, 306
Perrett, D. I., 38, 47, 167, 176, 177, 247,
260
Pervin, L. A., 109, 124
Peters, M., 38, 47, 261
Peterson, R. S., 242
Petrullo, L., 277
Petty, R. E., ii, 110, 111, 118, 124
AUTHOR INDEX
316

Pﬁefer, J. B., 42, 46
Phillips, K., 219, 227
Piaget, J., 102, 105
Pickett, C. L., ii, iii, 288, 291
Pietromonaco, P. R., 133, 138, 141
Pietrzak, R. H., 223, 228
Pike, A. W., 295, 306
Pike, C. L., 247, 259
Pillsworth, E. G., 43, 47
Pinker, S., 63, 68, 76, 79, 86, 87
Platt, M. L., 129, 140
Plutchik, R., 73, 74, 75, 76, 86, 87
Polonsky, M., 100, 103
Pomiankowski, A., 165, 177
Poore, J. C., 39, 46
Porter, L. W., 140
Porter, R. H., 185, 193
Posner, M. I., 252, 260, 261
Potts, W. K., 40, 47
Power, M. J., 127, 140
Powers, S. R., 91, 103
Preisser, E., 294, 306
Price, D. D., 282, 291
Price, J. S., 126, 128, 138, 141, 142
Puts, D. A., 39, 47, 167, 177
Pyszczynski, T., iii, 283, 290
Queller, D. C., 97, 105
Rabie, T., 297
Raleigh, M. M., 126
Randall, D. W., 256
Ranganath, C., 50
Rapoport, A., 233
Rather, P., 96
Rawins, 301
Reber, 252, 253
Reddington, K., 237
Redﬁeld, R. J., 96
Regan, D. T., 266
Reiber, C., 219
Reidl, L., 213
Reierson, G. W., 38
Repp, B. H., 249, 261
Rescorla, R. A., 255
Rhodes, G., 200, 245, 247, 249, 250, 250,
253, 254, 303
Rice, W. R., 42
Richardson, R., 286
Richerson, P. J., 3
Ridgeway, V., 133
Rikowski, A., 167
Robertson, T. E., 218
Robins, R. W., 198
Robinson, W., 237
Rockenbach, B., 21
Roelke, M. E., 183
Roese, 266
Roggman, L. A., 245, 250, 302
Rohde, P., 128, 130
Rohrmann, B., 135, 136
Rook, K. S., 133, 134, 138
Roseman, I., 77
Ross, M., 146, 269
Roth, D., 22
Rowe, L., 35
Rozin, P., 72, 189, 296, 304
Rubenstein, A. J., 245, 248
Rucker, D., 111
Ruter, K., 218
Ruxton, G. D., 235
Ryan, M. J., 37
Sadalla, E. K., 155
Sadowski, M., 118
Saenz, D. S., 268
Sagarin, B. J., 223
Salmon, C., 7, 169, 180
Salmond, G. P., 96
Salovey, P., 223
Sanchez-Burks, J., 272
Sandison, A. T., 295
Savitsky, K., 269
Sawaguchi, T., 264
Schachter, S., 62, 92
Schaller, M., 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 15, 65, 189,
191, 240, 254, 255, 281, 287, 294,
295, 299, 300, 301, 304, 305
Schelling, T., 231, 236, 237
Scherer, K. R., 72, 77, 80, 85
Scheyd, G., 200
Schiefenhovel, W., 304
Schlosberg, H., 75
Schmitt, D. P., 174
Schooler, J., 267
Schotter, A., 149
AUTHOR INDEX
317

Schultz, S., 25
Schwarz, N., 110, 252
Searcy, W. A., 34, 35, 40, 44
Seebeck, T., 40, 191
Seeley, J. R., 130
Seely, E., 223
Segal, Z. V., 129
Sellen, D. W., 40
Semmelroth, J., 222
Shackelford, T., 5, 215
Shakespeare, W., 28
Shapira, Y., 95
Shaver, P., 99
Shaw, S., 282
Shepard, R. N., 255
Shepher, J., 187
Sher, T., 287
Sherman, P. W., 266
Sherry, D. F., 62
Shettel-Neuber, J., 216
Shiﬀrin, R.M., 50
Shimkets, L. J., 97
Siegel, S., 255
Sigall, H., 266
Silverman, I., 66, 96, 186, 187
Simao, J., 154
Simmons, L., 38
Simon, H. A., 147, 149
Simpson, J. A., 43, 50, 53, 161, 162, 165,
167, 170, 173, 174, 196, 199, 200,
203, 214, 219, 232, 248, 280, 299
Sinclair, R. C., 111
Singer, J., 92, 109
Singh, D., 38, 42, 220
Slatter, P. E., 249
Sloman, L., 128
Smart, L., 129
Smith, A., 284
Smith, C. A., 77, 78, 109
Smith, D. J., 249
Smith, E. R., 253
Smith, J., 163
Smith, R. H., 220, 223
Smith, R. L., 41
Smurda, J., 39
Snyder, M., 300
Sober, E., 233, 234, 240
Solomon, R. C., 73, 283
Sommer, K., 284, 285, 288
Sorentino, R. M., 237
Sornette, D., 26
Sperber, D., 83
Spies, K., 137
Spiro, M. E., 187
Spoor, J. R., 15, 27, 91, 109, 132, 281
Sprecher, S., 197
Sprengelmeyer, R., 191
Stahl, G., 137
Stapel, D. A., 218
Sternberg, E., 305
Stevens, D. A., 223
Stewart, G. S., 96
Stiller, J., 23, 27, 28
Stogdill, R. M., 230
Stone, G. O., 61
Streeter, S. A., 38
Strenta, A., 300
Sturgill, G., 96
Sumer, N., 205
Sundie, J. M., 61
Swaddle, J. P., 38
Swaminathan, M. S., 183
Swarbrick, R., 27
Swift, S., 96
Symons, D., 216
Tagiuri, R., 264
Talmon, G. Y., 187
Tambor, E. S., 139
Tarabrina, N. V., 213
Terdal, S. K., 139
Thomas, G., 200, 204
Thompson, N. S., 223
Thornhil, R., 8, 9, 14, 35, 38, 41, 42, 43,
61, 95, 148, 162, 163, 165, 167, 181,
185, 214, 219, 231, 232, 247, 248,
297, 302
Throup, J. P., 96
Tither, J. M., 200
Todd, P. M, 4, 14, 147, 148, 150, 152,
154, 155, 158, 299
Tomkins, S. S., 72, 73
Tong, E. M. W., 76, 80
Tooby, J., 2, 4, 8, 62, 63, 66, 71, 72, 73,
75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83, 85, 110, 126,
134, 147, 163, 181, 182, 183, 184,
AUTHOR INDEX
318

187, 188, 191, 230, 236, 245, 248,
263, 280, 287
Traﬁmow, D., 266
Trapnell, P. D., 130, 138
Treasure, J. L., 301
Tremewan, T., 245, 250
Trent, D., 128
Trivers, R. L., 5, 8, 163, 164, 166, 167,
185, 195
Troisi, A., 125, 126
Troop, N. A., 301
Trost, M. R., 155
Tulving, E., 50
Turner, T. J., 74
Twenge, J. M., 288
Tyler, T. R., 237
van Schaik, C. P., 41
Vanable, P. A., 268, 269
VanLear, C. A., 92
van Vugt, M., 6, 15, 65, 216, 230, 231,
233, 237, 238, 239, 240, 281
Vargas, P., 116
Vaughn Becker, D., 218
Verdolini, K., 39
Veroﬀ, J., 198
Vieira, E. T., Jr., 100
von Hippel, W., 65
Vorauer, J. D., 269
Vujic, T., 287
Wakeﬁeld, J., 5
Warburton, W., 285
Wason, P., 133
Waters, C. M., 96, 97
Watson, D., 134, 135, 136, 197
Weary, G., 133
Webster, G. D., 3
Wedekind, C., 40, 191
Weeden, J., 155
Wegener, D. T., 110
Wegner, D. M., 217
Wei, J., 268
Weiner, D., 198
Wells, S. A., 204
Welton, K. E., 252
West-Eberhard, M. J., 232
Westen, D., 222
Westermann, R., 137
Westermarck, E. A., 186
Wheye, D., 62
Whitﬁeld, T. W., 249
Whittlesea, B. W., 253
Wiggins, J. S., 130, 138
Wilcoxon, H. C., 62
Williams, K. D., 4, 15, 34, 65, 79, 91, 96,
132, 163, 186, 187, 279, 281, 282,
283, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288
Williamson, D., 133
Willis, C. A., 221
Wilson, D. S., 233, 234, 235, 237, 240
Wilson, E. O., 92, 180
Wilson, M., 7, 97, 165, 185, 222, 233,
236
Wilson, T. D., 267, 288
Winans, S. C., 96
Winkielman, P., 252
Wittenbrink, B., 267
Wolf, A. P., 186, 187
Wu, C., 247
Yamazaki, K., 40
Ybarra, O., 8, 9, 23, 235, 239, 266, 272
Yukl, G. A., 230
Zadro, L., 281, 283, 286
Zahavi, A., 35, 36, 165
Zajonc, R. B., 78, 109, 253
Zander, A., 236, 237
Zebrowitz, L. A., 247, 248, 255, 256, 298,
303
Zentner, M. R., 197
Zhou, W.-X., 26
Zhu, W.-X., 97
Zimbardo, P. G., 268
Zinner, D. P., 41
Ziomkiewicz, A., 38
Zuckerman, M., 137
Zuk, M., 165
319
AUTHOR INDEX

Subject Index
Accuracy and partner serving bias, 197
Accuracy of judgment of mate preferences,
204
Adaptations and special design, 1, 6–7, 63,
163, 247–248, 250–251, 258, 280,
287, 289
Adaptive signiﬁcance of moods, 107–122
Aﬀect as a domain-speciﬁc adaptation,
110
Aﬀect as a feedback signal, 109
Aﬀect infusion model, 120
Aﬀect, 109, 120, 251–254, 259, 266
Agency, 130, 131, 135, 138
Aggression, 6, 129, 240, 285, 288, 305
Altruism, 89, 95–97
Anger, 58, 76, 79–84, 86, 113
Anxiety, 99, 126, 129
Appraisal theories, 14, 66–88
Assimilative versus accommodative
processing, 112–116
Attachment theory of depression,
129–130
Attachment, 91, 91, 99–100, 129–130,
202
Attention, 5, 11, 49, 50, 51, 58
Attitude–behavior relationship, 265–267
Attitudes, xv, 1, 58, 99, 115, 120, 165
Attraction, 6, 13, 40, 51, 78, 167, 247; see
also Mate selection
Attributions, 7, 80, 99, 114–116, 301
Ball-toss paradigm, 284–285
Basic emotions, 73–74, 82–83, 107, 113
Behavioral immune system, 293–305
Belonging, need for, 283
Betrayal, 223–224
Big Five personality traits, 202, 204–205
Biological ﬁtness and ostracism, 281, 282,
287, 288
Biology, 8–9, 12, 179
Bipolar disorder, 27
Body build, 213, 219–221
Bogus pipeline, 266–267
Bounded rationality, 147
Bower’s associate network model, 110
Brain imaging, 267, 282
Categorization, 180, 185, 186, 251–252
Changes in mate preferences across the
ovulatory cycle, 167–175
Cheating, 280; see also Deception
Coercion, 238
Cognitive adaptations and leadership, 230,
234, 239
Cognitive tuning, 110
Communication skills and leadership,
237, 239
Communication, 3, 34, 43, 89, 92–98,
113, 120
Communion, 130, 138
Competition, 270–273
Computational theory of mind, 180–181
Computer simulations of mate search,
147, 152–153, 158
Conditional strategies models, 232
Conservation of resources and depression,
126, 130, 138
Conspeciﬁcs, 127, 129, 235, 294
Control, need for, 283
Cooperation and competition, 3, 4, 8, 21,
320

38, 128, 133, 138, 151, 153, 156, 166,
214, 270–273, 280, 282, 283
Coordinating leadership, 231, 234, 236,
237, 238
Coordination problems, 230–240
Cross-cultural studies, 2, 174, 187, 303
Culture, 3, 12, 30, 149
Cyberball, 283, 284, 285, 286, 287
Danger, 254–255
Deception detection and mood, 113–114
Deception, 25, 34, 43–45, 113, 264,
272
Decision mechanisms, 8, 146–148,
154–155, 158
De-escalating strategies and theories of
depression, 128
Deleterious recessive mutations, 182–183
Depression and neuroticism, 137
Depression and positive aﬀect, 134–135
Depression, 111, 114, 125–139
Developmental psychology, 22, 23
Disability, 7
Disgust and inbreeding avoidance, 181,
187–191
Disgust, 296, 297, 299, 300, 301, 304,
305
Domain-speciﬁc mechanisms, 14, 66, 72,
74, 85, 86, 248, 258, 280
Dominance and leadership, 231, 233, 234,
236, 238
Dominance, 15, 89, 94, 98, 99, 101–102,
214–218, 220–225
Dowry problem and mate search, 149
Dysphoria, 108, 111, 116
Ecological rationality, 147
Ecologically contingent mate search, 164
Ecologically valid cues to kinship, 185
Emotional appraisals, 81, 109
Emotional communication, 2, 22, 33, 45,
94
Emotional ﬁdelity, 222, 223, 224
Emotions, xv, 2, 3, 14, 71–88, 90–94
Empathy and leadership, 237, 239
Environmental conditions and mate
preferences, 174
Equilibrium outcomes, 232–234
Error management theory, 51, 282, 283,
297
Ethnocentrism, 303–304
Ethology, 94
Evolution and social cognition, 1–20
Evolutionary beneﬁts of group inclusion,
280–281
Evolutionary functional analysis, 163–164
Evolutionary game theory and leadership,
229–240
Evolutionary theories of depression,
126–139
Eyewitness memory and mood, 116
Facial attractiveness, 303
Facial masculinity, 38, 39
Familiarity, 13, 27, 112, 253, 254,
257–258
Fear, 58, 72, 76, 83
Feminine features, 247
Fertility, 34, 37, 41, 42, 43, 167–169, 172
Flashbulb memory, 58, 60
Followership, 231–236, 238–240; see also
Leadership
Free-riders, 22, 270
Frequency dependent selection, 233
Frontal lobe, 24, 26
Fundamental attribution error, 114, 116
Game theory and leadership, 229–240
Gender diﬀerences, 2, 12, 27, 173, 199,
203, 223–225
Genetic Fitness, 165, 295, 296, 297, 299,
303
Goals, 11, 51, 57, 64, 78, 79, 84, 127,
231, 234, 236, 237, 238, 240
Good genes sexual selection, 162–175
Good provider model of sexual selection,
162–163, 166, 173
Group inclusion, 280–289
Group living, costs and beneﬁts of,
270–271
Handicapping and honest signaling,
165–166
Heuristics, 6, 57, 66, 85, 110–112,
146–149, 155, 158, 187, 198,
254–255, 300–303
SUBJECT INDEX
321

Hierarchies, 238
Honest signaling, 35–36, 39–40, 44, 45,
165–166, 173
Human nature, 12, 107, 108
Ideal Standards Model of relationships,
199, 203
Immune system, 295–305
Implicit attitudes, 266–267
Inbreeding avoidance, 4, 179–192
Incest avoidance and pathogens, 183–184
Inferences, 14, 33–48
Information processing, 6, 62, 181–184
Initiative and leadership, 233, 235, 237,
239
Intelligence, 237, 239
Intentionality, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30
Intergroup behavior, 15, 58, 240, 297
Interpersonal beneﬁts of moods, 118–121
Interpersonal communication, 3, 102,
111, 113, 305
Intersexual attraction cues, 162–163
Intimacy, 27, 93, 224
Intrasexual competition, 162, 163, 214,
216, 217, 219, 224
Introspective awareness of mood eﬀects,
115, 117
Jealousy, 6, 12, 15, 213–215, 219, 220,
221, 222, 225
Kinship, 4, 6, 34, 65, 95, 180–191
Language, 90, 91, 93, 100, 180, 185, 239
Leadership and social cognition, 239–241
Leadership in non-human species,
235–236
Leadership, 3, 6, 229–241
Leadership, deﬁnition of, 230
Learned helplessness and depression, 127
Life history and sexual rivalry, 220–221
Life history theory, 220 –, 221
Long-term versus short-term mate
preferences, 161–175
Machiavellianism, 237
Manipulation, 265–266
Masculine features, 247
Mate preferences, 33, 53, 145–158,
161–175, 216–217, 225
Mate preferences and ovulatory cycle,
161–162, 168–175
Mate selection, xv, 2, 3, 4, 14, 15, 33, 37,
162, 170, 185–207; see also Jealousy
Maternal perinatal association and
inbreeding avoidance, 187–188
Mating strategies, 25, 63, 161–166, 169,
173–175, 188, 199
Meaningful existence, need for, 283
Memory, 12, 49, 50, 51, 54, 58, 66, 110,
116, 117
Menstrual cycle, 5, 219
Mimicry, 285, 288
Misinformation eﬀect, 116
Mixed mate search, 164
Mood, 83, 107–122
Mood congruence, 110
Mood eﬀects as Darwinian adaptations,
121–122, 126–139
Mood eﬀects on persuasion, 118–121
Mood eﬀects on skepticism, 112–113
Mood-maintenance hypothesis, 110
Morality, 3, 14, 89–105
Motivation, 7, 51, 89, 90, 120, 188, 190,
192
Multi-level selection theory, 233, 234,
240
Mutations and pathogens and sexual
selection, 165
Mutual mate search, 152–156
Negative aﬀective states and depressed
mood, 107–139
Neocortex size, 264
Neuropsychology, 3, 4, 65, 122
Neuroticism, 137
Nonverbal communication, 3, 113
Obesity, 301
Ostracism, 15, 72, 91, 279–289
Ostracism detection, 281–283, 286–287
Outgroup homogeneity, 51, 58
Overgeneralization, 255–256, 298
Ovulation and mate preference, 161–175
Ovulatory cycle, 12, 15, 41, 43, 61,
161–175, 219
SUBJECT INDEX
322

Pain, 281, 282, 285, 288
Pairing game, 152
Paranoid cognition, 268–269
Parasites, 295, 296, 297, 298, 302, 303,
305
Parental investment, 8, 25, 156, 164, 180,
191, 195, 225
Parking problem, 152, 157–158
Partner selection see Mate selection
Partner-serving bias, 196
Pathogen detection, 296, 298, 303
Pathogens, 6–7, 40, 42, 165, 174–175,
182–184, 188–191
Perceived vulnerability to disease,
300–301
Person perception, 111, 180, 251, 270
Physical attractiveness, 12, 15, 52, 53,
168–173, 204, 214–217, 222–225,
246–247, 249–250, 252–254,
256–258
Positive aﬀect, 108–111, 115–116, 131,
134–139, 252–253
Positive aﬀect and depression, 134
Predictability, 264–265, 271, 273–274
Primates, 21, 25, 26, 41, 99, 128, 130,
238
Priming, 12, 58, 218, 221, 222, 224
Processing disjunctions, 49–66
Processing style, 110–116
Prototypicality, xvii, 13, 14, 15, 245–259
Prototypicality bias as an adaptation,
247–259
Proximal versus distal mechanisms, 5, 11,
12, 131
Psychodynamic theories of aﬀect, 108
Psychological immune system, 6, 7, 11,
15, 293–305
Reasons for partner similarity in
relationships, 197–198
Reciprocal altruism, 8
Recognition heuristic, 148
Regulation in relationships, 199–200,
206–207
Rejection, 4, 112, 152–154, 198; see also
Ostracism
Relational leaders, 237
Religion, 28, 29, 30, 102, 237
Reproductive ﬁtness, 247–248, 251,
254–255, 259
Resource conservation theory of
depression, 126–127, 138
Romantic love, 39, 40; see also Attraction;
Sexuality
Romantic relationships, 3, 200, 213–226
Romantic rivalry, 214–225
Satisﬁcing, 149, 151, 157–158
Schizophrenia, 27
Self-esteem, need for, 283
Self-esteem, 136–139, 153–155, 202,
237–239, 282–283, 289
Self-perceptions and relationship
satisfaction, 205
Self-perceptions of mate value, 196–204
Self-regulation, 288
Sequential decision-making, 148–151
Sexual ﬁdelity, 185, 219, 222–225
Sexual orientation, 216–217, 225
Sexual selection, 162–175
Sexual Strategies Theory, 173–175
Sexual versus emotional ﬁdelity,
222–224
Sexuality, 3, 4, 5, 6, 33, 41, 42, 61,
162–163, 165–166, 172–173,
186–191, 190, 191, 216–217, 224–225
Signal detection, 297
Signaling systems, 8, 9, 34–39, 44
Similarity of partners in relationships, 197,
204–205
Skepticism, factual versus interpersonal,
111, 112
Social attention holding power, 128–129
Social brain hypothesis, 14, 21–32, 93, 99,
127
Social cognition, xvii, 179–192, 217,
251, 258, 284, 299
Social cognition and evolution, 1–20
Social cognition and leadership, 239–241
Social competition and depression, 127,
128–129
Social exclusion and depression, 131–132
Social groups, xvii, 14, 25, 26, 30, 51, 230,
235
Social inﬂuence, 4, 120, 125, 170, 231
Social networks, 26–28
SUBJECT INDEX
323

Social perception, 3, 15, 34, 132, 181,
182, 264, 298; see also Social cognition
Social inference, 33–45, 115, 136, 180,
187, 303
Social rank and depression, 128
Social rejection, 294; see also Ostracism
Social relationships, 27, 43, 132, 138
Social risk-taking and depression,
130–139
Social uncertainty, 268, 271
Social value and depression, 132
Social versus non-social inﬂuences on
persuasion, 125, 127, 136
Speed dating and mate search, 155–156
Spotlight eﬀect, 269
Status, 12, 64, 65, 127, 128, 175, 214,
215, 217, 223, 225, 231
Stereotypes, 7, 12, 111, 267, 301
Stigma, 7, 297, 301,
Strategic leadership, 237–240
Strategic pluralism, 162, 166, 199–200
Stress, 5, 102, 131, 134
Subjective familiarity, 253, 258
Subliminal perception of sexual rivals,
217–219
Subliminal priming, 218, 221–222, 224
Sunk costs theory of depression, 127
Suppression and ampliﬁcation, 58–60
Theory of mind, 22, 23, 24, 29, 179,
181–182
Threat, 214, 218, 219, 222, 223, 224,
225
Top-down versus bottom-up processes, 51,
110
Trade-oﬀs in mate preferences, 203
Uncertainty, 286, 271
Waist-to-hip ratio, 38, 71, 79, 220, 221,
225
Wason card selection task, 133–135, 280
Westermarck Hypothesis and inbreeding
avoidance, 186–187
Xenophobia, 303–304
SUBJECT INDEX
324

