
 Existential Utopia 


 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA 
  NEW PERSPECTIVES ON 
UTOPIAN THOUGHT 
 Edited  by 
 Patrícia  Vieira 
 and 
 Michael  Marder 
 

 2012 
 Continuum International Publishing Group 
 80 Maiden Lane, New York, NY 10038 
 The Tower Building, 11 York Road, London SE1 7NX 
 www.continuumbooks.com 
 © Patrícia Vieira and Michael Marder 2012 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the written permission of the publishers. 
 EISBN: 978-1-4411-0051-1 
  
 Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data 
 Existential utopia : new perspectives on utopian thought / edited by Patrícia Vieira and 
Michael Marder. 
 p. cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references. 
 ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 8264- 2072- 5 (hbk. : alk. paper) 
 ISBN- 10: 0- 8264- 2072- 9 (hbk. : alk. paper) 
 ISBN- 13: 978- 1- 4411- 6921- 1 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
 ISBN- 10: 1- 4411- 6921- 0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Utopias– Philosophy. 2. Existentialism. I. Vieira, Patricia I., 1977-  II. Marder, Michael, 
1980- III. Title. 
 HX806.E955 2011 
 335’.02– dc23 
 2011034323
 
 Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems Pvt Ltd, Chennai, India 
 Printing and bound in the United States of America 

   For Lisete, Dinis, and Marina 


 Contents 
 
 Introduction Utopia: A Political Ontology 
  ix 
 Michael Marder and Patrícia Vieira 
 Part I  Utopia Unbound 
 Chapter 1 In Place of Utopia 
 3 
 Jean- Luc Nancy 
 Chapter 2 Utopia, Counter- Utopia, Irony 
 15 
 Gianni Vattimo 
 Chapter 3   From Modern Utopias to Contemporary Uchronia 
  23 
 Alexandre Franco de Sá 
 Chapter 4   Existential Utopia: Of the World, the Possible, the Finite 
  35 
 Michael Marder and Patrícia Vieira 
 Chapter 5 Still /  Encore 
 51 
 Márcia Cavalcante- Schuback 
 Chapter 6 The Theater of Utopia: Deleuze on Acting and Politics 
 63 
 Cláudia Baracchi 
 Part II  Putting Utopia to Work 
  Chapter 7   Ernst Bloch, Utopia, and Ideology Critique 
 83 
 Douglas Kellner 
 Chapter 8 Secularism and Post- Secularism in Roberto Unger and 
Ernst Bloch: Toward a Utopian Ontology 
 97 
 Ruth Levitas 
 Chapter 9 At the End of Utopia— Indifference 
 113 
 Josep Ramoneda 
 Chapter 10 History, Politics, and Utopia: Toward a Synthesis of Social 
Theory and Practice 
  127 
 Laurence Davis 
  Chapter 11   A Practical Utopia for the Twenty- First Century 
  141 
 Robert Albritton 
 Notes 
 157 
 Bibliography 
 165 
 Contributors 
 171 
 
   


 INTRODUCTION 
 Utopia: A Political Ontology 
 Michael  Marder and Patrícia Vieira 
   Is there still any space, whether conceptual or practical, for the thinking of utopia— 
which from the outset announces a certain negation of place,  topos — in a world 
marked by a chronic dystopian outlook? After more than a 100 years of what Nietzsche 
first diagnosed as “European nihilism,” dystopia has now firmly established itself as 
the current  Weltanschauung , a lens through which we filter historical reality. In the 
West, the sense that all viable alternatives for a different political organization have 
been exhausted led to widespread voter apathy, resignation, and nonparticipation in 
the political sphere. Aesthetically, this dystopian mood has given rise to countless 
novels and films, the most emblematic of which is perhaps George Orwell’s  1984 , 
that project into the future, or into an alternative reality, a society based on an exac-
erbation of the darkest traits and tendencies prevalent in the contemporary world. 
An interpretation of world history not as a triumphant march of Reason but as an 
unmitigated disaster has been a hallmark of some of the most influential currents of 
thought, including the writings of Walter Benjamin and of the critical theorists of 
the Frankfurt School. A veritable manifesto of an all- encompassing dystopia in this 
context is Herbert Marcuse’s 1964 bestseller  One- Dimensional Man  that thematized 
the flattening, impoverishment, and integration into a paralyzing totality of every 
sphere of life and human activity. Thanks to its insinuation into every facet of reality, 
dystopia turns into another name for social ontology, in that it becomes the default 
description of the world and gets identified with the totality of  what is . 
 And yet, dystopia heralds a promise of its own: in replacing the fake neutrality of 
social facts with a negatively charged value judgment, built into the very interpreta-
tion of the world, it evinces an intense sense of discontent with, and indeed a rejec-
tion, of the status quo. In this, it curiously shadows the utopian impulse, which is 
born of a similar negative valuation of actual existence but, unlike dystopia, is 
entwined with the hope of overcoming the oppressive actuality and constructing a 
perfect and just society. 
 The supplement of redemptive hope in utopia is a part of the inheritance 
bequeathed to early modernity, when this concept  first  germinated, by the Judeo- 
Christian worldview. As the process of European secularization unfolded, the belief 

X EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
in science and progress gradually replaced the idea of an other- worldly Paradise with 
the notion that the modern version of the Kingdom of Heaven could take root on 
earth, provided that the right social, political, and economic structures were created. 
The utopian impulse culminated in the nineteenth century, with thinkers such as 
Hegel, Fourier, Proudhon, and Marx imagining a utopian end of history, where a 
rational organization of human activity would create a world free of unnecessary 
suffering and conducive to human fulfillment. Nonetheless, the utopian imagina-
tion exhausted itself as faith in transcendental ideals waned in the aftermath of “the 
death of God,” the increasing irrelevance of divinity and of all its replacements that 
used to serve as the guarantors for the meaningfulness of reality. The historical sig-
nificance of utopia turned out to be limited to a concrete period of Western history 
when God was  dying  but not yet  dead , that is to say, when the closed system of theol-
ogy lost its monopoly on the paradisiacal vision of salvation, which, extended to the 
immanent domains of human life, such as economics and politics, was transformed 
into the idea of social and scientific progress. The death of God, as a  fait accompli 
constituting the first milestone of Western nihilism, spelled out the absurdity of 
externally imposed metaphysical standards for thinking and acting, be it in religion 
or in its secularized avatars. A feeling of disappointment with multiple injustices suf-
fusing human reality remained, even as the hope for a better future faded; Kafka’s 
statement to Max Brod emphasizes this relegation of hope to the theological past: 
“Plenty of hope— for God— no end of hope— only not for us” (75). Dystopia is an 
apt instantiation of discontent without hope; it is, we might say, a utopia adapted to 
the age of nihilism. 
 The project of overcoming nihilism and its attendant dystopian malaise does not 
mean that these negative phenomena are to be left behind; instead, this task would 
require deepening or working through them. To work through nihilism and dysto-
pia is to harness their negative and critical energies for the project of social and polit-
ical change, preventing their fossilization into a pessimistic and resigned outlook 
where all possibilities have been preemptively foreclosed. It is also to search for 
meaning and sources of hope that would not be tethered to metaphysical authorities 
but that would rather be embedded in the texture of existence. In this respect, we 
may envision, for the first time, a hope detached from its divine or messianic roots 
and placed in the hitherto unforeseen possibilities of human togetherness. It is this 
hope that fuels existential utopia , so dissimilar to the original utopian imagination 
of the early modern age, starry- eyed about the seemingly unlimited potential of sci-
entific progress, and to the dystopia of the twentieth century. 
 A post- metaphysical, existential utopia hinges upon a reconfiguration of the con-
cept of truth, which is neither immutable nor transcendentally guaranteed but is, 
rather, the result of contestation and permanent struggle among competing inter-
pretations. What is desirable— in other words, the Good and utopia itself— becomes 
a matter of dispute and political disagreement that, in the absence of an external 
arbiter (i.e., God or the teleological idea of progress), open the door to relativism and 
to a recasting of utopia in the banal guise of an individualistic and oft- times 

INTRODUCTION XI
 hedonistic “private paradise.” Against this background, the challenge facing the 
thinking of utopia today is, on the one hand, to avert the traps of relativism, which 
occludes a common horizon for social action, and, on the other, to avoid falling into 
the temptation of the totalizing grand narratives of the past. Positively put, a revived 
utopian thought enjoins us to search for meaning in the immanence of collective life 
and to fashion a common space devoid of an overarching unity, a malleable and 
plastic space, where shared existence is interpreted each time anew. Far from being 
magically erased, hermeneutical tensions and an ongoing polemical and practical 
contestation of “truth,” “justice,” and indeed “utopia” would play a formative role in 
this version of post- metaphysical coexistence. This is because existential utopia dis-
closes to us the unprecedented possibility— wholly compatible with the space of 
separation, difference, and dissensus— of being- together without the mediations of 
the sovereign body of the Leviathan, the State, or religious association. The dissolu-
tion of institutional and essential ties allows existential relations to come to the fore 
of sociality no longer incarnated in a determinate locale or body politic. It is this 
enabling placelessness, at the level of life itself and not of a transcendent ideal reality, 
that distinguishes the political ontology of existential utopia. 
 Any political ontology presupposes an organization of the common  topos span-
ning a national territory, social striation, and collective imagination. In the age of 
nihilism the transcendental grounding and justification of the political  topos were 
eroded to such an extent that the danger of  anomie , the loss of intellectual bearings 
in the shared space of coexistence, loomed large on the horizon of the West. The 
explosive potential of this sweeping experience of groundlessness had to do with 
putting into question the preset and ostensibly stable parameters of the political 
 topos  in its various instantiations: anarchism initiated a critique of exclusive sover-
eignty over national territory; communism prompted rebellions against the stratifi-
cation of social space into classes; and the movement for radical democracy called 
for previously marginalized groups to reshape, beyond recognition, the topography 
of collective imagination. The unhinging of the political  topos  constituted the mini-
mal condition of possibility for utopia, a glimmer of hope that the oppressive power 
formations of the past were about to crumble. 
 Nevertheless, the tenacity of the status quo should not be underestimated: in the 
absence of metaphysical justifications, the increasingly unjust political topology was 
naturalized, presenting injustice as a mere and brute fact of life— as, indeed, our col-
lective fate— to which there is no alternative. As defense mechanisms against the 
corrosive effects of nihilism, the forces of naturalization imparted to political sub-
jects a sense of helplessness in the face of seemingly predetermined historical events, 
and so attempted to maintain the semblance of an unshakeable order immune to any 
concrete occurrence. In the course of the twentieth century, technocracy became the 
avatar of naturalization, having replaced, in this capacity, the natural law. It forged, 
above all, an illusion of depoliticization, whereby citizens were led to believe that 
there was no more place for meaningful political decisions suffocated under the piles 
of statistical data and that governance was a mere reaction to, and the management 

XII EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
of, the circumstances as they presented themselves— an illusion banishing the una-
voidable acts of decision- making to a realm shielded from public scrutiny. Along 
with the utopian impulse, the political  qua  political was concealed, while the  topos of 
communal life turned into a frozen landscape amenable to nothing more than cos-
metic modifications. Utopia, on the other hand, discloses the structure of the politi-
cal  topos  in all its artificiality by demonstrating that no political space must be the 
way it is (one of the possible meanings of the ambiguous prefix  u-   is “not,” and hence, 
a negation of any immutable topology). By de- constituting the formalized, institu-
tionalized, and regimented arrangement of the public sphere and by representing, in 
the collective imagination, flashes of a better world, utopia takes us back to the draw-
ing board and reactivates the constituting moments of politics when the possibility 
of reinventing the  topos of our existence gains a new lease on life. 
 The essays gathered in this collection envision utopia for the twenty- first century, 
in light of the shift from an essentialist notion of politics and of communal being to 
the priority of collective existence in its perpetual becoming and constituting char-
acter. Consequently, each author is mindful of the open- ended character of utopia, 
which would correspond to the changing nature of political life and which would, 
therefore, reconstitute itself in response to the events shaping the community. In 
opposition to a utopia understood in terms of a “trans- historical transcendence,” of 
a supra- temporal ideal that can never be realized in the time of human existence, the 
essays comprising this book hint at a utopian movement beyond history within his-
torical temporality, an “intra- historical transcendence” that implies an existential 
conception of time as the opening up of the possible within the actual. This configu-
ration of utopian transcendence that cuts across the texts of  Existential Utopia arises 
as a fold in immanence itself, rupturing the continuum that extends from potential-
ity to its realization, from an abstract ideal to its teleological fulfillment. The chap-
ters, therefore, represent snapshots of  possible utopias  and invite the reader to engage 
with the  possibility of utopia inseparable from its existential grounding. 
 The intra- temporal nature of existential utopia puts in flux the idea of universal-
ity, or, more specifically, the idea of a universal common Good, as it pertains to the 
possible and desirable ways of organizing social and political life. If existential uni-
versals are no longer abstract and eternal ideals, then their political analogues pre-
clude blueprints for a perfect society, applicable everywhere and in every epoch. Such 
blueprints would merely reproduce the excessive formalization of politics, with its 
empty institutional molds,  a posteriori  filled with living content and translating 
abstract universality into the actuality of existence.  Existential Utopia  will, instead, 
put forth a series of fleeting and precarious universals, faithful to their singular con-
text and amenable to being changed or scrapped altogether, once they overstep their 
limited usefulness. At the intersection of the two terms, this book stages an encoun-
ter, where the utopian impulse takes its cues and learns from the here- and- now, 
while collective existence gets liberated from the straightjacket of the present, orients 
itself toward possibilities that are not constrained by what is, and overflows itself, 
such that this excess constitutes the movement of utopia. If nihilism can only be 

INTRODUCTION XIII
overcome from within by preserving its negative and critical edge, then the encoun-
ter of existentialism and utopia should not yield a rigid determination of new param-
eters for thinking and action but should rather serve as a compass for finding one’s 
bearings within the frequently disorienting landscape of contemporary politics. 
 As a precondition for such an encounter, it behooves us to unbind the notion of 
utopia from its intellectual history, which, despite eschewing sociopolitical  stasis and 
holding up the promise of social justice, rotated around a largely essentialist core and 
entailed a strict separation between the ideal and the real, as well as the intelligible 
and the sensible. A double inheritor of messianic theology and Platonism, utopian 
thought must strive to abandon the metaphysical legacy, to which it is irreducible, 
and take stock of what remains in the aftermath of metaphysics: the aspirations 
toward justice stripped of an ideal or transcendent dimension. At issue in the unbind-
ing of utopia, a process that is interminable and that metonymizes the thinking of 
utopia today, is its very survival as a pertinent category for social and political change. 
The uncertainty surrounding the fate of this concept is attributable to the fact that, 
in the minds of some skeptics, it is indelibly branded by the tradition, wherein it 
originated and, therefore, should be discarded along with the other metaphysical 
illusions akin to it. If utopia is to survive the ceremonial proclamations of its demise, 
contemporaneous with the persistent announcements of the end of history, it will be 
only as a trace of its former self. The essays comprising this book put their faith in 
this self- transformative, self- reinventing potential of existential utopia, which is not 
merely another utopia but the other of utopia, rid of the weightiness of essence and 
tradition and thus allowed to permeate the fabric of life itself. 
 In the interminable process of getting unbound from its provenance and from 
the tradition marked by its early modern origins, utopia— which is, in itself, unbound, 
in that it is dissociated from any given place— can, in turn, unbind political life and 
 topos  from the exigencies of institutionalization and formalization. This gesture of 
unbinding is not entirely negative, since it signifies the existential relevance of utopia 
to singular historical situations, where it is put to work. In this sense, the unbound 
existential utopia is simultaneously theoretical and practical, singular and universal, 
present and future, which is to say that it is put to work without any external media-
tions, without the need for bridging the  apriori  principles, maxims, or ideals and 
 political actuality. What replaces the normative guidance, provided by traditional uto-
pia, is the hermeneutical attention to existence that focuses on the lacks, lacunae, and 
deprivations, in the midst of life’s ostensible plentitude. Existential utopia resists the 
temptation to fill the gaps of existence and to project the image of fulfillment else-
where, onto a reality that does not and could not take place. Instead, it lingers with and 
within these gaps, treating them as those instances of immanent possibility, where 
practical political interpretations are set to work for the purpose of reshaping the here-
 and- now. Deriving from a variety of theoretical backgrounds and intellectual tradi-
tions, the chapters of the present collection may, therefore, be seen as hermeneutical 
exercises that glean the living potential of utopia discernable in the interstices of 
existence. 

XIV EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 The opening chapter of  Existential Utopia , titled “In Place of Utopia” by Jean- Luc 
Nancy, sets a philosophical tone to the treatment of the subject by raising many of 
the themes that will recur in the rest of the book, such as “world,” “presence/absence,” 
“representation,” “finitude,” and “possibility.” This text is followed by a brief inter-
view with the French philosopher, in which he reconsiders the relevance, or the irrel-
evance, of utopia today. In “Utopia, Counter- Utopia, Irony,” Gianni Vattimo links 
the dystopic cultural productions of the twentieth century to the dark underside of 
occidental rationality and of the metaphysical imagination subtending technocratic 
forms of government. Irony is then presented as a political- existential strategy to 
ward off  the force of dystopic negativity and to project a future no longer committed 
to the metaphysical values of authenticity and objective truth but conditioned by an 
ironical- hermeneutic understanding of history. Alexandre Franco de Sá, in his “From 
Modern Utopias to Contemporary Uchronia,” also departs from a critique of mod-
ern, teleological rationality that has led contemporary societies to believe they have 
reached the end of history. The author argues that these societies seem to establish 
themselves in a time outside of time, which could thus be defined as “uchronic”, 
their only glimpse into the future being an indefinite continuation of what they 
already are, a situation that precludes the activation of the utopian drive inherent in 
collective life. To counter this tendency, de Sá calls for a rethinking of the experience 
of time at the individual and political levels in such a way that a future qualitatively 
different from the present would again become possible. 
 “Existential Utopia— Of the World, the Possible, the Finite,” by Michael Marder 
and Patrícia Vieira, contrasts essentialist- prescriptive utopias, grounded in teleologi-
cal, instrumental rationality, to the concept of “existential utopia.” The authors spec-
ify the latter in terms of the crucial categories of the world, understood in the 
phenomenological sense of a tense coexistence of diverse lifeworlds; possibility, 
removed from the continuum of potentiality and actuality; and finitude, acknowl-
edging the absence of eternal and immutable truths or normative- transcendental 
ideals. In “Still /  Encore ,” Márcia Cavalcante- Schuback explores the existential 
dimension of utopia in poetry, particularly in T. S. Eliot’s poem “Ash Wednesday.” 
She situates utopian place in the unidentifiable “in- between,” where absence inexo-
rably percolates into the hidden core of pure presence. Understood in the terms of 
existential temporality, the utopian time of “Ash Wednesday” is, in turn, the coales-
cence of “before the beginning” and “after the end,” whereby the continual flow of 
time is disrupted. Cláudia Baracchi, in “The Theater of Utopia: Deleuze on Acting 
and Politics,” concentrates on a different aesthetic medium, namely theater. What 
Baracchi calls “the theater of utopia” is a double representation— theoretical and 
practical, theatrical and political— of that which does not exist: the collective sub-
ject, the people. Utopia is, once again, imagined here as the crossing, the placeless 
meeting point, or the conjunction of philosophy and art, where concepts are enacted 
and dramatic action puts thought in motion. 
 In “Ernst Bloch, Utopia and Ideology Critique,” Douglas Kellner undertakes a 
close reading of Bloch’s masterpiece,  The Principles of Hope , in an attempt to 

INTRODUCTION XV
 demonstrate that even the most hegemonic and conservative social and cultural arti-
facts of late capitalism hold, despite themselves, the utopian promise of a new world. 
An immanent critique of ideology will, therefore, benefit from a thematization of the 
irrepressible utopian aspirations that always percolate into its object. Ruth Levitas 
uncovers another facet of Blochian thought in her chapter, “Secularism and Post- 
Secularism in Roberto Unger and Ernst Bloch: Towards a Utopian Ontology.” She 
argues that the model of secular humanism involves a debased humanism, or what 
Bloch referred to as “stupid materialism.” In opposition to this debasement, which 
often leads to political and religious fundamentalism, Bloch insists on a deeper 
humanism that reclaims from religion matters of spirit and grace. Bloch, as well as 
Roberto Unger, prefers an ontology that is historicized rather than essentialist and 
that is centered on becoming and therefore existentially open to the future. In that 
respect, the author contends, Bloch and Unger put forth a utopian ontology. 
 The three concluding chapters of  Existential Utopia  describe what has become of 
utopia in late modernity and what it could signify in the twenty- first century. Josep 
Ramoneda, in “At the End of Utopia— Indifference,” diagnoses the permutations of 
utopia in the age of nihilism. From the standpoint of power and domination, utopia 
turns into the invisibility of the victims of historical, social, and economic injustices, 
their erasure from the radar screens of the mass media and collective consciousness. 
In “History, Politics, and Utopia: Towards a Synthesis of Social Theory and Practice,” 
Laurence Davis continues the exploration of a contemporary contestation of utopia, 
with reference to the experience of radical democratic grassroots movements. 
According to Davis, we need to conceive of utopia not as a transcendent ideal but as 
an empirically situated feature of the world, representing the claims for justice of the 
dispossessed. 
 Robert Albritton’s “A Practical Utopia for the Twenty- First Century” lays out the 
key principles of a practical utopia founded upon lived collective experiences and 
memories of failed political experiments, such as the Soviet Union. Albritton takes 
as his starting point one of the three basic tenets of the French Revolution, namely 
equality, transforms it into an existential scaffolding for the proposed utopia, and 
argues that the ideals of freedom and community are undermined unless all people 
are viewed as sufficiently equal as to have the material resources that make human 
flourishing possible. 
 


 PART I 
 Utopia Unbound 


 CHAPTER 1 
 In Place of Utopia  1 
 Jean- Luc  Nancy 
 The word  utopia  has a very peculiar history. It is one of those considerably rare terms 
that entered language through an individual invention meant for a very circum-
scribed usage, which was not only literary but also came under the guise of a proper 
name. In this respect, it is similar to the name Robinson, to which utopia is, actually, 
not unrelated, if only due to its insularity.  Utopia , the name of the imaginary island 
where Thomas More places his communitarian republic, ended up assuming the real 
existence of a common name or a concept, an existence that is as real as that of an 
earthly island. It is a very small island with a perfectly contemporary meaning that is 
active within language and thought. Moreover, this word imposed itself across many 
languages, and its meaning was imprinted at the heart of a thought that was hence-
forth recognizable at the world scale. A thought concerned with the reality of the 
world as such, with worldhood as awaiting and anxiety [ angoisse ], as the necessity 
that one experiences, or as a desirable utopia. 2 
 Let us recall that the word is composed of the Greek τοπος (a place, in the precise 
sense of a determined place, a location, a particular region) and the negative prefix 
ου, in the same way that ουτις means “nobody, not a someone.” This artificial Greek 
term forged by an Englishman in the fifteenth century is used today by everyone to 
designate a notion or a question, the absence of which from the world horizon of the 
philosophical and political reflection is unimaginable, regardless of the meaning 
and the specific values— sometimes opposed to one another— that particular kinds 
of reflection associate with it. (One might say that a world where utopia would be 
neither a notion nor a question is for our world . . . a utopia.) 
 * * *
 Utopia , a word that did not originate in ordinary language, that arose out of nothing 
in language as though by an act of creation  ex nihilo,  is given the task of designating 
a nothing- of- place [ rien- de- lieu ], a non- place [ non- lieu ], as though occupying the 
place of a wholly other place, or rather of an other in every place; a word that made 
concrete, within language, something that truly has a place in the space of meaning. 
It does not fail, at least, to occupy its place in all the dictionaries. From that place, it 

4 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
does not cease, at the same time, to pierce language, since it is one of those terms 
where the given signification (a chimerical dream, foreign to the real) is always sus-
ceptible to being unhinged, or contested both by an interrogation of the very func-
tion of this “dream” or this “chimera,” which precisely wants to be or to signify 
something else than a “dream” or a “chimera,” and by a reflection about the ties that 
bind “utopia” to existence and to action. For, in the end, one asks oneself: To what 
meaning does this kind of extraterritoriality of language lay claim? 
 Utopia , beyond a certain point of language and of thought, is a non- place of 
meaning through which, in fact, something else than a place among others in the 
configuration of meaning perhaps arises in thought. It is a place  from which meaning 
escapes but in such a way that it also constitutes a non- place  toward which  it escapes 
(where it flees and takes refuge). But, in this manner, the totality of language and of 
thought, a totality understood according to its openness and its indefinite move-
ment, would be  utopia  par excellence. Meaning only has a place within language, 
even though that which has such a place is always only a cross- reference [ renvoi ], or 
a sending [ envoi ] to the outside of language and of all places. In a word, meaning 
itself is the non- place or the outside- place [ hors- lieu ] (so that it can be interrupted by 
the  taking- place  [avoir- lieu] of truth, which announces, precisely, the impossibility 
of localizing meaning and of assigning to it a certain abode). 
 This non- place or this outside- place (is it still a place outside all places, or merely 
their negation? is the negation of place a place and does it take place? utopia endlessly 
stirs these questions) should be understood here as an  outside- there [hors- là], in 
keeping with one of the possible interpretations of that other proper name forged by 
another writer, the  Horla of Maupassant.  Horla is eponymous with a text, where it 
stands for an anguished creature that visits a familiar site from an unnameable out-
side, which lies beyond the human, beyond our senses and perception.  Utopia and 
 Horla  would thus form a couple of names posited within the same presence of 
absence: a couple of inverted signs, where Horla is the terrible one, while Utopia 
always signals a harmonious presence, a trait to which we will return. (Robinson, to 
whom we will also come back, could be the child of this couple and the third charac-
ter of this tragic- comic mythology, the one who restarts humanity while separated 
from other men, lost, and left to his own devices, but, therefore, perhaps, reduced to 
nothing other than his shipwreck.) 
 The presence of absence, the taking- place of the non- place, or of the outside- place, 
as a condition of meaning itself— such is perhaps the profound and general nature of 
utopia, as well as the reason for the exceptional fate of its linguistic invention. A rea-
son that is itself immersed in an originary constitution of history, which we have 
hitherto named Western but which is becoming global: the constitution of an unfa-
miliarity of meaning. History, in fact, is nothing other than the movement that com-
mences with the suspension of a given truth (of the world of myth and of a mythic 
foundation) and proceeds to a truth to be discovered or produced. History, therefore, 
is both  meaning  and  direction  [sens]: signification and trajectory— the trajectory of a 
truth that is fulfilled  or  that ceaselessly transforms itself and escapes from itself. In its 

IN PLACE OF UTOPIA 5
deepest sense, utopia is contemporary with history, and is, at bottom, its first effect. 
No doubt, Antiquity already evinces important features of utopia, even though they 
take the shape of dreams or of nostalgia, rather than the Judeo- Christian forms of 
awaiting and promise. Modern utopia simultaneously represents the fulfilled signifi-
cation  and  this fulfillment as an outside of history, which, nevertheless, also presents 
itself as the extreme edge and as the subsumption of a historical process. Utopia is 
always suspended between a representation of  progress  and a representation of an 
 imaginary or symbolic leap , in the course of which no progress would be attained. 
Consequently, utopia is the tearing of history and of historical meaning: at once its 
glorification, its mobilization, and its paralysis or discredit. 
 This is why today, at our historical moment, utopia reaches a sort of extremity: we 
live in an age that was represented, in various ways, as the possible, or, rather, probable 
age of a fulfilled utopia (that of machines and/or that of fraternity, that of knowledge 
and/or that of the complete production of the human). As opposed to this representa-
tion, our age appears to itself as that of a derailing, which opens the path to the implo-
sion of the world, or at least as the trigger for a mutation beyond which it would no 
longer be plausible to think in terms of history and/or of utopia, just as it would no 
longer be possible to return to myth (it is not by chance that the experiment of return-
ing to myth was made in the past century and we all know where it led). If, as one 
might think, the mutation of our age is only comparable to that which engendered the 
West (the one that gave rise to a post- sacrificial world between the tenth and the sixth 
centuries before Christ, along an arch that stretched from the Mediterranean basin to 
the shores of the Ganges), then this mutation will make us leave behind history, uto-
pia, and meaning or truth, such as they function in our configuration of thought. 
Utopia represents, therefore, something like a limit upon which we are touching 
today: as a figuration of a fulfillment, it becomes a thing of the past, but as a designa-
tion of the outside- place or of the non- place, it assumes, perhaps, a new value. 
 * * *
To grasp more precisely what may be at stake here, one needs to characterize utopia 
more precisely, a task that can be best accomplished by noting the necessary links 
that bind it to two other concepts, namely  representation and the  world. 
 1) Utopia is always a fiction avowed as such. It fashions itself as representation, at 
least from a perspective, according to which it implies the irreality of the represented. 
The invention of the word already contains this feature: it is the name of an island that 
proclaims that this island does not belong to the earthly geography. It is not insular in 
the world, but in relation to the world. For the European world, “the Islands,” as one 
used to say in absolute terms and with a capital “I,” or the idea of an island in general, 
were for a long time a privileged figure of extra- territoriality, of a place situated at a 
distance both of desire and of isolation, a virgin and protected land where one staged 
the possibility of a new world. The fiction of an island turns  utopia , from the outset, 
into a  Ur- topia , a term to be pronounced in German: a place of origin, of a new and 

6 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
pure origin (the prefix  ur , so familiar to German metaphysics—  Ursprung  = primor-
dial outpour, origin;  Urteil  = judgment, elemental division— means “outside of, com-
ing out of”; it has been compared to the English  out , and we could also link it to the 
privative Greek ου). Furthermore, this fictional function of an island could be fol-
lowed through the movement of the Western world in its detachment from its 
Mediterranean archi- pelagic cradle, where there were, at first, multiple neighboring 
islands, still not lost in oceanic distances (even though there was already the idea of a 
far- away mythical island that was pre- utopian, such as the island of the Phaeacians in 
the  Odyssey  (with the gardens of Alcinous), the Atlantis of Plato, the islands men-
tioned by Euhemerus, or the Islands of the Sun in Diodorus Siculus).  Utopia means 
that it exists nowhere, and that it has no other place than its own representation, 
which does not refer to a possible referent but, rather, represents an explicit non- reality 
using elements copied from the real. And yet, it is a  place . This non- place is not simply 
 a topic: if it is not another place, it is a place that is other, a place otherwise local and 
localized, and this outside- place is, in itself, a  topos or a  figure . 
 In this sense,  Utopia  is a literary exercise: it is a fable or an allegory of the same type 
as the ones we define, sometimes all too hurriedly, as Platonic myths (among which are 
Atlantis and the Cave, which is also, in the end, a kind of island), because in this hasty 
definition we keep the Greek word, to which Plato attached, in this case, a very differ-
ent connotation from the one he gave to the µυθοι of the priests and the poets. (The 
imitation of Plato is obvious in More’s book.) Thus  Utopia  is a double fiction and rep-
resentation: first, insofar as it is the explicit invention of that which it presents (the 
utopian community) and, second, insofar as its spectacle is transparent (all the names 
are made up, following the model of the title: Without- people, for example, is the name 
of the king and, most importantly, the name of the traveler- narrator is “Teller of 
fables”). The spectacle of utopia unfolds, clearly, in order to translate an idea, which, as 
it happens, is the idea of a communitarian state free from tyranny and injustice. 
(Needless to say, one can find analogous traits in later utopias.) 
 Thanks to this double characteristic, the representation of utopia announces that 
it does nothing but represent, but that it really represents what is desirable. It, conse-
quently, states that the desirable is undoubtedly only the desirable (unrealizable), but 
that it is, still, no less desirable, namely something that would be worth looking for 
or inventing in the real and, at the very least, that its representation deserves to be 
opposed to an unsatisfactory and contestable reality. 
 In fact, similarly to many other essays of the time (Rabelais or Campanella), More’s 
book aims first of all to criticize concrete politics, and its fictional presentation is also 
a means of dissimulation in the eyes of established powers (a method that is successful 
up to a certain point). With utopia, a decisive feature of modern political consciousness 
is introduced (already present in Plato, in a certain way), one that we could name the 
trait/trace [ trait ] of the impossible. Despite the fact that the ideal city is unrealizable, it 
is nonetheless this very city— its idea, its image— that we must resolutely oppose to the 
real city. Utopian spirit appears in its radical and revolutionary character: it demands 
the overturning of the established order so as to found a new one. But, at the same time, 

IN PLACE OF UTOPIA 7
insofar as utopia appears  qua  utopia (and becomes neither a project nor a program, 
since that would change its nature), it demands that the established order be faced with 
a representation, the obvious impossibility of which does not diminish but, on the 
contrary, sharpens its critical virulence. Utopian representation appears as fictional 
but not as unrealistic: one should rather say,  cum grano salis , hyperrealistic. It calls 
forth a real that would conform to the laws of this representation. 
 Yet, this call is made, at the same time, in the guise of an injunction (“it is neces-
sary”), in the guise of a wish (“it would be necessary”), and in the guise of a premise 
(“let us act as if”): in these three different modes, what we are talking about is a link 
between the unaccomplished and the accomplished, a link between a finite and an 
absolute being. Utopia is, in and of itself, an evidence of finitude: but not of finitude 
understood as simple limitation; on the contrary, of finitude insofar as the finite 
being exists precisely at its own limit, where it opens itself to the unlimited, to the 
simultaneously active and passive power of an unlimitation [ illimitation ]. Utopia is 
modern, precisely in that it encompasses this structuring of the finite around its 
infinity and/or around its finitude [ finition ]. 
 In a sense, this is how Rousseau sees pure democracy and (despite certain differ-
ences) how Marx sees realized socialism: they view it in light of a demand, the regu-
latory character of which precedes and renders secondary the exigencies of feasibility. 
(One could come back here, on a long detour, to the Kantian, and, later, the 
Nietzschean motif of the regulatory idea or fiction.) Utopia does not simply set up its 
non- place in the imaginary, but, rather, in a polemical negation of the real, a nega-
tion that, in and of itself, represents the reality— or the “hyperreality”— of necessity 
(of justice). Utopia is the impossible, not rendered possible, but shown as necessary. 
 Utopia is, therefore, doubly representative, according to the two meanings of this 
term. First, it is a figure or a painting of a possible, verisimilar, and recognizable real-
ity (a place, a State, of laws and of mores): a representation in the sense of a reproduc-
tion with a monstrative or demonstrative function (one should recall, here, certain 
models of the utopian architects of the eighteenth century, as well as the scenes and 
narratives from Sade and Fourrier). Second, it is a presentation, evidencing that 
which is not in itself present (this is the first meaning of the word “representation,” 
its theatrical or politico- moral meaning); specifically, it puts on display and makes 
present the impossible itself, but the impossible insofar as it constitutes an Idea and, 
as such, a law, a principle, and an injunction. With the figure that has been put forth, 
it is, then, the unfigurable that takes shape (e.g., the communitarian Idea) and this 
shape, rather than outlining a scene, opens up, through that scene, a breach of 
thought and of desire in the real, a breach we could also name the absolute, the true, 
or the unconditional. 
 In utopia, reason puts the rational above the reasonable, as the demand of an 
outside- place opened in and by reason: the infinite excess in reason of its own truth. 
Utopia is the representation— in the two senses of the word— of this infinity. 
 2) Second trait: utopia is always the representation of a world. The representations 
of technical accomplishment, such as those of da Vinci’s machines or others in science 

8 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
fiction, are not utopias as long as they do not explicitly entail a world, that is to say, a 
totality of existence and of meaning. All this, furthermore, does not mean that tech-
nology does not entail such a totality; quite the contrary is the case. But it is necessary 
to represent this totality as such (for example, neither  Star Wars  nor  2001, Space 
Odyssey offers a utopia, for these works describe extrapolations from our world). 
 Utopia is always, above all, social in the broadest sense of the word: it places itself 
in the order of a sharing/partitioning of meaning [ partage de sens ]— that is to say, of 
meaning itself, absolutely, given that meaning is nothing other than a sharing/parti-
tioning [ partage ]. It is “ur- topia” in a new sense, that of its novel apparition. 
 It is always a world that is utopian: a regime of sharing/partitioning, of division, 
and of connection of those who exchange and convert meaning. If the model of  uto-
pia , at least in its broader sense, is political, it is because politics itself has been the 
name of a combination— that also began with the history of the West— of relations 
of force and of meaning, ever since those categories were set up as two distinct orders 
that had to be conjoined, rather than being given as a unity (a sacred power). It is this 
that determines the issue of “community” insofar as it is a “city.” 
 In the world of the sacred, there is no  place  for utopia because there is no non- 
place: the here and the elsewhere are clearly situated, separated, and reconnected. 
The sacred rite (the sacrifice) performs an  ectopia : it expels to the outside something 
that belongs to the here, and that is not a utopia. 
 But as soon as one attempts to find, to produce and, in the first place, to posit and 
to thematize the non- given conjunction of power and meaning (what we shall call 
“democracy”), politics at once gets defined as that which still has not taken place but 
rather demands its place at the point where the disjunction between power and mean-
ing reigns. It is, therefore, not so much utopia that is first of all political, but, rather, it 
is politics that is always utopian. In fact, the Athenian πολις has presented itself, ever 
since its first appearance in the course of history, as already lacking its core, either by 
having already lost its truth, or by still having to reach it. And, at the same time, it has 
engaged in a philosophical inquiry into what the best πολιτεια should be. Perhaps the 
heart of every utopia is a fusion of power and of meaning in such a way that legitimacy 
is not under suspicion and authority is itself responsible for the well- being of the com-
munity. Utopia is, first of all, the non- place or the outside- place of community as 
such— I mean the community presented insofar as the “common” is not given or 
founded upon a certain principle, that is, when the community is not or when it is no 
longer the body or the conglomeration of a family or an empire. 
 As the representation of progress— still relatively foreign to the epoch of Thomas 
More— became established, utopia went through a slow movement of torsion to 
adjust to a different understanding of time. Instead of being that which happens 
outside of necessity and according to contingency, time, or the order of the tempo-
ral in the sense this word acquired in Christianity, became the arrival of the neces-
sary. As a result, that which was clearly not to be realized, or that which was to be 
realized only in an improbable future, in the  uchronia  of utopia, becomes that 
which, when eventually realized— even if only after a very long time— would define 

IN PLACE OF UTOPIA 9
the horizon of a time that could no longer be understood as  bygone  without being at 
the same time  realized , that is, accomplished according to the essence of its progres-
sion. (As a consequence, a “revolution” became the very demand to give a place to 
the outside- place. The trajectory of Marx best represents that future where utopia is 
subsumed under the mission of history.) Effectivity was thus attributed to time as 
the effectivity of the  subject , in other words, of that which must become what it is, 
and therefore always constitutes itself simultaneously as an after- fact of itself and in 
advance of itself:  ur- topia  turns into a production of itself as origin and end. The 
utopian world becomes the task of producing itself as a world, and representation 
becomes will, that is, a representation that creates its own realization. 
 The character of being  world  of utopia foregrounds two of its dimensions that 
have been hitherto barely visible: worldhood [ mondialité ] and worldliness [ mon-
danéité ]. Being world- wide [ mondiale ], utopia cannot but represent a state of com-
mon sense, or a meaning, that is shared by all humanity, without any essential 
differences. No utopia can be relevant only for a part of humanity. Being worldly 
[ mondaine ], it does not point toward another world or toward an other- worldly 
reality [ outre- monde ] but, rather, toward the realization of this world in itself and 
by itself. Utopia is not  paradise , at least in the sense of a beyond, but it retains from 
this notion the representation of an exceptional place within the world, thus open-
ing the world onto its meaning (this is, no doubt, another way for utopia to be 
Western: to be the linchpin of a double closure of divine exception, that of the gar-
den of Eden and the island of Hesperides, the garden being another figure for an 
island in Homeric culture, as well as in the cultures of Persia and Mesopotamia). 
 * * *
Consequently, utopia harbors an antinomy. In fact, it can from now on assume two 
forms: 
 — either its worldly and representational character leads to an intensification of 
the hollowing, of the breach that creates an outside- place in the world; not look-
ing onto another world, it opens in the world a non- place that creates a kind of a 
scar, marking the absence of pre- given meaning; 
 — or its character as a totality of meaning, instead of defining this totality as open 
and hollowed out, on the contrary, fills the breach and even erases the scar, sug-
gesting nothing less than the regeneration of the world; in this case, the  urtopia 
subsumes  utopia — and this is called totalitarianism (in other words, always more 
than politics: the subsumption of politics and of its constitutive gap); this is why, 
moreover, an insistent and ambiguous theme circulates across various utopias: 
the theme of communitarianism with its eugenic complement.   
 Consequently, utopia either gets imprisoned in a totalization conceived of as a satu-
ration (and this is the crushing and domineering “vision of the world”), or it is 
reduced to the diametrically opposed condition of a lack that perpetually awaits its 

10 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
remediation (and this is the “regulatory idea” or the “value” in their right- minded 
and hopeless formulations). Between a line of flight to infinity and a block, between 
flimsiness and thickness, between a pure negation of the  u  and the fullness of the  ur , 
 utopia  seems to have lost today the fragile measure that kept it in balance. A possibil-
ity therefore arises that our “utopia” should be, from now on, an absence of utopia in 
the sense of a projection of a total fulfillment or of infinite perfectioning. 
 The question seems to be, henceforth: What should come  in place of  utopia? A 
question to be understood in two possible ways: What should come in its place, in 
other words, as a replacement, a substitution, and what should come in the place that 
is its own, in other words, in this non- place or in this outside- place? 
 What can replace, without displacing it, the non- place of utopia? 
 Perhaps the answer has already been available for longer than we would have 
thought and for longer than utopia itself (or at least for as long as utopia has existed, 
if it is, in fact, a contemporary of the West). Perhaps the answer actually lies at the 
heart of representation and at the heart of the world. If representation is actually the 
presentation of that which is not present as such, and if the world is a totality of 
meaning that, as such, does not know how to close itself but that, on the contrary, is 
only sure of its infinite openness, then all representation is really representation of a 
world and every world is really the configuration of an unlimited expansion of mean-
ing, the truth of which is nothing but the infinity of singular parts where meaning is 
interrupted only to be taken up somewhere else: in the birth and the death of every-
body, in love and hate, in knowledge and ignorance, in image and force. 
 “Utopia” becomes the name of an outside- place that operates at the heart of the 
real, not in order to explode and annihilate it, but, on the contrary, in order to clear 
the space for its pulsation. It is the play of a hinge that cannot be welded because it 
must undertake the sharing/partitioning and revival of meaning— from one singular 
existence to another, without assumption or subsumption of their singularities but, 
on the contrary,  from one  to the other, which is precisely the condition of meaning. 
 If there is something that has not ceased to be of concern to the group of tech-
niques that the West has called “the arts,” is this not, precisely, the care [ souci ] for 
such play? Is it not the care for a hinge that does not weld meaning to meaning (in the 
way language would tend to do) but that, in the presentation itself, and as its theme 
and its motive, facilitates the opening of an outside- place, a syncope of meaning? 
What constitutes a work of art if not the fact that neither its performance nor its 
outcome exhausts it and that it gives place, precisely, to that which has no place? 
What does a work of art do other than working, in itself, for something altogether 
different from the occupation and saturation of its place, and other than tracing its 
own contour, with the greatest precision, when its goal is to plot an escape right here, 
to give place to the other of place? 
 Utopia has been the attempt— or the temptation— to put to work a representation 
that would locate the non- place. In this, utopia was close to the deeper structure or 
dynamics of the work of art (and, without a doubt, we could show that more than one 
utopian writer thought of her-  or himself as an artist). However, utopia as such is 

IN PLACE OF UTOPIA 11
determined by a program of completion. Art, on the other hand, only completes the 
work in order to open onto an outside that it harbors but that it cannot contain. One 
could say, in a word: the work of art is not an island and the one who inhabits it (the 
artist or her or his audience) is not Robinson: she or he does not restart a world of her 
or his own but engages with everyone’s world in the spacing that she or he opens. It is 
thus that, from now on, utopia, folding onto itself, finally designates, in place of itself, 
something that would unhinge all the places in order to create there innumerable 
suspensions and interruptions, innumerable releases or escapes: to be here, even when 
over there, and thus without an outside, to inscribe in eternity the instability of a 
moment, to replay every time a meaning of the world, without an end or without 
progress. We situate that “something” or that “somewhere,” approximately, as “art.” 
But this word itself is insufficient if it is to be defined according to an aesthetic insu-
larity, that is to say, in fact, according to that which would make art its own utopia. We 
need, on the contrary, to think in this context the putting to work— the  technique — 
entrusted with the task of doing justice to the nontotalizable infinity of that which 
puts us in the world and keeps us there, without letting us dream of another world but 
not without leaving for us the possibility, sometimes, in certain places, created as the 
beyond in the here— a painting, for example, a sentence, or a dance— of touching 
upon a reason without ground and without abidance.  
 Interview with Jean- Luc Nancy 
 Michael Marder and Patrícia Vieira 
 A note by Jean- Luc Nancy : I respond to your questions very quickly, between two 
trips, and I do not have the time to reread the old text to which you are referring. 
Maybe my responses distance themselves more or less from that text; I know, in any 
case, that for me today the notion of utopia is even more empty than it was when I 
wrote that text. Your questions make me think that this is not the case for you and 
that you would want to give “utopia” an actual power and a real chance. But that is 
not at all my point of view. I believe, on the contrary, that we need to reject all utopia 
and focus instead on the here- and- now! March 10, 2011. 
 Michael Marder and Patrícia Vieira (Hereafter, MM & PV): As a sign necessarily 
lacking an actually existing referent, does utopia shed light on the routine operations 
of meaning- making? Does it teach us something about the conditions of possibility 
for meaning? Could we interpret utopia as a spacing or an opening, wherein meaning 
(in particular a set of new shared meanings of a community) sets itself to work? 
 Jean- Luc Nancy (Hereafter, JLN): Well, I am not sure that there is no actual refer-
ent to “utopia.” If we think of the mere concept, the reference is the question about 
the way of conceiving the prefix “u”: “out,” “to come,” “never to come,” “in no place,” 
“in another place,” etc. That is the whole problematic of utopia. How to conceive of 
a  topos beyond all  topoi ? On the other hand, there are the utopias like the one of 

12 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
More, the one of Fourier, and so forth, that have precise features even if it is not 
strictly possible to make them real. Therefore, it seems to me that utopia does not 
really help us to think, for thinking never goes out of the real but, on the contrary, 
penetrates deeper into the real. Utopia helps us to dream . . . 
 MM and PV: Thank you for your thought- provoking response. The challenge, it 
seems, is to think (not to dream) about the dreaming facilitated by utopia. This is 
what we are experimenting with in our collection,  Existential Utopia .  
 Our next question is the following: Utopia co- emerges with political modernity 
in the absence of fixed truths. Does this mean that utopia presupposes a certain 
political anarchy, a lack of a unified  arché ? 
 JLN: Not an anarchy but the fact that the given “ arché ”— that of the monarch or 
of God— is no longer experienced as truly certain. Utopia is the idea that another 
place should be possible in place of this place (and not as another world, a 
“paradise”). 
 MM and PV: Is there a necessary disconnect between the idea of utopia and the 
historical experiments that have attempted to implement, or, at least, to flesh out and 
concretely outline, this idea? Would you agree to preserve the paleonym “commu-
nism” for the purposes of describing what you call the utopian “communitarian state 
free from tyranny and injustice”? 
 JLN: Please, note the following. Historical “communism,” such as that of the 
USSR or of China, similarly to all the others (in Yugoslavia, for example), was not—
 or was to a very small extent— an experience that tried to “incarnate” the commu-
nist idea. There was very little movement in that direction and, instead, many 
attempts were made to create a particular type of domination and of efficiency (par-
ticularly a military one). Certainly, one can retain certain social or cultural traits of 
communism, but in a very specific sense: these traits would not be related to utopias 
but, rather, to the measures of immediate justice. 
 MM and PV: With reference to utopia, how would you characterize the intercon-
nection of the— at least— two senses of the world: the phenomenological and the 
political, the Husserlian lifeworld or the existential spatiality of Heideggerian Dasein, 
on the one hand, and the setting or scene of world politics, on the other? What would 
it mean, in each case, to define utopia as “a representation of the world”? 
 JLN: Utopias are the representations of a transformed world, according to an 
imaginary projection and have nothing to do either with the lifeworld of Husserl or 
with the spaciality of Dasein. On the contrary, it seems to me that utopian worlds are 
deprived of life and of space. They are images. 
 MM and PV: What is the place of utopia within the history of religions? Isn’t “the 
place outside all places” the name and function of monotheism, as opposed to the 

IN PLACE OF UTOPIA 13
non- monotheistic divinities, embedded in concrete— albeit mythical— locales? Is 
utopia a secularized version of monotheism? 
 JLN: Not at all. In monotheistic religions, in keeping with their deeper truth, 
everything happens here, in this world. It is here that God is present/absent. There is 
no other representation of the world and the “otherworldly” (the “paradise”) has 
nothing to do with a utopia; it is a state of grace and not a world. 
 MM and PV: How would you articulate the non- place of utopia with the sense of 
placelessness or even homelessness marking political and philosophical modernity? 
Can invocations of utopia make any significant contributions to ameliorating the 
plight of displaced and dislocated populations all over the world? Does utopia still 
refer, in the words of Ernst Bloch, to “the principle of hope”? 
 JLN: No, I don’t think so. I believe that utopia does not play an important role 
today. Our questions and our demands are here and for here, in our world and for 
our world. 
 MM and PV: You mention that, from the vantage point of the past, we live in an 
age of fulfilled utopia, which we, nonetheless, perceive to be predominantly dysto-
pian. How does this pervasive dystopian dimension of contemporary society, 
expressed in cultural productions (literature, film, etc.), fit within the framework of 
your reflections on utopia? 
 JLN: Dystopia is the difficulty of being in our place or in our places. Yes, but that 
is what makes the “world” today: it is no longer a cosmos, but a place simultaneously 
open and closed; closed to all representation of an “other world” and open in itself to 
the questioning of its meaning. 
 MM and PV: Is utopia another name for the event, given that you describe it as 
the introduction of the impossible into politics? Is democracy as the “non- given con-
junction of power and meaning” a utopian political event? 
 JLN: No, not at all. An event arrives/happens [ arrive ] and utopia does not arrive/
happen. An event presupposes, rather, a negation or a forgetting of utopia. 
 MM and PV: As you state in the end of your contribution, the promise of the 
artistic drive, and specifically of the playfulness inherent in art, supplements and 
supplants that of utopia. How would it be possible to transfer or to translate such 
artistic playfulness into political terms? 
 JLN: One cannot transpose art into politics— not at all! Art can certainly raise 
questions and concerns, as well as effect ruptures, but it does not provide patterns to 
be “transferred” or “translated.” Art is untranslatable.  
 


 CHAPTER 2 
 Utopia, Counter- Utopia, Irony 1 
 Gianni  Vattimo 
   It has been rightly noted (Verra 1004) that one of the essential characteristics of uto-
pia today is the rise and dissemination of a literary genre that has been variously 
defined as anti- utopia, dystopia or counter- utopia. And maybe this is not  one  of the 
characteristics but  the salient characteristic of utopia today, at least judging by the 
consistency with which literature and other forms of utopian art, especially cinema, 
have produced “perfectly negative” images of worlds that still keep all the “optimiz-
ing” [ “ottimizzanti” ] features of utopia, in the sense that they imagine a reality where 
traits that are mere possibilities in the present situation are actualized in all their 
extreme implications. But, instead of giving rise to a perfectly happy world, all of this 
leads to the opposite condition, namely to complete and irreparable unhappiness. In 
relation to past models of counter- utopias, for example in works such as  Gulliver’s 
Travels , the negativity of contemporary counter- utopia is more complete and radical; 
it does not assume the form of an  exemplum  that warns against the distortions and 
dangers inherent in the possible consequences of current facts and elements of the 
present. Works such as  Metropolis  directed by Fritz Lang (1926), as well as the famous 
 1984  by G. Orwell (1948; which has also been turned into a film), and, again,  Brave 
New World by Huxley (1932) that are, finally, the emblems of counter- utopia, can be 
distinguished from all the counter- utopias of the past on the basis of the radicality of 
their theses. Can one attribute this radicality to the negative experiences of the last 
100 years, namely those that took place at the level of politics, the militaristic appli-
cations of technology, as well as the failure and perversion of revolutions, such as the 
Communist one? It is well- known that all of these were decisive factors in the rise of 
counter- utopia: to be sure, the catastrophic mood of the counter- utopia of expres-
sionist cinema deeply echoed the then recent experience of the First World War, 
which had determined, perhaps for the first time and in connection to the exigencies 
of military production, a very rigid, fragmented, and alienated organization of 
industrial labor and, consequently, of social structure and discipline. Thus,  1984 by 
Orwell reflects not only the experience of European fascisms of the 30s but also, 
much more gravely, the impact of Stalinist totalitarianism on the liberal conscious-
ness of those years. 

16 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 But it would be misguided, in my opinion, to relate the dissemination of counter-
 utopia in literature and in our collective imagination to these disappointments, to 
negative experiences such as the ones we have alluded to, that, at bottom, are always 
only partial explanations. By the same token, the present, tragically justifiable fear in 
face of the threat of atomic destruction or of the planet’s ecological devastation does 
not suffice to justify the radicality with which the utopian imagination produces its 
perfectly negative models. Rather, counter- utopia makes one think of more global 
explanations, qualitatively different from those referring to specific negative and 
particularly painful experiences of humanity. What is at stake and what manifests 
itself in counter- utopia can be defined as the coming to light of the  counter- finality 
of reason  [controfinalità della ragione] or, of what Adorno and Horkheimer called, in 
different words, the dialectic of Enlightenment, in their book from 1947. It is, there-
fore, not only the case that on the basis of certain negative experiences— the two 
World Wars and the innumerable local wars where ever more sophisticated deadly 
weapons are employed; the intensive exploitation of the resources of the planet up to 
the limit of their depletion; the new and unlimited possibilities of control and disci-
plining created by technology— we realize that “progress,” especially in terms of 
technology,  can  lead to catastrophic consequences for life. Such a possibility remains 
fully within tradition: the invention of new technologies has always entailed the pos-
sibility of their perverse application, or has led to the emergence of hitherto unknown 
risks. What seems to characterize our situation is, on the contrary, something more 
general that, though it is in front of everyone’s eyes, can only be seized upon thanks 
to a special reflective effort: it is the discovery that the rationalization of the world— 
insofar as it accomplishes its designs ever more perfectly and, therefore, not by mis-
take, by accident or by casual distortion— overthrows reason and its goals of 
perfection and emancipation. 
 If true, such hypothesis retrospectively throws a different light over the history of 
utopia. For example, it leads us to recognize the close ties binding utopianism to the 
history of modern rationalism. To be sure, there have been, from Plato onwards, 
utopian experiments that do not strictly belong to the history of modern rationalism 
(although, in a broader perspective that encompasses Nietzsche and Heidegger, it is 
perfectly legitimate to also include Plato, above all, in this history). But, if we con-
sider the more specific and historically precise meaning of utopia, that of the island 
described by Thomas More in the work that coined the term in the sense that it has 
for us today, we immediately find ourselves placed within the history of modern 
rationalist thought. Thomas More and Campanella, in his  City of the Sun , represent 
a reality that is not “optimized” [ “ottimizzata” ] on the basis of images inspired by an 
immediate and naïve desire for well- being and happiness; rather, in a certain way, 
the authors  derive  the features of their ideal worlds from a rational and systematic 
acknowledgment of the human essence, of its possibilities and of its calling. What is 
in More and, above all, in Campanella, a reason founded upon the identification of 
essences that, unfolding as normative ideals, give rise to what one might call 
 metaphysical utopia, becomes in  The New Atlantis by Francis Bacon (published 

UTOPIA, COUNTER UTOPIA, IRONY 17
 posthumously in 1627) a technological utopia, which makes use of all the possibili-
ties made available to human beings by the machines known at the time. But there is 
a deep tie between these two types of utopia, namely their nature as an optimized 
reality mediated through rational planning. No one uses the term utopia to refer to 
the country of Bengodi, to an image of a happy world, as it were, retrospectively 
invoking a mythic golden age that would be at the origin of history. Strictly speaking, 
the term utopia has to do with the actualization of an optimal reality mediated 
through rational planning, be it metaphysically inspired (as in Campanella) or tech-
nologically oriented (as in Bacon). 
 Considered in this way, utopia’s ties with modern rationalism, or with what 
Heidegger defined as desire for systematization [ volontà sistematica ] prevalent in 
metaphysics, become evident. As we know, from the Heideggerian perspective, met-
aphysics is a way of thinking that considers essence as a system of objects rigorously 
interlinked through the principle of causality. This linkage of all entities through a 
foundational nexus, which in ancient metaphysics— for example and, above all, in 
Aristotle— is only seized upon at the ideal level of the mind, is really actualized in 
modernity through the work of technology that becomes, therefore, concretized 
metaphysics. Now, considered in terms of its specifically modern origins, utopia is, 
in effect, part and parcel of the desire for systematization [ volontà di sistema ] inher-
ent in metaphysics. One might consider it to be a metaphysical rationalism, or a 
Hegelianism directed to a futural dimension. It is in such a way that, for example, 
Ernst Bloch, the paramount “utopian” thinker of our time, conceives of utopia. In a 
famous book on Hegel,  2   Bloch criticizes him neither for his desire for systematiza-
tion nor for regarding the totality as the only possible truth, but, rather, for the 
anamnesis marking his thought, that is, the fact that, for Hegel, the totality, or the 
system, already appears as complete from the beginning. For Bloch, the truth is also 
the whole, or the totality, outside of which there is nothing but error and alienation. 
However, the totality does not lie behind us as something already fulfilled but is, 
instead, a utopian  telos  seized by an anticipatory consciousness. One could also 
think, along the lines of Adorno’s later and more radical formulation, that the uto-
pian totality, thus understood, cannot even be represented. A sort of prohibition 
would thus be in place— analogous to the one that, in the Old Testament, forbids the 
making of images and invoking the name of God in vain— against forming a positive 
idea regarding the contents of the utopian  telos . It is difficult to say whether such a 
radical iconoclastic conception of the utopian  telos , characteristic of Adorno, con-
forms to the Blochian perspective. But it remains to be seen whether, even in its most 
radical form, namely the one espoused by Adorno, utopia is still bound up with a 
totality that can no longer be conceived of as fulfilled. Even if only by acting as a 
critical principle that warns against all claims of historical fulfillment, the utopian 
 telos  still reveals its connection to the totality and, therefore, to the metaphysical 
desire for systematization. 
 If, following the thread of a rational argument, we then conclude that utopian 
imagination, at least in its strict sense and not in the sense of a pure and simple 

18 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
imaginary escape into a happier world, is a constitutive trait of the modern meta-
physical mentality— if this is the case, what is the meaning of the emergence of con-
temporary utopia and of its characterization, above all, as counter- utopia? With the 
discovery of the counter- finality of reason, announcing itself in the collective imagi-
nary through the affirmation of counter- utopia, one can experience and identify 
something more than singular mistakes or risks of perversion. It is the very mecha-
nism of rationalization that comes to be “suspended,” thrown into crisis, and glo-
bally placed under attack. Thus, it no longer appears to be an accident that 
counter- utopia emerges at a time when, at the level of collective consciousness, we 
notice a dissolution of the ideology of progress (a dissolution, which is also, to be 
sure, motivated by the experiences of “counter- finality” that undergird counter- 
utopia; and, besides this, progress no longer makes sense as a dogma of the philoso-
phy of history, because this history itself is no longer thinkable in terms of a linear 
and  unitary  course, unless such thinking proceeds at the price of serious ideological 
violence: one is reminded of this in the  Theses on the Philosophy of History by 
Benjamin, as well as in Bloch’s “Differentiations in the Concept of Progress”).  3 On 
the one hand, philosophy, starting with Nietzsche and, later, with Heidegger, as well 
as, at bottom, with a less “auratic” thinker, such as Adorno (with his insistence on the 
fact that everything changed, for human beings and for their thinking, “after 
Auschwitz”) understands itself as a witness to an epochal turning point in the his-
tory of humanity. And, on the other hand, the discovery of the counter- finality of 
reason, about which philosophers as different as Adorno and Heidegger are in agree-
ment, is the distinguishing mark of this epochal turn. We are no longer talking about 
the possibility that one single mechanism invented by technology, or, even, an entire 
system of machines rebels against humans, the way the  robots  do in the expressionist 
phantasy. The counter- finality of reason consists in the fact that, even when it is 
fulfilled “correctly,” according to plan, reason turns against the very goals of eman-
cipation and “humanization” that drive it. Clearly, one cannot respond to this dis-
covery by taking yet another step on the path to a more complete and authentic 
rationalization, since it is, in fact, this very mechanism that has perverted its own 
calling. In the  Dialectic of Enlightenment , Adorno and Horkheimer suggested that it 
would be possible to correct, so to speak, the perversion of reason by means of a “cri-
tique of instrumental rationality.” Indeed, reason was perverted, that is, it gave rise 
to a completely administered world, to the manipulation of consciousnesses, etc., 
because it assumed a scientific, objectifying, and calculative rationality as a model 
for rationalization. This prevalence of objectifying, calculative, and instrumental 
rationality was associated— from the Adornian point of view, which, in turn, hark-
ened back to the Weberian theses— with the imposition of a capitalist order onto 
society. One could expect, in short, that the emancipation of society from capitalism 
would, in the same stroke, point toward a vision and an exercise of reason that would 
be less calculative and less instrumental, opening the path to a different mode of 
rationalization, capable of recovering its emancipatory meaning. Still, the develop-
ments in Adorno’s thought after the work of 1947, tended more toward this 

UTOPIA, COUNTER UTOPIA, IRONY 19
 critical- negative utopianism, to which we have already alluded. Hope in the emanci-
pation of reason from its historical modern “form,” which blends social disciplining, 
repression, calculative objectification, and the technological applications of science, 
seemed to be less and less realistic, and, conversely, the utopian  telos increasingly 
appeared as something one could affirm only in negative terms. 
 Where, then, does the consciousness of the revealed counter- finality of reason, 
present ever more clearly in contemporary philosophy, lead us? And do the instances 
of utopian imagination, in their turn, give any indications about the path that 
thought should take, once we have acknowledged that the linear, progressivist mech-
anism of rationalization has gotten trapped, buried in a radical self- contradiction? 
 Concerning this last point, the cinematographic utopia of the last few decades 
provides interesting material for reflection.  Blade Runner , a famous film directed by 
Ridley Scott that came out in 1983, is universally considered to be a model for all 
those cinematographic genres, where the future, appearing under the guise of ruins, 
is created by the scenography and by the rhythm of the action (this genre had, in fact, 
already come into existence before this film, for example, in works such as  Escape 
from New York,  or in the different survival epics proliferating based on the last, 
unforgettable scene of  The Planet of the Apes ). Much more than the storyline itself, 
namely the hunt after the “replicants,” or  robots  who look like humans and rebel 
against the “expiry date” determined by those who constructed them, the strongest 
impression  Blade Runner  leaves in the viewer’s memory is the image of a city (Los 
Angeles?) that has all the architectural traits of an enormous archeological site replete 
with buildings from the twentieth century; with reason, this image has been attrib-
uted to a postmodern scenographic imagination. This scenography of ruins, featured 
more explicitly in other films, is justified by the fact that the often- banal events, 
displaying a very “traditional” violence, are imagined as taking place at a moment 
when the atomic apocalypse had already occurred. One can, thus, speak of a verita-
ble post- apocalyptic thread in contemporary cinematographic utopias. 
 There seems to be no doubt that this has to do with utopia, not only for the banal 
reason that the events take place in the future, and, especially, in a future resulting 
from the exacerbation of those elements of technological and scientific progress that 
define our present lives. Above all, it is a utopia because, paradoxically, the post- 
apocalyptic condition these works describe is a condition that is happy in its way, at 
least if we take into account the fact that the atomic catastrophe, weighing on us as 
an impending threat, is there imagined as having already happened, bringing with it 
a sort of freedom for the survivors. This sense of liberation, albeit always a paradoxi-
cal one, also hinges on a distancing from technology and its products, which is typi-
cal of the post- apocalyptic genre. Such detachment is not necessarily motivated by 
ethical and rational concerns, which would be, obviously, justifiable by the fact that 
the catastrophe, located in the past from the standpoint of the survivors, was 
produced— one imagines— with the help of those technical apparatuses that consti-
tuted the world of rationalization. The distancing from all apparatuses of technology 
that still remain, despite the fact that they work poorly, in the general situation of 

20 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
ruins, in which the apocalyptic world finds itself, is rather marked by a sense of irony, 
as in certain sequences from Woody Allen’s  Sleeper  (with the proviso that this film, 
probably, does not belong to the post- apocalyptic genre). Given all these characteris-
tics— an apocalypse that has already taken place; the ruins of the “developed” world; 
ironic- nostalgic distancing from that world, which is also, often, a distancing from 
its rhythms; along with a general slowing down of the action— the counter- utopia we 
propose to call “post- apocalyptic” approximates, in a way that is not superficial, the 
contents of the preceding utopias stripped of any “progressivist” connotations. Such 
contents are present not so much in literature and theory but in the practices of 
oppositional groups from the late 60s. The “flower children” from the Californian 
campuses were moved by their desire to lead a life that would be close to nature and 
ecologically balanced; not repressed and, concomitantly, not aggressive; and, above 
all, subtracted from the means of production through an implicit choice of “zero 
growth,” displaying attitudes that, essentially, can often be found in the post- 
apocalyptic genre. This genre represents a sort of a forced return to the “natural” 
condition, which, however, is neither a new version of the originary paradise on 
earth, nor a pure and simple return to barbarism, but, on the contrary, a return to 
nature that retains the traces of a fulfilled and finite “progress,” cultivated with 
ironic nostalgia. One could say that the atomic catastrophe, which, in this kind of 
utopia, “closed” the path of “progress” once considered to be unstoppable, is the 
condition for the development of an inventorial attitude [ atteggiamento inventariale ] 
that ends up assuming— in a confrontation with the mass of objects produced in the 
technologically advanced world— a contemplative position of the kind described by 
Schopenhauer in terms of the aesthetic contemplation of ideas. It is worth trying to 
describe the state of mind experienced in the situations with which we are faced in 
these films, because doing so is probably more revealing than many theories dealing 
with the “post- historical” condition (an expression, which, as we know, originates in 
the work of Arnold Gehlen), a condition that seems to be the hallmark of humanity 
today. In sum, the meaning of post- apocalyptic counter- utopias is that they repre-
sent an existence, which is no longer historical, though not in the sense of a return to 
a happy nature typical of certain utopian phantasies of the past. Rather, this exist-
ence is no longer historical in the sense— more rigorously attuned to the event of 
utopia in modern mentality— of representing a completion, a passage to an extreme 
condition, founded upon the absolute fulfillment of that which, for now, presents 
itself as our (only) possibility. The ironic- nostalgic inventory of the fetishes of 
progress is, perhaps, the only “utopia” that is still possible, the only future condition 
imaginable, and, to a certain extent, desirable, for humanity in late modernity, which 
has witnessed with its own eyes the fading of hope for the rationalization of the world 
and, thus, for an ever more complete  Aufklärung . The difficulty in describing this 
condition as a utopia— for example, in deciding whether we are dealing with that 
mix of predictions and voluntaristic, wishful anticipations, which utopia was in the 
past— depends entirely on the fact that we find ourselves, precisely, in a situation, 
wherein a “utopia” is delineated, for the first time, after the fulfillment of the history 

UTOPIA, COUNTER UTOPIA, IRONY 21
of metaphysics and of its desire for systematization, outside any perspective of linear, 
and, therefore, potentially progressive temporality. 
 Besides this, at the end of metaphysics and of the faith in progress, utopia cannot 
have any content other than the inventory, the nostalgia, the  revival ; and, from the 
point of view of its emotional value, this post- metaphysical situation can no longer 
appear as a “completion,” an  attainment  (corresponding, therefore, to a course of 
events, to an active tension that is then resolved) of a condition that would be desir-
able, or, in any case, final, in the teleological sense of the word. The post- historical 
human being no longer observes the course of the world with that tension of hope or 
fear, which marked a humanity dominated by an experience of linear time. From 
this point of view, we can, perhaps, draw a different lesson for the interpretation of 
post- apocalyptic utopia and for the Adornian dialectic of Enlightenment. The recov-
ery and the transformation that the notion of dialectics undergoes in Adorno until it 
turns into “negative dialectics” are not primarily determined by logical and system-
atic reasons. Dialectics, in its Hegelian form, is not abandoned because it is contra-
dictory or, in some way, conceptually unsatisfactory. The only reason for Adorno’s 
conclusion— in opposition to Hegel’s belief that “the true is the whole”— that “the 
whole is false” depends on the observation of how, in the century and a half separat-
ing us from Hegel, the whole became real and the rational totalization of the world 
was fulfilled, at least in principle. Here, once again, Adorno is closer to Heidegger 
than one might think: the total organization of the world, the preponderance of an 
instrumental rationality ever more perfected and capable of disciplining society 
without leaving any significant residues is, by definition, what Heidegger described 
as the completion of metaphysics. 
 As we have seen, Adorno still hoped that one could correct the flattening of rea-
son in its instrumental and domineering configuration and that, through a total 
transformation of society, rationalization could point toward a new destiny of eman-
cipation. More and more explicitly, this conviction gave way to his negativization of 
utopia and, at bottom, to a renunciation of any philosophy of history. However, in 
the idea that the whole is false even when it is accomplished, there is,  in nuce , a new 
philosophy of history. This philosophy of history would be defined by the replace-
ment of the linear model (of ascent or descent, in a progressive or regressive sense) 
typical of the Hebraic- Christian view of history, as well as of the cyclical model, 
which is, conversely, characteristic of the classical conception of time,  4 by a model 
that may be termed “ironic- distortive” [ ironico- distorsivo ] and that may also draw 
upon certain “nihilistic” hesitations of hermeneutics in contemporary philosophy.  5 
In other words, historical development would be neither progress, nor regression, 
nor the return of the same but an “interpretation” always, to a greater or a lesser 
extent, falsifying the assumptions and the heritage of the past. Such a model is not 
only applied, at least according to our hypothesis, to the event of the rationalization 
of society and to the unveiling of the concomitant counter- finality of reason, but it 
also seems to be more deeply rooted in all modern history, which, not by accident, 
often presents itself in the form of “secularization.” This concept, the usefulness of 

22 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
which for the possible reconstruction of a philosophy of history remains to be 
explored, 6   rather, alludes— more than to the overturning of a sacred order that is no 
longer accepted, or the abandonment of this order as a mistake, which has been now 
recognized and corrected— to a relationship of recuperation- maintenance- distortion 
[ ripresa- mantenimento- distorsione ], a relationship that is typical of the ties anchor-
ing the modern profane civilization in its Hebraic- Christian roots. From this point 
of view, an exemplary secularization is the link established by Max Weber between 
protestant ethics, or, more broadly, the Hebraic- Christian monotheism, and the 
development of Western capitalism, that is, simply, of modernity itself. In modern 
capitalism, Christian ethics is not left behind as false and useless; rather, it is “ful-
filled,” but in such a way that the first disciples of Jesus would have barely recognized 
it. Christian ethics “explains” the capitalist world, which cannot “do without it”; 
thus, it is more historically effective and, therefore, also, truer when it is no longer 
maintained as a group of precepts (and even these precepts, to what extent are they 
authentic?) that have become increasingly less “likely” because they have been frozen 
in obsolete forms, less and less applicable to life as it is. 
 In its hitherto only barely sketched form of post- apocalyptic utopia, the utopian 
imagination of the last few decades seems to have found again, beyond the discovery 
of the counter- finality of reason, a possibility, if only a paradoxical one, of projecting 
itself into the “future.” A  sui generis  future that has to be redefined in the framework 
of neither a linear nor a circular conception of history, but in that of an ironic- 
hermeneutic- distortive [ ironico- ermeneutico- distorsiva ] one, which, with the help of 
utopian imagination, philosophy and culture have just now begun to explore. 
 

 CHAPTER 3 
 From Modern Utopias to 
Contemporary Uchronia 1 
 Alexandre  Franco de Sá 
   The point of departure for the reflection we propose to undertake here is a contem-
plation of the changes that Western societies underwent in the last decades. Based on 
these changes, it is obvious that our societies are characterized by a substantial 
progress in the economic, social, scientific, and technological domains. On a social 
and economic level, for example, our liberal democracies have freed their political 
structures from a social organization that Emile Durkheim described as being based 
on “mechanical solidarities” and have, thus, progressively integrated, at least as a 
shared ideal, respect for all types of difference, culminating in the revolution brought 
about  by professional and social equality between genders. On a scientific and tech-
nological level, in medicine or neuroscience, humankind is constantly overcoming 
previous barriers in regards to the knowledge of its genetic heritage, and, in the field 
of natural science, we have been increasingly augmenting our control over nature. 
The list is extensive and does not need to be expanded upon here. However, in light 
of the abovementioned examples, which are now the order of the day, we can exam-
ine the reasons why these current developments, in their varied forms, do not make 
fertile ground for the cultivation of new utopias or for the rebirth of what could be 
called a utopian way of thinking. This is the issue at stake here. How is it possible that 
our present situation does not generate a proliferation of new utopias and a new 
political and social enthusiasm? How can we explain that the formulation of social 
and political utopias in today’s society has become inadequate and anachronistic? 
  Modern Utopia as a Possible Place 
 In order to answer the first question, the term “utopia” must be defined as precisely 
as possible. Such a definition is indispensable, when considering that today’s society 
has become oblivious to the possibility of imagining, even amidst its daily achieve-
ments, a different way of living. Here, we will refer to the term “utopia” in the 
restricted sense that emerges from its coining by Thomas More in 1516, whereby it 

24 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
implies a type of political, social, and economic organization that, although not tak-
ing  place  in society as we know it, and having not yet found a  space  (therefore, being 
u- topian) in this society, does not otherwise pose any intrinsic contradictions and is, 
in this sense, humanly possible. 
 It is as a description of a possible way of life in human terms that utopia acquires 
its distinctive character, developing the nuances that generate expectations about its 
potential as a mobilizing force. Therefore, utopia is based on a description of some-
thing that does not exist, as an exercise in imagination unrelated to the reality of 
what “is,” but, although not immediately connected to the reality of what “is,” it is, 
nonetheless, related to reality as a projection of what “should be.” It is this intrinsic 
allusion to what “should be” that inevitably binds utopia to reality: not to instantly 
verifiable reality, but to the attempt to overcome it on the basis of the advent of a new 
reality that could and should come into force. 
 Utopia’s inherent allusion to “being,” or, more precisely, to the not impossibility 
of life as described in utopian terms, is where attempts to outline utopian projects by 
means of denying and transforming existing reality originate. It is in this sense that 
Karl Mannheim, for instance, distinguishes it from the concept of ideology:
  Utopias too transcend the social situation, for they too orient conduct towards 
elements which the situation, in so far as it is realized at the time, does not con-
tain. But they are not ideologies, i.e. they are not ideologies in the measure and in 
so far as they succeed through counteractivity in transforming the existing his-
torical reality into one more in accord with their own conceptions. (176) 
 It is also in this context that Arnhelm Neusüss does not give utopia an unreal or 
chimerical meaning, but a real one, in the sense that utopia denies the reality which 
factually unravels before it: “It is not within the positive determination of what it 
wants, but in the denial of what it does not want, that the utopian intention becomes 
concrete. If reality as it is known is the denial of a possibility of something better, 
therefore utopia is the dissent to this denial” (33). 2  
 Nonetheless, although utopia is to be defined by virtue of its specific ties to 
reality— even if in the form of denial of this reality— the fact is that utopia has often 
been accused of being connected with something that should be characterized as a 
merely imaginary possibility. As a brief example, we can look at the way in which 
Eric Voegelin described utopia: as a modern phenomenon that is created by remov-
ing one of the defining characteristics of human nature. For Voegelin, if, for exam-
ple, the appropriation of nature was to be a particular characteristic of the relationship 
between man and the world, and if private property would be, as a result, an essential 
element of human nature, then utopian discourse would be the result of trying to 
imagine human nature  as if  there was to be no private property, that is  as if human 
nature was to be different from what it really is. In this way, considering man not as 
he is, but as he could be if his nature were different, Voegelin interprets utopian dis-
course as the stage prior to what he described as the modern Gnostic revolt against 

FROM MODERN UTOPIAS TO CONTEMPORARY UCHRONIA 25
the world and nature (249ff.). Considered in this perspective, utopia becomes the 
name for a social project whose very essence consists in negating reality itself. As 
John Gray put it: “A project is utopian if there are no circumstances under which it 
can be realized” (28). Doing away with utopia’s link to reality, such a discourse can-
not help but simply identify utopian thought with political or religious fanaticism. 
 Approaches to utopian thought such as the one put forth by Voegelin discard the 
intrinsic relationship between utopia and a place or a space in which it can exist, a 
dimension that is of particular interest to us. Utopian discourse does not eschew a 
link to reality: it is a description of a fictional place that is to be found within this 
very reality, a narrative form of fiction destined to highlight reality’s possibilities to 
be explored. These possibilities do not go against human nature; on the contrary, 
they originate from it. By virtue of portraying a way of living which does not yet 
exist, utopia not only describes a society which is not yet present, but above all a 
society that could come into being in a different space on earth, a space equal in 
nature to the one we currently inhabit. Far from being something impossible, it is 
from this strange place that reality itself becomes strange, revealing utopia’s poten-
tial and possibility as a changing force. As Paul Ricoeur put it: “From this ‘no place’ 
an exterior glance is cast on our reality, which suddenly looks strange, nothing more 
being taken for granted. The field of the possible is now often beyond that of the 
actual; it is a field, therefore, for alternative ways of living” (16). 
 The origin of utopia, therefore, goes back to the allusion to another place on earth 
where it would be possible to create a different way of living. Utopia is thus linked to 
a representation based on the division of the globe into separate spaces, each of them 
subject to a distinct type of law and order. In this specific sense, utopia is an essen-
tially modern theoretical construction, a product of the division of space that arose 
with Europe’s expansion overseas and, in particular, the discovery of America. It is, 
perhaps, Locke’s well- known sentence from the beginning of §49 of the  Second 
Treatise of Government—  “Thus, in the beginning, all the World was America, and 
more so than that is now” (301)— that best evokes this division: the European world, 
determined by a  nomos  belonging to the  jus publicum europaeum , now faces the open, 
anomic, and indeterminate space of America. 
 It could, therefore, be said that the modern world emerges with the  primordial 
division  of planetary space into a “here” and a “there.” Based on this division, it is 
possible to draw the boundary between the space of the Old World, ruled by  jus pub-
licum europaeum and represented by a European system of states, and a New World 
overseas, open to a new type of determination and situated on the other side of the 
frontier, beyond the limit set by law and order. Once these two distinct spaces are 
defined— the closed space of Europe and the open space of America— it is easy to 
determine a fundamental criterion of demarcation: the type of conflict or dispute 
that could occur on each side of the divide. While, in Europe, struggles were gov-
erned by the rule of law, or, in other words, war was still an engagement ruled by law, 
in the virginal space of America, that is, in the space situated beyond the territory 
governed by law, it was the opposite: any struggle was subject to the law of the 

26 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 strongest. In the words of Carl Schmitt, the author who most profoundly expressed 
the relationship between  nomos and  earth :
  At this “line,” Europe ended and the “New World” began. At any rate, European 
law, i.e., “European public law,” ended here. Consequently, so, too, did the brack-
eting of war achieved by traditional European international law, meaning that 
here the struggle for land- appropriations knew no bounds. Beyond the line was 
an “overseas” zone in which, for want of any legal limits to war, only the law of the 
stronger applied. (93–4) 
 Because of the unbearable thought of the existence of a space where lawlessness is the 
order of the day, the dividing line that separated a space determined by law and a 
space undetermined by any order, that is, the division between the “civil state” of the 
civilized world and the “state of nature” of the law of the strongest, began to disap-
pear. This dissolution started already in the sixteenth century, when Spanish theolo-
gians such as Bartolomé de las Casas and Francisco de Vitoria demanded certain 
rights for the indigenous population of America. Yet, it is only with the organization 
of the American states that the planetary division between an anomic and undeter-
mined space, on the one hand, and a space ruled by  jus publicum europaeum , on the 
other, collapsed, and was replaced by the division of the Earth into large closed 
spaces, each determined in its own right. The most significant indicator of this state 
of affairs is perhaps the United States of America’s proclamation of the Monroe 
Doctrine of 1823, determining the American continent as a large republican, demo-
cratic space, to be shielded from any intervention that would emanate from Europe, 
united, in its turn, by the Holy Alliance. The division of the globe into the North 
American capitalist and Soviet socialist spheres of influence in the second half of the 
twentieth century, following the Second World War, represents the continuation of 
this division of the globe into large closed spaces. 
 In response to this division there were attempts to unify planetary space, a “glo-
balization” not necessarily achieved through the creation of an “open world,” but, 
rather, through the emergence of a unipolar world in which the single superpower 
defined the frontiers of forbidden or protected spaces on the basis of unilateral crite-
ria. It is in light of the unification of space as a globalized territory, exposed to the 
universal intervention of the single superpower, that an initial explanation for the 
crisis of utopian thinking in today’s society could be put forth. It has been said that, 
as of the sixteenth century, utopia consisted in the representation of human possi-
bilities that, although not accomplished in the European space, could (or even 
should) either be found in the New World or, at least, be tried out in this initially 
anomic and undetermined space. Therefore, utopia describes a state of affairs that is 
possible in human terms and not a fictional impossibility that would ascribe to 
humanity something it clearly is not. If utopias emerged in modern times from the 
separation between the spaces of the New World and the Old World, and if they 
depended on the existence of an anomic space where utopian experiments could be 

FROM MODERN UTOPIAS TO CONTEMPORARY UCHRONIA 27
projected, then the crisis in modern utopian thinking could be explained, at first 
glance, by the emergence of a globalized planetary space and the implicit disappear-
ance of old spatial divisions.  
 Modern Utopia as the Representation of a “New Time” 
 An important factor to consider when reflecting upon the current crisis in utopian 
thinking is, indeed, the thought of a world, the space of which is entirely unified and 
interconnected, following the disappearance of all boundaries. Nonetheless, this 
point must be cross- referenced with another assumption that cannot be overlooked 
in the context of the present reflection, namely the idea that, throughout the course 
of the unification of modern planetary space, utopian thinking does not disappear, 
but rather changes, in a very particular way. The reason why utopian thinking con-
tinues even after the vanishing of the separation between spaces, is that, in the rep-
resentation of utopia as a possibility, we are dealing not only with a spatial dimension 
but also with a crucial temporal dimension, according to which utopia is projected 
into the future. 
 Utopia is, therefore, seen as the representation of a society that could find its 
own special location in the future, thus becoming an idea that could guide the 
construction of a world yet to be realized. Based on the line delimitating two 
places, dividing the world as we know it and the world as it could be, another 
frontier is erected, this time between two eras: a line separating time as we have 
known it until now and time which breaks away from it and develops beyond it. 
In other words: utopia emerges through the allusion to a space without a place, a 
space that is nonetheless possible and whose existence does not essentially contra-
dict nature, and it does so by placing this space in the future. If the reference to 
space gives utopian thinking its essential link to reality, the dimension of time 
lends utopia its central meaning: the possible transformation of the future of 
humanity. In this way, far from being the description of a fantasy or the formula-
tion of mere wishful thinking, utopia is defined by a decisive connection to effec-
tive reality: not to reality as a given fact, but to a reality to be constructed and 
reinforced factually on the basis of an anticipated future opened up by utopian 
thought itself. 
 Yet, the anticipation of a future mediated by the lens of utopian thinking is always 
a dangerous game to play. One can succumb to the temptation of not only opening 
up the future, by anticipating it, but also of determining the past, transforming it 
into a history whose meaning is to be found only in the realization of the utopian 
experiment. In this case, utopia becomes synonymous with alienating ideology in 
which— using the well- known expression from George Orwell’s  Nineteen Eighty- 
Four—  the present controls the past so that, in turn, it can control the future. The 
identification of an ideological danger within utopian thinking lies at the core of the 
observations concerning utopia formulated by Hans Freyer. This author argues that 
the closed systems described in utopian thinking already anticipate the end point 

28 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
where all history should culminate, and present themselves as a final state of being 
which would render any future impossible. In this context, referring to the utopian 
way of thinking, Freyer observes: “Any historical route ought and has to lead to uto-
pia. Yet no historical route . . .  should lead outside and beyond it. Utopia must remain 
a- historical. Therefore, it defends itself  against history , and this fight will be lost” 
(38). 
 Considering utopia as an ideological description of the end point at which history 
should culminate means manipulating history and, therefore, disrespecting the past. 
Hannah Arendt evokes the consequences of the said manipulation when she refers to 
the loss of the utopian ability to anticipate the future, the ability “to begin something 
new,” this loss being the inevitable result of the transformation of factual historical 
truths into constructions that hold weight and bear future relevance only in the 
hands of propaganda. As Arendt put it:
  If the past and present are treated as parts of the future— that is, changed back 
into their former state of potentiality— the political realm is deprived not only of 
its main stabilizing force but of the starting point from which to change, to begin 
something new. What then begins is the constant shifting and shuffling in utter 
sterility which are characteristic of many new nations that had the bad luck to be 
born in an age of propaganda. (258) 
 Yet, in spite of the dangers inherent in anticipating the future through the lens of 
utopia, which can lead to a reduction of the past to the status of a mere potentiality 
of the future, it can be said that the opening of a future, its actual liberation and 
inauguration by a utopia that searches for a new place, cannot help but remain one of 
the crucial elements defining utopian thinking. Therefore, it is this intrinsic refer-
ence to a possible reality that makes utopian thinking, in its summoning of a future 
yet to be disclosed, irreducible to a simple ideological manipulation of history, whose 
temptation is an ever- present possibility. This irreducibility signals the presence of 
another inalienable possibility in utopian thinking, the possibility that, far from rep-
resenting the inevitable conclusion to the course of history, utopia anticipates an 
open and yet to be determined future that encourages the emergence of hope. 
 Ernst Bloch discussed the link between utopia and the “principle of hope” and 
elaborated on the connection between utopia and reality as an essential element of 
what he described as the “utopian function.” Such function attributes to utopias a 
double denial. On the one hand, as has been previously mentioned, utopias are not 
the mere expression of a wish removed from reality; rather, they are reality itself 
taking the shape of a project and presented in the form of its anticipation. For 
Bloch, therefore, a utopia devoid of all links to factual reality would be deficient 
and immature. As he expresses it: “Pure wishful thinking has discredited utopias 
for centuries, both in pragmatic political terms and in all other expressions of what 
is desirable; just as if every utopia were an abstract one. And undoubtedly the uto-
pian function is only immaturely present in abstract utopianizing [. . .]” 

FROM MODERN UTOPIAS TO CONTEMPORARY UCHRONIA 29
( The Principle,  1986b, 145). On the other hand, in Bloch’s view, just because utopia 
is linked to reality it does not mean that it should be hindered in its openness to 
what is new by a realism that lowers its expectations. Bloch adds, in continuation 
to the above:
 But what is important is the fact that the hope- charged imaginative glance of the 
utopian function is not corrected from a worm’s- eye view, but solely by the real 
elements in the anticipation itself. That is, from the perspective of that solely real 
realism which only is so because it is fully attuned to the tendency of what is actu-
ally real, to the objectively real possibility to which this tendency is assigned, and 
consequently to the properties of reality which are themselves utopian, i.e. con-
tain future. ( The Principle , 1986b, 145) 
 In this way, far from positing itself against reality, utopia represents the anticipatory 
vision of a future reality, not by describing the final conclusion of a history that it has 
manipulated but by calling upon humans, through the medium of hope, to build this 
new reality by themselves. By virtue of projecting the future as the coming of a new 
era, utopia finds its own time to be a time divided into what has happened until now, 
on the one side, and the opening of a new time, on the other. It could be said that, if 
the space of utopia can be found by drawing a boundary between the Old and New 
World, then the time of utopia is based on the drawing of a division, where a new 
history breaks away from history as we know it. 
 It is when facing the link between utopia and a radically new era, which must be cre-
ated as the future of human history, that is a time whose advent, in the most extreme 
case, relegates all history until now to the status of mere prehistory of humanity— to use 
Marx’s words— that the question concerning the deficit in utopian thinking in today’s 
society acquires a more precise configuration. It can be translated into the question as 
to why there is an incapacity to anticipate the future. In other words: the question of 
why, despite all social, scientific, and technological developments, we, today, are incapa-
ble of thinking in an utopian manner, implies questioning our ability to think about the 
passage of time, in particular with reference to the future. For what reason is it no longer 
possible to distinguish and divide between what has happened until now (the German 
 das Bisherige ) and the advent of something effectively new? Why, under the current 
circumstances, do we not widen our perspective so as to include the representation of a 
new future, which is precisely what characterizes the utopian way of thinking? 
 In order briefly to map out an answer as to why the prospect of opening up to a 
new era represented in utopian terms seems impossible today, we will evoke three 
different issues. The first point will take into consideration the way in which present-
 day societies— the democratic liberal Western societies in which we live— represent 
themselves in such a way so as to exclude the possibility of projecting a different 
future. A second point will consider the political experience brought about by this 
self- representation of society, such that it becomes understandable that its political 
structures are based precisely on this kind of representation. Finally, the third 

30 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 argumentative thread will analyze the relationship between this society and the 
experience of time underlying it. 
 Modern Utopia Without Location: Contemporary Uchronia 
 As to the first point, we would argue that contemporary liberal democratic societies 
close themselves off to the future since they believe they represent the end point in 
history after the collapse of the Soviet Union, as Francis Fukuyama argued in  The 
End of History and the Last Man , following Alexandre Kojève. This is done by pre-
senting history as a simple, unilateral, and progressive trajectory, at the expense of 
sacrificing many of its “factual truths.” Modern societies have gone through a his-
torical process of progressively conquering freedom, autonomy, and emancipation, a 
process that now seems to have come to an end. For this reason, history— the long 
fight to overcome natural obstacles that stand in the way of human desire— is con-
sidered as being at its end. This end point is represented, above all, by the reconcilia-
tion between humanity and nature, or by what Kojève, in his readings of Hegel, has 
described as the animalization of man. It is in this sense that, on the subject of the 
end of human history, Kojève says:
  The disappearance of Man at the end of History, therefore, [. . .] is not a biological 
catastrophe: Man remains alive as an animal in  harmony  with nature or given 
Being. What disappears is Man properly so- called— that is, Action negating the 
given, and Error, or in general, the Subject  opposed  to the Object. In point of fact, 
the end of human Time or History— that is, the definitive annihilation of Man 
properly so- called or of the free and historical individual— means quite simply 
the cessation of Action in the full sense of the term. Practically, this means: the 
disappearance of war and bloody revolutions. (158)   
 The reconciliation between man and nature and the arrival of man at a post- historical 
state, therefore, corresponds to the most complex reversal of the world’s utopian 
experience. If utopia was the equivalent of the opening to a new time, where history 
as it had occurred until now contrasted with history as it could be, one of the most 
important bases for social experience within our contemporary societies resides in 
the representation of both a fulfilled history and of a future that indefinitely extends 
an achievement that has been already reached. 
 A brief outline of human experience at the entry point into a post- historical life, 
and the conciliation of man with nature— the “animalization” of man— can be given 
here. Its first defining characteristic consists in what has been seen as the loss of 
human capacity for being oneself, a phenomenon that has frequently been regarded 
as the result of man’s immersion in mass culture. This loss is still best explained in 
the pages of  Being and Time , where Heidegger analyzes the inauthenticity of man’s 
escape from himself and his becoming an impersonal “self”: “In utilizing public 
means of transport and in making use of information services such as the  newspaper, 

FROM MODERN UTOPIAS TO CONTEMPORARY UCHRONIA 31
every Other is like the next. [. . .] We take pleasure and enjoy ourselves as  they [ man ] 
take pleasure; we read, see, and judge about literature and art as  they  see and judge; 
likewise we shrink back from the ‘great mass’ as  they  shrink back; we find ‘shocking’ 
what  they find shocking” ( Being and Time , 1996, 164). Heidegger’s  analysis of man’s 
conversion into something other than himself, into a mere version of the “they,” the 
analysis of his conversion into a mere “impersonal self” that thinks what is generally 
thought, that wants what is generally wanted, that says what is generally said and 
feels what is generally felt, is relevant today, in that it is not limited to criticizing mass 
culture, or to a political criticism of the loss of individuality within totalitarian phe-
nomena, but highlights the characteristics of human life in a post- historical 
condition. 
 The painless conversion of humans into a simple “they” leads to a second funda-
mental trait in the emergence of post- historical humanity. The human being who 
becomes an animal in harmony with nature, and who represents, in his singularity, an 
empty “self,” mainly comes into being by joining a public sphere, wherein she or he 
speaks, thinks, wants, and feels. If modern liberal democracy was the result of an effort 
to achieve human emancipation and of mankind’s endeavor to become more and more 
enlightened and educated by taking part in a political society guided by free and critical 
thought, then the post- historical status of this very democracy is based, precisely, on 
reversing the order in this relationship. Thought is now shaped as propaganda, which 
determines the opinions, wishes, and feelings of human beings. As Edward Bernays 
wrote in 1928, in the opening of his  Propaganda : “The conscious and intelligent manip-
ulation of the organized habits and opinions of the masses is an important element in 
democratic society. Those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of society constitute 
an invisible government which is the true ruling power of our country.” (37) 
 This painless experiencing of the world, where there is no place for conflicts and 
discord, where being oneself becomes identical with being what everyone is, or with 
feeling and talking as everyone feels and talks within the public sphere by increas-
ingly avoiding the expressing of indelicate feelings or politically incorrect talk, points 
to a third fundamental trait of post- historical man, a trait that one could describe as 
increasing infantilization. It could be said that in the fundamental experience of 
post- historical humanity all that is wished for must come true, and must do so with-
out any cost. We are dealing with the transformation of man into a child, whose 
instantly fulfilled wishes prevent him from representing himself as a temporal entity 
that must mature and develop. In this way, if contemporary liberal democratic socie-
ties represent themselves as being at the end point in history, the human beings who 
inhabit them are characterized not by the need of becoming or by the effort to 
develop, but by the simple desire to vindicate an “immediate authenticity,” pursuing 
their desire to be, here and now, everything they want to be. As Pascal Bruckner puts 
it, in his description of contemporary man’s experiences as an infantilized being:
  I do not “become” any more, I am all that I must be at every moment, I can stand by 
my emotions, desires, and fantasies, without second thought. Whereas freedom is 

32 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
the faculty of breaking free from determinisms I, on the contrary, intend to wed 
them. I will not erect any barrier to my appetites, I do not have to build myself any 
more— that is, I do not have to introduce any distance between me and me; I have 
only to follow my inclinations, to become one with myself. (112–13)   
 As to the second point, the representation of our contemporary societies as situated at 
an end point in history ties in with the organization of their political structure. These 
societies emerge as the inheritors of a modern tradition based on the rejection of abso-
lutist power. In this sense, they are in concord with Montesquieu’s famous claim that 
power had to be limited by power itself, holding the separation of powers as the main 
source of political legitimacy. The three essential powers that make up the state in 
Montesquieu’s view— the legislative, executive, and judicial— were both separate and 
convergent as a unit. It is based on the unity within this divergence that a reference to 
a temporal dimension underlying the three powers can be made. In the practice of 
judicial power one would look to the past for law and jurisprudence references. The 
executive power, concentrating on the present, would rapidly adopt measures fit for 
current circumstances. In its turn, the scope of the legislative power, in the discus-
sions undertaken during the process of legislating, would look into the future, a future 
whose profile could be imagined and prepared in the course of deliberations. 
 Having in mind the temporal articulation between the three powers in question, 
it is possible to say that our liberal contemporary democracies are characterized by 
an acceleration of time, in which social, technological, and economic changes occur 
at such a rapid pace that the process of anticipating them and of thinking in terms of 
the future is impossible. This is why parliaments and assemblies, that is, the political 
structures whose function should be precisely that of deliberating and thinking pro-
spectively, lose their original role of anticipating the future, while the very principle 
of the separation of powers fades away through a slow transference of legislative 
power to the decrees issued by the executive. As William Scheuerman wrote, account-
ing for this change:
  What classical writers failed to foresee is that social acceleration potentially 
undermines core features of the temporal separation of powers, disfiguring lib-
eral democracy as initially conceived. In particular, social acceleration presents a 
direct threat to the notion of prospective, or future- oriented, legislation, tending 
to undermine the paramount position of legislative rule making in the traditional 
liberal democratic temporal division of labor. [. . .] Nonetheless, the most likely 
beneficiary of recent shifts in the temporal horizons of human activity is the uni-
tary executive, whose contemporaneous and high- speed temporal contours 
appear to leave it especially well suited to decision making in a corresponding 
high- speed social environment. (45) 
 The concentration of power in the executive, which has been defined by Clinton 
Rossiter as “constitutional dictatorship,” and the relegation of parliaments to the 

FROM MODERN UTOPIAS TO CONTEMPORARY UCHRONIA 33
function of mere auxiliary agents of governments, in which real thinking, argumen-
tation, and persuasion become more and more rare, makes for the political organiza-
tion of a society whose fundamental characteristic resides in the impossibility of 
opening up to the future. 
 As a result of positioning themselves at the final stage of the development of 
political institutions, our societies view the future as an indefinite continuation of 
what they already are. They establish themselves in a time outside of time, a time 
without time, which we could, thus, define as “uchronic.” If the concept of opening 
up to a future has found in the utopian ideal the most immediate way of expressing 
itself within modern thought, the impossibility of thinking in a utopian manner 
shows that our contemporary societies are postmodern in a very particular sense, in 
that their defining characteristic is the absence of the future. It is on the basis of this 
removal of the future, on the basis of what could be called a uchronic reaction against 
any type of utopia, that the experience of time in the societies we live in can be 
defined. 
 On the one hand, these societies, by virtue of some sort of utopian nostalgia, 
cultivate feelings of enthusiasm toward the “other,” toward what is different and new, 
with an openness that is more “autophobic” than “heterophile” in nature, that is, an 
openness that expresses not so much a tendency for an approximation to the “other,” 
to what is different and strange, but, rather, emerges from a desire to become distant 
from one’s own “self.” This is why, in contemporary societies, the paradigm of the 
intolerable resides in xenophobia, an attitude found at the opposite end of the spec-
trum from what could be designated as a tendency for “autophobic ecophobia,” that 
is, the current disposition to free man from a representation of substantial identities 
and prejudices by placing him in a sort of selfless existence. “Political correctness” 
originates here, and does not necessarily entail openness toward the other or to what 
is different. Rather, it is based upon a simulation of this openness that tries to elimi-
nate difference by means of erasing the disparities between “oneself” and the “other” 
or between what is the same and what is different. The erasure of all differences— 
described by Plato in the  Republic  as the essential meaning of democracy (562d–
562e)— is, therefore, the fundamental experience at the foundation of contemporary 
societies, reducing what is different to an indifferent sameness (already portrayed in 
the Platonic text), including the abolition of differences between those who are gov-
erned and their governors, between citizens and foreigners, between masculine and 
feminine, between teacher and pupil, knowledge and ignorance, competence and 
incompetence, or even the move away from a clear difference between men and ani-
mals. 3   In all the specific differences mentioned, it is the fundamental differentiation 
between the “self” and the “other” that underlies the very possibility of difference. It 
is, therefore, the fundamental indeterminacy of sameness and otherness that defines 
the way time is experienced in our societies: time as opening up to a future that 
would not be, after all, different from the present. For our societies, it is no longer a 
question of inaugurating a different future, but, instead, of simulating this opening. 
This simulation legitimates contemporary societies by making them inherit the 

34 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
legacy of modernity through permanently invoking the “other” or the otherness of 
what is to come, yet making this “other” vanish into sameness. 
 On the other hand, if in contemporary societies the act of calling upon the other-
ness of the future becomes a mere expression of centrifugal dynamism, then that 
which is still to come ( l’avenir ) is reduced to a simple promise banished outside factual 
time. At the core, the experience of time in contemporaneity can be analyzed as a 
uchronic reconfiguration of the future as seen through the lens of modern utopias. 
Jacques Derrida’s concept of a “democracy to come” ( democratie à venir ) could be 
considered as the most expressive portrayal of experiencing time in uchronic terms in 
contemporary thought. This allusion to a “democracy to come” appears, for example, 
in  The Politics of Friendship : “For democracy remains to come, this is its essence inso-
far as it remains: not only will it remain indefinitely perfectible, hence always insuf-
ficient and future, but, belonging to the time of the promise, it will always remain, in 
each of its future times, to come: even when there is democracy, it never exists, it is 
never present, it remains the theme of a non- presentable concept” (306). It is here, in 
evoking a simple promise situated in a time which constantly subtracts itself from 
time, that contemporary uchronia finds its strength and its weakness, through, simul-
taneously, simulating and denying modern utopia. In its decentralization from itself 
and its fusion with the “other,” in the permanent allusion to something upcoming yet 
always subtracted, contemporary societies seem to belong, at first glance, to the per-
petual movement of the uninterrupted opening up to a future that, far from being 
shaped through a normative idea or an ideal, remains always unfinished and perfect-
ible, that is im- possible.  4   Yet, since such a future can neither be corrupted by its reali-
zation, since this future cannot be made present but remains an essentially 
indeterminate promise, nor can it entail a description of a real place or a time to 
come— the contemporary equivalent of modern utopias— contemporary uchronia, 
the evocation of a time which evades time itself, ends up as the mere intellectual echo 
of the removal of the future. In this sense, in the same way in which utopia is a con-
struction of the modern world, the emergence of contemporary uchronia, which 
encompasses a nostalgic celebration of its utopian past, is, in today’s terms, nothing 
more than an intellectual construction removed from the life experiences within soci-
eties notorious for the persistence of their  status quo .  
 

 CHAPTER 4 
 Existential Utopia: Of the World, 
the Possible, the Finite 1 
 Michael  Marder and Patrícia Vieira 
   If the plurivocal utopian aspirations resounding throughout history in different 
corners of the earth could be distilled into one slogan, this uncanny chorus of voices 
would announce, “Another world is possible!” From a profound sense of dissatis-
faction with the present, this battle cry draws the energy to outline a new sociopo-
litical configuration in a performative gesture that strives to bring into existence 
the very future order it inaugurates in speech. But the utopian fervor, ignited by a 
righteous urgency, does not leave enough time for reflecting upon the meaning of 
the performative and, instead, prompts its adherents to adopt the prefabricated 
interpretation of these words imposed by the same hegemonic ideology it aims to 
overthrow; herein lies the tragedy of many utopian experiments of the past. To 
restore to utopia its radical edge, it behooves us to dispense with the certainties 
inherent in the consensually accepted meaning of “Another world is possible!” 
questioning not only its overall sense but also every single word comprising this 
expression. 
 On the one hand, with a view to reassuring its supporters, imparting to them a 
feeling of hope, and gathering them around a common cause, the utopian slogan 
strategically presents the “other” world, the world to come, as undoubtedly better 
and more desirable than the “old” world. The formalism of “Another world is pos-
sible!” however, does not substantiate this implicit assertion, for the future it prom-
ises— if qualitatively different from the present— is always unpredictable and fraught 
with risk that dwells in all open- ended possibilities. On the other hand, the apoca-
lyptic overtones of the phrase proclaiming the end of  this  world and the advent of the 
next one, based on the shaky foundations of a belief that the present can be reduced 
to a  tabula rasa,  upon which the infinitely malleable future will be inscribed, harbors 
extreme idealism: the utopian projection becomes a mere figment of collective imag-
ination unless it takes materiality and resistance to idealization into account. In 
order to avoid the double trap of formalism and idealism, while retaining the uto-
pian impulse, we put forth the notion of existential utopia that acknowledges, and 
even embraces, the risks of alternative futures; that replaces the empty form of 

36 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 utopian hope with the figure of existence; and that recovers the material underside 
of utopian projections, even as it spells out their limitations. 
 The outlines of existential utopia will only come into a sharper focus when each 
of the words making up “Another world is possible!” is submitted to close scrutiny. 
Revisiting utopian thought today entails registering the obvious theologico- 
philosophical connotations of “world,” “possibility,” and “otherness”— terms that 
are also crucial to phenomenology and existentialism— not only for the purpose of 
excavating the various semantic layers of the slogan but also for reorienting it back 
toward existence, wherein it has originated. First,  the  world, commonly understood 
as a unified structure inhabited by multiple individuals, is a concept presupposed 
by objectivist science, which reduces divergences in perspective to different points 
of entry into a reality, ultimately monolithic and the same  in itself . Globalization, 
starting with the economic integration of world markets, and scientific rationality 
with its growing monopoly on thinking are the mutually reinforcing aspects of a 
single metaphysical outlook that raises the notion of  one  world to the status of a 
regulative ideal for lived actuality. But, as phenomenology shows, a plurality of 
worlds is intrinsic to the concept of the “world,” understood as a web of significa-
tions irreducible to an objectively true and, hence, unitary structure of meaning. 
The event of utopia would, on this view, be defined by a break in the coherent 
semantic network, a productive sense of worldlessness, or being in- between, that 
could give rise to a new framework of meaning— meaningless within the old coor-
dinates of signification but carrying with it the possibility of rupture and delineat-
ing a path to a new world. 
 Second, phenomenology and existentialism reject both an erroneous identifica-
tion of possibility with something merely imagined, lacking any bearings upon actu-
ality, and the quasi- Aristotelian approach that takes it to be synonymous with 
potentiality awaiting its inevitable realization. Rather, possibilities form the fabric of 
human existence, guiding our projects and actions in the world without standing for 
 teloi  to be fulfilled. In the context of existential utopia, they ought to be nurtured  as 
possibilities, not converted into blueprints for the realization of a predefined politi-
cal project. Uncoupled from a teleological worldview and the logic of productivity, 
possibility would not be annihilated by historical failures inherent in an existential 
modality of utopia. 
 Third, in the mirror of a utopia that tears the continuum of the present, the sub-
ject sees herself as alien to herself, incapable of making sense both of the new world 
unraveling before her eyes and of her own place in it. This subjection to “otherness,” 
tied to the finitude of sense and of the world, highlights the frailty of meanings, that, 
rather than transcendental or transhistorical givens, are transitory existential frag-
ments that arise and pass away in temporal immanence. If existential utopia is to 
heed the call of the Other, summoning us to our responsibility, it would need to 
come to terms with such finitude as its own enabling condition and, instead of insist-
ing on the immutability of the project it enunciates, accept diverse possibilities, 
including those that do not coincide with its own vision for the future. 

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 37
 Between This World and Another: An Ex- Topic Overture 
 A crucial insight of phenomenology is that the world is not set over and against the 
subject in a primordial confrontation and, therefore, is not an object to be appre-
hended and potentially dominated through the imposition of rigid forms onto 
unruly matter, leading to a technical subjugation of the natural environment or of 
other human beings, but is, rather, a milieu, wherein the I is  a priori  immersed. This 
conception reflects one of the four senses of the world put forth in Martin Heidegger’s 
 Being and Time , namely the world as  Umwelt , or environment, which is the practical 
scene of Dasein’s (the German philosopher’s word for a human being) being- in- the- 
world. What is common to this and the remaining three aspects of the world— “the 
totality of things,” the modes of being of this totality as ready- to- hand or present- at-
 hand, and the worldhood of the world that coincides with Dasein itself— is that they 
refer, in various ways, to a web of meanings constitutive of the being of Dasein ( Being 
and Time,  1962, 93). In this period of Heidegger’s work, the predominant question is 
one concerning the meaning of Being, and the philosopher’s forever provisional 
response is, in a nutshell, that the meaning of Being is meaning itself as it appears 
before Dasein in lived actuality.  2   Yet, if being- in- the- world entails being posited 
within a network of significations, this does not imply that Dasein is the source of all 
meaning, in the way that a subject or consciousness, in idealism, determines the 
entirety of its object. Instead, Dasein is “thrown” into the world, passively carried 
into the midst of significations that precede it, all the while attempting to take over 
this thrownness and make it its own in a movement of projection that completes its 
temporal- ontological constitution. 
 A decade after the composition of  Being and Time , in a lecture course titled  The 
Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics , Heidegger emphasized the projective charac-
ter of Dasein, which he had already sketched before, in terms of its world- forming 
capacity, distinguishing it from inanimate beings and even animals (177). Within 
the framework of the earlier text, this world- forming capacity is tantamount to 
Dasein’s active ability to explicate the meanings that comprise its world as well as, 
more radically, to reinterpret and re- signify its thrownness. Hermeneutical activity 
should not be confined to a superficial and merely theoretical exercise that leaves 
unchanged the underlying architectonics of the world, since the latter,  qua  a set of 
meanings, is drastically transformed with every new interpretation and act of 
 re- signification. In this light, Marx’s Thesis XI on Feuerbach ought to be reformu-
lated to express the co- imbrication of interpretation and change, so that to interpret 
the world would already be to change it. Such insight is consistent with Heidegger’s 
criticism directed, at the same time, against the traditional distinction between the-
ory and practice that has culminated in Husserlian theoreticism and against the 
technicalization of theory and thought itself, enslaved to the exigencies of making 
(“Letter on Humanism,” 218). To the extent that it appropriates and re- signifies the 
world of meanings, thinking or theory is eminently practical and, therefore, is one of 
the linchpins of Dasein’s world- forming capacity. 

38 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 Existential utopia is, precisely, this theoretical practice, re- signifying the life-
world of a community and enabling the formation of a new world, that is to say, 
facilitating the emergence of a new set of shared semantic coordinates. But under 
what conditions is re- signification possible? What are the sites of rupture in the 
otherwise hermetically sealed totality of meanings, in which Dasein finds itself? In 
 Being and Time  parallel fissures are depicted in the two main divisions of the book: 
the first break occurs in the conglomeration of usable things ( Zeuge ), when a piece 
of equipment fails to function as it should, while the second takes place when 
Dasein faces the ineluctability of its death, causing all other practical concerns to 
fade into the background. In both cases, Dasein reacts with shock to the deficien-
cies in the totality of its world, such that its sense of astonishment causes the dis-
placement of what used to be familiar not to mention a total breakdown of 
previously established meanings. Thus, re- signification becomes possible where 
something loses its secure, preassigned place in the totality of significations, trig-
gering a sense of meaninglessness and confusion that clear the space for the emer-
gence of new meanings. Existential utopia begins, then, with the experience of 
displacement and dislocation, the realization that the world one inhabits is imper-
fect, or, in the words of Novalis, that “Die Welt ist der  Inbegriff  des unvollkom-
menen Lebens” [“The world is the  essence of an imperfect life”] (72). It commences 
in an  ex- topia, where parts of reality turn out to be no longer at hand, unusable, 
estranged, so that the whole world becomes uncanny, and where Dasein’s whole 
being is shaken by the anticipation of its death, which brings it outside of itself in 
an intimate and ecstatic relation to its future. 
 The private ex- topia of Dasein is directly translatable into a ground- shift in the 
political  topos , precipitated by the sense of injustice, a presentiment that the world is 
out of order and that time is out of joint. As Derrida put it in a tacit reference to 
Heidegger, “Everything, beginning with time, seems out of kilter, unjust, dis- 
adjusted. The world is going very badly, it wears as it grows [. . .]” ( Specters,  77–8). To 
make the world just and to set it aright it is not enough to make local adjustments in 
the network of meaning, while maintaining its overall structure intact; the dawning 
awareness of multiple localized wrongs, corresponding to the breaks in the totality 
of significations, is a catalyst for a replacement of the entire system of meaning. More 
precisely, the subjects thus politicized come to understand that the “dis- adjustments,” 
similar to the ruptures described by Heidegger, are not sheer accidental occurrences 
in an otherwise smoothly functioning totality, but are constitutive of the political 
and economic organization, dependent upon these very injustices. The ensuing dis-
appointment, deemed by Simon Critchley to be the common beginning of philoso-
phy and politics (2), is born from this massive loss of confidence in the world that 
marks a moment of crisis. If to be in the world is to rely upon the support of our sur-
roundings and, politically, to trust in the basic fairness and minimal advantageous-
ness of the sociopolitical arrangement in which we take part, then our 
being- in- the- world is shaken to its core when the world is revealed to be neither sup-
portive nor trustworthy. 

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 39
 An analogous “limit experience” is narrated by Jean Améry, who pinpoints the 
most lasting consequence of torture, resulting from the “first blow” inflicted upon 
the victim, as the total loss of confidence in the world and in the benevolence of oth-
ers, a trust which can never be regained (40). The victims of torture and of political-
 economic injustice are expelled from the world, or, better yet, the world as a 
meaningful set of significations is withdrawn from them, inscribing the idea that it 
“is going very badly” right on their bodies. Devoid of the mediations of mundane 
concerns and put face- to- face with death, which, aside from intimating a certain 
worldlessness, is perceived as the utmost injustice, they embody an ex- topic exist-
ence, are placeless and reduced to the status of worldless things, according to 
Heidegger’s classification in  The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics (177). 3 
Elsewhere, Heidegger considers such homelessness to be the negative condition of 
modern humanity  par excellence , an evidence for the forgetting of Being, which is an 
offshoot of an instrumental approach to the world: “Homelessness is coming to be 
the destiny of the world. [. . .] [T]he estrangement of man has its roots in the home-
lessness of modern man” (“Letter on Humanism,” 243). Ex- topic uprooting, never-
theless, does not end in the impasse of alienation but effects a denaturalization of 
uncritically accepted meanings surrounding Dasein in everyday life, and this loss of 
home and world— the fact that they have become unusable and uninhabitable— is an 
occasion to problematize and reinvent them. In contrast to Heidegger’s position, it 
could be argued that the state of homelessness, the absolute evacuation of the world, 
leaves in its trail Being in its mereness, to which Dasein is abandoned, vulnerable to 
every injustice, exposed to its impending death, and, as a result, prompted to rede-
fine the very meaning of “home.”  4   The predicament of homelessness, the ex- topic 
“ground zero” of modernity is, then, the  sine qua non  for any positive formulations 
of utopia anchored in finite human existence. 
 In the depths of a crisis, be it purely political or economic, a community arrives 
at the ex- topic “ground zero,” when its entire world is put on the verge of collapse. 
Even when it comes as a surprise, the crisis is a phenomenalization, making evident 
the already existing disadjustments in the  res publica  that can no longer be circum-
scribed or obfuscated. Yet, what follows the exacerbation of the constitutive injus-
tices fissuring the world does not necessarily include a complete systemic overhaul 
that would amount to a utopic displacement of the “old” world; on the contrary, a 
slew of minor changes are frequently introduced in an attempt to salvage and keep 
essentially unchanged the existing web of significations, even if, on the long run, 
these patchwork modifications generate greater injustices. A paradigmatic ex- topic 
situation unfolded in U.S. politics at the height of the latest economic crisis, when, in 
September 2008, the Congress rejected the bailout package endorsed by the White 
House, due to a vociferous opposition to a measure that meant an increase in eco-
nomic inequalities and an unprecedented allocation of public funds to banks and 
large private companies. When the Congress reconvened some days later, it approved 
the bailout bill with minor changes, succumbing to the pressure of conservative 
lobby groups and of the most emblematic figures of the political establishment. On a 

40 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
deeper level, however, the congressional decision was motivated by the fear that, in 
case of an economic collapse, the existing framework of meaning would suffer an 
irreversible blow, heralding what Heidegger called “world- withdrawal” and “world- 
decay” (“Origin of the Work of Art,” 166). The loss of trust in the quasi- miraculous 
capacity of capitalism to renew itself put the system as a whole into question but 
failed, in this case, to guide the displacement to its utopian climax, in a recodifica-
tion of the meaning of the economy as an activity that, in the last instance, should be 
pursued for the benefit of the community. Once again, the communist specter was 
conjured as a scarecrow to frighten the public away from real alternatives to the sta-
tus quo. 
 Ex- topic dislocation is a temporary suspension of this world, with all its rules 
and semantic- ontological formations, that propels the subject into a gap  between 
worlds , where utopia may finally be thought: a rupture that is spatial but also tem-
poral, separating the bygone world from the one yet to come. This in- between 
region, where old meanings are no longer valid, while new ones have not yet been 
found, is not accessible from the standpoint of ontological experience, lacks phe-
nomenal clarity, and withholds the possibility of naming (hence, of determining 
and mastering beings) from the ex- topic subject. To submit oneself to the terrifying 
namelessness, to unlearn the old set of meanings and names, is already to be on the 
path to a utopic reconfiguration of the world: “But if man is to find his way once 
again into the nearness of Being he must first learn to exist in the nameless” 
(Heidegger, “Letter on Humanism,” 223). The “nearness of Being” is Heidegger’s 
designation of utopia, the promise of a new name that, instead of replicating the old 
semantic power- structures of the world, would keep its existential- utopian com-
mitment to a name without mastery, retaining a modicum of namelessness. Far 
from a dialectical synthesis of the name and its other, the survival of the nameless 
in a web of meaning signals a capacity for deformalization, in other words, a fluidity 
of semantic- ontological complexes and their readiness to dissolve as soon as they 
have been brought into existence in the new world shaped by the utopian impulse. 5 
Both methodologically and ontologically, deformalization is predicated upon an 
exercise of power without domination— an aspiration inherent in all utopian 
thought— that embraces its own precariousness and opens itself to the possibility of 
its own undoing. 
 In accepting its fragility, existential utopia avows its temporal character, leaving 
behind the illusion that it would be able to transcend history and to lay claim to an 
immutable idea of justice. In this sense, utopia is neither limited to this- worldly 
immanence nor bound to an other- worldly transcendence; it discloses the temporal-
ity and the finitude of the world, as much as of the “truth” that is born and that dies 
with every new set of meanings. Its post- metaphysical thrust consists in a dethroning 
of the objectivist notion of eternal truth, so that the guiding thread for political 
praxis is not a normative ideal, against which the imperfect world would be meas-
ured, but an appeal to justice, which contends with the unbearable senselessness of 
hegemonic meanings, proliferating in the current world dis- order.  

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 41
 Reality’s Fantasy: A Utopian Ontology of the Possible 
 Ex- topic meaninglessness, freed from the signifying framework of the bygone world, 
holds in store two mutually exclusive possibilities: the dead- end of utter resignation, 
nihilism, and the foreclosure of all meaning- making, or the utopian promise of the 
emergence of a new world. Including in equal measure the possible and the impos-
sible, such meaninglessness is the source of existential utopia and the prototype of 
possibility itself, which, if it is to avoid being reduced to a predetermined plan await-
ing actualization, must be coupled with impossibility, with what resists the logic of 
fulfillment. Resignation and nihilism are the side effects of one’s abandonment to 
impossibility, while existential utopia envisions the possibility of a new meaning, 
which is not safeguarded against the risk of sliding back into meaninglessness. 
Attuned to impossibility even in the midst of exploring the horizons of the possible, 
existential utopia inherits from ex- topia the capacity of deformalization, precisely 
because possibility  as  possibility would be betrayed if it were to solidify into a preor-
dained course of action. It follows that the distinction drawn by Fredric Jameson in 
 Archaeologies of the Future  between the idealized utopian impulse and a more con-
crete utopian program is not applicable to a utopia that has eschewed the Aristotelian 
emphasis on the actualization of potentialities in favor of possibilities comprising 
the nuclei of human existence (1–9). Its impulse, deformalizing all programmatic 
overtures, renders existential utopia self- deconstructive: plastic and agile thanks to 
its accedence to self- disruption. 
 Possibility, the self- deconstructive element of existential utopia, is subtracted 
from the continuum of potentiality and actuality, where the present is the point of 
reference for the past, as well as for the future, transformed, under its sway, into past-
 present and future- present. As the purely futural modality of time, possibility does 
not coincide with a point of the Now that has not yet arrived, that is to say, it is not 
exhausted by the Aristotelian conception of the future formulated in  Physics  (Bk. IV, 
Chs. 10–14). Specifically, it parts ways with Aristotle’s understanding of the future, 
insulated from that which is unpredictable and unexpected, because this future- Now 
is a potentiality on the brink of actualization, a fixed essence whose self- presence is 
only temporarily deferred on a predestined route toward its fulfillment. A closer look 
at the Greek words for potentiality ( dunamis ) and actuality ( energeia ), converted by 
Aristotle into rigorous philosophical terms, demonstrates that the latter is truer to 
utopian possibility than the former, in that  energeia , which literally meant “putting-
 to- work” in a perpetual reactivation of an essence, defies formalization by com-
mencing every time anew and, thus, constituting a recurrent starting point for 
human action. Existential utopia is, precisely, this  energeia , a putting of possibilities 
to work, without postulating an underlying essence and without any guarantees for 
a successful outcome; it is the energy and capacity for a fresh start that still remains 
after everything has been actualized. Unlike a utopia beholden to essentialism (that 
is, an  essential utopia ), the one wedded to the concerns of existence does not foretell 
a happy resolution of the human drama at the end of history, when all potentialities 

42 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
have fully blossomed, given that it subscribes to a view of the human as a crossroads 
of volatile possibilities. 
 In his thought, Heidegger revised the relation between the Aristotelian categories 
of potentiality and actuality, as well as their conceptual connection to Being. In 
doing so, he launched an overarching critique of post- Aristotelian philosophy that, 
from Scholasticism to the late nineteenth century, saw in actuality nothing more 
than the seat of full presence (and, hence, of objective Being), having erased the con-
notations of  energeia  as “putting- to- work” and having turned this process into a 
finished product of essence’s self- actualization. In order to revitalize that lost sense 
of  energeia , a loss that exacerbated Aristotle’s demotion of potentiality to a deficient 
mode of Being, Heidegger’s version of phenomenology ascribes Being, in the existen-
tial sense, to possibilities, privileged over the continuum of potentiality- actuality 
and standing “higher than actuality” ( Being and Time , 1962, 63). Correlatively, 
Heideggerian phenomenology avoids molding existence after a meta- physical ideal 
of essence cast in terms of pure presence: “Concealed in its [Western thinking’s] 
essential provenance, the differentiation of  essentia  (essentiality) and  existentia 
(actuality) completely dominates the destiny of Western history and of all history 
determined by Europe” (“Letter on Humanism,” 232). An existential approach to 
existence, advocated by Heidegger, distances itself from the traditional determina-
tion of existence by essence and, instead, distills human essence from that existence, 
which takes place in a constant tension between past and future possibilities, config-
uring Dasein in terms of a “thrown projection.” Such re- elaboration of existence 
requires a hermeneutics of possibility that would tease out the tacit connotations of 
this term: the German words for the “possible” and “possibility,” “ möglich ” and 
“ Möglichkeit ,” respectively, are etymologically associated with “liking” and “ena-
bling” (“Letter on Humanism,” 220). While to like or to favor something is, for 
Heidegger, to let it be in the unfolding of possibilities proper to it, to enable is to 
allow these possibilities to be put to work and, so, to retrieve the sense of  energeia in 
Aristotelian philosophy, occluded by the subsequent history of metaphysics. 
According to this double etymology, then the activation of possibilities is possible 
thanks to an underlying receptivity that precedes and displaces the beginning of any 
work, utopian or otherwise. 
 Existential possibility diverges from potentiality, also, insofar as it is not a mat-
ter of potency or power, the ability to bring into effect one’s sovereign will. Such 
differentiation is applicable even to instances of the autonomous subject interrupt-
ing itself, as it were, and choosing its own impotence. It is by underlining the nega-
tive and disruptive aspects of potentiality, the “potentiality to not be” ( Potentialities, 
183), that Giorgio Agamben endeavors to redeem this Aristotelian term. On 
Agamben’s reading, potentiality hinges upon the proclamation “I cannot,” or 
Bartleby’s “I prefer not to,” and is, therefore, a decision  not  to exercise one’s power 
or capacity, a withholding that distinguishes humans as such. What this formula-
tion leaves out, however, is the existential condition of possibility for the possibil-
ity of action, the infra- potential favoring and enabling that necessarily precede any 

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 43
“I can” and “I cannot.” In the terms of Levinas’s  Totality and Infinity , any potential 
capacity of the subject is invested by the Other, who is the precondition for my 
being able to be able, since the Other is the heteronomous origin of my autonomy, 
as much as of my subjectivity (198). This first assent to otherness, before any 
explicit affirmation or negation of the power of the I, is the unchosen and unpre-
dictable grounding of existence and of the very possibility of the future. Existential 
utopia, oriented toward possibilities, is a liking and an enabling of (indeed, an 
opening unto) a future that would be eventful— not predicated on a choice between 
potentiality and impotentiality still tethered to the hegemonic framework of 
signification— and that would impel the construction of new worlds in response to 
the appeal of others, those victim to injustice, who prompt the search for a new 
structure of meaningfulness. The victims of injustice are the embodied conditions 
of possibility for existential utopia, which always carries with it the possibility of 
failure, as it aims to respond to the call of the Other, the heterogeneous source of 
the utopian project. 
 The most prevalent criticism of utopia faults it for being an instance of wishful 
thinking, in that it fails to acknowledge the constraints of reality and, reduced to an 
unviable dream in the world of  Realpolitik ,  a priori  invites failure. There is, how-
ever, no contradiction between the real, reinterpreted in an existential key as a point 
of intersection of various possibilities, and utopian aspirations that make explicit 
the possibilities comprising reality itself. That, in its temporal unfolding, reality is 
nothing but a conglomerate of possibilities has been observed by Novalis, who 
stated: “Alle  Wirklichkeit  hat ein Vor und ein Nach— beides sind Möglichkeiten— 
Nach  ist  Möglichk[eit]. Vor war Möglichkeit. In ihr ist aber alles zugleich” (“All 
 reality  has a before and an after— both are possibilities— After  is  a possibility. 
Before was a possibility. In it [in reality], everything, therefore, exists simultane-
ously”) (16). Consequently, numerous possibilities, precisely because they are not 
identical with potentialities awaiting actualization, will fail, that is, they will not 
come to pass and will not be thrust into the light of the present and of presence. In 
the Aristotelian logic governing the continuum of the potential and the actual, fail-
ure is inscribed as a lacuna in the teleological ordering of the world, a lack to be 
filled by perfecting human knowledge of the immutable hierarchy of ends. From an 
existential point of view, however, failure is not equated to negativity, given that it 
betokens the non- actualization of possibilities, which does not preclude their effi-
caciousness in the existential reality of Dasein.  6   If, following Novalis, reality is the 
aggregate of temporal possibilities, then some of these will surface at the expense of 
others in a dynamic aleatory process, devoid of prior determinations, that weaves 
the fabric of history. What is commonly regarded as failure is the underside of the 
historical fabric, where marginalized possibilities, rejected on the grounds of being 
unrealistic at a given sociopolitical conjuncture, have been eclipsed. Utopia shifts 
the spotlight onto these sidelined possibilities and fleshes out the existential core of 
history that, as Jameson has it, “progresses by failure rather than by success” 
( Postmodernism, 209). 

44 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 In the post- Aristotelian paradigm, history strives toward a  telos  to be fulfilled in 
accordance with the logic of actualization, while failure stands for a merely tempo-
rary setback on this path. But a consideration of history from the standpoint of exist-
ence discloses that failure is an integral part of its becoming, where historical 
experiments reconfiguring the world in radically new ways lead to unpredictable 
outcomes. The recent controversies surrounding the fate of the Euro and, by exten-
sion, of the European Union, aptly illustrate the divergence between these competing 
models for interpreting history, as well as their implications for the thinking of 
utopia.  
 On the one hand, at the ideological level, the philosophy of history underlying the 
utopia of European integration has drawn heavily on the Kantian teleology of perpet-
ual peace, postulating the absence of conflict between members of the European com-
munity as a measure for the successful actualization of this ideal. Although, from its 
inception, the European Union has been, in the first place, designed as an economic 
association, the ideology buttressing it has downplayed the economic underpinnings 
of “cooperation” and “peace”— ideals, predicated, at the origins of political economy, 
on free trade that would contribute to the augmentation of the wealth of nations. The 
utopian project of the EU is, accordingly, presented as primarily political and as rooted 
in a common cultural heritage that, presumably, gave birth to the idea of a shared 
European destiny. The ideological account of the European telos explains failures— 
such as, most notably, the Second World War— in terms of a temporary blindness 
plaguing some actors on the European political stage, and preventing a complete reali-
zation of the Kantian ideal, which should continue to shepherd the efforts at “conflict 
resolution.” In light of this ideological construction, the current crisis in the Euro zone, 
provoked by the global economic downturn and intensified by the danger that some 
members of the EU would default on their sovereign national debts, represents the 
failure of peripheral countries, most of them located in the South, to conform to the 
call of the common European destiny and to live up to the Spirit— of Protestantism, 
capitalism, and Hegelian idealism— born in the center of the continent. The actualiza-
tion of the Spirit’s potentialities demands that the particular, that is, the poorer nation-
 states of Europe, be sacrificed to the will of the core countries that wears the mask of 
universality; unless such sacrifices are performed, thus filling the lacunae (or the fail-
ures) in the teleological project, the deviant countries are to be immolated on the altar 
of History, thereby paving the way for the nations that remain true to the European 
ideal to achieve its fulfillment. As it is the case in Hegel’s dialectics, the self- sacrifice of 
the PIGS— a racialized and animalistic abbreviation referring to Portugal, Italy, Greece, 
and Spain— would allow them to get back into the human fold, molded in the image of 
the frugal and, at the same time, more prosperous North. 
 On the other hand, an existential perspective on failure suggests that crises, like 
the one unfolding in the Euro zone, expose the fault- lines around which the entity in 
crisis is organized, namely the profound economic inequalities not only among 
European countries, but also within each EU member state. The failure—exacer-
bated by the economic slump—to approximate the ideals of peace and prosperity for 

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 45
all is, in this case, an occasion for voicing and redressing the dormant utopian 
demands for social and economic justice, rendered all the more urgent in this pre-
dicament. Following the precepts of existential utopia, Europe is neither an ideal to 
be actualized, nor a placeholder for a preexisting collective identity, but a set of pos-
sibilities underwritten by the appeal of the sacrificial victims of economic “progress.” 
If it is to heed the call for justice, Europe will need at least to entertain the possibility 
of a radical transformation, at the end of which it might no longer recognize itself. 
The utopian Europe, stripped of a fixed identity, would bear its name as a promise of 
justice, uncoupled from all demands for the actualization of an essence, whether his-
torical or transhistorical. 
 The possibility of failure, ensconced in the task of reimagining the European 
project, is part and parcel of utopian imagination as such: “It is the failure of imagi-
nation that is important, and not its achievement, since in any case all representa-
tions fail and it is always impossible to imagine” (Jameson,  Postmodernism , 209). 
Considering that existential utopia is a performative that endeavors to give rise to 
what it announces and, therefore, does not have in view an ideal against which its 
truth claims could be assessed, the vocabulary of failure may not be entirely appro-
priate for discussing its outcomes. No longer following the compass of objective 
truth, utopian thought inaugurates a space of freedom for imagining reality other-
wise and, thus, matches the vocation of philosophy itself: “[. . .] philosophy is an art, 
striving to break through a logical chain of conclusions and carrying man into the 
shoreless sea of fantasy, of the fantastic, where everything is equally possible and 
impossible” (Shestov 40, our translation). Shestov’s philosophy searches for alterna-
tives to the narrow prescriptions of formal logic and assigns to fantasy the role of 
exploding the prevalent webs of signification that set the ontological and epistemo-
logical parameters for existence, thus avoiding the constraints and exigencies of 
conclusions: “He [human being] starts to look for darkness since darkness gives 
freedom, in that, in darkness, the ruling principle is not logic, forcing one to reach 
conclusions, but fantasy, with its arbitrariness [ proizvol ]” (Shestov 118, our transla-
tion). Contravening the logical principle of noncontradiction, the Russian thinker 
holds the possible and the impossible to be simultaneously valid, emphasizing, once 
again, the inherence of failure in all acts of imagination. Fantasy, usually reduced to 
an ephemeral adornment of or, worse yet, an escape route from a harsh reality, is, in 
existential terms, the mainstay of this very reality, to the extent that it displaces the 
petrified contents of the present and enlivens it with possibility. Like the existence 
it always accompanies, fantasy, devoid of closure, explodes rigid identities and 
neatly drawn conclusions, freeing utopia from the calculative rationality of means 
and ends. 
 Husserlian phenomenology takes a first step in identifying fantasy with the founda-
tion of social reality, since it is fantasy that permits the phenomenologist to reach the 
eidetic core of the practices shaping society. So much so that, in  Ideas I , Husserl bestowed 
upon “feigning” (“ Fiktion ”) the honor of serving as “ the vital element of phenomenology ” 
and as “the source from which the cognition of ‘eternal truths’ is fed” (160). Such 

46 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
“truths,” deriving from fantasy, are the main targets of eidetic phenomenology, which 
discloses the pure essences built into phenomena themselves:
  The Eidos, the  pure essence , can be exemplified for intuition in experiential data 
[. . .] but it can equally well be exemplified in  data of mere phantasy . Accordingly, 
to seize upon an essence itself [. . .] we can start [. . .]  from intuitions which are 
non- experiencing, which do not seize upon factual existence but which are instead 
“merely imaginative” .  If we produce in free phantasy  [. . .]  social practices , [. . .]  we 
can see various pure essences originarily and perhaps even adequately:  [. . .]  the 
essence of  [. . .]  any  social practice  whatever  [. . .]. [F]ree phantasy should lead to 
the imagination of data [. . .] of an essentially novel sort [. . .] that would in no 
respect alter the originary givenness of the corresponding essences. ( Ideas,  11)   
 A free variation of the data of mere fantasy destroys the illusion of necessity that 
chains us to things as they appear in the present and prevents us from envisioning a 
different order of reality. Outside the grip of factual existence restricted to the present, 
when the weight of the perceptual world is lifted and empirical details shed their mask 
of immutability, alternative social practices no longer seem impossible, in that both 
feasible and unrealistic (from the standpoint of the intuitional present) examples of 
sociality become equal partners in the task of outlining the essence of social practices. 
In the spirit of the Scholastic  quodlibet ens , or “whatever being,” “ any  social practice 
 whatever ” fuses freedom and universality by vacating its object of all determinations 
and eventually becoming an indifferent receptacle for any sociopolitical arrangement. 
Politically, the receptivity of eidetic fantasy, with its rejection of necessity and its exer-
cise of free variation, announces the utopian  kairos  and espouses unlimited possibili-
ties otherwise suppressed in hegemonic reality. Despite paying utmost attention to 
lived experience and the minutiae of the data it yields, however, Husserl remained 
entrapped in an essentialist position (beholden to “pure essences”) that precluded an 
existential treatment of fantasy. If, inspired by phenomenology, the production of 
social practices in free fantasy is to live up to utopian demands, it must trace its prov-
enance back to human finitude and precariousness, supplementing Husserl’s philo-
sophical breakthrough with a thinking steeped in the vicissitudes of existence.  
  Finitude Without End: From Death to the Other on 
the Way to Utopia 
 Among existential possibilities, the possibility of death occupies a special place, 
since, after the decline of the theo- onto- metaphysical model of human beings 
endowed with an immortal soul, unsurpassable finitude became the hallmark of the 
human condition. Post- metaphysical philosophy examines the ramifications of fini-
tude not only in its multifaceted thematizations of death but also by focusing on the 
vulnerability of the human body and the material conditions for its survival, 
 symbiotically entwined with the ethical and political implications of a finite human 

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 47
ontology. As a result, existential utopia needs to grapple with the constitutive 
 finitude of its subjects, as much as with the limits of it own political project. 
 Heidegger’s writings of the 1920s were part of an effort to overcome traditional 
metaphysics, demonstrating that, for Dasein, the meaning of Being is finite time. As 
he states in  Being and Time :
  Death is a possibility- of- Being which Dasein itself has to take over in every case. 
[. . .] When it stands before itself in this way [in facing death], all its relations to 
any other Dasein have been undone. [. . .] Death is the possibility of the absolute 
impossibility of Dasein. Thus death reveals itself as that  possibility which is one’s 
ownmost, which is non- relational, and which is not to be outstripped [ unüberhol-
bare ]. As such, death is something  distinctively  impending. (1962, 294)   
 The possibility of death ruptures the world of Dasein, permitting it not only to ques-
tion its own Being, thanks to a disruption of its being- in- the- world (i.e., of its heed-
less immersion in the network of significations from which it generates meaning), 
but also, placed in an ex- topic position, to reconfigure the world from the existential 
standpoint of being- toward- death. If Dasein “has to take over” the possibility of its 
death, then, according to Heidegger, every human should be able to undergo a loss of 
meaning ensuing from the collapse of her “old” world and, thus, be existentially 
prepared for the task of utopia. In everyday life, however, Dasein evades the unset-
tling confrontation with the futurity of its death and, instead, submerged in the 
world of mundane concerns, anesthetizes itself to the thought of its finitude and, 
consequently, forecloses the possibility of utopia. Driven by the fear that their indi-
viduality would be dissolved in the impersonality of death, human beings shore up 
the old, reassuring webs of signification, but, in doing so, they undergo a deeper loss 
of self, since they do not seize upon the possibility of death, which, for Dasein, is  the 
individuating factor. 
 The fear of utopia— the affective dimension of anti- utopianism— is attributable, 
like the terror in the face of death, to the looming threat of depersonalization. In this 
regard, Jameson observes that “the existential fear of Utopia” is raised by “the pos-
sibility of a loss of self so complete that the surviving consciousness cannot but seem 
an other to ourselves, new- born in the worst sense, in which we have lost even that 
private unhappiness, that boredom and existential misery (‘je mein eigenes,’ as 
Heidegger might say), which constituted our identity in the first place” ( Archaeologies , 
191). No matter how oppressive existence may be, human beings cling to the shreds 
of their Being, since they dread losing whatever little they have, first and foremost 
what they take to be their “identity.” This fear, instilled in the subjects by the hegem-
onic ideology, ensures the maintenance of the status quo and precludes the possibili-
ties of utopia. Those who “have nothing to lose but their chains” are conditioned by 
ideology to be affectively invested in the source of their unfreedom and to derive 
their identity, indeed their very Being, from this identification. The fear of a “com-
plete loss of self” is, therefore, the common root of the evasion of death and of the 

48 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
aversion to utopia, even though both are possibilities that cannot be superseded 
( unüberholt ). 
 While it is hard to dispute Heidegger’s characterization of death in terms of a 
possibility that cannot be outstripped, his qualification of it as “one’s ownmost” and 
“non- relational” lends itself to intense criticism, especially because being- toward- 
death and, by implication, utopia, are inconceivable without a call emanating from 
the Other. For Heidegger, Dasein derives its authenticity from a temporal relation to 
its futural self, which is experienced as Other: Dasein’s ownmost core, for which 
conscience furnishes phenomenological evidence, is formed when it faces death and 
is put on the verge of an absolute dispossession. But Heidegger’s claims of authentic-
ity and non- relationality in the face of death are undermined if, in the footsteps of 
Levinas, one takes their premises to the extreme. The thrust of Levinas’s philosophy 
may be interpreted along the lines of such a radicalization, insofar as it substitutes for 
the self- othering of Dasein the “wholly Other,” another human being to whose call 
the I responds and for whom it dies. Being- toward- death becomes meaningful only 
when it is shown to be, at bottom, a dying for the Other that reaffirms, rather than 
negates, the ethical bond; that makes the concern for one’s own existence irrelevant; 
and that exceeds the scope of personal authenticity in deriving meaning from alter-
ity. It is in this context that Levinas’s formulations in “Dying For . . .” should be read: 
“The humanness of dying for the other would be the very meaning of love in its 
responsibility for one’s fellowman [. . .]. The call to holiness preceding the concern 
for existing, for being- there and being- in the- world [is]  utopian , a dis- interestedness 
more profound than [a concern with] ‘one’s things’ and vested interest” (216, empha-
sis added). 
 Existential utopia is as heteronomous as one’s relation to death, since it responds 
to the appeal of the victimized Other, taking into account, above all, the finitude of 
the human condition. It does not claim to be authentic— an immutable, transcen-
dental blueprint for the best conceivable mode of organization applicable to all future 
societies; on the contrary, it avows its historicity and transience, establishing itself on 
the same plane of fragility and finitude as human beings. Whereas many traditional 
utopias evince a desire either to defer or to suspend death altogether, to the point of 
wishing to prevent or reverse ageing, erasing the imprints time leaves on the body 
(cryonics and stem cell injections for the purpose of tissue rejuvenation are just two 
examples of this utopian ambition), a utopia grounded in our ephemeral existence 
and, consequently, exposed at every moment to the possibility of death, is convoked 
by the responsibility to ameliorate the conditions of precarious life, precisely because 
life, in its constitutive relation to death,  is  precariousness. As opposed to strands of 
utopian thinking that are amnesiac of death, finite existential utopia is entwined 
with ethics, in keeping with Levinas’s implicit reference to the ethical relation as a 
“no- place prior to the  there  of  being- there , prior to the  Da  of the Dasein, prior to that 
place in the sun that Pascal feared was ‘the prototype and beginning of the usurpa-
tion of the whole world’ ” (“Dying For . . . ,” 216). The “no- place,” synonymous with 
what Levinas, in  Otherwise than Being,  calls the “null- site,” is a common 

OF THE WORLD, THE POSSIBLE, THE FINITE 49
denominator of ethics and utopia, which are excluded from the space of sameness 
not only because they are entirely beholden to the eventfulness of time, first 
announced in the encounter with the Other, but also because they steer clear of the 
“usurpation of the world,” the imperialistic ascription of an objective meaning to 
reality. The ethical relation of the I to the Other and the political project of utopia are 
here shown to be the mutually complementary places of what has no place in the cur-
rent world order, which they put into question, bracket, or reduce from the stand-
point of human finitude. 7 
 For utopia to preserve its elemental bond to ethics, it needs to ventriloquize the 
suppressed voices emanating from the victims of past injustices, to keep the memory 
of previous utopian aspirations alive, and to nourish its own impulse from the pro-
ductive failures that always accompany the radical politics of “re- making the world.” 
 Utopian hope without memory is senseless; utopian memory bereft of hope is empty — in 
this double assertion the finite temporality of Dasein, which Heidegger construed as 
“thrown projection,” gets transcribed into the future of the past, that is, the memory 
of hope shaping a community of those who, throughout history, have raised the 
demand for justice. In utopian memory, past possibilities are cherished and allowed 
to survive as possibilities, outside the closed circuit of potentiality- actuality, so that 
utopia would entail, in a certain sense, a work of mourning  8   or, better yet, the melan-
cholic incorporation of these possibilities into the horizons of its future. Inspiring an 
ethically responsible utopia that refuses to betray unfulfilled promises, the melan-
cholic accounting for losses in the ongoing struggle for justice prevents utopian 
action from lapsing into a “euphoric suspension of the self,” a private “illusion of 
bliss,” a pleasure devoid of responsibility, akin to that of the Lotus- eaters in the 
Homeric  Odyssey  (Adorno and Horkheimer 26, 49). Utopia’s finitude is palpable in 
the way it retains the unhealing scars of past traumas on its collective body, even as 
it nurtures future possibilities without crumbling under the weight of history. 
Spurning the language of power and an attitude of domination that dictate the neces-
sity of mustering these possibilities into a coherent and rigid formation, existential 
utopia turns itself into a channel, a medium, or a passageway for the unforeseeable 
event of justice. 
 


 CHAPTER 5 
 Still /  Encore 
 Márcia  Cavalcante- Schuback 
   The question is about existential utopia. It is about the place of utopia in existence, 
not about the existence or inexistence of the place or places of utopia. But how do we 
draw the lines of this place in existence? The first figure of  utopia  was drawn by 
Ambrosius Holbein and printed in the original edition of Thomas More’s famous 
work. In this figure, utopia is an island and, as such, it lies within the open space of 
an ocean. As an island, it is a place that limits the open sea. The figure in the book is 
followed by the alphabet of utopia, where letters are transcribed as symbols, forming 
utopia’s symbolic language. In Holbein’s figure, the island of utopia is a place in the 
ocean, a place that is seen by talking men. It is not seen by an observer who contem-
plates distances, but by men talking to one another about this place, pointing at it, 
and moving their gazes toward it through words. In this figure, utopia is a place of 
words and, therefore, only a promised place. It is a place of the words inscribed in 
human existence, words promising good places and good words for the sake of exist-
ence. Discussions about whether the place of utopia exists or not, whether it can exist 
or not, whether it should exist or not, forget, for the most part, the way utopia can be 
 seen  as utopia. It is seen as utopia from the place of a certain word, the telling word, 
the word in which places are displaced and displacements take place. Utopia, the 
limiting place drawn within the open sea that connects different earthly places, is a 
language within language, a word within the word. This place within the place, lan-
guage within language, word within the word is a non- place, a non-language, a non-
word— utopia— not necessarily in the sense that it would be the negation of all 
places, languages, and words, that is, the negation of worldly existence. It is not nec-
essarily in this sense that it would be the contrary of places, languages, and words, an 
affirmation of existence out of and beyond the world. It is rather a displacing place, 
the tensional place of language and the word, within language and the word, where 
ends and beginnings coincide, where language and the word are pronounced at the 
edge of existence. In this sense, utopia, this placeless place within the place, this lack 
of language within language, this absence of the word within the word, appears when 
human existence is exposed to the concurrence of end and beginning, of the once- 
upon- a- time and the time of the only- once. 

52 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 Understood by way of the word, where it can be seen as such, utopia is not neces-
sarily a future or a possibility never to come that could disable the living forces of the 
present or enable the present to emancipate itself from the dead forms of the past. As 
worded, the time of utopia is indeed neither past nor future. It is coincidental, tran-
sitional, and gerundive: the time of a turn where the after- the- end and the before- 
the- beginning meet each other. It is the time of “existing” rather than of existence. 
Heidegger called the time of existence “ecstatic,” underlining the way the already 
having been is still becoming and the still to come is already enduring. “Ecstatic 
temporality” names how the end and the beginning coincide in existence. 
Considering, however, that existence, in Heidegger’s account, is nothing but a 
“between,” 1   the ecstatic temporality of this between appears as  meanwhile , in which 
the having been  delays  and the yet to come  advances , revealing an end that does not 
end which coincides with a beginning that does not begin. This coincidence of an 
after death and a before birth exposes the gerundive character of existence, existence 
as existing, and its ecstatic structure. The time-place of utopia in existence is defined 
by a delaying past and an advancing future. It is a coincidence that takes place, 
indeed, every day, and, thus, the day is the place and time where after the end and 
before the beginning meet. But there is also a day that exposes this daily coincidence 
in a very clear phenomenological and existential sense. This day is Ash Wednesday, 
the day of an end that does not end and a beginning that does not begin: the utopia 
of a day. 
 Ash Wednesday is the first day of Lent, the period that leads to Easter, to resur-
rection, to the chance of being born again from ashes. It inaugurates a time of 
purification through penitence and lack; a time of regression where almost noth-
ing is allowed. Being a “day” it is, however, not only the first day, the day of what 
comes after, but, at the same time, the last day, the day of what came before. Ash 
Wednesday is the last day of Carnival, the feasting period of abundance preceding 
the Lent to come. It then also names this day: a time of transgression when almost 
everything is allowed. Thus, what has been is still there and what hasn’t been is 
already there. In some languages, such as Portuguese and Greek, Ash Wednesday 
is also called the fourth day, recalling the fourth day in which God created the sun 
and the moon, following the biblical narrative: the day in which the coming about 
of the world and the absence of the world coincided. “Ash Wednesday” is likewise 
a long poem by T. S. Eliot that names the utopian place of a poem, the place of a 
word within the word, where that which is after the word coincides with that which 
is before the word. 
 “Ash Wednesday” is a long poem composed of six poems.  2   The first one begins 
with the verses: 
 Because I do not hope to turn again 
 Because I do not hope 
 Because I do not hope to turn 

STILL / ENCORE 53
 Desiring this man’s gift and that man’s scope 
 I no longer strive to strive towards such things 
 (Why should the aged eagle stretch its wings?) 
 Why should I mourn 
 The vanished power of the usual reign? 
 [. . .] 
 The last poem begins with similar verses: 
 Although I do not hope to turn again 
 Although I do not hope 
 Although I do not hope to turn 
 [. . .] 
 In its form, the whole poem is constructed as a series of echoes and variations. Verses 
from the beginning echo throughout the whole poem and, in this echoing, new verses 
sound and resound. There is no progression or development of thought, but only endur-
ing echoes of the having been said, in which the lost word is delayed, and the word to 
come advances and goes ahead. The form of the poem is the poem and, therefore, “Ash 
Wednesday” is a poem of the “wavering between” the first and the last day, “the profit 
and the loss”; it is a poem of the “dream- crossed twilight between birth and dying,” of 
“the time of tension between dying and birth.” “Wavering between,” “brief transit,” 
“dream- crossed twilight,” “time of tension” are all names for a certain place, the certain 
place of a day. Almost at the end, this place of a day is called “the place of solitude where 
three dreams cross between blue rocks.” This wavering and brief place, the place of a 
day, the place of solitude, is “always and only place.” It is nothing else and nothing more 
than the twilight crossed by three dreams. What are these three dreams? 
 Listening to the last part of the poem, we hear about the “yew- tree” shaking away 
voices, the oldest sacred tree of transformation and rebirth. The proximity of the 
sounds of “three” and “tree” makes us think about the proximity between the three 
crossing dreams and the oldest yew- tree, the elusiveness of dreams and the longevity 
of roots. Here, the crossing and the staying are connected in order to describe the 
place of solitude in a day, the place where what disappeared is still there and what is 
still there disappears. In the place of a day where “wavering between” occurs, the 
past, as what has disappeared without return, the present, as what never remains, 
and the future, as what is still to come, intersect with one another. The still- here is 
already- there; the already- here is still- there, interlacing reality with non- reality, 
being with nonbeing. Past, present, and future cross one another in the day. They are 
the three crossing dreams between blue rocks, and, in their dream- crossed twilight, 
emerges the place of solitude and the solitude of a place— a strange non- place in 
existence, the place of utopia. 

54 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 When past, present, and future appear as crossing dreams, when the “time of 
tension between dying and birth” appears as the “always and only place” of exist-
ence, what happens to existence? More specifically, what happens to the human 
meanings of existence, always betraying ways or modes of this existence? When the 
place of existence is experienced as the place of the day’s solitude, where the “three 
dreams” of past, present, and future cross the “blue rocks,” human existence discov-
ers itself as “the years that walk between,” as “one who moves in the time between 
sleep and waking,” as a gerundive between; it discovers itself as existing. After a cer-
tain experience of the day’s solitude, human existence appears as the place of soli-
tude, and the human appears as the one who is this place, this “time of tension 
between dying and birth.” Such is the experience of Ash Wednesday, the last day of 
abundance and the first day of loss, the place where abundance and lack coincide, 
where the ashes of death and the oil of birth mix. 
 In the fourth poem, “this” Ash Wednesday experience is described as  
 The token of the word unheard, unspoken 
 Till the wind shakes a thousand whispers from the yew 
 And after this our exile 
 The necessarily larger spaces between the lines show the ineluctable silence and 
nothingness that must be heard and that must say the unheard and unspoken. Let 
the first of these verses resound in such a way that it advances the opening verses of 
the fifth poem, according to which: 
 If the lost word is lost, if the spent word is spent 
 If the unheard, unspoken 
 Word is unspoken, unheard; 
 Still is the unspoken word, the Word unheard, 
 The Word without a word, the Word within 
 The world and for the world; 
 And the light shone in darkness and 
 Against the Word the unstilled world still whirled 
 About the centre of the silent Word. 
 O my people, what have I done unto thee. 
 The word unheard and unspoken is a “token,” the sign and evidence of “this Ash 
Wednesday experience” of the “un- stilled world still whirled about the centre of the 
silent Word,” in which the “lost word is lost and the spent word is spent.” The verses 
describe not simply the end of a world and of a word but an end without an end, 
an end that is still whirling and living further. Here, we find verses of a certain 

STILL / ENCORE 55
 experience of the end of hopes for new beginnings or better places, where the word 
could be heard and spoken. “Where should the word be found? Where will the word 
resound?” “Not here; there is not enough silence.” The word cannot be found. It 
will resound. There is nothing to find “here,” in the here measured by the there, or 
in the “there” measured by the “here.” In this end without an end, still un- stilled 
and whirling, the distinction between here and there, immanence and transcend-
ence, is not enough to grasp this place called Ash Wednesday, the name of the uto-
pian place of a poem, of existing existence. The loss and exhaustion of the world and 
of the word is the experience of the “word without a word,” of the world without a 
world. What is lost and spent is the very hope for a revolutionary other: either a bet-
ter place or a new place, either the other beyond our world or the other beyond the 
dreams of a beyond. 
 Spent and lost is the force of revolutionary energy, leading to an exhaustion that 
appears in modern history as a “scheme of betrayal,” as Jean- Luc Nancy described it. 3 
In this end without an end, where it becomes impossible to mourn (“Why should I 
mourn/ The vanished power of the usual reign?”) and to hope (“I cannot hope to 
turn again”), the categories of “the usual reign” reveal themselves as a “scheme of 
betrayal.” Thus, in this endless end, time and space betray their usual meaning of 
succession and exteriority. Time betrays itself as the “before” that still remains and 
the “after” that is already there. No mourning and no hope: this means un- stilled 
stillness, a whirling within a no- way out, in which time “betrays” itself as the time of 
existing, as existential facticity. In the end without end, space betrays itself where the 
“there” is already here and the “here” is already there. No mourning, no hope. A 
“scheme of betrayal” that shows the structure, wherein the end without end, “Ash 
Wednesday,” coincides with a beginning that does not begin; where the opposites 
coincide and the coincidence opposes (itself): 
 Calm and distressed 
 Torn and most whole 
 Rose of memory 
 Rose of forgetfulness 
 Exhausted and life- giving 
 Worried reposeful 
 The single Rose 
 Is now the Garden 
 Where all loves end 
 Terminate torment 
 Of love unsatisfied 
 The greater torment 
 Of love satisfied 

56 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 End of the endless 
 Journey to no end 
 Conclusion of all that 
 Is inconclusible 
 Speech without word and 
 Word of no speech 
 Grace to the Mother 
 For the Garden 
 Where all love ends. 
 The “scheme of betrayal” is a scheme of phenomenalization. It shows and reveals 
through suspension. It shows appearances in their appearing which is only possible 
when a caesura, a space of nothingness, emerges holding together separations with-
out dissolving them in any kind of synthesis. In this place of a day— “Ash Wednesday,” 
the place of an end without end, the place without places for mourning and hope, 
“ still  is the unspoken word, the Word unheard, The Word without a word, the Word 
within the world and for the world.” The caesura holding still the un- stilled world 
shows and reveals that precisely the unspoken word  is  the spoken word, that exhaus-
tion  is  life- giving, that the end without end  is  incipient. Nietzsche would say  Incipit 
tragoedia ( Werke, vol. 3, 571 ). Here another meaning of otherness is pronounced as 
“whispers from the yew.” Thus, the other is nothing, but the  still- being  word of the 
unspoken and unheard word, the still- being word of the word without a word. No 
mourning for the lost and spent word. No mourning for having lost the word and no 
hope for a new redemptive word. No mourning for the past, no hope for the future 
insofar as the past and the future are already and still in this place of solitude, in this 
place of a day: Ash Wednesday. 
 Suspending the chronology of time, time itself is redeemed in appearing as a 
coincidence of dying and birth. Therefore, there is no longer need for striving to 
strive toward such things (“I no longer strive to strive . . .”) as the pure past and the 
pure future, for “desiring this man’s gift and that man’s scope.” The crude tautology 
of a word without a word  still- being  the word without a word presents “things as they 
are” and shows how the un- stilled whirling speeches about a “there,” the nostalgic 
“there” of the past and the intrepid “there” of a future, blend into the “there is.” But 
 Because I cannot drink 
 There, where trees flower, and springs flow, for there is 
 Nothing again 
 Because I know that time is always time 
 And place is always and only place 
 And what is actual is actual only for one time 

STILL / ENCORE 57
 And only for one place 
 I rejoice that things are as they are and 
 I renounce the blessed face 
 And renounce the voice 
 Because I cannot hope to turn again 
 [. . .] 
 In the crude tautologies that emerge in this end without end, the “there” appears 
(betrays itself) as the “there is,” as a scheme of phenomenalization, as a way of self- 
appearing. In these verses, the expression “there is” is at the end of the verse and it 
makes us take a new breath. The verse coming right after begins with a blank space 
and only then it is said: “nothing again.” “There is,” without qualifications or condi-
tions, coincides with “nothing again,” in which time can be known as being always 
time,  still  time, and place as always and only place,  still  place. There is / nothing 
again: this coincidence makes it possible to rejoice in the fact “that things are as they 
are.” The crude tautology of “things as they are,” where the nothing that comes after 
approaches and where everything that came before delays, exposes “the vanished 
power of the usual reign.” It exposes how nihilism betrays itself in revealing (i.e., 
betraying) that “nothing is the force/ that renovates the World,” to recall a verse by 
Emily Dickinson (650). “Nothing” appears in the poem, “Ash Wednesday,” as  still- 
being , as un- stilled stillness, challenging the logic of causes which grounds both 
nihilistic denials of future and its utopian affirmations. 
 The power of the usual is the power of causal logic, the language of because. This 
language is one of causal relations. It speaks in the following terms: because I cannot 
hope there is no hope; because I cannot speak and hear the word there is no word; 
because I cannot believe there is no belief. It is the language that reasons and speaks 
at the basis of a “because I,” insofar as the “I,” the “self,” the “human self” is assumed 
as the only possible foundation of the world. This “because I” explains the whole 
world on the basis of the human identified as the self- positing subject, taking the 
human as the cause of itself,  causa sui , and thereby assuming for itself the qualities of 
the divine. “Because I” is an inverted image, in which the belief that I cause the world 
interprets the human as the subject of the world it institutes, of the modern world as 
the reign of power. From within the logic of the “because I cause the world,” the 
modern world is the world of  re naissance,  re form,  re volution, the world of turning 
again and again (= said in the prefix “ re ”), the “there is” against itself, driving it 
beyond itself into a there—either past or future, either nostalgic or utopian, either 
retrospective or prospective—, into the “deceitful face of hope and of despair.” 
 The power of usual reign is that of self- causation, the reign of isolation that 
encloses freedom in self- determinacy, autarchy, and autonomy. This reign signals the 
dissolution of place as “always and only place,” a dissolution that can be considered 
“the most important and painful testimony of the modern world,” insofar as it is 
“the testimony of dissolution, of dislocation or of deflagration of community,” to 

58 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
quote Jean- Luc Nancy (11). 4  Self- causation and self- enclosure of the human, the 
human detached from the community with the nonhuman, nature or gods, the 
human as “absolute immanence,”  une immanence absolue de l’homme à l’homme , 
(14) testifies to the way the modern world has untethered utopia from human exist-
ence, transforming the meaning of utopia into the dissolution of existentiality.  5 The 
end of utopias, this eloquent postmodern trope, indicates, in a nihilistic mood, the 
utopia of the end, of isolation, when dissolution betrays itself, when the “commu-
nism” at the basis of absolute immanence of the human betrays itself, revealing itself 
as the dissolution of community, to follow Nancy once again (13). 
 When the dissolution of place— utopia— becomes so absolute that it betrays itself 
in a dissolution of dissolution, it is, nevertheless, possible to experience how this 
“scheme of betrayal” is a scheme of phenomenalization, the scheme in which the 
same appears as already other in its still- being. So understood, utopia betrays itself, 
showing its existential character and, thereby, showing how the placeless place of 
utopia is an existential place. In this sense, “the Word without a word,” the lost and 
spent word of the “unstilled world still whirled about the centre of the silent Word” 
appears as  still-  being the word within the world and for the world. Hence the “because 
I,” the dissolved place of the self- caused subject, the absolute immanence of the 
human, appears as  still-  being the already- having- been- given of the “there is,” of the 
inexorable gratuity of existence. Saturation and exhaustion of the omnipotent sub-
ject’s absolute immanence is  still human existence; exhaustion is life- giving. 
 The poem shows, at the very beginning, this strange life- giving meaning that 
arises in the exhaustion of meaning. The first verses say “Because I do not hope to 
turn again”— a “scheme” that resounds again and again (“the word will resound,” as 
it is said later on in the fifth poem) in other verses such as “Because I do not hope,” 
“Because I do not hope to turn,” “Because I do not hope to know again,” “Because I 
do not think,” “Because I know I shall not know,” “Because I cannot drink.” In this 
resounding, the “Because I. . . .” begins “fading, fading; strength beyond hope and 
despair.” Exhaustion is life- giving and repetition leads to a caesura, to the breath of 
an interruption. And when the omnipotent subject, used and abused by his absolute 
immanence (the subject habituated to hope, the hope of turning again and again, of 
knowing again and again, the subject sure of itself as the thinking thing, never admit-
ting that it should not know, and this in such a way that her/his words without a word 
always imply a “because I cause the world”)— when, in its immanence, this subject 
becomes absolute as the human only referred to itself, it betrays itself as not knowing 
that “I cannot drink, there, where trees flower, and springs flow, for there is/ nothing 
again.” 6   It betrays that “I do not think” and “I do not know,” that “I shall not know” 
because “human kind/ Cannot bear very much reality,” reiterating a verse from 
another poem of Eliot, from “Burnt Norton,” the first of his  Four Quartets ( Collected 
Poems , 175). “Human kind” cannot drink there where springs flow, cannot bear too 
much reality, existing as “those who are torn on the horn between season and season, 
time and time, between/ Hour and hour, word and word, power and power, those 
who wait/In darkness,” between hope and despair. 

STILL / ENCORE 59
 This way of existing in- between, of existing as the between, must still be learned. 
But it can only be learned when human existence learns to listen to the still time 
and place of the still- being, the time that is always time and the place that is always 
and only place, neither here nor there: the still time and place of the “there is.” In 
the end without an end of Ash Wednesday, where “wings are no longer wings to fly/ 
But merely vans to beat the air,” where “The air (. . .) is now thoroughly small and 
dry/Smaller and drier than the will,” precisely the wings turned into vans and the 
air turned into dryness “teach us to care and not care,” “teach us to sit still,” to 
become what we are: existence in- between. Again and again, meanings are exhausted 
and fade away, opening places for breathing in exhaustion. “Because I do not hope 
to turn again”— this verse resounds again and again until a new verse emerges at the 
end saying “although” instead of “because”: “although I do not hope to turn again.” 
Instead of “because,” “although”; “although” in “because”; “because” “turning in 
stairs, fading, fading; strength beyond hope and despair.” This is a kind of initia-
tion, where one has “to learn to unlearn” (evoking a verse of Fernando Pessoa),  7 
unlearning the lessons of utopia and of nostalgia, of the utopia of nostalgia and of 
nostalgia of utopia, while learning “to sit still/ even among these rocks” (of hope 
and despair), to listen still to the still- being in “words without a word,” in “empty 
forms between the ivory gates,” in “the lost heart,” “in the lost lilac and the lost sea 
voices.” This initiation of learning through unlearning is pronounced in the fourth 
poem through a quote from Dante’s  Purgatorio in the  Divina Comedia that reads 
“ Sovegna vos. ” 
 “sovegna vos a temps de ma dolor” 
 Poi s’ascose nel foco che gli affina.  (Dante, XXVI, verses 147–8) 
 Eliot translated these verses in his essay on “Dante” from 1929 as follows 
 be mindful in due time of my pain. 
 Then dived he back into that fire which refines them. ( Selected Prose , 250) 
 Be mindful,  sovegna vos , learn to listen still to the still- being of the “there is,” when 
all constructions of a “there” on its way to becoming a “here,” and of a “here” to 
becoming a there betray themselves, says the poem. This is the “token of the word 
unheard, unspoken/ Till the wind shake a thousand whispers from the yew.”
 And after this our exile.   
 After this, listening still to the still- being in the end without end, on Ash Wednesday, 
existing existence exposes and becomes exposed to its meaning as “exile.” The exist-
ing existence is the exposed existence and in this sense not only exile but “our exile,” 
our common exile. 

60 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 Explaining the “scheme of betrayal” that structures the testimony to the disso-
lution of the community in the modern world, Jean- Luc Nancy observes how the 
notion of the individual is the residue of the evidence for this dissolution, the resi-
due of the absolute immanence of a “for- itself absolutely separated taken as origin 
and certitude of the totality of beings” (16). But, inasmuch as absolute immanence 
betrays itself as the totalitarian besiegement of a “no- way out,” the individual, too, 
betrays itself, if to be an individual means to be the only one one should be, or even 
the only one who can be the only one (16). Here, it becomes clear that “the logic of 
the absolute violates the absolute,” (16) the logic of the “because I” violates the 
“because I,” the logic of separations and oppositions makes violence to separation. 
In the scheme of betrayal, violence shows how this scheme is a scheme of phenom-
enalization, of the  how  of an appearing. The most extreme testimonies of dissolu-
tion, of dislocation, and of deflagration betray being as a relation. Nancy says as 
“community,”  communauté , and defines it as “ecstasy,”  extase , following the traces 
left, above all, by Schelling and Heidegger. Far from meaning effervescence or effu-
sion, ecstasy is defined as the “epistemological and gnoseological impossibility of 
absolute immanence” (16). Defining the impossibility of absolute immanence either 
as the whole or as the individual, the impossibility of being as self- positing and 
 causa sui , “ecstasy” shows the very way in which this impossibility appears: how 
being in itself is outside and beyond itself. Being is ecstasy, community is in such 
way that “ecstasy” (being as community) “arrives to the singular,”  arrive à l’être 
singulier (16). 
 The question is, however, how to describe the being- ecstasy of being, how to 
describe its way of arriving and coming- toward. It arrives in the experience of Ash 
Wednesday, the place of the day’s solitude, which is the place and the time of 
“between the profit and the loss,” of “this brief transit where the dreams cross,” of 
the “dream- crossed twilight between birth and dying,” of the “time of tension 
between dying and birth,” “the place of solitude where three dreams cross.” 
“Solitude” is Eliot’s name for the ecstatic experience of what Nancy called “the 
ecstatic being of Being itself” ( l’être- extatique de l’être lui- même ). Solitude, as 
ecstatic experience, is the only place that is always place and the time that is always 
time for one time and for one place of the between. This “place” is an experience, 
the ecstatic experience of “our exile.” Ecstatic experience means here existing as 
exilic existence. 8   
 Exilic existence finds its phenomenal residue in existence in exile. In exile, not 
only “life changes” but the meaning of existence is transformed to such an extent 
that it becomes impossible to envisage existence as self- causation, as one being one’s 
own root. It is the discovery of oneself as an in- itself outside and beyond itself, of 
being rooted in the absence of roots, grounded in groundlessness. 9 Exilic existence is 
existence exiled from existence: in exile, one thus begins to live a sort of lack of life 
for the sake of not dying (as Seneca explained in his dialogue  On Consolation ). Thus, 
in exile, one “lives as no one and stands nowhere” (Vallega x). It is an existence in 
continuous estrangement, where one becomes strange in one’s own home and never 

STILL / ENCORE 61
feels at home in strangeness. It is existence existing as illegal in the disquietude of the 
between. It is a loss without return but also without arrival, insofar as the naturally 
constructed identification with the current modern representation of a self is broken 
and the identification with the other never becomes natural. 
 Exilic existence exists in a space— and time— in- between. It is an existence in 
which one experiences simultaneously the suspension and the intensification of 
proximity and distance in time and space. A person in exile is never here or there, 
being always here and there, in the presence of the no longer and of the not- yet. 
Exilic existence exists in the place and time of a day, where every day is Ash 
Wednesday, being with and without the past and the future. In English, we can say 
simply that we are  without . Exilic existence is existence without past and future, 
existence with the “without” and without the “with,” without our and the others’ 
others. In this being with the being- without, in this being without the being- with, 
without the “where from” and the “where to,” exile is never “mine” but always 
“ours.” Thus, in exile, we are without no longer being and not yet being, as we are 
without our dead and the unborn. Exilic existence is always “our exile,” because in 
it community is not simply a community of “living beings” and “existing things” 
but a community that includes our dead and the unborn, the experience of existing 
after death and before birth. Exilic existence exposes, while being exposed to, both 
placeless places and the place of placelessness, both times, time after time and times 
before time, worldlessness in the world and the world of absent worlds, wordless-
ness in words and words without and within the words. In this experiential mean-
ing, utopia is not the name of a non- placed place but of this “withoutness,” where 
and when the not- ending of an end and the not- beginning of a beginning coincide. 
Being without the being- with and being with the being- without define the utopian 
spatial temporality and temporal spatiality of existing existence, discovering itself 
as exilic existence. Utopia is here not seen as utopia from the worded word but as the 
way another meaning of the word, another meaning of human existence, appears 
within the loss of meaning of words and of existence. What appears here is neither 
a new meaning nor a better meaning but another meaning, an other that neither 
denies nor affirms but displaces and unlearns, an other as non- other, as Ash 
Wednesday. 
 The whole poem “Ash Wednesday” indicates this strange sense of otherness when 
describing how  
 If the lost word is lost, if the spent word is spent 
 If the unheard, unspoken 
 Word is unspoken, unheard; 
 Still is the unspoken word, the Word unheard, 
 The Word without a word, the Word within 
 The world and for the world   

62 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 This other meaning of otherness is named in the poem with the expressivity of “still 
is.” Still- being is the core of the poem, showing the coincidence of endless ends and 
beginnings not yet begun, of life after death and life before birth, still already and 
already still, the utopian place where the still- being of things manages to 
 Teach us to care and not to care 
 Teach us to sit still 
 Even among these rocks, 
 The unspoken and unheard word is still unspoken and unheard. This still- being 
teaches us to sit still, to be still in the core of existence, be still,  encore , listening 
“among these rocks” to how the exhaustion of still- being gives birth to a listening 
still, to where from and where to things are going as they are. When still- being coin-
cides with being still, the “scheme of betrayal” reveals the work of resonance through 
which the exhausted meaning of utopia as a place without place in existence can 
become the birth- giving meaning of the non- place of coexisting with the “existing 
without” and existing without coexisting. This non- place is the here of a day, of an 
Ash Wednesday, betraying that 
 Here are the years that walk between, bearing 
 Away the fiddles and the flutes, restoring 
 One who moves in the time between sleep and waking, 
 Wearing 
 White light folded, sheathed about her, folded. 
 The new years walk, restoring 
 Through a bright cloud of tears, the years, restoring 
 With a new verse the ancient rhyme. Redeem 
 The time. Redeem. 
 In the Ash Wednesday of a poem, existence exists “in the light of utopia,” as Paul 
Celan defined it (54). Years of exhausted words and worlds can still restore, “through 
a bright cloud of tears,” through another verse, a silent word within the lack of word, 
an open world within the absence of world, and in- between places within places of 
dissolution. 
 

 CHAPTER 6 
 The Theater of Utopia: Deleuze on 
Acting and Politics 
 Cláudia  Baracchi 
  This thought does not lie in the future, promised by the most distant of new 
beginnings. It is present in Deleuze’s texts— springing forth, dancing before us, in 
our midst; genital thought, intensive thought, affirmative thought, acategorical 
thought— each of these an unrecognizable face, a mask we have never seen before; 
differences we had no reason to expect but which nevertheless lead to the return, as 
masks of their masks, of Plato, Duns Scotus, Spinoza, Leibniz, Kant, and all other 
philosophers. This is philosophy not as thought but as theater— a theater of mime 
with multiple, fugitive, and instantaneous scenes in which blind gestures signal to 
each other. This is the theater where the laughter of the Sophist bursts out from under 
the mask of Socrates; where Spinoza’s modes conduct a wild dance in a decentered 
circle while substance revolves about it like a mad planet; where a limping Fichte 
announces “the fractured I // the dissolved self”; where Leibniz, having reached the 
top of the pyramid, can see through the darkness that celestial music is in fact a 
 Pierrot lunaire . In the sentry box of the Luxembourg Gardens, Duns Scotus places 
his head through the circular window; he is sporting an impressive mustache; it 
belongs to Nietzsche, disguised as Klossowski. 
 (Michel Foucault, “Theatrum Philosophicum”)   
 These words reach us from another world, another time. 1970: undoubtedly that day 
seems remote today. In the conclusion of his dazzling review essay of Gilles Deleuze’s 
 Différence et répétition  (1968) and  Logique du sens  (1969), Michel Foucault salutes 
“philosophy not as thought but as theater”— philosophy as act, in action, unfolding 
in the world with the disruptive force of embodied performance. 
 In Deleuze’s theater, Foucault points out, a subversion of categorial thought is 
enacted, which frees difference from the logic of conceptual differentiae and repeti-
tion from subjection to a model. But if repetition is illuminated as other than the 
work of indifference, indeed, as the taking place of difference, that which repeatedly 
returns demands to be understood as other than the replica of an unmoving script— 
altogether foreign to the play of copy and original, object and subject. 

64 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 In such a movement, being is affirmed as becoming. Deleuze’s action disarticu-
lates being, relieves being from the categorial articulation that would partition it. 
Being becomes, recurs ( revient ), turns and returns at incalculable speed, in vibrating 
luminescence and guises “never seen before.” At stake is nothing less than an onto-
logical revolution, a turn from metaphysics to a physics of the singularly evanescent: 
“the repetitive revolution of being around difference [. . .] the condition for thinking 
the phantasm and the event” (Foucault, “Theatrum,” 187; translation slightly 
modified). 
 * * * 
 The theater of philosophy opens up a space where life is comprehended— neither 
imitated nor represented, nor yet analyzed, but rather echoed in its truth and per-
formed in its illuminative reiteration. Philosophy as a place of reenactment entails a 
manifold destabilization of boundaries. It demands crossing and retracing the lines 
of demarcation between the philosophical and the non-  or pre- philosophical, 
between contemplation and creativity, reflection and action, action and production, 
and therefore between ethics and aesthetics, politics and sensibility, thinking and 
body, discourse and the registers of the material (the anonymously living, the non-
verbal, the non-  or un- speaking— which need not mean nonlinguistic, let alone 
inarticulate). At stake, then, are borders, territorial and not— in fact, those frontiers, 
most labile and unstable (though never simply dissolving), between the earth and 
territory, the European, the oriental, the bastard, the animal, the stammering, the 
silent— frontiers that, in their mobile delineations, configure the living. 
 In what follows, I will focus on Deleuze’s thinking as it turns to theater and the 
arts. The turn to theater and, more broadly, to the phenomena of creativity, unfolds 
theatrically and creatively, that is to say, lays out the theme performatively. The 
theme is not approached in the mode of aesthetic fruition, let alone art criticism. 
Rather, Deleuze’s discourse relates to creative acts as if by resonance, allowing phi-
losophy to become manifest as a creative act, while at the same time reaffirming the 
irreducibility of the philosophical performance to other modes of bringing forth and 
enactment. Thus, Deleuze incisively develops both the precariousness and the vital-
ity of the distinctions among the fields broadly designated as philosophy, the arts, 
and the sciences. Accordingly, for philosophy, the encounter with the arts becomes, 
at once, a self- reflective moment and the occasion for a refined tracing of 
differences. 
 The political undertones of such a mode of acting are evident in the transgressive 
language already evoked. The contestation of conventions as well as the striving to 
touch the real traverse Deleuze’s thought from the early texts celebrated by Foucault 
to the latest works— with consistent dismantling energy. A text by Jerzy Grotowski, 
first published in 1968, captures the mood of the time and the interruptive potential 
of the archaic art of the stage, evoking the “shock,” “the shudder which causes us to 
drop our daily masks and mannerisms” (“Statement,” 257).

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 65
  We see theater— especially in its palpable, carnal aspect— as a place of provoca-
tion, a challenge the actor sets himself and also, indirectly, other people. Theatre 
only has a meaning if it allows us to transcend our stereotyped vision, our con-
ventional feelings and customs, our standards of judgment— not just for the sake 
of doing so, but so that we may experience what is real and, having already given 
up all daily escapes and pretenses, in a state of complete defenselessness unveil, 
give, discover ourselves. (“Statement,” 257) 1 
 In the attunement to the systemic implications of radically singular operations, 
responsibilities, and actions, is announced the convergence of ethics and politics, 
the private and the public. Here lies a visionary thrust that is less a programmatic 
statement than the work of relentlessly clearing the space for the arrival of what 
may arrive— what is not yet and (perhaps) yet “to come.” As we shall see, Deleuze 
himself repeatedly resorts to this phrase, and occasionally to the noun “utopia,” 
to designate the possibilities that his discourse evokes, provokes, and calls forth. 
 Again, a political manifesto is not at stake. As Grotowski will have said in a lec-
ture entitled “Tu es le fils de quelqu’un,” delivered in Florence (Italy) in summer 
1985, “ I work not to make some discourse, but to enlarge the island of freedom which I 
bear; my obligation is not to make political declarations, but to make holes in the wall. 
The things which were forbidden before me should be permitted after me; the doors 
which were closed and double- locked should be opened. . . . Bad artists  talk  about the 
rebellion, but true artists  do  the rebellion” (294–5). The work of the theater, then, is 
to keep open, to puncture the ordinary, methodically attacking ideological fixations 
in order to protect the openness to come. 
 * * *
Thus, Deleuze’s frequentation and understanding of philosophy are at odds with 
traditional, rationalistic systematizations as well as the phenomenological perspec-
tive. Indeed, philosophy is neither the hegemonic account of beings by reference to 
eidetic/ideal determinations nor the discourse authorized by the things themselves 
to unlock their truth. It is neither the discovery of truth through objectification and 
conceptual representation nor the disclosure of what is through receptiveness and 
letting be. In fact, philosophy is not a matter of discovery, disclosing, and uncover-
ing. Rather, we see Deleuze outline and enact philosophy as a mode of inventive-
ness. Not to be reductively confused with the arts, philosophy is, still, no less a 
matter of production. 
 This is exposed methodically and with unusual pedagogical sensibility in  What 
Is Philosophy?  (1991), written with Félix Guattari. However, in the lecture “Qu’est- ce 
que l’acte de création?” (1987), Deleuze anticipates, limpidly and often word for 
word, what will have been articulated at length in the later book.  2 “Philosophy,” he 
says, “is not made ( n’est pas faite ) for reflecting on something else [. . .] in treating 
philosophy as a potentiality for reflecting on [something], one seems to concede a 

66 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
great deal to it, but in fact one is taking everything away from it.” Deleuze 
continues:
 For no- one needs philosophy in order to reflect. . . . [Those involved in movie- 
making and criticism] absolutely do not need philosophy in order to reflect on 
cinema. The idea that mathematicians would need philosophy in order to reflect 
on mathematics is a comical idea. If philosophy should have to reflect on any-
thing whatsoever, it would have no reason for being. If philosophy exists, that is 
because it has its own content. If we ask ourselves: what is the content of philoso-
phy?, the reply is simple. Philosophy is a discipline as creative, as inventive as any 
other discipline. Philosophy is a discipline involving the creation or invention of 
concepts. And concepts do not exist ready- made, in a sort of sky where they would 
wait for a philosopher seizing them. Concepts have to be fabricated. (“Qu’est- ce 
que l’acte de création?”) 
 What is urgently conveyed here is a renegotiation of the relation between philosophy 
and other modes of human enactment: philosophy does not enjoy the status of  the 
discipline of  all  disciplines, taking the other disciplines as its content and object. 
This is indeed a “worthless ( indigne ) idea.” Philosophy is a mode of creation along-
side others, exposed to common perils and vicissitudes. This is the case for the sci-
ences as well. They are no less creative. “There, too, one invents; one does not 
discover” (“Qu’est- ce que l’acte de création?”). 
 Philosophy, then, emerges as a kind of fabrication. Deleuze employs here the lan-
guage of artful production, artistry, even craftsmanship. Nietzsche is evidently a 
source of this insight— although Nietzsche goes even beyond the juxtaposition of 
philosophical and other creations, and indeed suggests art (most notably, the arts of 
the image) as the paradigm operative in properly philosophical making. Consider, 
for instance, his portrait of Plato as an artist, in the following posthumous 
fragment:
  An artist cannot endure actuality ( Wirklichkeit ); he looks away, back: his serious 
view is that the value of a thing lies in that shadowy residue one derives from 
colors, form, sound, conceptions, thereby he believes that the more attenuated, 
rarefied, volatile a thing or human being is,  the more its value increases :  the less 
 real, all the more value . This is Platonism, which however was endowed with yet 
another audacity in its turning: Plato measured the degree of reality ( Realität ) by 
the degree of value and said: The more “idea,” the more being. He turned around 
the concept “actuality” and said: “What you take for actual is an error, and the 
nearer we come to the ‘idea’, the nearer to ‘truth’”— Is this understood? It  was the 
 greatest  re- baptism : and because it was taken up by Christianity we do not see the 
astonishing thing. Plato, as the artist he was, fundamentally  preferred appearance 
(Schein) to being: thus lie and fiction ( Erdichtung)  to truth, the non- actual to the 
present— but he was so convinced of the value of appearance that he gave it the 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 67
attributes “being,” “causality” and “goodness,” truth, in short, everything to 
which one gives value.  3 (Nietzsche,  Werke , vol. VIII 1, 261; my translation) 
 Here we are called to witness the work of the philosophical theater or, rather, work in 
the theater of philosophy, as if we were allowed into its secret operations. Nietzsche 
stages the philosopher in act and casts light on the usually dimly lit laboratory where 
conception, incubation, and bringing forth take place. This is the scene of the genesis 
of the Platonic idea out of a distancing, an attenuation of phenomenality. As Deleuze 
and Guattari will have said, “Plato said that one must contemplate the Ideas, but before-
hand he had to create the concept of Idea” (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 11). 4   
 Of course, Deleuze specifies in the 1987 lecture, neither the philosopher nor the 
painter tell themselves: “Very well, now I’m going to make such and such a concept 
. . . now I’m going to make a painting like this.” “There must be,” he says, “a 
necessity”— and this is a “very complex” matter, “if it exists” (“Qu’est- ce que l’acte 
de création?”). 
 Thus, we assume that when philosophy turns to the other disciplines, it is never 
in order to “reflect on them” and disclose them to the philosopher and to themselves. 
When philosophy speaks of the other disciplines, say, of the arts, we will have to 
expect that it is showing something about itself, putting itself into focus. 
 * * *
 Sovrapposizioni  (“Superimpositions,” if one were to translate it into English) is the 
title of a short book originally published in Italian in 1978. It contains a script by 
Carmelo Bene, an essay by Deleuze on theater (entitled “Un manifesto di meno,” 
“One Less Manifesto” in English), and a response by Carmelo Bene. The volume, as 
such, was never published in English.  5   It is equally remarkable that this text by 
Deleuze is rarely addressed in scholarly and strictly philosophical discussions alike.  6 
More broadly, the theatrical element and the pervasiveness of dramatic figurations 
in Deleuze’s thinking are seldom considered in their deeply structuring, dynamic 
operation (and not merely, in fact not at all, as extrinsic presentational devices). 
 It may thus prove fruitful to linger for a moment with the text “One Less 
Manifesto” and explore the performance of Deleuze’s approach to the question of 
performance, the movement of his thought hovering between the encounter with 
this theme and the glimmers of self- reflection sparked in such an encounter. Far 
from a mere curiosity (a  divertissement ) on a peripheral topic, this essay reveals 
theater and theatricality at the heart of Deleuze’s thinking. It is not a philosophical 
reflection on theater, but philosophy staging itself, carrying itself out as the discus-
sion of performance: philosophy in deed, performing its creative task, taking the 
theme of theater as the scene of its own conceptual configuration. 
 Thus, the discussion of performance takes us into Deleuze’s philosophical con-
structivism, even into those aspects of creativity most akin to craftsmanship and 
technical skill. Filtered through this apparently marginal theme, and illuminated by 

68 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
its uncanny light, we shall encounter preoccupations that are central to Deleuze’s 
creation: the questions of presence and the real, of movement and variation in their 
ontological as well as political range, of the interpenetration of inside and outside, 
the proximate and the uncontrollably nomadic. 
 Again, you will not fail to notice resonances with early as well as late texts— 
beyond those mentioned above, let me simply recall  Nietzsche and Philosophy ,  Kafka , 
and  A Thousand Plateaus . “Concepts are centers of vibrations, each in itself and in 
relation to each other,” Deleuze and Guattari will have said. “And this is why every-
thing resonates instead of following or corresponding” (“Qu’est- ce que la philoso-
phie?” 28). 
 * * *
 Sovrapposizioni  is the result of the encounter of Deleuze and Carmelo Bene, an actor, 
writer, and a rather singular agitator in the landscape of Italian culture in the last 
decades of the twentieth century. In addition to a note in response to Deleuze’s essay, 
Bene contributed the script  Richard III: Or, The Horrible Night of a Man of War , a 
rewriting of Shakespeare’s play and the basis of one of Bene’s productions. As Deleuze 
suggests in “One Less Manifesto,” Bene’s rewriting should be considered a “critical 
essay,” but not in the sense of a text “on” Shakespeare: “the critical essay is itself a 
theatrical work” ( Sovrapposizioni , 69). “This critical theater,” Deleuze adds, “is a 
constituent theater, Critique is a constitution” in the sense that at first the work 
revolves around “the fabrication of the character, its preparation, its birth, its stutter-
ings, its variations, its development” ( Sovrapposizioni , 70). The character is not 
found, ready to be infinitely replicated, but must be brought forth, in a gesture that 
is genuinely creative, that is to say, founding. 
 Deleuze had been provoked by Shakespeare’s  Richard III  even before seeing Bene’s 
play, or, at any rate, before discussing Shakespeare’s text with Bene (see Cull 4 and 
Bogue 117). In  Dialogues  (1977), he briefly lingered on the figure of the treacherous 
king, emphasizing his uncontrollable becoming and the destructiveness he unleashes 
against the State. Here we find the parallel contrasts of the “man of the State” or 
“courtier,” vs. the “man of war (not a marshal or a general),” the deceiver vs. the traitor, 
the quest for power vs. the dynamic of total treason leading to the “assemblage of a war 
machine” (41–2, 141). It is such an enactment of ruinous betrayal, of treachery sparing 
nothing, which sets Richard III apart from a number of other Shakespearian kings, 
“trickster- kings” who may have conquered power deceptively, but wield it effectively, 
expediently. In his extreme venture, Richard III allows us to glimpse the disquieting 
mechanism of power stripped of any mitigating and stabilizing factors— power unadul-
terated, deprived of its embellishments, whether theological or prosaically related to 
administrative skill. This is a figure of self- consuming power, not at the service of the 
state’s self- assertion, not convertible into an apparatus, but, in fact, threatening all 
institutions. As such, it is simultaneously a figure of becoming, out of control and 
disordered. 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 69
 In line with the suggestions in  Dialogues , in “One Less Manifesto” Richard III is 
the “man of war,” shown in his unadorned bareness by Bene’s strategy, which involves 
the subtraction of the paraphernalia (textual and scenic) of regal power. What 
remains is a man conspicuously “different from the King or the Statesman”: 
“deformed and gloomy,” the man of war who “always comes from elsewhere” 
( Sovrapposizioni , 71)— a nomad, figure of restless agitation and foreignness. 
 A  cri de guerre  of sorts, “One Less Manifesto” addresses those who “operate” in 
theater, as well as the witnesses variously exposed to such operations and in complic-
ity with them (I shall not call them “spectators”). The characterization of the theatri-
cal operation is reminiscent of Baudelaire’s vision of artistic creation taking place in 
the workshop of destruction: “The man of theater is no longer author, actor or direc-
tor. He is an operator. By operation, one must mean the movement of subtraction, of 
amputation, but already covered over by the other movement, that lets something 
unexpected be born and proliferate, as in a prosthesis” ( Sovrapposizioni , 70). 
 We have here the exposition of a question carrying ethical no less than aesthetic 
implications. The questions concern what the dramatic art has become under the 
empire of representation: the current domain of the machinery of the spectacle, 
which has demoted the theatrical event to uneventful entertainment. We are well 
familiar with the conventionality of theater and the indifference of its “seasons”; 
with its crystallized banality; with the matter- of- fact administration of art as a well-
 oiled engine, alternating between empty production and distracted reproduction; 
and, above all, with the reduction of art to a consumable product, at once infinitely 
reproducible, stripped of the mystery in its midst, the object of evaluation and eco-
nomic transactions (there is such a thing as a cultural marketplace!). Furthermore, 
it hardly needs to be underlined that theater, as the luminous locus of action, enact-
ment, becoming and disappearing, is a cipher of the conditions of action— the theater 
of the world. Indeed, at stake are no less the place, time, and plots into which our 
singular lives are inscribed. 
 Deleuze’s rejoinder to current convention may sound imperative, even martial, 
and yet it is the most tentative and vulnerable of hypotheses: if theater has become an 
empty shell, a desert paced by prosaic appearances neither living nor dying (though 
arguably more dead than alive), then it is imperative to empty the emptiness, or to 
clear the theatrical space from what clutters it and voids it of life, from the accumu-
lated incrustations that have turned radiance into opacity, fluidity of motion into 
dead mannerisms. The imperative is to clear the space, freeing it from paralyzing 
encumbrances, so that dance, unexpected life, and unbound repetition may again 
take place, and so that becoming may unfold, unimpeded, or with least resistance. 
 But letting that space vibrate again bespeaks an invocation and evocation of pres-
ence. The imperative, then, entails the creation of a theater (i.e., of conditions for 
action) fostering presence in the sense of attention to the “line of continuing varia-
tion” ( Sovrapposizioni , 71), to “the subterranean work of a free and present variation” 
( Sovrapposizioni , 88)— presence as vibrant alertness, adherence, and attunement to 
becoming (to the revolution of being, the event, the phantasm). 

70 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 This reappropriation, reclaiming of the word “presence” deserves the closest 
attention: for at stake is not the presence of what is present, of being in its fixity, but 
the presence of what is always in the process of becoming; the presence of and in the 
speed of becoming, in the constant transition of what does not abide; presence as the 
site of dissipation and rearticulation, the site that is not a site, of ongoing de- 
territorialization, traumatic passages across discontinuities. At stake in presence 
thus understood is the quality (perhaps the discipline) of attentiveness, the “satura-
tion” of each moment, the intensification of life that leaves nothing unchanged. 
 It is inevitable to perceive the tension between the terminology here outlined and 
the elaborations on presence in phenomenological discourses in Heidegger, and later 
in Derrida. In its culmination, the latter lineage thinks presence as self- presence  and 
as always already divided from itself by an affirmation of itself that is unavoidably 
representational in tenor. The unsustainable paradox of presence as non- difference 
lies in the fact that, precisely in its self- assertion (in presenting and representing 
itself), presence draws away from itself, differs from itself, and reveals itself contami-
nated by absence. In its quest for power, presence renounces its purity. In this per-
spective, a theater of pure presence, that is, a theater without representation is strictly 
speaking impossible.  7   As we shall see, however, Deleuze outlines a thinking of theat-
rical presence as presence to another, presence outside oneself, as the dispersion of 
subjective structures in the becoming of difference, in the movement and variation 
of repetition at unrepresentable velocity. This would be presence disengaged from 
the plays of power and, far from asserting itself, constantly dissolving. The same 
word turning differently. In this gesture lies Deleuze’s rejoinder to the regime of 
representation and communication. 
 * * *
Echoing strategies and formulations found in Bene, Deleuze develops the question of 
presence in terms of what he calls becoming minor:
  Bene is very interested in the notions of Major and Minor. He gives them a lived 
content. What is a “minor” character? What is a “minor” author? First of all, 
Bene says that it is silly to be interested in the beginning or end of something, in 
the points of origin or termination. What is interesting is never the way in which 
someone begins or ends. What is interesting is in the middle, what happens in 
the middle ( au milieu ). It is not by chance that maximum velocity is in the 
 middle. . . . What matters, instead, is becoming: becoming- revolutionary, and 
not the to- come or the past of revolution. . . . Becoming, movement, velocity, 
whirlwind are in the middle. The middle is not an average, but rather an excess. 
Things grow from the middle. ( Sovrapposizioni , 73)   
 The key in the thinking of the Minor, then, is an understanding of becoming not so 
much by reference to initial and ending points, but rather in terms of what is in 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 71
between. The privilege of origin (the originary and originality) and teleology is radi-
cally called into question, along with the conceptual configurations to which it gives 
rise. What is crucial “happens in the middle”: unmoored from the beginning and 
with no end in sight, becoming pushes through the middle and vastly exceeds the 
determinations that filiation and destination would impose. Being in the middle 
means becoming beyond the representations that hold us captive: seizing around 
oneself times and modes of unfolding infinitely more comprehensive or infinitely 
more minute than one’s own, in short, infinitely other than oneself, and sensing 
them (the cosmos, the molecule, the animal) converge and coexist in oneself. It 
means, becoming a “particle” that “infinitely meditates on the infinite,” thus attuned 
to the “hour of the world” (291, 342–3). 8 
 Again, Deleuze repeats these indications in  Dialogues , after emphatically recalling 
Virginia Woolf’s  Mrs. Dalloway : “‘I spread myself out like fog BETWEEN the people 
that I know the best’ says Virginia Woolf in her walk among the taxis.” 9 He then con-
tinues: “The middle has nothing to do with an average, it is not a centrism or a form of 
moderation. On the contrary, it’s a matter of absolute speed. Whatever grows from the 
middle is endowed with such a speed.. . . [T]he absolute is the speed of movement 
between the two, in the middle of the two, which traces a line of flight” ( Dialogues , 
30–1). The understanding of presence in light of relentless variation, repetition unse-
cured, not fastened to  terminus a quo  and  terminus ad quem , clearly involves a radical 
turn away from the dialectical exercise and the logic of mediation. It involves having 
departed from the binary two and their result, from their communication, commonal-
ity, conversations, debates, and economy, which acknowledge a between only to the 
extent that it is sublimated into a third— a higher synthesis. What Deleuze is gesturing 
toward here is entering the between without seeking to reach the other shore: entering 
the middle uncountable and unaccountable. It could also be called immediacy. 
 Needless to say, the Minor and becoming minor have to do with the question of 
minorities only to the extent that these are not defined by quantity and identity. The 
Minor is uncountable and unaccountable from the perspective of the majoritarian 
state and its communicative/representational apparatus. Therefore, the Minor hardly 
counts, even though it should be the case that “ everyone  is minoritarian” 
( Sovrapposizioni , 88). 10 
 In “One Less Manifesto” as well, precisely when adumbrating the question of 
presence (presence in becoming) in terms of becoming minor, Deleuze refers to 
Virginia Woolf. Woolf embodies most vividly, for Deleuze, the incandescence of 
becoming: the presence of becoming with no reference to departure and arrival; 
presence as inhabiting the moment in all its imperviousness; presence in entering 
the speed of things, seizing them in their indefiniteness, in their passing from one 
state to another, in between one state and another; presence in coming into contact 
with the real, whatever risks may be folded into this exposure. Her writing surfaces 
from this living, unfolds like a “line of flight” traced across an incessant flow, and 
thus gives word to that which flows in the middle, overpowering and sudden, with-
out routinely resorting to the tricks of technique and the tools of mastery. 

72 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 And in this risk, in this lability of forms that is also an instability of psychic struc-
tures, the threat of disease is also announced— precisely there where the most 
extreme adherence to life coincides with unease, and the intensity of being “only a 
sensibility” 11   verges on dismemberment. Virginia Woolf’s writing often evokes the 
coincidence of saturation and dissolution, concentration and dispersion. The follow-
ing pages are from  The Waves , a text that Woolf, signaling her uncertainty regarding 
genre and proper literary taxonomy, called a “play- poem.” It is a stage for intertwin-
ing inner monologues with no narrator— a work that Deleuze’s thinking absorbs in 
important ways: 
 With intermittent shocks, sudden as the spring of a tiger, life emerges heaving its 
dark crest from the sea. It is to this we are attached; it is to this we are bound, as 
bodies to wild horses. And yet we have invented devices for filling up the crevices 
and disguising these fissures.. . . [S]ilence closes over our transient passage. This 
I say is the present moment; this is the first day of the summer holidays. This is 
part of the emerging monster to whom we are attached.. . . 
 One moment does not lead to another. The door opens and the tiger leaps. You 
did not see me come. I circled around the chairs to avoid the horror of the spring. 
I am afraid of you all. I am afraid of the shock of sensation that leaps upon me, 
because I cannot deal with it as you do— I cannot make one moment merge in 
the next. To me they are all violent, all separate; and if I fall under the shock of 
the leap of the moment you will be on me, tearing me to pieces. I have no end in 
view. I do not know how to run minute to minute and hour to hour, solving them 
by some natural force until they make the whole and indivisible mass that you 
call life. Because you have an end in view . . . your days and hours pass like the 
boughs of forest trees and the smooth green of forest rides to a hound running 
on the scent. But there is no single scent, no single body for me to follow. And I 
have no face. I am like the foam that races over the beach or the moonlight that 
falls arrowlike here on a tin can, here on a spike of the mailed sea holly, or a bone 
or a half- eaten boat. I am whirled down caverns, and flap like paper against end-
less corridors, and must press my hand against the wall to draw myself back. 
(64–5, 130–1)  
 Such, then, is the arduous crossing of a “minor author”: “without future and without 
past, she has only a becoming, a center, through which she communicates with other 
times, other spaces” (S 73). She has (she is) only a present into which converge, 
unmediated, times and spaces that always threaten to tear her apart. A “minor” 
author, then, is altogether other than secondary, let alone negligible. Rather, she is 
extemporaneous, in the etymological sense of the term. Indeed, “the center does not 
at all mean belonging in one’s own time, belonging to one’s own time, being histori-
cal; on the contrary. It is that in virtue of which the most diverse times communi-
cate. It is neither the historical, nor the eternal, but the untimely” ( Sovrapposizioni , 
73). Out of time, she lives at the “time ( heure ) of the world” ( Mille Plateaux , 343). 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 73
 Presence in becoming requires a kind of athleticism, Deleuze and Guattari 
observe in  What Is Philosophy? — here, too, in connection with Woolf. “An athleti-
cism that is not organic or muscular,” they specify, but rather “‘an affective athleti-
cism,’ which would be the inorganic double of the other, an athleticism of becoming 
that only reveals forces that are not its own”— what Artaud called “plastic specter,” 
they conclude (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 163). Such an agility, or plastic avail-
ability, is required in order to sustain that which is no mere sensory experience, but 
rather an undergoing of the ultimate violation: “Affect is not the passage from a lived 
state to another, but the becoming non- human of the human. . . . It is rather an 
extreme contiguity, in a crush of two sensations without resemblance or, on the con-
trary, in the receding of a light that captures both of them in the same gleam” 
(“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 163–4). 
 The response of theater to the empire of representation, thus, would have to be in 
this register. Theater would assume as its own the task of cultivating presence as the 
experience of “saturation” (the saturation of “every atom” [“Qu’est- ce que la philoso-
phie?” 163] or even that which Woolf called incandescence). 
 It is important to underline that this response is no mere boycott or situationist 
gesture (after Guy Debord, the  Internationale situationniste , had aimed precisely at 
this: actions of disturbance and attempts at ripping apart the fabric of the dominant 
phantasmagoria). Rather, it is a response appealing to a creative resourcefulness, to 
the ability to discern that the machinery of the theater as spectacle does not exhaust 
the possible. The point is manifestly neither to passively undergo the theater of rep-
resentation, nor to devise strategies for deserting and sabotaging it. The call is for 
doing theater otherwise. And this concerns both those who act onstage and those 
who look at them— those absorbed in the  theorein  constitutive of the  theatron  as such 
(again, I do not dare to call them “spectators”). Indeed, the very separation of the 
scenic space ( skene , space of shadows) and that of onlookers should be renegotiated 
and, if not altogether fade, remain mobile and porous, with lasting consequences 
concerning the status of the human (of the world) and its phantasmatic character.  12 
 * * *
But Deleuze, in his close interaction with Carmelo Bene in  Sovrapposizioni , provides 
even more detailed (more concrete, intimately technical, “molecular”) indications 
regarding how those who “operate” in the theater (those who live in the world) are to 
carry out a response, saturating the present. Indeed, how do the suggestions in this 
text relate to apparently proximate gestures, such as those of certain members of the 
avant- garde, as well as those of a politically militant theater  à la Brecht? 
 Representation, and most notably the “ representation of conflicts ” (conflicts 
“between individual and society, between life and history, all sorts of contradictions 
and oppositions that traverse a society, but also the individuals” [ Sovrapposizioni , 
87]), is a crucial means of control through codification and normalization. 
“Institutions,” Deleuze continues, “are the organs of representation of recognized 

74 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
conflicts, and theater is an institution, theater is ‘official,’ even if avant- garde, even if 
popular” ( Sovrapposizioni , 87). Brecht himself, according to Deleuze after Bene, does 
not nearly go far enough in the overcoming of the representational hold. He seems to 
limit himself to the task of providing the spectator with instruments for the compre-
hension and possibly the “solution” of conflicts. As Bene notes, Brecht’s “critical 
operation” presents outstanding features, to be sure, but is carried out “on the script 
and not on the stage,” and in this way it surreptitiously reinscribes the supremacy of 
the text over the act and reasserts those dynamics of power that it purports to de- 
structure ( Sovrapposizioni , 79). 
 Thus, we observe the phenomenon of “a popular theater that is like the narcis-
sism of the worker” and shares the same structures and operative assumptions with 
“classical” (bourgeois) theater. The “epic pole of popular representation” and the 
“dramatic pole of bourgeois representation” ( Sovrapposizioni , 87) only stand in a 
rhetorical contraposition. “Even the rich and the poor, Bene describes them as 
belonging in the same system of power and domination which divides them into 
‘poor slaves’ and ‘rich slaves,’ and in which the artist has the function of intellectual 
slave” ( Sovrapposizioni , 88). Along these lines, we could say that Brecht falls short of 
thinking through the question of form; concentrated on the content of the represen-
tation, he fails to address the question of representation and the power harbored 
therein, the question of form as such, indeed the question of the very distinction 
between form and content. And it is in such an oversight, in such an inability to rec-
ognize the problematic nexus of form and content, that power is left alone, function-
ing undisturbed. Paradoxically, then, such a theater, focused on content as it may be, 
remains essentially formalistic. And that means superficial. 
 But “art is not a form of power” ( Sovrapposizioni , 89). If this is the case, however, 
“how can theater free itself from this situation of conflictual, official, and institu-
tionalized representation?” Deleuze asks. “How are we to support the underground 
work of a free and present variation that slips through the net of slavery and over-
flows the whole?” ( Sovrapposizioni , 88). How can the representation of conflicts be 
replaced with “the presence of variation” ( Sovrapposizioni , 87)? 
 Again, Bene’s suggestions toward a “complete critical operation” in theater are 
crucial, precisely because they point beyond the textual work (which still remains 
robust) to embodied strategies, to the functions and dysfunctions of the phantom 
onstage, and to the becoming of acting. Deleuze recalls the moments of the elision of 
the “elements of Power” ( Sovrapposizioni , 72): “1) withdrawing the stable elements, 
2) thus placing everything in continuous variation, 3) then transposing everything 
equally in  minor  (it is the function of the operators, corresponding to the idea of 
‘smaller’ interval)” ( Sovrapposizioni , 79). The latter passing remark is noteworthy, 
for it illumines the question of the minor in yet another way: the transposition in 
minor corresponds to the enactment (“the function of the operators”), the taking 
place of theater in its materiality, in its material vicissitudes, formations, deforma-
tions, and dissolutions— theater in ebb and flow. The minor, with its “smaller” inter-
val, indicates a precipitation into the body, sinking into its molecular structures and 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 75
variations. It is this emphasis that makes the operation thorough and “complete”— 
not merely declared and scripted, but acted out and lived, with the dangers of 
unscripted movement. The theater without representation is risky indeed. It is the 
presence here cultivated that presents risks. 
 We already mentioned the double movement of subtraction and creation that 
characterizes this theater. Speaking of Bene’s dramaturgy, and in particular of his 
Richard III, Deleuze notes from the start the political inflections of such an opera-
tion: “[w]hat is here amputated, subtracted, is the entire princely and regal system. In 
fact, only Richard III and the women remain” ( Sovrapposizioni , 70). But he also notes 
that subtracting the elements of power, the elements representative of political power 
at large (“Romeo as representing the power of the families, the Master as representing 
sexual power, kings and princes as representing State power” [ Sovrapposizioni , 72]), 
means at once subtracting power from theater, detracting the power that theater 
enjoys in its institutional complicity:
  . . . the elements of power in theater are at the same time that which ensures the 
coherence of the subject treated and the coherence of representation onstage. 
They are at the same time the power of what is represented, and the power of 
theater itself. In this sense, the traditional actor has an ancient complicity with 
princes and kings, and theater with power. ( Sovrapposizioni , 72) 
 Let this be repeated. Detracting representations of power means detracting the power 
of representation, the power that the representational machinery deploys, the power 
that representation itself is, in other words, power as such— ordering and stabilizing:
  Eliminating the constants or invariants, not only in language and gestures, but 
also in theatrical representation and in what is represented on the scene; thus, 
eliminating everything that “makes” Power, the power of what the theater repre-
sents (the King, the Princes, the Masters, the System), but also the power of the 
theater itself (the Text, the Dialogue, the Actor, the Director, the Structure). . . . 
( Sovrapposizioni , 86) 
 Detracting this from theater means making theater vulnerable, unjustifiable. It 
means leaving it shattered, unreliable, incoherent, unauthorized— minor, in short. 
Manifold, taking on many forms, following diverse lines of flight, the theater with-
out representation is not one. It is no manifesto. 
 * * *
It is in this way that, with Bene, we catch sight of an “operator” who is “less narcis-
sistic than an actor, less authoritarian than a director, less despotic than a text” 
( Sovrapposizioni , 86). Accordingly, in such a theater we witness the renunciation of a 
representation of “the masses” (as if the masses were one) and, in turn, the one 

76 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
becoming the mass: “at once text, author, and actor . . . I am a mass . . . ‘the mass of 
 my atoms . . .’” ( Sovrapposizioni , 86). 
 Thus, this becoming minor of theater, this extreme operation of deprivation is far 
from impoverishing. Rather, privation clears the space for the unpredictable and the 
free, in a dynamic that reveals the interplay of lack and superabundance, poverty and 
(re)sources, a dynamic that is the cipher of  eros : 13 
  Thus one detracts or amputates the story ( la storia ), because History  (la Storia ) 
is the temporal mark of Power. One subtracts the structure, because it is the 
synchronic mark. . . . One subtracts the constants, the stable or stabilizing ele-
ments, because they belong to the major use. . . . One amputates the text, 
because the text is like the domination of language over the word. . . . One sup-
presses the dialogue . . . (linguists try to determine the “universals of  dialogue”). 
Etc., etc. . . . . [O]ne subtracts even diction, even action. . . . But what remains? 
Everything remains, but in a new light, with new sounds, new gestures. 
( Sovrapposizioni , 77–8)  
 In this movement, among other things, politics becomes erotic ( Sovrapposizioni , 85). 
And I, not doing theater for “the people,” doing theater neither “popular” nor “offi-
cial” nor yet avant- garde, am in the midst of costumes and props falling apart, 
machinery not responding to my commands, present in and to becoming. 
 Through the contact with Bene, and not altogether removed from a constel-
lation of theatrical thinking including Artaud, Peter Brook, and Grotowski, in 
his own way Deleuze gestures toward an understanding of art as a vehicle— 
performance as a study, machine or channel making possible a contact with the 
real. And we should underscore the diversity of operators he mentions, held 
together only by the most imperceptible alliances— alliances in searching and 
not amounting to a program: “Artaud, Bob Wilson, Grotowski, the Living 
[Theater] . . .” ( Sovrapposizioni , 72). And here we can only mention the discus-
sion in  Difference and Repetition , where Deleuze presents Nietzsche and 
Kierkegaard as theatrical operators dedicated to “the highest theatrical problem” 
of how to create “a movement which would directly touch the soul” ( Difference , 9). 14 
Nonrepresentation is no formula, no method, but a genuinely open horizon, 
itself varying, and a theater of the possible. 
 * * *
Not unlike  What Is Philosophy? , and indeed anticipating several movements of 
the later text, “One Less Manifesto” culminates and closes with a piece of political 
imagination. The visionary (if not utopian) thrust appears to be a genuine and long-
 standing element in Deleuze’s thinking, even aside from the collaboration with Félix 
Guattari. “The whole problem,” Deleuze observes, “hinges on the majoritarian 
datum. Since the theater for everyone, popular theater, is somewhat like democracy, 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 77
it appeals to the majoritarian datum” ( Sovrapposizioni , 88). And yet, Deleuze will 
have interjected from another time, the time of  What Is Philosophy? , “[d]emocracies 
are majorities, but a becoming is by nature that which always subtracts itself from 
majority” (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie,” 104) or even reconfigures the thinking 
and concept of majority. In fact, Deleuze continues in the earlier voice,
   [m]ajority does not designate a greater quantity, but, first of all, this specimen in 
relation to which the other quantities, whatever they may be, will be said to be 
smaller. For instance, women and children, blacks, Indians . . . etc., will be minor-
itarian in relation to the specimen constituted by the Christian white Man any- 
male- adult- urban- American or European of today (Ulysses). But, at this point, 
everything is turned upside down. For, if the majority refers to a model of power, 
historical or structural, or both at the same time, it should also be said that every-
one is  minoritarian , potentially minoritarian.. . . Isn’t continuous variation per-
haps everyone’s becoming minoritarian, in opposition to the datum of majority 
belonging to No- one? ( Sovrapposizioni , 88–9) 
 Here then could be found the function of the theater: nurturing the condition and 
possibility for the cultivation, the exercise of consciousness in a minor mode, of a 
minority consciousness, as “everyone’s potentiality.” “In this sense, it is evident that 
the minority is much more numerous than the majority” ( Sovrapposizioni , 91). And, 
of course, “making a potentiality present, actual, is altogether other than represent-
ing a conflict” ( Sovrapposizioni , 89). For, as Deleuze and Bene stress, art is not 
power, “it becomes a form of power only when it ceases to be art” ( Sovrapposizioni , 
89). The authority of the “operator” is a strange authority, if any: it is “the authority 
of a perpetual variation, in opposition to the power or despotism of the invariant . . 
. the authority, the autonomy of one stuttering, one who has conquered the right to 
stutter . . .” ( Sovrapposizioni , 89); the authority of the foreigner— of one who has 
become a foreigner “in one’s own language” ( Sovrapposizioni , 79) (“we speak the 
same language, yet I do not understand you . . .” [“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 
105]); finally, the authority of the nomad, the bastard, the animal. 
 In its uncanny authority, art, as infinite variation, as perpetuation of unsustain-
able instability, would endure. It would display a “strict affinity” with the “act of 
resistance.” “[A]rt is that which resists,” Deleuze intimates from yet another time, 
that of the lecture “Qu’est- ce que l’acte de création?” And the act of resistance is two-
 faced: “it is human, and it is also the act of art”:
  Only the act of resistance resists death, both in the form of the work of art and in 
the form of a struggle of human beings. And what relation is there between the 
struggle of human beings and the work of art? The closest and, to me, most mys-
terious relation. Exactly what Paul Klee meant when he said: “You know, the peo-
ple is lacking ( Vous savez, le people manque ).” The people is lacking and, at the 
same time, it is not lacking. The people is lacking, this means that . . . this funda-

78 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
mental affinity between the work of art and a people that does not yet exist, is not 
and will never be clear. There is no work of art that does not appeal to a people 
that does not yet exist. (“Qu’est- ce que l’acte de création?”)   
 Deleuze said it and will have said it, will have repeated this at different speeds, at dif-
ferent times, each time with infinite precision. In the earlier text echoing Bene: 
“Everyone claims to be part of the people, in the name of majoritarian language, but 
where is the people? ‘It is the people which is lacking’” ( Sovrapposizioni , 90). Here the 
response to such a diagnosis is a vision: “Theater will rise as that which does not 
represent anything, but presents and constitutes a minority consciousness, as uni-
versal becoming” (91). And again, in  What is Philosophy? : “The creation of concepts 
in itself appeals to a form of future, calls for a new earth and a people which do not 
yet exist.. . . Art and philosophy converge on this point, the constitution of an earth 
and a people which are lacking, as the correlate of creation” (“Qu’est- ce que la phi-
losophie?” 104).  15 
 The people, thus, “does not yet exist”  and  is envisioned to come. Utopia may or 
may not be the word to designate this auroral effort, but at stake is the present that is 
coming, becoming new. 
 Utopia may be the word for designating this, if understood in the context of the 
Frankfurt school and of Adorno’s “negative dialectic” (“Qu’est- ce que la philoso-
phie?” 95). But one must be careful not to revert to a “restoration of transcend-
ence” (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 96), to keep the “ No- where ” also “ Now- here ”: 
utopia not as “a dream, something that never realizes itself or realizes itself only in 
betraying itself,” but rather as “revolution,” as “a plane of immanence, infinite 
movement,” understanding that “these traits are connected with what is real here 
and now” (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 96). In this sense, the word “utopia thus 
designates  this conjunction of philosophy or of the concept with the present environ-
ment  (milieu)” (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 96). And here it is “a question of 
becoming. The thinker is not acephalous, aphasic, or analphabetic, but becomes 
so. . . . One becomes animal so that the animal as well may become something 
else,” and in this “zone of exchange between the human and the animal . . . some-
thing of the one passes into the other. It is the constitutive relation of philosophy 
with non- philosophy. Becoming is always double, and it is this double becoming 
that constitutes the people to come and the new earth” (“Qu’est- ce que la 
 philosophie?” 105). 
 In this ongoing exchange, a people is not created, not brought forth, and Deleuze 
writes rapturously about the community of the thinker (or of the artist) and the 
people:
  The people is internal to the thinker because it is a “becoming- people,” just as the 
thinker is internal to the people, as a no less unlimited becoming. The artist or the 
philosopher are unable to create a people, they can only invoke it with all their 
resources. A people can create itself only in abominable sufferings, and cannot 

THE THEATER OF UTOPIA 79
occupy itself with art or philosophy. But the books of philosophy and the works of 
art also contain in turn their unimaginable amount of suffering which allows for 
the presentiment of the advent of a people. They have in common the fact of 
resisting, resisting death, servitude, the intolerable, shame, the present. (“Qu’est-
 ce que la philosophie?” 105) 16 
 * * *
Philosophy shares the relational structure with its other (nonphilosophy), with art 
and science. Each of them needs such a “non- ,” not as a point of departure or arrival, 
in which it would finally be resolved and realized, but in each moment of its unfold-
ing.  What Is Philosophy?  ends by evoking the merging of these three modes of “non,” 
of alterity. Out of such an absorption emerges a shade:
  In this immersion, we could say one draws from chaos the shadow ( l’ombre ) of the 
“people to come,” as art calls it, but also philosophy, science: the people- mass, 
people- world, people- brain, people- chaos. Non- thinking thought that dwells in 
all three, like the non- conceptual concept of Klee or the inner silence of Kandinsky. 
It is here that concepts, sensations, functions become undecidable, just as phi-
losophy, art, and science become indiscernible, as if they would share the same 
shadow, which extends across their different nature and does not cease to accom-
pany them. (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 223)   
 This was not to have been a “reflection on” theater. This would be the theater of 
Deleuze’s thinking— skene , a place where shadows come to play. 
 


 PART II 
 Putting Utopia to Work 


 CHAPTER 7 
 Ernst Bloch, Utopia, and Ideology Critique  1 
 Douglas  Kellner 
   The great utopian Marxist philosopher Ernst Bloch developed a method of cultural 
criticism that expands conventional Marxian approaches to culture and ideology 
and provides one of the richest treasure houses of ideology critique found in the 
Marxian tradition. In this essay, I suggest that Bloch provides a method for discern-
ing and criticizing ideological content in theories, philosophies, and cultural arti-
facts whose ideological nature and effects are often overlooked. Bloch’s practice of 
ideological criticism discerns emancipatory utopian dimensions even in ideological 
products, ferreting out those aspects that might be useful for radical theory and 
practice. Bloch therefore provides exciting methods of cultural criticism, a new 
approach to cultural history, and novel perspectives on culture and ideology. He also 
contributes uniquely distinctive utopian perspectives on Marxism, socialism, and 
revolutionary theory, though that will not be my focus in this study.  2 
 Reading The Principle of Hope 
 Since Bloch’s magnificent magnum opus  The Principle of Hope has been translated, 
his mature philosophy is accessible to English- speaking readers.  3   Problems in appro-
priating Bloch and using him for cultural and political analysis and critique remain 
significant, as Bloch’s text is extremely difficult, elusive, and extremely long (over 
1,400 pages in the English translation). Consequently, if Bloch is to have any real 
impact on political and cultural analysis in the English- speaking world, efforts must 
be made to explain and interpret what he is up to, and convincing arguments must 
be provided by us to persuade people that reading Bloch is worth the time and 
effort. 
 The Principle of Hope  contains three volumes, divided into five parts, and fifty-
 five chapters. The three volumes roughly correspond to Hegel’s division of his sys-
tem into interrogations of subjective, objective, and absolute spirit. The first 
volume entails “Little Daydreams” (Part One), “Anticipatory Consciousness” (Part 
Two), and “Wishful Images in the Mirror” (Part Three). The latter studies analyze 
the utopian dimensions of fashion, advertising, fairy tales, travel, film, theater, 

84 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
jokes, and other cultural phenomena. The second volume (Part Four) depicts 
“Outlines of a Better World,” focusing on social and political utopias, including 
technological, architectural, and geographical utopias, as well as quests for world 
peace and a life of leisure. Volume three (Part Five) discusses “Wishful Images of 
the Fulfilled Moment,” including morality, music, images of death, religion, 
morning- land of nature, and the highest good. 
 Just as Hegel’s philosophy articulated the odyssey of spirit through history and 
culture, so too does Bloch’s philosophy chart the vicissitudes of hope. He believes, 
hope permeates everyday consciousness and its articulation in cultural forms, rang-
ing from the fairy tale to the great philosophical and political utopias. For Bloch, 
individuals are unfinished; they are animated by “dreams of a better life,” and by 
utopian longings for fulfillment. The “something better” for which people yearn is 
precisely the subject- matter of Bloch’s massive  The Principle of Hope , which provides 
a systematic examination of the ways in which daydreams, fairy tales and myths, 
popular culture, literature, theater, and all forms of art, political and social utopias, 
philosophy, and religion— often dismissed tout court as ideology by some Marxist 
ideological critique— contain emancipatory moments which project visions of a bet-
ter life that put in question the organization and structure of life under capitalism 
(or state socialism). 
 Bloch urges us to grasp the three dimensions of human temporality: he offers us 
a dialectical analysis of the  past  which illuminates the  present  and can direct us to a 
better  future . The past— what has been— contains both the sufferings, tragedies and 
failures of humanity— what to avoid and to redeem— and its unrealized hopes and 
potentials— which could have been and can yet be. For Bloch, history is a repository 
of possibilities that are living options for future action; therefore what could have 
been can still be. The present moment is thus constituted in part by  latency  and  ten-
dency : the unrealized potentialities that are latent in the present, and the signs and 
foreshadowings that indicate the tendency of the direction and movement of the 
present into the future. This three- dimensional temporality must be grasped and 
activated by an  anticipatory consciousness  that at once perceives the unrealized eman-
cipatory potential in the past, the latencies and tendencies of the present, and the 
realizable hopes of the future. Above all, Bloch develops a philosophy of hope and the 
future, a dreaming forward, a projection of a vision of a future kingdom of freedom. 
It is his conviction that only when we project our future in the light of what is, what 
has been, and what could be can we engage in the creative practice that will produce 
a world in which we are at home and realize humanity’s deepest dreams. 
 In his magnum opus, Bloch carries though both a thorough examination of the 
ways in which hope and visions of a better world exist in everything from daydreams 
to the great religions, and of cultural studies that trace throughout history anticipatory 
visions of what would later be systematized, packaged, and distributed as socialism by 
Karl Marx and his followers. Consequently, Bloch provides a critical hermeneutic of 
the ways in which cultural history and socioeconomic developments point to socialism 
as the realization of humanity’s deepest dreams and hopes, and that encourages us 

ERNST BLOCH, UTOPIA, AND IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE 85
to look for the progressive and emancipatory content of cultural artifacts (rather than 
the merely ideological and mystificatory).  
 Bloch’s Concept of Ideology Critique 
 In my view, Bloch is most useful today in providing a model of cultural theory and 
ideology critique that is quite different from, and arguably better than, dominant 
models that present ideology critique as the demolition of bourgeois culture and 
ideology, thus, in effect, conflating these two. This model— found in Lenin and most 
Marxist- Leninists like Althusser, but also to some extent in the Frankfurt School— 
interprets dominant ideology primarily as an instrument of mystification, error, and 
domination that is contrasted to science, Marxist theory, or “Critical Theory.” The 
function of ideology critique on this model is simply to demonstrate the errors, mys-
tifications, and ruling class interests within ideological artifacts, which are then 
smashed and discarded by the heavy hammer of the ideology critic. 
 Such a model is, of course, rooted in Marx’s own texts since, for Marx, ideology 
was the ideas of the ruling class, ideas that legitimated bourgeois rule, ideas that mys-
tified social conditions, covering over oppression and inequality, and ideas that thus 
produced false consciousness and furthered bourgeois class domination.  4 Within the 
Marxian tradition, there is also a more positive concept of ideology, developed by 
Lenin, which sees socialist ideology as a positive force for developing revolutionary 
consciousness and promoting socialist development. Bloch, however, is more sophis-
ticated than those who simply denounce all ideology as false consciousness, or who 
stress the positive features of socialist ideology. Rather, Bloch sees emancipatory- 
utopian elements in all living ideologies, as well as deceptive and illusory qualities. 
 For Bloch, ideology is “Janus- faced,” two- sided: it contains errors, mystifications, 
and techniques of manipulation and domination, but it also contains a utopian resi-
due or surplus that can be used for social critique and to advance progressive politics. 
In addition to reconstructing and refocusing the theory and practice of ideology 
critique, Bloch also enables us to see ideology in many phenomena usually neglected 
by Marxist and other ideology critiques: daydreams, popular literature, architecture, 
department store displays, sports, or clothing. In this view, ideology pervades the 
organization and details of everyday life. Thus, ideology critique should be a critique 
of everyday life, as well as critique of political texts and positions, or the manifestly 
political ideologies of Hollywood films, corporate and state television, or other forms 
of mass- mediated culture that serve interests of domination. 5 
 Previous Marxist theories of ideology, by contrast, tended to equate ideology 
with texts, with political discourses, and with attempts to mystify class relations 
and to advance class domination. Ideology critique then, on this model, would sim-
ply expose and denounce the textual mechanisms of mystification and would 
attempt to replace Ideology with Truth. Bloch would dismiss this merely denuncia-
tory approach to ideology critique as “half- enlightenment,” which he compares to 
genuine  enlightenment. Half- enlightenment “has nothing but an attitude,” that is, 

86 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
rationalistic dismissal of all mystification, superstition, legend, and so on, that does 
not measure up to its scientific criteria. Genuine enlightenment, on the other hand, 
criticizes any distortions in an ideological product, but then goes on to take it more 
seriously, to read it closely for any critical or emancipatory potential. Half- 
enlightenment deludes itself, first, by thinking that truth and enlightenment can be 
obtained solely by eliminating error, rather than offering something positive and 
attractive. Indeed, Bloch believes that part of the reason why the Left was defeated 
by the Right in Weimar Germany is because the Left tended to focus simply on criti-
cism, on negative denunciations of capitalism and the bourgeoisie, whereas fascism 
provided a positive vision and attractive alternatives to masses desperately search-
ing for something better. 
 Against merely negative ideology critique, Bloch urges us to pay close attention to 
potential progressive contents within artifacts or phenomena frequently denounced 
and dismissed as mere ideology. For Bloch, ideology contained an “anticipatory” 
dimension, in which its discourses, images, and figures produced utopian images of 
a better world. Utopian elements, however, coexist with “merely embellishing ones” 
( The Principle , 1986a, 148). In some cases, this amounts to a “merely dubious polish-
ing of what exists” (149). Such apologetic functions “reconcile the subject with what 
exists” (149). These purposes appear above all “in periods of class society which are 
no longer revolutionary” (149). Even in this situation, however, ideologies may con-
tain embellishing elements that anticipate a better world, that express in abstract and 
idealist fashion the potentialities for a better future. If such ideologies deceive indi-
viduals into believing that the present society has already realized such ideals, they 
serve mystificatory functions, but Bloch’s method of cultural criticism also wants us 
to interrogate these ideologies for their utopian contents, for their anticipations of a 
better world, which can help us to see what is deficient and lacking in this world and 
what should be fought for to produce a better (i.e., freer and happier) future. 
 Bloch therefore restores to radical theory a cultural heritage that is often neglected 
or dismissed as merely ideology. Critique of ideology, Bloch argues, is not merely 
unmasking ( Entlarvung ), or demystification, but is also uncovering and discovery: 
revelations of unrealized dreams, lost possibilities, abortive hopes that can be resur-
rected, enlivened and realized in our current situation. Bloch’s cultural criticism 
thus accentuates the positive, the utopian- emancipatory possibilities, the testimony 
to hopes for a better world. As Habermas dramatically puts it:
  What Bloch wants to preserve for socialism, which subsists on scorning tradition, 
is the tradition of the scorned. In contrast to the unhistorical procedure of 
Feuerbach’s criticism of ideology, which deprived Hegel’s “sublation” ( Aufhebung ) 
of half of its meaning (forgetting  elevare  and being satisfied with  tollere ), Bloch 
presses the ideologies to yield their ideas to him; he wants to save that which is 
true in false consciousness: “All great culture that existed hitherto has been the 
foreshadowing of an achievement, inasmuch as images and thoughts can be pro-
jected from the ages’ summit into the far horizon of the future.” (Habermas 63) 

ERNST BLOCH, UTOPIA, AND IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE 87
 Bloch believed that even ideological artifacts contain expressions of desire and artic-
ulations of needs that radical theory and politics should heed to provide programs 
and discourses which appeal to deep- seated desires for a better life. Ideologies also 
provide clues to possibilities for future development and contain a “surplus” or 
“excess” that is not exhausted in mystification or legitimation. And ideologies may 
contain normative ideals whereby the existing society can be criticized and models 
of an alternative society. For example, the notion of the  citoyen  (citizen) in bourgeois 
ideology, with its individual rights, civil liberties, and actively engaged autonomy, 
expressed something more than mere legitimation and apologetics for bourgeois 
institutions and practices. Bloch takes seriously Marx’s position that the task of 
socialism is to fully realize certain bourgeois ideals. Throughout his life, Bloch 
argued that Marxism, as it was constituted in its Social Democratic and other lead-
ing versions, was vitiated by a one- sided, inadequate, and merely negative approach 
to ideology. 
 For Bloch, the problem of ideology “is broached from the  side of the problem of 
cultural inheritance , of the problem as to how works of the superstructure progres-
sively reproduce themselves in cultural consciousness even after disappearance of 
their social bases” (154). Such notions contain a  cultural surplus  that lives on and 
provides a  utopian function  whereby the ideal can still be translated into a reality and 
thus be fully realized for the first time. Although for Bloch the primary site of ideol-
ogy is the cultural superstructure— philosophy, religion, art, and so on— the super-
structure contains a surplus and thus cannot be reduced to mere ideology. For Bloch, 
this surplus preserves unsatisfied desires and human wishes for a better world, and 
because such wishes are usually not fulfilled they contain elements which remain 
relevant to a future society that may be able to satisfy these desires and needs. In 
other words, ideology contains hints as to what human beings desire and need that 
can be used to criticize failures to satisfy these needs and to realize these desires in 
the current society. 
 Ideology critique thus requires not only demolition but also hermeneutics, for 
ideology in Bloch’s view contains preconscious elements, or what Bloch calls the 
“Not- Yet- Conscious.” Properly understood, the Not- Yet- Conscious may point to real 
possibilities for social development and real potentials for human liberation. Bloch 
tends to present the theory of utopian surplus along historical- materialist lines in 
terms of the rise and fall of social classes. Utopian surplus generally appears when a 
class is rising: the ascending class criticizes the previous order and projects a wealth 
of proposals for social change, as when the bourgeoisie attacked the feudal order for 
its lack of individual freedom, rights, democracy, and class mobility. Bourgeois cri-
tiques of feudalism proliferated, as did revolutionary proposals for a new society. 
Some of these ideas were incorporated into bourgeois constitutions, declarations of 
rights, and some were even institutionalized in the bourgeois order.  6 
 Thus culture ranges, for Bloch, from an ideal type of pure ideology to purely 
nonideological emancipatory culture. Purely ideological artifacts embellish or legiti-
mate an oppressive existing reality, as when Bloch speaks of ideology as that which 

88 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
excludes all progressive elements (9). Most cultural artifacts, however, contain a 
mixture of ideology and utopian elements. Since ideologies are rhetorical constructs 
that attempt to persuade and to convince, they must have a relatively rational and 
attractive core and thus often contain emancipatory promises or moments. Drawing 
on Bloch, Fredric Jameson has suggested that mass cultural texts often have utopian 
moments and proposes that radical cultural criticism should analyze both the social 
hopes and fantasies in cultural artifacts, as well as the ideological ways in which fan-
tasies are presented, conflicts are resolved, and potentially disruptive hopes and 
anxieties are managed (“Reification” 130–48). 
 In his reading of  Jaws , for instance, the shark stands in for a variety of fears (i.e., 
uncontrolled organic nature threatening the artificial society, big business corrupt-
ing and endangering community, disruptive sexuality threatening the disintegration 
of the family and traditional values, and so on). In Jameson’s reading,  Jaws  tries to 
contain these fears through the reassuring defeat of evil by representatives of the cur-
rent class structure. Yet the film also contains utopian images of family, male- 
bonding, and adventure, as well as socially critical visions of capitalism, which 
articulate fears that unrestrained big business would inexorably destroy the environ-
ment and community. In Jameson’s view, mass culture thus articulates social con-
flicts, contemporary fears and utopian hopes, and attempts at ideological containment 
and reassurance. In his view:
  [W]orks of mass culture cannot be ideological without at one and the same time 
being implicitly or explicitly Utopian as well: they cannot manipulate unless 
they offer some genuine shred of content as a fantasy bribe to the public about to 
be so manipulated. Even the “false consciousness” of so monstrous a phenome-
non as Nazism was nourished by collective fantasies of a Utopian type, in “social-
ist” as well as in nationalist guises. Our proposition about the drawing power of 
the works of mass culture has implied that such works cannot manage anxieties 
about the social order unless they have first revived them and given them some 
rudimentary expression; we will now suggest that anxiety and hope are two faces 
of the same collective consciousness, so that the works of mass culture, even if 
their function lies in the legitimation of the existing order— or some worse 
one— cannot do their job without deflecting in the latter’s service the deepest 
and most fundamental hopes and fantasies of the collectivity, to which they can 
therefore, no matter in how distorted a fashion, be found to have given voice. 
(“Ideology,” 144)  
 Films like  Jaws , for instance, might use utopian images to provide a critique of the 
loss of community and its destruction by commercial interests. Popular texts may 
thus enact social criticism in their ideological scenarios and one of the tasks of radi-
cal cultural criticism is to specify utopian, critical, subversive, or oppositional mean-
ings, even within the texts of so- called mass culture. For these artifacts may contain 
implicit and even explicit critiques of capitalism, sexism, or racism, or visions of 

ERNST BLOCH, UTOPIA, AND IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE 89
freedom and happiness that can provide critical perspectives on the unhappiness 
and unfreedom in the existing society.  The Deer Hunter , for instance, though an 
arguably reactionary text, contains utopian images of community, working class and 
ethnic solidarity, and personal friendship that provide critical perspectives on the 
atomism, alienation, and loss of community in everyday life under contemporary 
capitalism.  Avatar  provides an allegorical vision of ecological harmony and peace, 
interrupted by Western military technology and colonial invasion. The utopian ele-
ments of getting high and horsing around in the drug hootch in  Platoon constitute 
visions of racial harmony and individual and social happiness that offer a critical 
perspective on the harrowing war scenes and that code war as a disgusting and 
destructive human activity. The images of racial solidarity and transcendence in the 
dance numbers of  Zoot Suit  provide a utopian and critical contrast to the oppression 
of people of color found in the scenes of everyday and prison life in the film, while 
the transformation of life in the musical numbers of  Pennies From Heaven  give criti-
cal perspectives on the degradation of everyday life due to the constraints of an 
unjust and irrational economic system that informs the realist sections of the film. 
 Ideologies thus pander to human desires, fantasies, anxieties, and hopes, and cul-
tural artifacts must address these, if they are to be successful. Ideology and utopia are 
thus interconnected and culture is saturated with utopian content. On the other 
hand, ideologies exploit and distort this utopian content and should be criticized to 
expose their merely embellishing, legitimating, and mystifying elements. 
 Everyday Life, Human Beings, and Psychology 
 Certain versions of Marxist ideology critique and half- enlightenment err, Bloch 
believes, by failing to see the importance of culture in everyday life. A rationalistic 
ideology critique believes that simply by exposing mistakes and pointing to the truth 
it can motivate people to action. Such a belief, on Bloch’s account, is mistaken both 
in its overestimation of rationalistic enlightenment and in its underestimation of 
sub- rational desires, fantasies, beliefs, and so on. Properly understanding human 
motivation and psychology, Bloch believes, requires taking fantasy, imagination, 
wishes, and desires more seriously. 
 Bloch’s thought is rooted in a humanist anthropology that grounds his critique of 
oppression and emancipatory perspectives. Bloch always begins with the wishing, hope-
ful, needy, and hungry human being and analyzes what impedes realization of human 
desire and fulfillment of human needs. Thus, humanism for Bloch is revolutionary and 
provides standards for critique and impetus for political action and social change. 
 Unlike most Marxists, Bloch thus takes human needs, desires, and psychology 
very seriously. Here Bloch’s thinking runs parallel to that of Wilhelm Reich and the 
Freudo- Marxists, though in significant ways it also differs from this tendency.  7 For 
Reich and others urged the communists to pay more attention to sexual needs and 
desires and unconscious wishes and fears. But they tended to overestimate the role of 
sexuality in constituting human psychology and motivation, and downplayed such 

90 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
things as hunger, needs for security, home, community, and many other issues that 
Bloch believes the fascists addressed with more success than the Left.  8 
 In  The Principle of Hope , Bloch carries out an extremely interesting apprecia-
tion and critique of Freud, and develops his own psychological theories of imagi-
nation, needs, and hope against Freud. In fact, I would think that Bloch could 
productively be used to develop a Marxian anthropology and social psychology 
today and that his own anthropological and psychological perspectives are deeper 
and more illuminating than Freudo- Marxist approaches associated with the 
Frankfurt school or French theory like that of Deleuze and Guattari, Lyotard, and 
so on. Briefly examining Bloch’s critique of Freud will enable us to perceive how he 
is able to point to ideological tendencies in thinkers and theories often not per-
ceived by standard Marxist ideology critique, as well as to articulate Bloch’s own 
distinctive anthropological- psychological perspectives. This discussion will also 
show how Bloch is, if anything, more critical and devastating in his attack on ide-
ologies, like psychoanalysis, than many Marxist critics. 
 Given Bloch’s emphasis on the importance of the subjective dimension in the 
constitution of human experience and for radical theory and politics, it is necessary 
that he distinguish his theory of subjectivity from psychoanalytic theories. He does 
this, first, by rooting psychological tendencies in the body and in human needs, pri-
marily hunger, rather than in instincts and the unconscious à la Freud ( The Principle , 
1986a, 45ff.). He also conceptualizes “man as a quite extensive complex of drives” 
(47ff.) and constantly emphasizes cravings, wishing, desiring, and hoping for a bet-
ter life, opposed to Freudian emphases on castration, repression, and the conserva-
tive political economy of the instincts that are more characterized by repetition, 
excitation- release, and ultimately entropy (the death instinct) than the development 
of new drives, impulses, tendencies and possibilities for change and transformation 
such as one finds at the center of Bloch’s theory (Freud tends to present a fixed view 
of human nature). 
 At the end of the first stage of his critique of Freud, Bloch concludes: “In short, we 
realize that man is an equally changeable and extensive complex of drives, a heap of 
 changing , and mostly badly ordered wishes. And a permanent motivating force, a 
single basic drive, in so far as it does not become independent and thus hang in the 
air, is hardly conceivable.” Rather there are several basic drives that emerge as pri-
mary at different times in social and individual life, depending on the conditions 
prevailing at the time (50). 
 In a discussion of “Various Interpretations of the Basic Human Drive,” Bloch car-
ries out critiques of Freud’s notion of the primacy of the sexual drive and Freud’s 
notions of the ego drive and repression, repression and the unconscious, and subli-
mation (51ff.). The key point is that:
  The unconscious of psychoanalysis is therefore, as we can see,  never a Not- Yet- 
Conscious , an element of progressions; it consists rather of regressions. 
Accordingly, even the process of making this unconscious conscious only 

ERNST BLOCH, UTOPIA, AND IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE 91
 clarifies What Has Been; i.e.  there is nothing new in the Freudian unconscious . 
This became even clearer when C. G. Jung, the psychoanalytic fascist, reduced 
the libido and its unconscious contents entirely to the primeval. According to 
him, exclusively phylogenetic primeval memories or primeval fantasies exist in 
the unconscious, falsely designated “archetypes”; and all wishful images also go 
back into this night, only suggest prehistory. Jung even considers the night to be 
so colorful that consciousness pales beside it; as a spurner of the light, he deval-
ues consciousness. In contrast, Freud does of course unhold illuminating con-
sciousness, but one which is itself surrounded by the ring of the id, by the fixed 
unconsciousness of a fixed libido. Even highly productive artistic creations do 
not lead out of this Fixum; they are simply  sublimations of the self- enclosed 
libido. (56)  
 In his analysis, Bloch positively valorizes Freud’s enlightenment rationalism over 
Jung’s irrationalism, and while he carries through a rehabilitation of what is some-
times dismissed as “the irrational,” he also carries out a devastating critique of 
obscurantist, reactionary, irrationalist tendencies, especially those connected with 
fascism. Indeed, continuing to examine his critique of Jung and his critique of 
Freud’s disciple Alfred Adler,  9   who claimed that the will to power was the primary 
human drive, should help differentiate Bloch’s theory of the subjective from more 
reactionary variants with which he might be wrongly identified. This exercise will 
also illustrate what a sharp and powerful critique of ideology Bloch undertakes, how 
he discerns ideological tendencies in phenomena often overlooked, and is able to 
connect ideological theories to sociohistorical tendencies. 
 Bloch discerns, for example, how Adler’s Will to Power is related to competitive 
capitalist drives to move from the bottom to the top, and how his theories of inferior-
ity complex and neurosis reproduce the feelings of those strata of capitalist societies 
who have failed economically and who thus blame themselves for their failures 
(57ff.). Bloch concludes:
  Because Adler therefore drives sex out of the libido and inserts individual power, 
his definition of drives takes the ever steeper capitalist path from Schopenhauer 
to Nietzsche and reflects this path ideologically and psychoanalytically. Freud’s 
concept of libido borders on the “will to life” in Schopenhauer’s philosophy; 
Schopenhauer in fact described the sexual organs as “the focal points of the 
will.” Adler’s “Will to Power” conversely coincides verbally, and partly also in 
terms of content with Nietzsche’s definition of the basic drive from his last 
period; in this respect, Nietzsche has triumphed over Schopenhauer here, that 
is to say, the imperialist elbow has triumphed over the gentlemanly pleasure- 
displeasure body in psychoanalysis. The competitive struggle which hardly 
leaves any time for sexual worries stressed industriousness rather than randi-
ness; the hectic day of the businessman thus eclipses the hectic night of the rake 
and his libido. (58)  

92 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 Bloch then points out that the hectic life and the structural anxiety that permeates 
life in capitalist society— which submits the underlying population to the vagaries 
and uncertainties of the market— produce tendencies toward escape and regression, 
especially among the middle and lower petit- bourgeois strata. Thus Adler’s celebra-
tion of a Will to Power— which implicitly summons one to muster one’s energies for 
production and competition— loses appeal as it becomes increasingly difficult to 
succeed in the marketplace. “Above all the path to the so- called heights lost some of 
its interest and prospects, in exact proportion to the decline of free enterprise, as a 
result of monopoly capitalism” (59). 
 The class strata that had previously responded to follow the calls by Nietzsche, 
Adler, and others to scale the heights of competition and worldly success began to 
look backward toward “the so- called depths, in which the eyes roll instead of aiming 
at a goal” (59). Consequently, the appeal grew of Carl Jung, “the fascistically frothing 
psychoanalyst” who “consequently posited the frenzy- drive in place of the power 
drive” (59). I cite the following passage in its entirety to provide a sense of Bloch’s 
power as a critic of ideology:
  Just as sexuality is only part of this Dionysian general libido, so also is the will to 
power, in fact the latter is completely transformed into battle- frenzy, into a stupor 
which in no way strives toward individual goals. In Jung, libido thus becomes an 
archaically undivided primeval unity of all drives, or “Eros” per se: consequently 
it extends from eating to the Last Supper, from coitus to unio mystica, from the 
frothing mouth of the shaman, even the berserker, to the rapture of Fra Angelico. 
Even here, therefore, Nietzsche triumphs over Schopenhauer, but he triumphs as 
the affirmation of a mescaline Dionysus over the negation of the will to life. As a 
result, the unconscious aspect of this mystified libido is also not contested and 
there is no attempt to resolve it into current consciousness as in Freud. Rather the 
neurosis, particularly that of modern, all too civilized and conscious man, derives 
according to Jung precisely from the fact that men have emerged too far out of 
what is unconsciously growing, outside the world of “elemental feel- thinking.” 
Here Jung borders not only on the fascist version of Dionysus, but also partly on 
the vitalistic philosophy of Bergson. (59–60)   
 Those who might be inclined to dismiss Bloch as an irrationalist should read his 
critique of German irrationalist thought and fascist ideologies. After critiquing Adler 
and Jung, Bloch goes after Bergson, the “sentimental penis- poet,” D. H. Lawrence, 
the “complete Tarzan philosopher,” Ludwig Klages, the celebrator of Neanderthal 
man, Gottfried Benn, and the petit bourgeois mystifier Martin Heidegger (60ff.).  10 
While Bergson’s vitalism contained some progressive moments, by contrast D. H. 
Lawrence, “and Jung along with him, sings the wildernesses of the elemental age of 
love, which to his misfortune man has emerged from; he seeks the nocturnal moon 
in the flesh, the unconscious sun in the blood. And Klages blows in a more abstract 
way on the same bull- horn; he does not only hark back like the early Romantics to 

ERNST BLOCH, UTOPIA, AND IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE 93
the Middle Ages, but to the diluvium, to precisely where Jung’s impersonal, pande-
monic libido lives” (59–60). 
 Bloch continues his provocative critique of German irrationalism (61ff.), that 
rivals his friend Lukàcs’ critiques,  11   and then presents his own theory of subjectivity, 
hope, the preconscious, the Not- Yet- Conscious, and so on (65ff.) discussed earlier in 
this study. Bloch’s anthropological analysis of the elements in subjective experience 
that strive for a better life far surpasses the theory of the subjective dimension of 
Lukàcs, or almost any other Marxist. Indeed,  The Principle of Hope  offers a treasure 
house of insights into many topics neglected in standard Marxism, and provides an 
extremely useful concept of culture and ideology critique. In the next section, I thus 
want to examine some of the richest sections of  The Principle of Hope , which I believe 
are most productive for cultural criticism today. 
 Bloch’s Cultural Criticism and the Panorama of Culture 
 I have stressed how Bloch’s theory of cultural criticism is rooted in his anthropological 
and philosophical perspectives, which are delineated in the first two parts of  The 
Principle of Hope . 12   Part three contains explorations of “Wishful Images in the Mirror,” 
in which Bloch decodes traces of hope permeating everyday life and culture. No phi-
losopher since Hegel has explored in such detail and with such penetration the cultural 
tradition, which for Bloch contains untapped emancipatory potential. Yet, Bloch con-
centrates not only on the great works of the cultural heritage, but on familiar and 
ordinary aspects of everyday experience, within which he finds utopian potential. 
 Fashion, grooming, new clothes, and how we make ourselves appear to others 
exhibit the utopian potential of transforming us into something better. Perceiving 
this potential in advertising, Bloch recognizes that it invests magical properties into 
commodities, which will produce allegedly magical results for the customer. “Shop-
 windows and advertising are in their capitalist form exclusively lime- twigs for the 
attracted dream birds” (344). To be sure, the promises of advertising and consumer 
culture are often false promises and often produce false needs, but their power and 
ubiquity shows the depth of the needs that capitalism exploits and the wishes for 
another life that permeate capitalist societies. 
 Moreover, many people wear masks, often derived from magazines or mass cul-
tural images, to transform themselves, to attempt to invent a more satisfying life. 
Thus, do youths join subcultures, even fascist ones like the Ku Klux Klan. Criminals 
and crime provide powerful attractions to oppressed youth, promising transcend-
ence of their everyday misery.  13   Similar motivations lead individuals to join the Klan 
and other racist groups, to try to get a new and more satisfying identity through 
immersion in violent subcultures. Magazines, best- selling novels, film and television 
also offer advice and models for self- transformation and how to achieve romance, 
success, and wealth. 
 Fairy tales celebrate the courage and cunning, whereby ordinary individuals 
achieve their dreams. The realization of wishes is the very substance of fairy tales and 

94 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
images of artifacts like Aladdin’s lamp provide powerful fantasies of wish- fulfillment. 
Travel to exotic far- away places enables individuals to dream of better lives, while the 
circus provides access to a “wishful world of eccentricity and precise dexterity” (364). 
Adventure stories are vehicles of escape to a world of excitement and often show 
ordinary individuals defeating evil villains and oppressors. These are “immature, 
but honest substitute[s] for revolution” (368) and expressions of deep- seated desires 
for more power and satisfaction in their daily lives among ordinary people. 
 These forms of popular culture thus demonstrate desire for change and transfor-
mation and contain utopian energies that can make individuals yearn for a better 
world and attempt to transform themselves and their life. This culture is not, how-
ever, completely innocent or positive in its effects. Travel stories and images are 
exploited by travel agencies, promoting colonialism and the decline of everything, 
“with the exception of the West” (376). Much culture simply expresses and furthers 
the decadence of capitalist societies. In an attack on American popular music and 
dance that out- does Adorno, Bloch writes:
  Where everything is disintegrating though, the body also contorts itself effort-
lessly along with it. Nothing coarser, nastier, more stupid has ever been seen than 
the jazz- dances since 1930. Jitterbug, Boogie- Woogie, this is imbecility gone wild, 
with a corresponding howling which provides the so to speak music accompani-
ment. American movement of this kind is rocking the Western countries, not as 
dance, but as vomiting. Man is to be soiled and his brain emptied; he has even less 
idea amongst his exploiters where he stands, for whom he is grafting, what he is 
being sent off to die for. (394) 
 Against this “American filth,” however, Bloch claims that “a kind of movement of 
purification emerged” in the new schools of dance developing from Isidora Duncan 
which attempted “to demonstrate a more beautiful human image in the flesh” (394). 
Bloch also celebrates the Russian folk- dance which expresses a “joy beyond the day 
of drudgery. The calmness and boisterousness both say: Here I am human, here I am 
entitled to be” (395). Expressionist dance, however, is more ambivalent, rebelling 
against “the spirit of gravity,” but also flowing into “the local bloodlake of fascism; 
for which this kind of roaring of wings was already foreseeable in its imperialist 
premises” (398). 
 These examples show that Bloch carries out a differentiated critique of cultural 
forms, tending to attack those which he sees involved with fascist culture, or a deca-
dent capitalism, and praising those which rebel against capitalism and bourgeois life, 
or celebrate a healthy socialism. He contrasts, for example, the “incomparable falsi-
fication” of Hollywood film, with the “realistic film in its anti- capitalist, no longer 
capitalist peak performances” (408). While Bloch is sharply critical of Hollywood 
film (see especially  The Principle of Hope , 1986a, 410), he believes that film per se 
contains much utopian potential in its ability to project images of a better life, to 
explore and redeem concrete reality, and to transmit utopian dreams and energies. 

ERNST BLOCH, UTOPIA, AND IDEOLOGY CRITIQUE 95
 In sum, Bloch finds utopian traces throughout the field of culture, demonstrating 
that “[m]ankind and the world carry enough good future; no plan is itself good with-
out this fundamental belief within it” (447). Even though it is beneficial to affirm 
Bloch’s methodological imperative of searching for utopian and emancipatory poten-
tial within all forms of culture, while also attending to embellishing and mystifying 
ideological elements, one might quarrel with his specific evaluations and judgments. 
As my presentation makes clear, he tends to attack culture that affirms capitalism, fas-
cism, and philosophical idealism, and to praise culture which promotes socialism. 
 The limitations of his evaluations, I believe, derive from his overly dogmatic 
Marxism and his exile experiences that provide consistently negative depictions of 
the United States. 14  The Principle of Hope was written while Bloch was a relatively 
emphatic Marxist and his political hermeneutic deeply influenced his readings. His 
discussion of theater, for instance, celebrates Brecht (413ff.) and progressive German 
and Soviet theater, and exalts theater that promotes “defiance and hope” rather than 
the catharsis of pity and fear of Greek theater (429ff.). He also constantly attacks the 
enemies of utopia, such as the French artist Grandville and Greek playwright 
Aristophanes (434, 435ff.) and above all attacks American culture. 
 Utilizing Bloch for cultural criticism thus requires distancing oneself from some 
of his specific judgments and analyses while making use of his double- coded concept 
of ideology and his method of cultural criticism. Cultural studies, for Bloch, should 
reject distinctions between high and low culture, seeing utopian potential in cultural 
artifacts ranging from advertising and department store displays to Beethoven and 
opera. Bloch’s politicization of cultural critique forces one to make political evalua-
tions of cultural artifacts, though one may make different judgments, and have dif-
ferent political perspectives than Bloch. Indeed, cultural studies for Bloch was 
intimately bound up with his social and political theory, so that cultural criticism for 
him was an important part of political practice.  15 
 Socialism, Revolution, and the Red Arrow 
 In conclusion, Bloch offers a paradigm of “intra- historical transcendence,” in which 
utopian elements are grounded in a cultural tradition and historical situation, and 
thus point to a better future in which long- held wishes and dreams for freedom, hap-
piness, and justice can be realized. For Bloch, hope is thus always grounded in con-
crete historical conditions and struggles and there is always future potentiality for a 
better life and society. 
 In the Obama era, hope has become part of the political discourse of the day, and 
in my view Ernst Bloch provides a particularly rich philosophical and political 
grounding of hope in his theory of utopia.  16   Part Four of  The Principle of Hope inter-
rogates the “Outlines of a Better World” in a variety of utopias. Bloch finds utopian 
dreams not only in the social and political utopias of the great utopian theorists, but 
also in a variety of technological, architectural, and geographical utopias, as well as 
in painting, opera, literature, and other forms of art. Part Five describes “Wishful 

96 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
Images of the Fulfilled Moment,” in which morality, music, religion, and philoso-
phies project images and visions of supreme fulfillment, culminating in the figure of 
an individual who “has grasped himself and established what is his, without exploi-
tation and alienation.” In this situation, “in real democracy, there arises in the world 
something which shines into the childhood of all and in which no one has yet been: 
homeland” (1376). 
 Culture for Bloch contains traces of what he calls red arrows that migrate through 
history looking for realization in socialism. Bloch finds a red path weaving through 
history, revolting against alienation, exploitation, and oppression, struggling for a 
better world. The social and political utopias present imperfect yearnings for what 
was more fully developed in Marxism and socialism. Thus Bloch develops an explic-
itly political hermeneutic that interprets certain cultural artifacts and residues from 
the past as pointing toward socialism. 
 Certain aspects of the bourgeois revolutions, for instance, were never realized 
and contain a surplus of critical and emancipatory potential that can be used to criti-
cize bourgeois society on the grounds that it was not realizing its own potentials and 
ideals. One of Bloch’s more productive ideas is that the ideological surplus or cul-
tural surplus is not just an expression of the socioeconomic base or the dominant 
mode of production but is  Ungleichzeitig , describing what is noncontemporaneous or 
nonsynchronic with the present.  17   This concept points to the fact that residues and 
traditions from the past continue to be effective in the present, even though it might 
appear that they are completely archaic and historically surpassed (i.e., fascist primi-
tivism, or the ultra- market capitalism and conservatism in the Reagan and Bush 
administrations in a technologically advanced United States). 
 But  Ungleichzeitigkeit  also points to elements from the past that anticipate future 
developments, which appear before their time and point ahead to a time to come 
(i.e., earlier anticipations of socialism). However, the utopian surplus contains the 
potential to project long- term goals for an individual or society and for political 
practice that provide alternatives to the status quo that are far- seeing and future 
oriented. For Bloch, ideology and utopia are therefore not simply opposites because 
utopian elements appear in ideology and utopias are often permeated with ideologi-
cal content and mystification. Cultural surplus, for Bloch, has the potentiality of 
utopian surplus that anticipates, previews, and points to a better organization of 
society and everyday life, and it is the task of the cultural critic to discern and unfold 
this progressive potential and to relate it to the struggles and possibilities of the 
present. Bloch’s cultural hermeneutic is thus deeply political and cultural studies for 
him is intimately bound up with political practice. 
 

 CHAPTER 8 
 Secularism and Post- Secularism in Roberto Unger 
and Ernst Bloch: Toward a Utopian Ontology  1 
 Ruth  Levitas 
 Introduction 
 In 2007 I wrote an article on the relationship between pragmatism and utopianism, 
contrasting the avowedly anti- utopian position taken by Roberto Unger in his 2007 
book  The Self Awakened: Pragmatism Unbound  with the self- styled “realistic utopi-
anism” of Richard Rorty (Levitas,  Pragmatism ). I argued that the former is effec-
tively utopian in its opening to the future, while the latter is effectively anti- utopian 
in closing down the possibility of radical alterity. That article originated in a work-
shop on social hope held at Queens University, Belfast. Several participants responded 
by locating Unger’s argument as part of the post- secular turn in social theory, a view 
that is repeated in the critical literature. For example, Gregor McLennan argues that 
Unger’s “relatively secular re- imaginings are overwhelmed at times by standardly 
religious intuitions” (98). This article chapter examines the case for and against that 
suggestion, concluding that it is a misunderstanding. The misunderstanding arises 
partly because of Unger’s focus on the self, which may be (mis)read as a retreat from 
the social. Moreover, a language of divinity, godlikeness, prophecy, and grace per-
vades the text. Yet, to associate the views in  The Self Awakened  with the post- secular 
turn is to neglect the fact that the arguments, and to some extent the language, are 
present in Unger’s earlier work, notably his 1984  Passion: An Essay on Personality . A 
close reading of both texts, informed also by Ernst Bloch’s recently reissued  Atheism 
in Christianity , reveals a militantly secular argument and an intrinsic connection 
between these accounts of the self and Unger’s commitment to social reconstruc-
tion. The last part of the chapter argues that the use of quasi- religious language 
derives from the absence of evidently secular language to address questions of ontol-
ogy, especially in normative and prescriptive terms. This in a sense echoes 
Christopher Hill’s contention that the use of religious, apocalyptic imagery, and 
language by radical sects in the English Revolution occurred at least in part because 
of the absence of an available adequate political language. I contend that an adequate 
secular language is absent in part as a result of the current polarization between 

98 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
secular and religious positions. The model of secular humanism at work in these 
debates involves a debased humanism, or what Bloch referred to as “stupid material-
ism.” The most prominent proponent of this is Richard Dawkins in  The God 
Delusion , but many popular accounts of evolutionary biology are implicated here. 
The only way to stem the rise of pathological fundamentalisms of all kinds (includ-
ing Dawkins’s) is to insist on a deeper humanism that, as Bloch would insist, reclaims 
from religion matters of spirit and grace. Such matters are not eliminated from sec-
ular culture, but sequestered in art, poetry, and music, and they are a source of deep 
embarrassment to most secular social scientists. Unger, like Bloch, effects this recla-
mation. He shares with Bloch an ontology which is historicized rather than essen-
tialist, and which is centered on becoming and therefore open to the future. In that 
respect it is a utopian ontology.  
 Ernst Bloch 
 Bloch himself is of course the most important theorist of utopia, and especially its 
relationship to Marxism. In that context, the most central work is  Das Prinzip 
Hoffnung , translated into English in 1986 as  The Principle of Hope . The arguments of 
this 1,400- page work are complex, and can only be briefly summarized here. Bloch 
does not equate utopia with a blueprint or plan for the future. Rather, it is the prod-
uct of lack, longing, and desire, and the imagination of what would meet that lack. 
Expressions of this are suffused throughout culture, from alchemy and myth, 
through art, literature and especially music, into social and political action. Bloch 
endorses even the most unrealistic fantasies as an expression of the wish that the 
world might be otherwise. He also makes a distinction between “abstract utopia,” or 
wishful thinking that is merely fantastic, and “concrete utopia,” the outcome of 
wishful thinking passed into will- full action. For Bloch, the world is essentially 
unfinished, and the future must be brought into being by human agency: our par-
ticipation in this process is inescapable. The world is intrinsically and necessarily in 
process of becoming. The path of development is indeterminate and contains multi-
ple possibilities— possibilities that are not set against the real, but are part of it. The 
anticipation or forward- dawning of a world transformed, of possibility on the hori-
zon, attests to a utopian process. Bloch’s key concept of the “not- yet” encompasses 
both absence and anticipation. The not- yet is characteristic not only of the external 
world but of the human condition. The idea of a transformed, or more accurately 
self- transforming, humanity is reflected in such concepts as the Not- Yet- Conscious 
and the Upright Gait. The later parts of  The Principle of Hope  discuss religion as a 
repository of utopian imagination. Bloch’s arguments here echo Marx’s assertion 
that religion is not simply the opium of the people, but “the heart of a heartless 
world, the spirit of spiritless conditions.” He insists that the necessary move to athe-
ism is one which  reclaims  the essentially human characteristics that have been pro-
jected onto God and Christ because they cannot be expressed or encountered in the 
constraints of the world as it is. 2 

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 99
 In 2009 Bloch’s later work  Atheism in Christianity  (first published in English in 
1972) was reissued with an introduction by Peter Thompson. It is an exercise in bibli-
cal criticism, exegesis and theological critique directed to supporting a rebellious 
and utopian reading of both Old and New Testaments. The date of the book suggests 
it is a contribution to the contemporaneous “Christian- Marxist dialogue,” although 
Bloch describes this as “grey and compromising” ( Atheism, 256). He discusses both 
Feuerbach and Marx, supporting their arguments about religion as alienation. But 
he does argue against the simple interpretation of religion as the opium of the people, 
by insisting on considering the wider context of that phrase. Of course “one cannot 
expect miracles from a consideration of the opium- quotation in its entirety (instead 
of just half of it), but it might at least open the way, as they say, to conversations 
between believers purged of ideology and unbelievers purged of taboo” (Bloch, 
 Atheism, 51). Bloch quotes Marx:
  Religion is the fantastic realization of human nature, inasmuch as human nature 
has no true reality . . . Religious misery is at once the expression of man’s real 
misery and the protest against it. Religion is the heart of a heartless world, the 
soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people. The suppression of reli-
gion as man’s illusory happiness is the demand for their real happiness . . . The 
criticism of religion has plucked the imaginary flowers from their chains, not so 
that man may wear a dreary unimaginative chain, but so that he may throw off 
the chain and pluck the living flowers . . . The critique of religion ends with the 
doctrine that the highest being for mankind is man: with the categorical impera-
tive, therefore, to overthrow every state of affairs in which man is degraded, 
enslaved, abandoned and despised in his very being. 3 ( Atheism, 50) 
 Bloch argues that there are two different narratives running through the Bible: “a 
Scripture for the people and a Scripture against the people” ( Atheism,  70). One 
story is that of a creator- god, a law- giver from above, nonhuman, utterly tran-
scendent and other. Bloch argues that mistranslations, corruptions, and deliber-
ate redactions of biblical texts accentuate the potential for religion to support 
repressive political agendas, by promoting compliance and submission to both 
secular and religious authority. He alludes in this context to Church support for 
dictators such as Franco (still in power in Spain when the book was written) and 
to collusion with anti- semitism and the burning of Jews, heretics, and Lutherans. 
Theologically, the characterization of Christ as Son of God stresses his divine 
rather than human character, while the representation of humanity involves 
descriptive subalternity and prescriptive self- abnegation. The Kingdom of God is 
placed outside time and history, inaccessible to human experience and impervi-
ous to human action. Bloch discusses the treatment of transcendence by theolo-
gians, especially Karl Barth, in which the human/God distinction is absolute and 
bridged only by the Word (of the Bible, which is thus de- historicized) and by 
Christ. He claims that Barth’s eschatology is one that ends the world: there is no 

100 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
redemption of this world. Bloch argues that in Barth “The taboo of God’s other- 
worldliness and the sovereignty of his revelation minimize every achievement of 
man’s spirit” ( Atheism, 36). 
 The atheism of the book’s title is the rejection of the creator- God in favor of the 
God of Exodus. This de- theocratizing is necessary because “the Bible only has a 
future inasmuch as it can, with this future, transcend without transcendence” (Bloch, 
 Atheism,  70). There is an alternative eschatological story of Exodus into the Kingdom. 
This is a half- buried plebeian element, a narrative of rebellion against injustice, 
which recurs in the story of the Fall and the desire for knowledge that precipitates it. 
It appears  par excellence  in the Book of Job, which reveals Job as morally superior to 
God (and to his so- called comforters who preach subjection and compliance), and in 
which Job appears as a Hebrew Prometheus. It is there, says Bloch, in the Prophets 
who point toward freedom of choice and the power of human decision so that the 
future is not an immutable category. It is there in Jesus’ own political orientation, 
and is taken up by writers such as William Blake, and religious movements such as 
the Anabaptists. In this, the emphasis is on Jesus as Son of Man. This restores human 
agency, brings the Kingdom within historical time, opens the future to a process 
which is a double exodus into human and social transfiguration. Transcendence is 
not removal from or beyond the world, but its immanent and imminent transforma-
tion. The ontology that is involved here is an “ontology of Not- yet- being” (Bloch, 
 Atheism,  55), just as the cosmology is one that has not- yet- become. And this leads 
back to Marxism:
  Implicit in Marxism— as the leap from the Kingdom of Necessity to that of 
Freedom— there lies the whole so- subversive and un- static heritage of the Bible: 
a heritage, which in the exodus from the static order, showed itself far more as 
pure protest, as the archetype of the Kingdom of freedom itself. As the abolition 
of every On- High which has no place for man; as a transcending with revolt, 
and equally a revolt with transcending— but without transcendence. (Bloch, 
 Atheism, 57)  
 The Self Awakened 
 Reading Unger through Bloch may have historical as well as conceptual reso-
nance. For Bloch’s work was hugely influential on liberation theology in South 
America in the 1960s and 70s; and Unger, born in Brazil in 1947, lived there 
throughout the 1960s, leaving for graduate studies at Harvard in 1969. There are 
echoes of Bloch’s language and concerns, although differences of interpretation, 
throughout Unger’s work. 
 Unger’s 1998 book,  Democracy Realised: The Progressive Alternative , is a sum-
mary statement of his hopes for a gradual move from the global  status quo  to a world 
that is more democratic and more economically just, through a process he describes 
as  democratic experimentalism . Here Unger’s arguments are pitched in terms of the 

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 101
institutional structures of society, and a process of change of those economic, social, 
and political structures and processes through step by step improvisation and col-
lective learning.  The Self Awakened  is not pitched at this institutional level. Its cen-
tral trope is “to represent and raise up our humanity” through the medium of 
imagination and hope (Unger,  Self,  2). It entails a radical pragmatism because it is 
focused on step by step becoming which is both open to, and opens up, the future. 
For Unger, possibilities are not hypostatized or reified blueprints “out there” 
between which we choose and toward which we work. The supposition of the exter-
nality of alternatives Unger regards as highly dangerous. Indeed, he shares some of 
Karl Popper’s concern about the dangers of revolution, which in Unger’s view arise 
from the erroneous perception of social change as the substitution of one indivisible 
totality for another. His position is explicitly gradualist and anti- necessitarian. But 
if it rests on tinkering with the system, it is “motivated, sustained and cumulative 
tinkering” (Unger,  Democracy,  16). It is not a refusal to challenge fundamental 
aspects of the existing system, since his political goal is an alternative to neoliberal-
ism. The defining feature of radical pragmatism is its project “to associate the idea 
of discontinuous structural change with the practical attitudes of the person who 
forever asks: What is the next step?” (Unger,  Democracy,  19). Imagination plays a 
central role. This does not demand the construction of utopias in the sense of 
detailed blueprints, but is deployed in the practical activity of social improvisation: 
“The master tool of democratic experimentalism is institutional innovation, prac-
tised not from on high, with fanciful blueprints and perfectionist designs, but with 
the materials at hand and in the situation of the moment” (Unger,  Democracy, 165). 
The importance of a “visionary” element in sustaining and directing political 
change is a constant theme:
 The visionary intimation of a reordered social world, with its poetic attempt to 
connect present personal experiences to hidden social possibilities, helps right the 
scales of risk by enlarging the imaginative terrain on which the debate takes place. 
As the consequences of reforms for the understanding of interests and ideals 
become manifest, the boundary shutting the instrumental off from the visionary 
begins to open. Then history makes more room for imagination. (Unger, 
 Democracy, 12) 
 Changing the world does demand a changed subjectivity. But whereas the conven-
tional appeal to a brave new world that has such people in it carries always the risk 
of demanding that historically determined human nature force itself into 
Procrustean systems, Unger asks only that this change in who we might be happens 
slowly, and with our consent: it involves “the intimation of a different world, in 
which we would become (slightly) different people, with (slightly) revised under-
standings of our interests and ideals” ( Democracy,  12). Subjects are also agents, and 
the development of individual and collective capabilities and capacities— which 
have a material basis— should include the capacity to engage in debate about 

102 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 possible futures: “A set of capacity- ensuring rights and resources must find their 
counterpart in practices and institutions that keep society open to alternative 
futures and inspire in politics and culture a contest of visions” (Unger,  Democracy, 
168).  The Self Awakened  develops themes of what amounts to a utopian ontology, in 
a framing of questions of transcendence and connection. True, as McLennan 
observes, Unger refuses the category of ontology, both in relation to individuals and 
the ontology of hypothesized (and hypostatized) possible worlds. But this is a rejec-
tion of a  timeless  ontology. And just as Norman Geras has shown that there is a 
concept of human nature in Karl Marx despite the historicization which rejects the 
fixity of human nature, so too Unger is concerned with a nonessentialized ontology. 
If “[t]he legitimate successor to ontology is a history of nature, historicizing the 
laws of nature as well as the kinds of things that arise in the course of history” ( Self, 
85), the whole argument of the book is about what it means and could potentially 
mean to be human, and the implications of this for creating a world adequate to the 
project of human flourishing. 
 The emphasis on capacity and capability (which, certainly, as inflected by Marx 
and Amartya Sen, are not quite the same thing) means that human identities also 
need to be more strongly articulated in terms of what people individually and col-
lectively might become, rather than in terms of where they come from: thus he 
argues we should “call on prophecy more than upon memory” (Unger,  Democracy, 
181). We should also educate our children to be prophets, through the development 
of their capacities, which— like all education— entails hope, transformation, and a 
move beyond what now is and what we now are. This leads to a “remaking of our 
understanding of the actual by the imagination of the possible” and “requires a 
large measure of detachment from the now dominant culture” (Unger,  Democracy, 
231). Conversely, action  creates  possibility, both imaginatively and institutionally. 
What is regarded as real— and what is actually possible— is defined both by imagi-
nation and by praxis. Unger argues further that when we imagine things otherwise, 
we normally assume that causal processes and relationships remain essentially 
unchanged. But he argues that time and change “go all the way down,” such that 
even the laws governing processes of change may themselves be subject to change, 
indicating a greater possibility of novelty, of openness (Unger,  Self,  86). This does 
not mean that anything is possible, but that step by step changes of ourselves and 
our world might lead to a transformation of social structures and of the capacities 
and capabilities of those who inhabit, produce, and reproduce them. There is a fine 
line between abstract utopia, wishful thinking, hoping for the unattainable; and 
imagining, hoping for, and claiming too little, and there is no certainty that we will 
draw the line in the right place:
  We lack the metric with which to measure the proximity of our programs to our 
circumstances. We must walk, in relative darkness, the narrow path between 
wishful thinking and the denial of the pragmatic, prophetic residue in our under-
standing of transformative possibility. (Unger,  Democracy, 237) 

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 103
 This is an entirely secular argument, deeply informed by Marxism, even if the focus 
on the self by someone who is primarily known for a focus on legal, political, and 
economic institutions may come as something of a surprise, and the very idea of 
 raising up our humanity may also raise up a few eyebrows. 
 So what grounds could be adduced for seeing it as post- secular? Post- secular, like 
postmodern, post- Marxist, postfeminist, post- Freudian, may have a multiplicity of 
meanings or no precise meaning at all. “Post” may imply supersession in the sense of 
moving on from something completed and no longer necessary, as in some uses of post-
feminism; or it may, as in the case of post- Marxism, imply the rejection of the discourse 
in question; or it may at least pose as a more neutral characterization of dominant dis-
courses. In all cases, these “post” terms involve an implicit characterization of what 
went before, and one which is often misleading. Thus Raymond Williams challenged 
the construction of modernism in the postmodern in “When was Modernism”? 
Similarly, “post- secular” raises the question of the imputed character, as well as periodi-
zation, of the secular itself. The last section of this chapter returns to this issue. At this 
point, however, it is useful to distinguish several possible meanings of “post- secular” 
that might bear on the current argument. First, it can refer to a personal trajectory from 
a secular to a religious position. An example of this would be Terry Eagleton’s recent 
move from an assumedly atheist and Marxist position to at least sympathy for the 
Catholicism in which he was raised. Of course, given the hegemony of atheism among 
professional intellectuals, some of these moves may be more apparent than real, a “com-
ing out” of closet religious sympathizers. Here, the question would be whether Unger 
has suddenly either acquired, or revealed, a religious orientation that is expressed in his 
recent work. The second and third meanings are the fracturing of this hegemony in the 
discourse of social theory itself and in wider public discourse. One version of this would 
be Charles Taylor’s characterization of the post- secular age. An era when “belief” could 
be taken for granted gives way to secularism, where “unbelief” at least in public and 
intellectual discourse may dominate. What characterizes the post- secular is a back-
ground assumption that neither belief nor unbelief may be taken for granted. Here, the 
question would be whether  The Self Awakened  implicitly or explicitly takes religious 
faith (whatever that might mean) as seriously as secularism and thus  as a possible episte-
mological position . The fourth meaning is the greater recognition in the public sphere of 
religious faith and its practitioners and institutions, and the contention around such 
issues. There are manifold examples of this, including the European equalities legisla-
tion that defends against discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief, the rise in 
faith schools at least in the United Kingdom, the contestation in France over the wearing 
of the  hijab  and  naqib  in schools and public places. This has less bearing on character-
izing Unger’s position, although aspects of it are important to its implications. 
 There is no doubt that the language Unger uses is at times explicitly theological 
and for that reason somewhat perplexing. If  The Self Awakened  opens with a prospec-
tus of raising up our humanity, it closes with the claim that while we cannot become 
God, ‘we can become more godlike’ (256), and this claim is repeated in various ways 
throughout. His central theme, he says, is “the single idea” of “the infinity of the 

104 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
human spirit, in the individual as well as in humanity”; its “wonderful and terrible 
disproportion . . . to everything that would contain and diminish it”; its belittlement 
and enslavement in the realities of the world that exists and therefore “its need to 
create a world, a human world, in which it can be and become itself” (Unger,  Self , 
26–7). He refers to raising up the individual to “godlike power and freedom,” the 
“godlike powers of ordinary humanity,” the “divinization of the person,” the “divi-
nization of humanity,” the “path of divinization” (Unger,  Self,  28–9, 130, 181, 217). 
He talks of spiritualizing society, of the need for a “world revolution that is spiritual 
as well as political” (Unger,  Self,  145). He writes of the struggle between “spirit and 
structure” as “the revolt of the infinite within us against the finite around us” (Unger, 
 Self,  124). He writes repeatedly and at length about transcendence. Less centrally but 
nevertheless throughout there are references to prophecy, vision, and to the awaken-
ing of the self. 
 Passion: An Essay in Personality 
 The Self- Awakened  does not, however, represent a shift in Unger’s concerns that 
can be read as part of the post- secular turn, in the sense of a renewed sympathy for 
religion. The first reason why such an interpretation of Unger’s position is simply 
wrong is a historical one. Nearly a quarter of a century earlier, Unger addressed 
very similar themes in  Passion: An Essay in Personality . Here too the questions of 
transcendence and the link between personal and social transformation, are cen-
tral. As so often in Unger’s work the echoes are precise: “We ask of one another 
more than any person can give another: not just respect, admiration or love, but 
some reliable sign that there is a place for us in the world” ( Self,  13) is a reiteration 
of earlier claims that “there is no end to what people want of one another” ( Passion, 
95); people “want a sign that there is a place for them in the world” ( Passion, 97), 
and “We seek in others more than an opportunity to live out our sense of longing 
and jeopardy; we seek an answer to the enigma of our existence or a way to forget 
this enigma altogether” ( Passion,  123). The extent to which  Self  is revealed as a 
reprise of  Passion  establishes that there has not been a fundamental shift in Unger’s 
thought that could be tied to either a personal conversion or some general post- 
secular turn in social theory. 
 Unger describes  Passion  as “a speculative and prescriptive view of personality 
from the standpoint of a single but pervasive aspect of our experience; our desire to 
be accepted by one another and to become, through this acceptance, freer to reinvent 
ourselves” (vii); and as “a modernist criticism and restatement of the Christian- 
romantic image of man” (vii). The main essay begins “The world is real and dense 
and dark” (Unger,  Passion,  95) recalling Bloch’s repeated references to the darkness 
of the lived moment.  4   Unger characterizes the human condition in terms of unlim-
ited mutual need and unlimited mutual fear— our need of acceptance, love, and 
connection with the other, and our fear of the vulnerability this need imposes, lead-
ing to a tension between longing and jeopardy. From this issues a quest for freedom, 

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 105
“for the basic freedom that includes an assurance of being at home in the world” 
(Unger,  Passion,  107). Again, there are echoes of Bloch and the concept of  heimat . 
 The Principle of Hope ends:
  But the root of history is the working, creating human being who reshapes and 
overhauls the given facts. Once he has grasped himself and established what is his, 
without expropriation and alienation, in real democracy, there arises in the world 
something which shines into the childhood of all and in which no one has ever 
been: homeland. (Bloch,  The Principle , 1986b, 1376) 
 For Unger though the reshaping and overhauling of the given facts include— and in 
the context of this essay center on— the facts of self and character. Specifically, the 
flexible potential of self as someone who could act, experience, and be otherwise 
must resist and overcome the ossification of character, the accretion of habits and 
dispositions limited by specific historical circumstances. For Bloch, “[w]e have in us 
what we could become” ( Principle , 1986b, 927). For Unger, the basic features of self-
hood are “embodiment, contextuality and the grasping for the supra- contextual” 
( Passion , 123). 
 In  Passion , the issue of connection is central, and especially connection in face- 
to- face encounters. Passion, as redefined by Unger, is not contrasted with reason. It 
refers to “the whole range of interpersonal encounters in which people do not treat 
one another as means to one another’s ends” (105–6). The ability to imagine our-
selves otherwise and the possibility of being otherwise entail remaining open to our 
vulnerability and jeopardy in encounters with others. Here too, as in  Self , the argu-
ment is political as well as personal, for the reflexivity and flexibility of self is intrin-
sically bound up with the possibilities of social transformation:
  The readiness to experiment with different kinds of encounters, and with their 
distinctive styles of vulnerability, is akin to central features of the practical, trans-
formative political imagination: its refusal to take any established set of alliances 
and antagonisms for granted, its effort to mobilize people in ways that are not 
predefined by the existing order, and its capacity to make these essays in mobili-
zation the means for building new varieties of collaboration and community in 
the practical affairs of society. (Unger,  Passion, 110) 
 Unger argues for this flexibility of self, in which you “experience yourself as an iden-
tity that is never wholly contained by character and that grows to greater self- 
knowledge and self- possession by the willed acts of vulnerability or the accepted 
accidents of fortune that put a character under pressure” ( Passion,  109). Such flexi-
bility depends, he says, upon material welfare, but develops also the practical quali-
ties for safeguarding and developing that welfare, which is a political matter. Freedom 
from rigidity and from compulsion enables political action by allowing “people to 
identify opportunities but resist the temptation of importunate action,” and 

106 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 encouraging them (again with echoes of Bloch) to “wait when the moment is not 
yet”( Passion,  110). Conversely, the political opening up of the social imaginary “has 
a spiritual as well as a practical significance” ( Passion,  266). Unger’s argument is 
unashamedly prescriptive about the “best” way of being in the world.  Passion 
addresses “negative” emotional states and orientations of hatred, vanity, pride, envy, 
jealousy, lust as well as compulsion and addiction— all viewed as responses to the 
primary predicament of unlimited need and unlimited fear in relation to the other. 
But hope, love (both sexual and asexual), and faith are also possible responses to and 
outcomes of our common predicament. Hope and its “anticipatory power” are 
described in Blochian terms: “hope differs from expectation. . . . It is a predisposition 
to action rather than merely a foretaste of pleasure. It instantiates a conceived future 
rather than merely looking to it” (Unger,  Passion, 245). 
 The goal of “patient and hopeful availability,” Unger’s “moral perfection,” is a 
combination of ardour and gentleness ( Passion,  269). Gentleness, or sympathy, 
involves a particular orientation to the other: “It is to see and to treat the other as 
a person always incongruously caught in finite and conditional worlds and situa-
tions, character and body, and thus entangled in circumstances disproportionate 
to the context- transcending capacities of the self” (Unger,  Passion,  269). The inte-
gration of this with ardor, with engagement in life, prevents the treatment of the 
other as a means to an end, and thus facilitates a connection closer to Buber’s 
I- Thou than I- it. This is particularly so since we understand ourselves also to be in 
the same predicament as the other. Yet throughout the argument, Unger also 
stresses that our knowledge of the other is “inescapably and radically incomplete” 
( Passion,  210), perhaps placing his account of moral perfection closer to Levinas’s 
ethic of grace. Importantly, although it may involve risk, it is not sacrificial. Like 
Adam Phillips and Barbara Taylor stressed in  On Kindness , we are driven to the 
other not out of duty but our own need, and love and kindness are an expression of 
our inherent sociality, not of altruism. For Unger, actual relations with real per-
sons in the here are more important than abstract relations with groups or in pos-
sible future scenarios. Nevertheless, nothing “excuses us from the need to imagine 
an alternative human world and to imagine it in a way that enables us to act in the 
present as if this alternative had already begun to emerge and its anticipated norms 
had already begun to bind us” (Unger,  Passion, 247). 
 Quasi- theological concepts run through the text of  Passion , even leaving aside 
the probably inadvertent Christological resonance of the title. Hope, love, and faith 
depend upon grace. There is overt reference to the New Testament in the aspiration 
to being in the world but not of it. Unger writes of “revelatory events” ( Passion, 247). 
There are references to redemption including a “redemptive impulse” (Unger, 
 Passion,  254), to salvation and to “spiritual corruption” (Unger,  Passion,  237). And 
again, there are repeated references to transcendence. Both the arguments and the 
language are consistent across the two works, although there are additional elements 
in  The Self Awakened about the nature of time, reality, and possibility that are absent 
from the earlier work. 

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 107
 Words and Meanings 
 A second reason for reading the argument as consistently secular lies in the close 
examination of the texts themselves. Unger’s own account in both works of what 
these “quasi- religious” concepts mean returns them unequivocally to the secular, 
and to a secular humanism which is processual but not thereby lacking in content. 
Indeed, the introduction to  Passion  asserts that it is “possible to develop an account 
of identity that is neither trivial nor context- bound” (21). In this introduction, Unger 
suggests that there are two routes to a reading of talk about God in the Christian- 
romantic tradition. One follows Feuerbach and treats theological terms as meta-
phors. This, he suggests, poses a simple process of translation, after which no surplus 
meaning remains. The alternative is an analogical reading, in which “the psychology 
of personal encounter prefigures the theology of redemption” (Unger,  Passion, 28). 
But “[f]or the purposes of a secular view of human identity we have no need to 
choose between . . . Feuerbachian and . . . analogical readings” (Unger,  Passion, 28). 
Unger’s own explanations of his concepts tend to the Feuerbachian, precisely because 
a secular argument that does not include God (although it does include human 
yearning for the absolute) cannot be analogical in the sense he describes. Thus faith 
can be given “a purely secular interpretation” (Unger,  Passion,  237). It entails either 
or both emotional and cognitive risk, in going beyond what can be rationally justi-
fied. One can neither be sure of the veracity of some cognitive beliefs nor that one’s 
vulnerability, especially in loving another, will not be exploited. Faith and grace are 
linked, for in the secular form this refers to acts of grace by other people, specifically 
that they refrain from attacking your exposed or heightened vulnerability. And 
Unger goes on to comment that it is in the absence of such grace that another, implic-
itly non- secular, grace would be needed or appealed to ( Passion,  99). “Spiritual cor-
ruption” means turning occasions of vulnerability into “devices of dependency, 
withdrawal, and self- delusion” (Unger,  Passion, 239). 
 The same secular translation is provided in  The Self Awakens . “Spirit,” for exam-
ple, translates as “the resistant and transcending faculties of the agent” which enable 
us to “spiritualize society” (Unger,  Self,  38); spirit is only another name for this tran-
scendent capacity. Transcendence here is more akin to what Bloch describes in 
 Atheism in Christianity  as the need to transcend without transcendence. That is, it is 
about a context- transcending capacity which Unger attributes to the human condi-
tion. It is an emergent property of the human mind to create the infinite out of the 
finite; one innate characteristic of the mind is its nonmechanical character, its capac-
ity to outrun and subvert the given, in short, to imagine. While we are always and 
everywhere constrained and constructed by historical circumstances, these circum-
stances vary in the extent to which they permit and enable human agency, and they 
never shape us fully. There is always left over “a residue of unused capability for 
action, association, passion, and insight worth having” (Unger,  Self, 209). 
Transcendence is the capacity to imagine ourselves beyond, and to act upon rather 
than simply react to, the external structures around us. We become more “godlike” 

108 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
here because less suborned, more creative, freer; we simultaneously become more 
human, in the exercise and development of this essentially human characteristic. 
Our godlikeness lies therefore in a “quality of context- transforming spirit” (Unger, 
 Self, 217). 
 Again, the object of Unger’s project is a transformation of social relations and 
personal experience in the material world:
  The hope held out by the thesis that we can change our relation to our contexts 
will remain hollow unless we can change this relation in biographical as well as 
historical time, independent of the fate of all collective projects of transforma-
tion. It will be hollow as well unless that change will give us other people and the 
world itself more fully. That the hope is not hollow in any such sense represents 
part of the thesis implicit in the idea of futurity: to live for the future is to live in 
the present as a being not fully determined by the present settings of organized 
life and thought and therefore more capable of openness to the other person, to 
the surprising experience, and to the entire phenomenal world of time and 
change. It is in this way that we can embrace the joy of life in the moment as both 
a revelation and a prophecy rather than discounting it as a trick that nature 
plays on spirit the better to reconcile us to our haplessness and our ignorance. 
(Unger,  Self , 150)   
 It is, says Unger, perfectly possible to “devise institutions and practices that, by 
diminishing the distance between the ordinary moves by which we reproduce them 
and the extraordinary moves by which we change them, make us greater, freer and 
more human” ( Self , 165). The claim seems interchangeable with the way in which we 
make ourselves “more godlike” as we become in the process the people that we are 
not yet: for that full humanity is something which has been alienated from us. 
 Where it is not alienated into religion, spiritual intensity is sequestered into the 
field of art, emptying philosophy and social science and the politics of our being in 
the world: “the human spirit as portrayed in the humanities— escapes from the 
stifling structure of everyday life. Having escaped it, it then floats above, disem-
bodied, unwilling and unable to infuse and reanimate the spiritless world of rou-
tine and repetition” (Unger,  Self,  123). The treatment of the transcendent human 
spirit in art, music, literature, and responses to (evolved) nature is precisely the 
subject of  The Sunrise of Wonder , an autobiographical anthology arranged as letters 
to his grandchildren by Michael Mayne, one- time Dean of Westminster. Mayne 
articulates the spirit infusing these often secular passages in a religious, Christian 
direction, suggesting that wonder is the fundamental religious category. But this is 
not a necessary move. Susan McManus argues that wonder is the fundamental 
utopian category. Phillippa Bennett, writing about the thought of the atheist and 
Marxist William Morris, argues that it is the fundamental human category. She 
notes, as does Mayne, Gradgrind’s hostility to wonder in Dickens’s  Hard Times . 
Bennett argues:

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 109
 [Wonder] is best defined less as a response than an attitude towards the world. To 
wonder is not so much the ability to experience the occasional spontaneous 
epiphany as the willingness to be perceptive and receptive to the opportunities for 
wonder that present themselves to us on a daily basis. And, just as importantly, it 
is willingness to allow those opportunities and experiences to affect, and perhaps 
even transform us— to allow them to challenge our preconceptions and renew 
our vision. To do so is to recognise the most fundamental and radical aspect of 
wonder— its revolutionary potential. (13) 
 Bennett suggests that Morris’s whole work is driven by the desire to reclaim wonder, 
just as Bloch and Unger seek to return sequestered spirit to the social world in unal-
ienated form. 
 The awakening of the self is not, then, a religious matter in the conventional 
sense, although Unger does use the term transcendence to talk about it. Rather, it is 
“a continuation,  without the theological backdrop (my emphasis), of some of the moral 
and psychological beliefs most characteristic of the narrative of salvation” ( Self, 222). 
Such a narrative, for Unger, is an “attempt to provide grounds outside us for what can 
have grounds only within us” ( Self,  222). The awakening is twofold. The first awak-
ening is an awakening to consciousness. The second awakening may be existentially 
similar to that figured in conversion experiences as being “born again” (although 
Unger does not draw this parallel):
  The second awakening of the self is the discovery within us of the demand for the 
infinite, for the absolute. Once discovered it must be lived out. Its living out changes 
the meaning of everything we had experienced before. The second awakening is 
therefore a revolution in the experience of consciousness and distinction. ( Self, 225) 
 But again here it is unequivocally secular: “it is not a miracle but an accomplish-
ment” ( Self , 227), and one which thrives more in conducive environments of thought 
and social structure, and is therefore a collective as well as an individual achieve-
ment. It is a discovery, or awareness, of our “infinity,” our context- transcending 
character— and therefore something which disturbs and disrupts the status quo. For 
Unger, through democratic experimentalism and radical pragmatism, this awakened 
self pulls spirit back from the realms of art and religion into a transformative politics 
of next steps that opens out to a better future.  
 Against Stupid Materialism 
 The positions taken by Unger and Bloch are of clear contemporary relevance. They 
stand in stark contrast to current debates in the public sphere between the religious 
and the secular, which discursively polarize religion and belief against atheism and 
unbelief. What Unger and Bloch offer is secular and atheistic, but scarcely unbelief. 
The importance of their arguments is more evident when contrasted with current 

110 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
versions of atheism. In characterizing post- secularism less as a return to religion 
than as a state in which neither belief nor unbelief can be taken for granted, Charles 
Taylor reproduces a profoundly problematic contrast between belief and unbelief 
which structures public discourse. The dichotomy is repeated by Bloch himself, and 
by Thompson, referring to the reemergence of religions “against a background of 
unbelief” (ix), as well as by Christopher Hitchens in  God is Not Great  and Richard 
Dawkins in  The God Delusion.  These books are certainly post- secular in Taylor’s 
sense, since their purpose is to defend atheism against the increasing incursion of 
religion in the public sphere; they only make sense in a context where both religion 
and secularism are contestable and contested. Discursively, the term “unbelief,” like 
atheism, operates as a negative in which theism and belief have dominant status. This 
leaves little space for the potentially  positive  content of secular humanism, or indeed 
for subtle and non- fundamentalist forms of religion, nor for the possibility that these 
have more in common with each other, and are more common, than the debased 
character of contemporary public discourse suggests. Nor is there space for a serious 
enquiry into what those defining themselves as religious or nonreligious actually 
believe, and why. 
 The declaration of atheism is currently dominated by writers like Dawkins and 
Hitchens. Both  The God Delusion and  God is Not Great  claim religion to be not only 
wrong, but immoral— a position supported by biblical exegesis and reference to the 
professed beliefs and actions of adherents of fundamentalist religions. Religious 
believers are portrayed as either weak- minded and deluded or malign and manipula-
tive. Both writers conduct their arguments by sleight of hand. Religion is defined as 
belief in supernatural beings, principally Bloch’s creator- God, and is treated as fun-
damentalist belief in scripture. Both use at one point the example of cargo cults, 
though neither has apparently read Peter Worsley’s excellent  The Trumpet Shall 
Sound , still less its careful discussion about what religion is, which establishes that 
not all religions involve a belief in supernatural beings. Both then explicitly exclude 
religious beliefs that do not fit their definition as not really religious: Dawkins thus 
declares that Buddhism is not a religion and that Spinoza’s pantheism was really 
atheism. Hitchens claims that the Lutheran Pastor Dietriech Bonhoeffer, whom he 
commends for his political opposition to the Nazis, was not really religious, but an 
adherent of “an admirable but nebulous humanism” (7). Dawkins at least concedes 
Bonhoeffer’s belief as religious, arguing that they are on the same side, and that “sci-
ence finds itself in alliance with sophisticated theologians like Bonhoeffer” (153). 
However, apart from this aside,  The God Delusion  attacks religion in general as fun-
damentalist and creationist. Both Dawkins and Hitchens struggle with Einstein’s 
references to God, claiming that his disavowal of a personal God renders these purely 
metaphorical; Dawkins, indeed, describes this as something “we can all trivially 
 subscribe to” (183). 
 If the target is bad religion, it is opposed by bad science. Dawkins is primarily 
concerned to argue the case against creationism and intelligent design, in favor of 
natural selection and evolution. The latter are, of course, not challenged by many 

SECULARISM AND POST SECULARISM 111
people who regard themselves as religious. But he puts forward a bizarrely mechanis-
tic view of the human mind and human condition, in which the level of the social is 
almost entirely absent. “Genes for refusing to be martyred,” for example are likely to 
dominate, leading to a decline in “tendencies towards martyrdom” (Dawkins 199). 
The brain is a collection of modules, in which “there is a module for dealing with 
kinship, a module for dealing with reciprocal exchanges, a module for dealing with 
empathy, . . . and for discriminating in favour of in- group members and against 
strangers” (Dawkins 208–9): perhaps, as in the film  Matrix , we could upload a few 
more. Religion is a “virus,” to which children are particularly vulnerable, since 
Dawkins posits a selective advantage in this: unquestioning belief and trust in and 
obedience to adults “is a generally valuable rule for a child” (203). However, the evi-
dence from most 2- year- olds is that obedience is not preprogrammed, and the evi-
dence from most teenagers is that neither is unquestioning belief. Dawkins also 
posits the existence of memes, units of cultural inheritance which are analogous to 
genes, but for whose actual existence there is scarcely more evidence than there is for 
the existence of God. While in theory allowing that there may be emergent proper-
ties of mind, the argument as popularized and presented in  The God Delusion embeds 
an entirely reductionist view of the human condition, the mind and the brain. 
 Both Hitchens and Dawkins claim that their own positions do not constitute 
belief or faith, claiming that all their opinions are in principle open to revision by 
evidence. This is an idiosyncratic use of the term belief. Dawkins argues religion is 
accorded superior moral status in public discourse. He is right: the claim that “my 
principles require this” or “it is against my principles” will not generally be met with 
the same respect as the claim that “my religion requires this” or “it is against my 
religion.” Dawkins points out the conscientious objections to war by Quakers were 
readily accepted, whereas those whose pacifism had nonreligious grounds found it 
much harder for these to be accepted. It seems hard to make this argument without 
conceding that the moral commitments of atheist pacifists involve beliefs. And 
indeed, the British courts have recently accepted that belief in climate change may be 
as deeply held as a religious belief, and therefore subject to the legislation against 
discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief. To claim atheists do not have 
belief(s) but only a thought- through consequentialist morality presumes— as is 
implicit in Dawkins’s argument— both the theoretical possibility of perfect causal 
and consequential knowledge  and  a reduction of normative judgment to knowledge. 
In contrast, Unger uses the term faith in relation to a practical and existential need 
to go beyond what we can rationally justify. This is not necessarily the same as saying 
it is in principle beyond rational justification; indeed, the risk in our encounters is 
always that we may be proved false. But we do necessarily act on the basis of belief, 
despite the doubt that is implicit in faith. And moral choice cannot be reduced to 
(theoretically possible) knowledge. 
 The outcome of this is a public discourse in which fundamentalist religion and 
strident atheism based on bad science stand opposed. As Karen Armstrong argues in 
 The Case for God , where she also rejects the meaning of belief as assent to a cognitive 

112 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
proposition and draws attention to the mystical traditions that have always regarded 
any representation of God as necessarily erroneous, bad science meets bad religion. 
Bloch refers to reductionist scientism as “stupid materialism,” and quotes Lenin: 
“Intelligent idealism is closer to intelligent materialism than stupid materialism is” 
( Atheism,  247). Bloch’s own dialectical materialism has “the notice above the door: 
No mechanists allowed” ( Atheism,  224). For any intelligent debate about the human 
condition and our possible future to take place, the space of intelligent materialism 
and intelligent religion needs to be expanded. For religion to lose its appeal as “the 
heart of a heartless world, the spirit of spiritless conditions,” the positive content of 
secular humanism needs to be asserted. Yet metaphors of God, faith, grace, spirit, 
and transcendence are necessary because of the  difficulty  of finding a language and 
substance for these within the dominant polarized discourse. Hitchens reproduces 
the sequestration in art and literature of which Unger complains, appealing to “the 
study of art and literature, both for its own sake and the eternal ethical questions 
with which it deals” (283). In the very last paragraph, he refers to Ian McEwan’s 
“ability to elucidate the numinous without conceding anything to the supernatural” 
(Hitchens 286). In the end even Bloch declares: “But enough of this religious imagery” 
( Atheism,  247). He concludes in  Atheism in Christianity  that there is a need to “retain 
the depths of the Kingdom of Freedom as the real content of revolutionary con-
sciousness on the road to becoming true substance” (Bloch,  Atheism,  256). It is a 
matter of a hope which “is able to inherit those features of religion which do not per-
ish with the death of God” (Bloch,  Atheism,  250). What both Unger and Bloch seek 
to do is to counter “stupid materialism” with a view of humanity which has moral 
and existential depth, which is construed in terms of becoming rather than an essen-
tialized ontology, and which remains open to possibility at the level of the individual 
and the social. 
 

 CHAPTER 9 
 At the End of Utopia— Indifference  1 
 Josep  Ramoneda 
 Bellisima città ma ti pare de non essere in nessun luogo 
 Hermann Bahr on Trieste 
 Being Has No Meaning 
 Jan Patočka, a Czech philosopher and the first spokesperson for Charter 77, who 
died in Prague in that same year, 1977, as a consequence of police interrogations, was 
a disciple of Edmund Husserl who intensely lived through the bloody contradictions 
of Central Europe during the twentieth century. In his books, he did not skirt the 
central themes of his time and civilization: Europe, the war, the meaning of history, 
technology, totalitarianism, and intolerance. The chapter “Does History have a 
Meaning?” in his  Heretical Essays  includes two fragments that I will gloss at length. 
The first fragment says the following: “The antinomy of meaning and meaningless-
ness, of meaning and being, seems so to suggest that life is only possible thanks to the 
perennial illusion of total meaning which certain experiences show precisely to be an 
illusion. Truth would thus prove fundamentally hostile to life, in an irreconcilable 
opposition and conflict with it” (59) 2 . And a few lines below, Patočka adds: “In its 
practical unfolding, life cannot rest on a relative meaning which itself rests on mean-
inglessness, since no relative meaning can ever render the meaningless meaningful 
but, rather, is always dragged into meaninglessness by it” (59). 
 Based on these fragments, we can infer that, according to Patočka, a life truly 
lived in absolute nihilism, in the full conscience of the meaninglessness of the whole, 
is not possible, or rather, it is only possible through an illusion. That is to say, abso-
lute nihilism is also an illusion. 
 But Patočka also tells us that “life is only possible thanks to the perennial illusion 
of total meaning” (59). The total meaning that makes life possible is, then, presented 
as an illusion. This illusion is far from reality; it is an effect of our capacity for self- 
deception, for which we are so well prepared. It is an illusion that derives from an 
antinomy— that of meaning and meaninglessness; that of meaning and of being— 
which, as Patočka tells us, presents itself in certain moments as completely evident. 

114 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 At the same time, Patočka makes another striking statement: “Truth would thus 
prove fundamentally hostile to life . . .” (59). We stand before two basic oppositions: 
truth/life; meaning/being. The relationship between truth and life is that of an irrec-
oncilable opposition and permanent strife. The antinomy of meaning and meaning-
less is equivalent to the antinomy of meaning and being. 
 We can, therefore, state: 
 a.  Being has no meaning. 
 b.  Meaning is necessary for life. 
 This double affirmation establishes a fundamental nihilism— being has no meaning— 
and delineates the idea of an opposition between being and life. I am talking about life 
in the Nietzschean sense: life as a meeting point between biology, conscience, and the 
surroundings, between the will to power and the external world. I base myself in 
Aphorism 121 of the  Gay Science , titled “Life not an argument,” which states: “We 
have arranged for ourselves a world in which we were able to live— by positing bodies, 
lines, planes, causes and effects, motion and rest, form and content; without these 
articles of faith no one could endure living! But that does not prove them. Life is not 
an argument; the conditions of life might include error” (117). 
 The words of Nietzsche and the arguments of Patočka are not very different, even 
though their configurations might lead us to the opposite conclusion. As I said 
before: meaning is necessary for life. Meaning corresponds here to the articles of 
faith that Nietzsche mentions. Who established these articles of faith? They are the 
world that “we have arranged for ourselves.” Therefore, meaning, as life itself, devel-
ops in relation to us and emanates from our own inconsistency. Those who have a 
life— and, for Nietzsche, life is, above all, the will to power— are those who have the 
ability to give meaning to things. Meaning and life go hand in hand. Meaning ema-
nates from power: “the conditions of life might include error.” We should, then, not 
confuse life with truth. Life can find a better foundation in error than in truth. Is it 
then truth itself that needs to be reconsidered? 
 The meaning we ascribe to the world is necessary for life and, at the same time, it 
is an illusion, “articles of faith,” as Nietzsche calls them. It is a necessary illusion. 
What do we understand by a necessary illusion? If we follow Nietzsche, a necessary 
illusion is the truth as he presents it to us in his “On Truth and Lie in an Extra- Moral 
Sense.” He tells us that truth is an illusion that forgot about its illusory status, an 
illusion without which a certain kind of living beings— ourselves— would not know 
how to live: “If he [man] could escape from the prison walls of that faith for just a 
moment, his consciousness of himself ( Selbstbewusstsein ) would be crushed instantly” 
(36; translation slightly modified). It is a necessary illusion for life: human beings 
create it and believe in it. It is “[a] mobile army of metaphors, metonymies, anthro-
pomorphisms” that people end up considering as “fixed, canonical and binding” 
(29–30). Meaning gets its foundational dimension from language, of which Nietzsche 
performs a radical critique. 

AT THE END OF UTOPIA 115
 The other category that shares this characteristic of presenting itself as a neces-
sary illusion is ideology, according to Louis Althusser. In the last chapter of “ For 
Marx ,” Althusser describes ideology as an indispensable mechanism for us to relate 
to the world. We can explain it thus: reality is unbearable; we need a sieve, a veil that 
hides the most unbearable parts of reality. This sieve is called ideology and no society 
can elude it. Later, Althusser will say that ideology is eternal in the same way that 
Freud tells us the unconscious is eternal. Ideology represents the most apparent 
dimension of meaning, the tip of the iceberg of meaning piercing through the social 
and political web. 
 The necessary illusions of Nietzsche and Althusser are two aspects of the enor-
mous systems of illusions that we call meaning: one of them— language— is the 
foundation of the system and therefore has the aura of truth; the other one— 
ideology— completes the system and, therefore, is apparently more vulnerable and 
in constant mutation. 
 Meaning is Necessary for Life 
 What is the nature of meaning? It is an illusion. I have contrasted this illusion with 
truth both in the Platonic sense of adequation to an ideal order and in the positivist 
sense of correspondence to a fundamental universal order. What am I trying to sig-
nal with this contrast between meaning and truth? Very simply, that our desires and 
illusions do not necessary correspond to the modest, monotonous, and boring truth 
of the natural order of things. They are our way of being different, our form of rebel-
lion. By asking about meaning we ended up touching upon the secret of life: life is a 
differential factor in the order of the universe. Human life is made of two mistakes: 
reason and truth, or, in other words, the capacity to establish goals and to choose the 
paths to reach them. This is the exceptionality of our species in the general order of 
the world. The cause for the development of meaning is then the illusions that con-
stitute a necessity for men: to build one’s own world. Its cause is the general ways of 
identifying the world— language and its constructions— and the rationalizations 
that bedeck each specific social articulation. 
 If being has no meaning but meaning is necessary for life, then the origin of 
meaning is a convention. But it is a convention that has forgotten its conventional 
origin: one that functions as fundamental and that aspires to be absolute. Meaning 
is, in consequence, the belief and the wager that correspond to each concrete model 
of rationalizing the social. Hence, the importance of the critique leveled against the 
modes of rationalization— the mechanisms created to establish meaning and to 
make it work. 
 Patočka raises the critique of meaning from the perspective of anguish. But, in 
fact, anguish signifies only the moment of crisis. From its standpoint, from the 
standpoint of a lucid, radical nihilism, there are only two paths: either a return to 
the world and to the universe of meaning, or the immobility of foundational mean-
inglessness. Meaning has its direct source in the will and in power relations. In my 

116 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
book  El Sentido Íntimo  I resorted to the notion of the suspension of power in order 
to delineate the possibility of the revelatory experience, at the limit of meaning and 
of power, but not outside meaning and power: artistic creation, scientific intuition, 
and the experience of love. These are singular moments that are immediately fol-
lowed by a return to order, namely to style, scientific proof, and social customs. 
 From the instantaneous, fleeting perspective of the suspension of power, the pos-
sibility of reflexive meaning opens up. It results from the acceptance that meaning is 
necessary for life and from the lucid acknowledgment that this meaning is not an 
absolute truth, even though it functions as one. Probably, it is for this reason that 
Michel Foucault conceived even the experience of oneself as a perspective, in order to 
question its modes of rationalization and of problematization. 
 In the prehistory of humanity there is no problematization of meaning: the world 
seems to human beings— so Patočka tells us— to be in good order and to be justified, 
in spite of everything. One needs to enter history, that is to say, a critical view of one’s 
destiny, in order for a cataclysm in accepted meaning to take place. Meaning becomes 
a problem. Utopia is born. Reflexive meaning is the challenge in this problem. One 
needs simultaneously to question the structures of meaning— to perform a critique— 
and permanently to create meaning, since there is no life without it. One needs a 
reflexive and a constructive meaning. But is constructive meaning compatible with 
a critique? Utopia is the answer to this riddle. 
 If there is no preestablished harmony or a final promise, the interpretation 
of meaning leads us to a different understanding of truth and to another conception 
of life. The nihilistic critique of meaning is certainly a radical critique of truth and 
of values. In these circumstances, we either assume the creative virtuality of a reflex-
ive meaning or we inevitably condemn ourselves to the stagnation of life because of 
the loss (anguish as our situation and silence as our answer) or the petrification of 
meaning (religions as our destiny and mysticism as the only critical alternative). 
 The Excess of Reality 
 Jean Améry is the pen name of Hans Mayer, who was born in Vienna in 1912. He was a 
Jewish writer, philosopher, and resistance fighter who was arrested in 1943 and sent to 
Auschwitz. In 1978 he committed suicide in Salzburg. Before that, in 1966, he published 
 Jenseits von Schuld und Sühne Bewältigungsversuche eines Überwältingen , where he nar-
rates the uselessness of intellectual experience in the concentration camp. 
 Améry writes: “if the intellect was not centered around a religious or political 
belief it was of no help, or of little help” (15). And he adds: “nowhere else in the world 
did reality have as much effective power as in the camp, nowhere else was reality so 
real. In no other place did the attempt to transcend it prove so hopeless and so 
shoddy” (19). In other words: “In the camp the intellect in its totality declared itself 
to be incompetent” (19). 
 Améry describes the experience of an intellectual placed in a situation at the lim-
its of the mind. A situation where, precisely, all powers conspire to negate every 

AT THE END OF UTOPIA 117
movement that tries to overcome the weight of brute reality. What is the use of an 
intellectual in the empire of Evil? What is the use of culture, of all the imaginary 
accumulated in books or in the exercise of creative intellectual faculties in these cir-
cumstances? What is the use of the word when open, bare force rules and when it 
becomes clear that Evil is the abuse of power? Améry’s answer is devastating: they are 
worth nothing. The intellectual strives to overcome reality. But nowhere does reality 
possess such operative force as in the concentration camp: “In no other place did the 
attempt to transcend it prove so hopeless and so shoddy” (19). No, the concentration 
camp is no utopia, it is not a no- place; rather, it is the most brutally real place, where 
no veil remains to soften reality for our subjective experience. Overwhelmed by real-
ity, by the force of a reality that obscenely shows death as the only destiny, as the 
immediate horizon— death that does not present itself as a problem but as a concrete 
presence— the intellectual becomes immobilized and the word, useless even as a 
consolation, dies between his hands. 
 What does Améry realize? 
 a.  That the intellect capitulates when faced with the abuse of power.  
 b.  That the intellect is paralyzed when faced with the excess of reality. 
 He tells us that the intellect is only worthwhile on those occasions when it is linked 
to a religious or political experience, in other words, when it capitulates and gives in 
to a concrete and closed referent in order to make the intolerable ontological solitude 
bearable. Only those who believe in a religion or in an ideology have enough support 
to face that overdose of reality. In fact, they were the only ones who had a veil with 
which to separate that reality from themselves and, thus, were able to place that 
experience in their world: to give it meaning. For Christians, as well as for commu-
nists, Auschwitz was horrible but also a step toward salvation. 
 Be it as it may, Améry says, “at no time could I discover within me the possibility 
for belief” (12), even though the overwhelmed intellectual tends to capitulate when 
faced with power and to become paralyzed when faced with the excess of reality. In 
fact, the two are the same: the excess of reality is the manifestation of totalitarian 
power. They are the moments when the will to power unfolds without any kind of 
limitations, that is to say, without meaning. 
 Faced with the excess of reality, there are only two possibilities: to give in to real-
ity or to domesticate it. To give in is a useless submission since the enemies are ene-
mies for structural, irreversible reasons. To give in is to detach oneself from the rest 
of humanity, which was the main goal of the concentration camp. To domesticate 
reality means to integrate it, to find a place for it in one’s own narrative; only a total-
izing vision can deal with totalitarian power. Those who have faith can integrate the 
camp itself in the number of incidents that are a part of a global and hopeful view of 
history. Only definitive meanings can resist when reflexive meaning fails. 
 And what about the meaning of the concentration camp? Evil. It is evil as an 
apotheosis of the process of domination. Evil as an unbearable dose of reality, as if 

118 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
suddenly we had lost centuries of civilization and found ourselves face to face with 
primordial chaos: power without limits. Under the appearance of absolute order, 
there is always chaos. 
 The intellect has always struggled to overcome reality— this is the Sisyphean task 
we have as a species. And this task has a name: the attribution of meaning. The 
paralysis experienced by the intellect when faced with the absolute expression of 
reality does not mean that the intellect is useless but, rather, that truth is overwhelm-
ing. Because in these circumstances there is no meaning (intellect), but rather truth 
(reality), the horizon of nothingness, that is to say, of absolute order, takes shape 
before us. There is no order more radical than nothingness. The other orders have to 
be filled and, therefore, they have fissures. It is not in vain that God created us out of 
nothing. 
 “Nowhere else in the world did reality have as much effective power” (19), says 
Améry. When all veils have been lifted, when everything is manifest, what remains? 
Not even death is a problem. There where everything leads to death, it becomes 
merely a concrete event— the tragic truth of life rendered banal by the camp. The 
labyrinth that is our life, leading us to death through the intricate path of meaning 
and civilization, is demolished by totalitarianism. There is no labyrinth, but a simple 
line that goes through the path leading to the gas chambers.  
 Meaninglessness as Utopia 
 Totalitarianism is the elimination of meaning. And without meaning there is no life; 
only the horizon of being remains: meaninglessness. “In no other place,” says Améry, 
“did the attempt to transcend it prove so hopeless and so shoddy” (19). To overcome 
reality is to stamp our mark onto it, to add to it the emblem of meaning, and to make 
it ours. There are two ways of relating to this illusion of overcoming reality: to believe 
in the possibility of overcoming it or to accept this possibility in a critical manner 
and, as such, tinged with fragility. In the first instance, one conflates truth and 
meaning. In the second instance, one distinguishes meaning from truth. This is the 
difference between the definitive meaning and the reflexive meaning. 
 We build our world with meaning— such is our necessary illusion. We occupy the 
space between the consciousness of reality and the desire for autonomous survival. 
For this we have language: “The word always dies where the claim of some reality is 
total,” warns Améry (20). To recover language is the intellectual’s only response to 
Evil. This is the reason why, at any given moment, Améry decided to write, beyond 
guilt and expiation. Language is cultivated in this space that we call culture, between 
the meaninglessness of being and the meaning of life. 
 The camp made Améry realize:  
 a.  That it is necessary to hide basic reality. It is illusion that makes life possible. 
  b.     That culture is useless when reality prevails, since this reality is the presence of 
nothingness. 

AT THE END OF UTOPIA 119
 Consequently: 
 a.  To create meaning is to create our world. 
  b.     To deny meaning is to renounce our world. Totalitarianism represents the most complete 
negation of meaning. 
 We move in this space: if we lean too far on the side of meaninglessness, paralysis 
ensues, together with absolute domination, and life ends. To overcome reality is not 
denying it; rather, it entails accepting the uncomfortable position of reflexive mean-
ing that consists in creating meaning, while knowing that it is only meaning. This 
precarious balance is the tension that illuminates life. And it carries an ethical prin-
ciple: Evil, understood as the abuse of power, is meaning at the service of domina-
tion, that is to say, the deceit underlying the utopian promise. It is something 
necessary for life at the service of the destruction of life. Utopia is, then, really a non-
 place in its relation to life. 
 Are we beings that must be deceived? No, provided that we know that illusions 
are necessary but, at the end of the day, are only illusions: our modest footprints in 
the universe of meaninglessness. They are the pieces of bread left behind on the path 
by a lost being who has no other value but her/his ability to mark things with signs, 
that is to say, with meaning. 
 The Culture of Indifference 
 If totalitarianism is the annihilation of meaning, then the shape totalitarianism 
takes today is the culture of indifference. 
 Indifference is the state of mind in which we feel neither inclination nor aversion 
toward a particular person, object, or situation, according to the dictionary of the 
Spanish Royal Academy. Indifference is, then, the loss of empathy, the slow dissolu-
tion of social bonds, and the reduction of the libido accompanied by an increase of 
the drive. 
 What does indifference mean in advanced contemporary societies? It means four 
things: 
 a. A- politics. Man is a political animal who lives, even if in a forced way (Kant’s 
“unsociable sociability”), in society and who finds fulfillment in the shared space of 
the  polis . If humans detach themselves from politics, they amputate an essential part 
of their human condition. They start to abandon their humanity. And for power to 
encourage this distancing of citizens from the  res publica  is an abuse of power that 
leads to the totalitarianism of indifference, in which public life is suspended, hijacked 
by a political- economic- mediatic elite that recognizes no other meaning except for 
individual interests. This is the first figure of indifference. 
 b. De- hierarchy. It means the indistinction of values and ideas, the loss of mean-
ing of truth, the Good and beauty, as well as the looming disappearance of philoso-
phy, unless it accepts its circumscription to the ancillary role of analytic philosophy. 

120 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
Audiovisual mass culture entails a banalization of life. When bodies accumulate 
every day in TV news, they become routine images that are unable to convey their 
profoundly real significance. This inevitably leads to an escalation of images, so as to 
draw the attention of the ordinary spectator: violent events have to be more spec-
tacular; images have to be more obscene and cruel. A dangerous cultural construc-
tion of indifference thus takes shape. Here, only shouts stand out, favoring the 
irruption of populist discourse— the discourse that promises with impunity that 
which it knows it cannot deliver and that legitimizes any means to reach those 
goals— and the trivialization of anticultural, antipolitical discourse. The 
Berlusconization of Europe— the legalization of the privileges of a few and the audi-
ovisual control of citizenship— is a manifestation of this banalization of meaning. It 
is the second figure of indifference. 
 c. Irresponsibility that denies the possibility of social change. The ups and downs 
of the economy become the expression of natural laws that cannot be countered by 
actions intended to bring about social change. Politics can thus only be in the hand 
of economy experts. With the dissemination of this idea three goals are achieved: 
responsibility is denied; the idea of social change reached by means of political action 
is annihilated; and citizens are removed from decision- making. If meaning is derived, 
in Nazism, from the natural laws of the race and, in Communism, from the inescap-
able laws of history, then, in today’s corporate state, which results from the subsump-
tion of politics to financial power, meaning derives from the laws of the economy. 
There is room neither for the creation of other forms of meaning nor for acknowl-
edging the complexity of the human economy of desire. Politics withers at the hand 
of the economy, with obvious consequences for the political situation of citizens, 
who are reduced to being competitors, consumers, and taxpayers. This is the third 
figure of indifference. 
 d. The refusal to acknowledge the other. Difference lays the foundations for indif-
ference. The profile of the other is sketched with sharp contours in order to deny her 
or him the right to be one of us, and, therefore, to reject any duty of hospitality, aid, 
or respect. Indifference is a subtle crystallization of the old racism and xenophobia. 
The denial of alterity is the fourth figure of indifference.  
 The Excess of Fiction 
 Indifference is a crisis of meaning, as much as it is a form of domination. As a crisis of 
meaning, indifference is based upon a blurred future: there is no promise for the future 
but only the uncertain nightmare of a catastrophe in a society that multiplied risks 
because it was convinced that everything was possible. “Everything is possible” is the 
basis for all totalitarian thinking. To give meaning to the everyday? It is inevitably a 
pure exercise of survival. And this is why indifference becomes the utopia of power. 
This is, then, the dimension of domination present in the culture of indifference. 
 But indifference is probably also the response to an inversion of the question of 
meaning: the move from an excess of reality to an excess of fiction. In the Introduction 

AT THE END OF UTOPIA 121
to his novel  Crash , James G. Ballard writes: “The most prudent and effective method 
of dealing with the world around us is to assume that it is a complete fiction— 
conversely, the one small kernel of reality left to us is inside our own heads” (11). 
Ballard, then, approaches a world whose primary and fundamental characteristic he 
diagnosed, namely the radical inversion of the mechanisms of meaning. “In the past 
we have always assumed that the external world around us has represented reality, 
however confusing or uncertain, and that the inner world of our minds, its dreams, 
hopes and ambitions, represented the realm of fantasy and the imagination” (11). 
These roles are inverted now: According to Ballard, “Freud’s classic distinction 
between the latent and manifest content of the dream, between the apparent and the 
real, now needs to be applied to the external world of so- called reality” (11). Fiction 
populates our external universe. Television permanently dumps tons of fiction into 
our homes and touches it with the magic wand of fantasy. Advertising also easily 
incorporates politics, together with food and clothing, into the realm of fiction; sci-
ence and technology expand the confines of possible dreams with such vertiginous 
speed that one loses sight of the distinction between the real and the fantastic. These 
three major vehicles for hallucinations show that Ballard is right when he says that 
“we live inside an enormous novel” (11). 
 Since the external world is filled with fiction, it appears to us as a fantasy, which, 
albeit an absurd one, is a fantasy nonetheless. The episodes follow one another rap-
idly in our consciousness and we have no time to follow their true line of argument; 
they progressively limit our right to get an answer. This is a curious situation where 
a market of illusions that places within our reach almost all of our childhood fanta-
sies competes with a repeated frustration when we realize that, in fact, we very rarely 
manage to take pleasure in the fulfillment of our desires since we realize that pleas-
ure is also a complete fiction. Ballard immediately concludes: “It is now less and less 
necessary for the writer to invent the fictional content of his novel. Fiction is already 
there. The writer’s task is to invent reality” (11). That is to say, the task of the writer 
is to create meaning. Meaning happens in a very restricted area, always in danger of 
being absorbed by the excess of fiction or the excess of reality. 
 The lesson of Ballard can be extended to another major mediator of the real, that 
is, politics. In fact, some would say that politics already recycled itself and moved 
from modern utopianism to postmodern pragmatism. And they would assure us 
that precisely in order to deflate the limitless balloon of fantasy that envelops the 
external world— the social stage— one chose realism— a politics close to the ground, 
with no concessions to illusion— as a means to recover the balance between fantasy 
and reality. 
 But it does not seem that, in practical terms, the pragmatism of our time responds 
to the logic of creation of the real. On the contrary: it is a pragmatism of television, 
advertising, and institutional fictions. It is a pragmatism that takes mere fiction as 
reality— the fiction of money and its bubbles, above all— and tries to legitimate it 
using fundamental criteria. Postmodern politics believes in the novel that was forced 
upon it. And, instead of creating reality, it confuses reality with fiction. This 

122 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 pragmatism is an ideal; it is, in fact, the most radical of idealisms. Not only does it 
think in terms of an ideal truth but it also raises conventions to this condition. 
“Increasingly, our concepts of past, present and future are being forced to revise 
themselves,” writes Ballard. “Just as the past, in social and psychological terms, 
became a casualty of Hiroshima and of the nuclear age, so in its turn the future is 
ceasing to exist, devoured by an all- voracious present” (10). These are the times of a 
present continuous. In order to master the present it is necessary to restore the bal-
ance: to create reality. 
 In fact, during the crisis of modernity, in the shape of what we call postmoder-
nity, there is a double inversion of roles. To be sure, the external world is increasingly 
transformed into pure fiction— a political fantasy, a fantasy of communication, a 
techno- scientific fantasy— and, when faced with this monumental artifice that sur-
rounds us, we progressively rediscover the inner world as a possible refuge from real-
ity. Freud is right: in the inner silence hides the only solid ground for human beings. 
And Foucault is equally correct in observing that the central question is the question 
of the subject. But this subject is a relational being, who only stands on her or his feet 
when she or he gets recognition from others. It is only by rethinking that subject that 
we will be able to break the spiral of fantasy starting with the individual as a fiction 
created and fed by the state and with the blind submission— voluntary servitude (La 
Boétie)— of our subjectivity to this condition. 
 This change in roles becomes manifest, second, in the creation of social, moral, 
cultural, or political forms. The scene of modernity was dominated by the activity of 
the creator: from the politician to the artist, to be a protagonist meant to have the 
ability to challenge the “great book” and to create meaning (reestablishment of insti-
tutions; normative innovation; and stylistic breaks); it meant the power to formalize 
and the will to build a world. This scene was surrounded by a great reserve of fantasy, 
from the obscure zones of intimacy to the territories where rationality lost its shapes. 
These outlaying areas were the intrigues of a great scene with which they maintained 
a necessary but problematic relationship and in relation to which, in the end, the 
represented reasons were defined. 
 The creator sought to expand the confines of intelligibility and to extend the 
zones of transparency. The preoccupation with the question of meaning was the 
motor of the project of modernity. Literary and artistic fictions could not escape 
the exigency to search for the understanding of things. The logic of the time spurred 
a continuous discovery of new perspectives that would allow the penetration of our 
gaze into the secrets of reality (the idea of the disclosure of nature as the meaning of 
technology and as the goal of modernity). When time came to show the results of 
this endeavor, concealment was more powerful than the art of unveiling. And thus a 
great cloud of perverse imaginary was formed. 
 During the postmodern holiday, the roles changed: the public scene was invaded 
by clouds of fiction coming from the abovementioned intrigues, which left the cul-
tural universe afloat in the midst of a perverse imaginary. It is an imaginary, that is, 
a fable and a space of fantasies and illusions; and it is perverse insofar as it is a novel 

AT THE END OF UTOPIA 123
of confusion and of concealment that dangerously mixes the two distinct orders of 
experience and of knowledge, progressively downgrading the subject to the role of a 
mere spectator. 
 The external world progressively takes the shape of an immense novel and it is 
lived as a fantasy in which it is hard to believe because it is missing precisely that 
which necessarily ties the subject to the collective cultural universe: meaning. This is 
the root of the malaise of the postmodern urban culture. And in the absence of 
meaning, indifference grows. The new utopia is precisely this: the possibility of liv-
ing without meaning. The project is that I do not make projects; only technological 
change remains. This change becomes an end in itself, insofar as it is a harbinger of 
the great financial bubbles. If there is no meaning, politics as a space of shared mean-
ing disappears. Given that there is no alternative, there is also no political debate. 
The corporate state, in which the big financial companies impose their law upon 
elected officials, replaces democratic politics. The democracy of indifference is 
reduced to a vote every four years that chooses between increasingly indistinguish-
able programs. And society unravels: where there used to be a community of citi-
zens, we have now a plethora of consumers. And the consumer, who, as Bernard 
Stiegler points out, has all of her or his libido absorbed by the alienation of consump-
tion, loses the capacity for social empathy. Interpersonal relations become relations 
of consumption and fellow human beings turn into completely disposable objects. 
The Berlusconianism that consumes everything, from the bodies to the institutions, 
is the most salient characteristic of this culture. If the totalitarianism described by 
Jean Améry is the excess of reality, the totalitarianism of indifference, toward which 
we are led by the postmodern parenthesis, is that of the excess of fiction. But utopia 
is that which has no place, and so the question arises: Can the present society of 
indifference be a utopia? Or, rather: Are citizens able to render the utopia of indiffer-
ence impossible, or are they too trapped in it already? 
 Nihilism and Indifference 
 The events of September 11 were, in a certain sense, the paramount icon of this 
postmodern fantasy. It was where this fantasy culminated, because it was incredi-
ble, because it was like a story that astonished spectators seeing it from a distance on 
television, and also because it was hard to believe that it was true. And it is the cul-
mination of a fantasy because the modesty of the great power extends fiction by 
censuring the images of the victims, to a point where the image remaining from 
September 11 is that of the collapse of the two towers that symbolize a way of life 
with no human figure, as if one were afraid to let the horrible reality of the thou-
sands of dead be glimpsed. This concealment of those who should have been the 
object of our solidarity and empathy is profoundly postmodern in its fear to show 
reality in all its harshness. It highlights the difficulty in clearing up the clouds of 
fiction. But, at the same time, it is a terrible shock that makes the fantasies of the 
end of history and of a reconciled world crumble in one stroke. Reality does not 

124 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
accept postmodern fabulation. The great nihilistic blow is only the prelude to a 
nihilistic crisis. 
 The key to the present economic crisis lies in the dismantlement of the notion of 
boundaries. Minimal morality contains a principle, the destruction of which opens 
the doors to nihilism and its hidden face, totalitarianism. This principle is that “not 
everything is possible.” Just before the crisis exploded, we had destroyed all notions 
of limits, until we reached the catastrophic point where all the financial garbage was 
dumped over the heads of citizens. Simultaneously, at the level of politics, the Bush 
administration had broken all limits with the legalization of torture. 
 Nihilism as a concept entails two aspects: on the one hand, it means the end of 
values, that is to say, the end of limits; on the other hand, it means the adoption of 
the destructive drive as the only logic of salvation, according to which one kills for 
the sake of killing, deploying violence as a means of purification. “In the beginning 
of the millennium,” Claudio Magris wrote in 1996, “much will depend upon how our 
civilization solves the following dilemma: whether to fight nihilism or to take it to its 
last consequences” (8). The attacks of September 11 and the crisis of 2008 are a dou-
ble confirmation of the nihilistic hypothesis. And this is the common ground shared 
by the suicide terrorists who destroyed both people and symbols and the speculators 
who destroyed the savings of people and of countries. Thus, the question is: Are we 
going to follow the path of nihilism that inexorably leads us to the totalitarianism of 
indifference, to a society without a soul, and to the rule of money and of death (of 
which Asian despotism is giving a peculiar example in China) or is this an opportu-
nity to fight and overcome nihilism, and again to follow the path of limitations, of 
taking the individual into account, and of respecting the other? 
 At this point in the crisis, when financial speculators determine our political 
response, Magris’s dilemma takes a concrete shape: we either continue to accept that 
everything is allowed for economic power and that political power has a strictly 
ancillary role, and we keep moving toward a soft form of totalitarianism based upon 
fear, corruption, and power’s isolation from individuals; or we create forms of gov-
ernance that are able to impose limits on economic power based upon the demand 
for the autonomy of politics and upon an active defense of democracy. Economic 
progress is founded upon technological progress. Moral progress is not. The abuse of 
power is a structural problem. But we have juridical progress that allowed us to abol-
ish slavery and to make torture illegal before it was reinstated by Bush. In order for 
the law to be a weapon in the hands of citizens against the abuses of power, as Karl 
Polanyi noted, we need politics to be autonomous, something that is completely 
negated by the present nihilistic crisis. For 30 years now, according to Pierre Dardot 
and Christian Laval, we have been adopting a form of existence that places each of us 
“in an economic universe of generalized competence, forces populations to go into 
an economic struggle against one another, organizes social relations according to the 
model provided by the market and transforms individuals themselves, who are called 
upon to conceived of themselves as a company” (5). The current crisis has done 
nothing but to consolidate this way of life, while the impotence of politics gave it an 

AT THE END OF UTOPIA 125
aura of irreplaceability. Consumption works as a culture of resignation. The “union 
of corporate power and governmental power,” says Sheldon Wolin, “heralds the 
American version of a total system” (111). We are the markets, the most cynical 
among us point out. That is to say, no one is responsible for anything: the apotheosis 
of nihilism. There is NO responsibility: there is no meaning. This is the utopia of 
meaninglessness. 
 Invisibility as Utopia 
 This crisis has a very surprising feature: it lacks icons. From the crisis of 1929 we 
retained the images of people committing suicide in Wall Street; from the 1973 crisis 
we remember the ads on British television in which a soccer player and his wife 
explained that there were more fun things to do at home during the night than 
watching television, and without spending any electricity. Yet, from this crisis, we 
basically have cold statistical data: the thousands of Euros lost here and there, the 
enormous debts accumulated, and the millions of unemployed people. And, maybe, 
a few images in the style of Ballard of the skeletons of large unfinished construction 
sites and neighborhoods in California with strings of closed houses fitted with signs 
saying that they are under court jurisdiction. It is a financial crisis in which money 
is about to reach the privilege of invisibility: it travels from one place to the other, 
crossing borders, by the mere hit of a computer key. 
 But, above all, this crisis does not have images of discomfort because there is 
barely any contestation. It is a crisis that corresponds to the culture of indifference 
which brings us closer to the great utopia of power: submission and servitude. The 
crisis of the 1980s in Spain produced icons of rebellion such as the  quinquis  that had 
an impact in popular culture through cinema. And resistance struggles linger in the 
memory of the regions that were most affected by the great industrial restructur-
ings of the past century. Not now. In these days what stands out is, on the contrary, 
the fact that the antiglobalization movements have even abandoned the usual sites 
of large meetings of the IMF and the World Bank. Pessimism weighs on the social 
sphere. But discomfort does not emerge, as if it were repressed by the fear of worse 
evils. In countries such as Spain, where the unemployment rate for the younger 
population is 40 percent, not even the youth— which had emerged as a political 
subject in the second half of the twentieth century— make themselves heard. Are 
they also afraid? 
 The mediatic invisibility of the victims of the crisis makes us wonder: who are 
they? Sociologist Fermín Bouza states that unemployment affected qualified workers 
the most, but also the new middle class and unqualified workers. Owners of small 
companies that collapsed are also victims of the crisis, together with parts of the 
upper middle class that suddenly saw themselves swallowed by precariousness, which 
they never imagined could become their problem. Within this group, there are cer-
tainly many people who are ashamed of showing their situation, who are frightened 
because they never thought they would reach such a state, and who are afraid that 

126 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
things might get worse if they protest. And there are also many immigrants who 
prefer to go unnoticed because of the instability of their situation. 
 Probably, these psychological features and the social situation explain why there 
is so little social conflict. There are no signs of unrest or protest, nor is there an 
increase in crime, which one would expect to come out of so much desperation. 
There is, rather, the desire to adjust. The silence of young people is particularly sur-
prising. Maybe it signals a crisis where conventional forms of struggle are already 
obsolete and new ones, such as social networks, have still not completely taken shape. 
But without the icons of protest in our society of the image, the losers are condemned 
to being forgotten. At the end of the crisis, many people will never have looked in the 
eyes of an unemployed. No even on television. This is the crisis of a society that has 
forced itself to accept the idea that there is no alternative. And where there is no 
alternative, the utopia of indifference and the totalitarianism of indifference rule. 
For, what if the utopia of those in power is the final invisibility of the losers, that is to 
say, a system where these have no place in which they can be acknowledged?  
 

 CHAPTER 10 
 History, Politics, and Utopia: Toward a 
Synthesis of Social Theory and Practice  1 
 Laurence  Davis 
   The term “utopia” derives from the title of Thomas More’s classic book  Utopia , pub-
lished in 1516. More’s neologism connotes a place that is both  good  and  nowhere , 
playing on the similarity between the Greek words for “good” (eu) and “not” (ou). 
The concept of utopia is thus from the moment of its inception an elusive one, inso-
far as its relationship, if any, to the empirical concerns of history and politics is 
ambiguous and so open to debate. Among the puzzling questions raised by this con-
ceptual ambiguity are the following. First, how might one reach such a good place if 
it cannot be located on a map of the world? Second, is utopia accessible only by 
means of the faculty of imagination, and if so, what possible  political  function(s) can 
it perform in the very imperfect “real” world in which we all must live? Third, must 
utopia entail a rejection of history or transcendent movement beyond it, or can we 
instead conceive of utopia as an integral part of history which ensures that the past 
never assumes a final shape and the future never shuts its doors? 
 In this essay I propose to analyze the relationship between utopia, history, and 
politics in a way different from how it has traditionally been conceived by defenders 
and critics of utopia alike. My argument is that whereas both have tended to conceive 
of utopia primarily as a transcendent and fixed “ought” opposed to the “is” of politi-
cal reality and the “was” of social history, it may also be understood as an empirically 
grounded, dynamic, and open- ended feature of the “real world” of history and poli-
tics representing the hopes and dreams of those consigned to its margins. I contend, 
moreover, that this latter interpretation of utopia is the one best suited to contempo-
rary, radical democratic grassroots social movements seeking to reclaim control over 
the conditions of their existence from capitalist, market- driven globalization. 
 The plan for the chapter is as follows. First, I analyze influential liberal and 
Marxist criticisms of utopia, and suggest that the common core of their critique is an 
aversion to what they take to be utopia’s quality of ahistorical and antipolitical 
abstraction from existing reality. Second, I consider briefly some problematic defini-
tions of utopia proffered by its contemporary defenders that, however unintention-
ally, provide ammunition for this anti- utopian critique. Third, I challenge such 

128 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
reductive conceptions of utopia, both by tracing their historical roots and by exca-
vating an alternative minority utopian tradition grounded in a very different under-
standing of the relationship between utopia and history. Fourth, I draw on this 
historical perspective in order to formulate an analytical distinction between what I 
refer to as “transcendent” and “grounded” utopias. Fifth, I examine the explanatory 
power and political relevance of the concept of “grounded utopias” with respect to 
contemporary grassroots movements opposed to the dominant global transcendent 
utopia of endless material progress. Finally, I conclude with some brief reflections on 
research gaps and open questions. 
 Utopia and its Critics 
 According to the critics of utopia, it is precisely its “defining” quality of ahistorical 
and antipolitical abstraction from existing reality that renders utopias either hope-
lessly impractical, or dangerously idealistic, or both. The latter objection (dangerous 
idealism) has been expressed with particular vehemence by influential post- Second 
World War liberal thinkers such as Karl Popper, Isaiah Berlin, Leszek Kolakowski, 
Michael Oakeshott, and Friedrich Hayek, all of whom equated utopia with the quest 
for impossible perfection and then concluded from this premise that it raised the 
specter of totalitarianism. Kolakowski, for example, warned in his Tanner Lectures 
on Human Values that “the victory of the utopian dreams would lead us to a totali-
tarian nightmare and the utter downfall of civilization” (145). Berlin, for his part, 
declared that “no perfect solution is, not merely in practice, but in principle, possible 
in human affairs, and any determined attempt to produce it is likely to lead to suf-
fering, disillusionment and failure” (48). 
 Of particular concern was the gap that utopian abstraction necessarily opened up 
between ends and means. Berlin expressed the point by posing the following rhetori-
cal question: if it is possible to attain a final solution to all human ills, then what 
price could be too high to pay for such a goal? Those convinced they had discovered 
the only true path to ultimate salvation would also believe they had a licence to do 
away with the liberty of choice of others provided they did so in the name of utopia. 
This, according to Berlin, was the faith of Lenin, Trotsky, and Mao, and the justifica-
tion for the slaughter of millions in wars or revolutions: “gas chambers, gulag, geno-
cide, all the monstrosities for which our century will be remembered— are the price 
men must pay for the felicity of future generations” (16). 
 The former objection (hopeless impracticality) was articulated most forcefully 
and influentially from a very different political perspective by Marx and Engels in 
 The Communist Manifesto . In Part III of the  Manifesto , under the heading “Critical- 
Utopian Socialism and Communism,” Marx and Engels lampooned utopian social-
ists such as Saint- Simon, Fourier, and Robert Owen for conjuring up utopian castles 
in the air abstracted from the realities of the modern class struggle between prole-
tariat and bourgeoisie: “[H]istorical action is to yield to their personal inventive 
action, historically created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones, and the 

HISTORY, POLITICS, AND UTOPIA 129
gradual, spontaneous class- organization of the proletariat to an organization of soci-
ety specially contrived by these inventors” (244). Marx and Engels acknowledged 
that the utopian socialists deserved praise for articulating imaginative criticisms of 
existing society that contributed to the enlightenment of the working class. But they 
also contended that the significance of these socialist visionaries bore an inverse 
relationship to the historical development of the working class. In short, like their 
anti- utopian liberal counterparts, Marx and Engels condemned utopianism because 
of its apparent quality of abstraction from existing historical and political reality. 
Insofar as these criticisms are valid, then it would appear that utopia has very little 
value for contemporary political practice. Moreover, whatever value it does have 
would be more than outweighed by its potential dangers. 
 Perfectionist Defenders of Utopia 
 Ironically, many contemporary scholarly defenders of utopianism have, however 
unintentionally, provided theoretical ammunition for this line of anti- utopian cri-
tique by defining utopia in terms of the quest for a state of impossible perfection. The 
sociologist Krishan Kumar, for example, argues that utopia, however open- ended it 
aspires to be, must in principle be bounded. This is so because it is by definition “the 
perfect society,” or a “state of impossible perfection,” and its organization is the 
embodiment of such perfection. This is no less true of utopian social theory than it 
is of utopian literature, for what links More’s  Utopia  to, say, Robert Owen’s  A New 
View of Society  (1813), and separates both from say Hobbes’s  Leviathan  and Locke’s 
 Two Treatises , is the conviction that humanity is “perfectible.” What unites utopians, 
in short, is the assumption that there is nothing in human being, nature, or society 
that cannot be so ordered as to bring about a more or less permanent state of material 
plenty, social harmony, and individual fulfillment. There are no fundamental barri-
ers or obstacles to human earthly perfection: scarcity can be overcome, conflict 
eliminated, and moral dilemmas and psychological frustrations resolved. Humans 
can, in other words, “become gods (if not God)” (Kumar 3, 29, 55, 77). 
 Other contemporary defenders of utopia have defined the concept in similar per-
fectionist, static, or abstractly idealistic terms. The historian J. C. Davis, for example, 
contends that “the dynamic utopia is a myth,” inasmuch as utopia is by definition a 
society without change. In a similar vein, the political scholars Barbara Goodwin 
and Keith Taylor claim that utopia is an elaborate version of the “good life” in a “per-
fect society” which is viewed as an integral totality. Hence the “static quality” of 
utopian writing referred to in so many commentaries about them, and their critical 
political functions of imaginatively “transcending the ubiquitous, seemingly unas-
sailable present,” helping us to “escape from the existent,” and suggesting an instant 
or immanent transition from the present system by means of a “break with history.” 
In an influential earlier account, Manuel and Manuel point to the “changeless char-
acter” of utopia, and define it as a “perfectly reconstructed society.” And in his 
 particularly influential sociological account of ideology and utopia, Karl Mannheim 

130 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
defines utopia as an idea that is necessarily “situation transcending” or “incongruent 
with reality” (all quotations in this paragraph cited in Hoffman 28, 33, 36–7). 
 To be sure, it is possible to reference abundant evidence in the long history of 
utopian writing lending support to such claims. As even those who are most sympa-
thetic to the utopian tradition are now likely to concede, the vast majority of literary 
utopias have been static states, seemingly devoid of processes tending to upset them 
or change their design. Naomi Jacobs, for example, suggests that this is no less true 
of many progressive utopias written in the nineteenth century than it is of the bulk 
of those produced in the Renaissance period or ( avant la lettre ) Greek antiquity. 
According to Jacobs (and Lewis Mumford, on whose scholarship she relies to support 
this particular point), the stasis and symmetry of many classic utopias was a con-
scious product of the attempt to imitate an elegantly balanced and stable divine crea-
tion. While some utopias, such as Campanella’s, attempt to incorporate progress by 
importing new ideas and technologies, their only movement is “that of a spinning 
wheel, a kind of stasis” (Jacobs 34). Even the so- called dynamic utopias of such late- 
nineteenth- century or early- twentieth- century utopian writers as Bellamy, Gilman, 
and Wells are unconvincing, because no future can be projected for them other than 
a larger or purer version of what they already have. This content- driven stasis is 
matched by the narrative stasis of the standard utopian form. As Jacobs rightly points 
out, the familiar narrative resolution of the conflict between the visitor to utopia and 
his or her utopian guide, in which the visitor’s doubts are all quickly overcome, seems 
to promise a disturbingly final resolution of all residual conflict, questioning, and 
unhappiness. 
 Having said this, one might also cite abundant historical evidence to the con-
trary. Moreover, I contend, the character of this contrary evidence is such as to estab-
lish beyond a shadow of doubt that the utopian tradition is far richer and more 
complex than the above scholarly accounts would appear to suggest.  
 Utopia and/in History 
 Consider, by way of an entrée into this history, the way in which time is commonly 
 perceived in the modern era, even by many of its most philosophically sophisticated 
analysts. As Friedrich Kümmel has observed in a thoughtful but largely neglected paper 
on the subject, modern philosophers of time have tended to conceive the nature of the 
relationship between past, present, and future as essentially one of vanishing succession. 
They have assumed, in other words, that while a particular time exists at present, there 
is a time which is “not yet,” but which will sometime come into being, as well as a time 
which, already having been, “no longer” exists. From this perspective, time is never 
present as a whole, but is divided into the elements of a succession. It consists of two 
periods delimited by the present and continually passing into one another, so that what 
was previously a future is “now” a present and will soon be a past. 
 The problem with this view, as Kümmel points out, is that it fails to do justice to 
time’s real, abiding quality. If something is to endure, then its past may never be 

HISTORY, POLITICS, AND UTOPIA 131
simply “past,” but must in some way also remain “present.” It follows that an alterna-
tive theory of time is required, and specifically one which accounts for duration 
without negating temporal succession. Toward this end, Kümmel proposes a concep-
tion of time as a correlation of future, past, and present in which past and future may 
 coexist with the present  conjointly . Granted their independent individual nature and 
determination, the coexistence of past and future is no longer in contradiction with 
the present. All periods may be conceived of as existing at one and the same time. 
This incessant interweaving of the “times” does not however, as in Bergson’s philoso-
phy, imply their fusion. For only the past  as  past and the future  as  future are able to 
make the present, entering into it and giving it foundation. 
 Being primarily concerned with metaphysical questions, Kümmel does not offer 
much in the way of social theory. He does, however, help to lay the foundations for 
such theory by speculating on the implications of his “life- sustaining” conception of 
time for a theory of human freedom. As he observes more than once, “man” is unique 
among organic beings in his ability to condition the order of his time himself. Indeed, 
the “main difference” between animal and human life is the complete lack of time 
consciousness in the former. The animal remains always limited to its spatial situa-
tion, living the strict correlation of organism and environment. Unable to put a dis-
tance between the past and its own being, or to imagine a future that might enable it 
to transcend itself, it is forever bound to the present. A human being, by contrast, is 
able to transform his or her environment into a world in which he or she can act 
freely. Being a time- conscious organism, he or she is able to relate himself freely to 
both his or her past and his or her future. He or she is thus also able actively to medi-
ate the present. The exercise of this freedom is by no means a precondition for his or 
her survival. He or she may, for example, struggle to “emancipate” himself or herself 
from time by attempting to live only in the present moment. Ultimately, however, 
such efforts are self- defeating. They are products of a compulsive reaction rather 
than free agency, and invariably end in subjection to the tyranny of time. 
 The alternative is to work with time rather than against it. This one does by 
accepting the reality of past and future, and by recognizing the interconnections 
between them. What, specifically, does the latter of these conditions entail? Most 
importantly, it entails recognition that no act of a human being is possible with refer-
ence solely to the past or solely to the future, but is always dependent upon their 
interaction. Thus, for example, the future may be considered as the horizon against 
which plans are made, the past a source of the means for their realization, and the 
present the time in which these plans and means are mediated and actualized. From 
this perspective, the future represents the possibility, and the past the basis, of a free 
life in the present. Both, according to this view, are always found intertwined with 
the present. As Kümmel memorably puts it, “in the  open circle  of future and past 
there exists no possibility which is not made concrete by real conditions, nor any 
realisation which does not bring with it new possibilities. This interrelation of recip-
rocal conditions is a historical process in which the past never assumes a final shape 
nor the future ever shuts its doors” (50). 

132 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 Turning from Kümmel’s essay to the history of the relationship between utopia 
and history, we can see that in historical terms the prevalent conception of time as 
essentially vanishing succession criticized by Kümmel is in fact a distinctive product 
of the modern Western world without significant precedent in the wider scope of 
human history. As Antonis Liakos, among others, has observed, until the seven-
teenth century it was impossible to think about the past without a framework com-
prising the future. This understanding of history was challenged at the end of the 
seventeenth century, when the modern structure of three historical time periods 
(ancient, medieval, and modern) was introduced. In the new historical thinking, 
historical time was quantified and measured. Thinking historically, from this new 
perspective, meant that the past should be considered as a “closed” case, as some-
thing complete that would not threaten the established order. The task of the histo-
rian was no longer to interpret the entirety of human history from Genesis to the 
Second Coming, as it was in Christian eschatological thinking, but simply to recount 
what already happened in the past (Liakos 26–7). 
 Ironically, even as it endeavored to distance itself from this slavish focus on a 
closed past bereft of the possibility of a qualitatively different future, the flurry of 
utopian writing that followed the publication of More’s  Utopia  in 1516 subscribed to 
a similar conception of history as a homogenous plane beyond the reach of promise 
and fulfillment. More specifically, early modern European utopian writers from 
More to Bacon and Campanella strove to imagine qualitatively different futures cut 
off from the useless burden of the past. Although the formation of utopian expecta-
tions, values, and norms was historically embedded in the background of utopian 
thinking, history as a continuing concern for the past was rejected because of a belief 
that the new ideal world had to emanate from reason, nature, or morality (Liakos 
28). Like their ancient Greek forebears, most utopian writers in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries tended to assume that utopian ideals occupy a fixed space out-
side time and history. 
 Influenced, no doubt, by ever- accelerating processes of capitalist globalization 
that drive a wedge between the present and the past, between, on the one hand, such 
spatially unifying forces as capitalism, science, and technology and, on the other 
hand, the diversity and particularity of the local, the dominant trend of subsequent 
Enlightenment and Industrial era utopian thinking has been to postulate a break 
between the dynamic present of modernity and its comparatively “primitive” static 
past. One thinks, for example, of the many so- called progressive or dynamic utopias 
of the nineteenth century, which acknowledge the extent to which utopian ideals are 
bound up with time and history, but only insofar as history is conceived in linear, 
law- like, and necessarily progressive terms as a set of fixed and hierarchical stages 
leading ultimately to perfection. 
 Interestingly, however, alongside and in opposition to these dominant utopian 
trends, the attentive scholar of utopian thought may also detect the traces of an 
alternative minority utopian tradition grounded in a very different conception of 
the relationship between utopia and history. Almost without exception, this 

HISTORY, POLITICS, AND UTOPIA 133
 alternative tradition has a distinctively anarchist(ic) or libertarian socialist 
 character. It is also much closer than its statist counterpart to contemporary 
 ecological, feminist, and anti- imperialist perspectives. While the scholarly litera-
ture on the subject is still in its infancy, the existing evidence is sufficiently compel-
ling to suggest the need for a much broader conception of utopian studies than 
many of its proponents would allow. 
 Consider, for example, Chris Ferns’s helpful but relatively neglected study 
 Narrating Utopia  (1999), in which he traces some of the connections between ideol-
ogy, gender, and form in utopian literature from the Renaissance to the present day. 
The main body of the work is organized in two sections, roughly chronological in 
sequence, which are structured primarily in terms of the content of the utopias under 
discussion. The first, under the heading “Dreams of Order,” comprises a set of chap-
ters dealing with utopias whose character is centralized and regimented— among 
them More’s  Utopia , Campanella’s  The City of the Sun , Bacon’s  New Atlantis , Bellamy’s 
 Looking Backward , and Wells’s  A Modern Utopia . The second, entitled “Dreams of 
Freedom,” critically examines a range of attempts to imagine utopias based on liber-
tarian rather than authoritarian premises. Among the works considered are Morris’s 
 News from Nowhere , Bogdanov’s  Red Star , Huxley  Island , Gilman’s  Herland , 
Gearhart’s  The Wanderground , Piercy’s  Woman on the Edge of Time , and Ursula K. Le 
Guin’s  Always Coming Home  and  The Dispossessed . While Ferns’s conclusions are 
largely critical— he acknowledges the extent to which even many of the more liber-
tarian utopias remain constrained by the limitations of the traditional or dominant 
utopian narrative paradigm— he also argues, with particular reference to Piercy and 
Le Guin, that utopia is “still capable of pointing the way, however hesitantly, toward 
something new” (Ferns 236). It does so in part, he suggests, by experimenting with 
novel narrative frameworks that serve to foreground the relationship between utopia 
and the reality from which it stems— yet to which it proposes an  historically condi-
tional radical alternative. 
 These conclusions are confirmed and considerably developed in more recent 
scholarly studies of the relationship between the anarchist and utopian traditions. In 
2005, for example, Peter Stillman and I published the first collection of original 
essays devoted to the new utopian politics of Le Guin’s  The Dispossessed . In my own 
contribution to the volume I focus on the subtle, sophisticated and highly creative 
literary ways in which Le Guin attempts to do justice to both the enduring and suc-
cessive aspects of the cosmos by playing with an open conception of time in which 
past and future are always found intertwined with each other, and with the present. 
I argue that the primary  political  aspiration animating Le Guin’s innovative treat-
ment of time in the book is to illuminate the ways in which different conceptions of 
the relationship between utopia and existing reality may either enrich or constrain 
the possibilities of free human choice and meaningful action. In the course of the 
novel, I suggest, the reader is exposed to two very different conceptions grounded in 
two very different understandings of the nature of time. The first is the static assump-
tion that utopian ideals occupy a fixed space outside time and history. On this view, 

134 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
time is but a trifling and ephemeral element of human life. The second is the dynamic 
recognition that utopian ideals are intimately bound up with time and history. 
According to this point of view, time is an integral and enduring part of human life. 
The psychological, ethical, and political consequences of choosing one or the other 
of these abstract positions is clarified for the reader by Le Guin in her concrete, liter-
ary description of the changing relationship between the novel’s two central worlds. 
Considered as a whole, I conclude, the novel is an example of something that defend-
ers and critics of utopia alike have difficulty even imagining: namely, a genuinely 
dynamic and revolutionary utopia premised on an acceptance of the enduring reality 
of social conflict and historical change. 
 Some of these same themes are reprised in a much more wide- ranging edited col-
lection that Ruth Kinna and I published in 2009,  Anarchism and Utopianism . In this 
book we assembled the first collection of original essays to explore the relationship 
between anarchism and utopianism, and in particular the ways in which their long 
historical interaction from the Warring States epoch of ancient China to the present 
time has proven fruitful for emancipatory politics. Among the literary case studies 
examined in the book are the  Daodejing  of Lao Zi, Diderot’s  Supplément au voyage de 
Bougainville , Morris’s  News from Nowhere , J. A. Andrews’s  The Triumph of Freedom , 
Florence Huntley’s  The Dream Child , Henry Olerich’s  A Cityless and Countryless 
World , William Windsor’s  Loma, a Citizen of Venus , Rosa Graul’s  Hilda’s Home: A 
Story of Woman’s Emancipation , Pierre Quiroule’s trilogy  Sobre la ruta de la anarquía , 
B. Traven’s  Treasure of the Sierra Madre , Robert Nichols’s  Daily Lives in Nghsi- Altai , 
Le Guin’s  The Dispossessed  and  Always Coming Home , P. M.’s  bolo’bolo , and Starhawk’s 
 The Fifth Sacred Thing . Beyond this literary focus, the book also excavates the rich 
and extensive history of the relationship between anarchist and utopian ideas, move-
ments, and communal experiments. It illustrates the remarkable range of instances 
in which the two traditions converged, be it in dissident spiritual philosophies, 
anthropological studies, unorthodox lifestyles, self- consciously political expressions 
of gender and sexuality, experiments in alternative education, ecological communi-
ties, or revolutionary social movements. 
 Among the most notable findings of this wide- ranging analysis is that nearly all 
of the anarchist or anarchistic utopias examined are open, dynamic and organically 
linked to actual social practices. There is a consensus among the contributors that in 
stark contrast to the rationally fixed and transcendent utopias associated with escap-
ism and/or domination, the largely anti- perfectionist and antiauthoritarian utopias 
they examine do not represent a form of abstraction from the world. On the con-
trary, such utopias are focused, first and foremost, on transforming the present as 
part of an organic process in which already existing historical tendencies are actively 
engaged with, nurtured, and built upon. Most of them call into question modern 
conceptions of progress, and recall the organic communities of the premodern past 
and the dissident present in order to inspire and inform contemporary libertarian 
struggles for a more humane future. They affirm the reality and worth of those natu-
ral and cultural forces that are the devalued and rejected “other” of civilized 

HISTORY, POLITICS, AND UTOPIA 135
 domination, and in their nonliterary forms frequently exemplify a prefigurative 
form of direct action politics demonstrating that libertarian utopias are not only 
eminently desirable but also immediately realizable. 
 Generalizing from this and related research, I am inclined to agree with Antonis 
Liakos that we may well be witnessing a paradigm shift in utopian thinking at the 
dawn of the twenty- first century. Consistent with the increasing skepticism expressed 
by social critics in the twentieth century toward the idea of progress and theories of 
modernization, contemporary utopianism is increasingly taking the form of a reen-
actment of the possibilities of the past in juxtaposition to the present so as to open 
the way to a qualitatively different future. This reevaluation of the relationship 
between past, present, and future is particularly evident in the field of utopian social 
history. The pioneering work of E. P. Thompson, Raymond Williams, and Barbara 
Taylor, among others, is paradigmatic in this regard. It clearly illustrates a renewed 
appreciation of the past as a series of presents, each open to more than one possibil-
ity, and a consequent problematization of the relationship between the present and 
past. From this perspective historical time is no longer conceived as continuous and 
homogenous, the present is no longer understood as the linear evolutionary result of 
the past, and historical testimonies and memories are pregnant with living dreams 
for another and better life (Liakos 48; see also Varikas).  
 Transcendent and Grounded Utopias: 
Defining Features and Functions 
 The practical political implications of the above historical, philosophical, and liter-
ary analysis are, I suggest, profound. First and foremost, they suggest a need at the 
level of conceptual social and political theory for a clear analytical distinction 
between transcendent and grounded utopias. 
 As should now be evident, some utopias are indeed constructs of the perfectionist 
ethical imagination that abstract from existing reality in a transcendent fashion. 
They thus posit a dichotomous opposition between the ideal and the real, ought and 
is, in which utopianism and realism confront one another as irreconcilable oppo-
sites. In her excellent essay “A Non- Euclidean View of California as a Cold Place to 
Be,” Ursula K. Le Guin refers to such utopias as “Euclidean” utopias. A reaction of 
reason and will against the here- and- now, the Euclidean utopia is quite literally 
“nowhere.” A purely abstract and static end, or goal, it ceases to be utopia as soon as 
we reach it. It can thus speak only in the future tense— the language of progress— 
and is inherently uninhabitable (Le Guin,  Dancing,  81). As the histories of capitalist, 
industrial, and colonial “development” make all too clear, it is also potentially 
destructive of what is. 
 The focus of the “non- Euclidean” utopia, by contrast, is on the temporally 
extended present, the “right here, right now” inhabited by living, breathing human 
beings. Paradoxically, it is such that if it is to come, then it must exist already. In fact, 

136 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
according to Le Guin it has existed already, as a feature of many of the so- called 
primitive societies crushed under the wheels of European capitalism and technologi-
cal “progress.” Its essence was and is a form of society in which human beings are at 
peace with themselves and their natural environment. Animated by a generous Spirit 
of Place rather than an exclusive and aggressive Spirit of Race, Le Guin’s habitable 
utopia is concerned primarily not with the continuous advance of technology and 
ever- expanding economic growth, but with preserving its existence. It has a modest 
standard of living, is conservative of natural resources, and features a political life 
based upon consent (Le Guin,  Dancing, 93, 84, 96). 
 The distinction I wish to draw here between “transcendent” and “grounded” 
utopia is similar in many ways to the one formulated by Le Guin. In particular, I 
want to emphasize the difference between utopias associated with the imagination of 
and/or quest for perfection in some impossible future (transcendent utopia), and 
those associated with the encouragement of greater imaginative awareness of 
neglected or suppressed possibilities for qualitatively better forms of living latent in 
the present (grounded utopia). Rather than abstracting from the ostensibly irre-
deemably corrupt social practices of our world in order to pass final moral judg-
ments on them, the latter helps to shape existing social practices by converting the 
given confines of the here-and-now into an open horizon of possibilities. It does so 
in part by illuminating the heterodox and the extraordinary in the seemingly ordi-
nary, and by reminding us that past, present, and future all contain multiple possi-
bilities far in excess of seemingly fixed actualities. 
 Another World is Possible: The Grounded Utopianism of 
Contemporary Grassroots Subsistence Movements 
 From the point of view of contemporary, grassroots social movements seeking to 
reclaim democratic control over the conditions of their existence, transcendent uto-
pian imagination or theory is of little value. This is because it depicts or conceptual-
izes a static vision of society in which change seems neither desirable nor possible. It 
thus reproduces the dichotomous division between the actual and the real, on the 
one hand, and the impossible and the ideal, on the other that it seeks to challenge, 
and so disempowers those who engage in protest precisely in order to reject predeter-
mined assumptions about what should be desired and what can be attained. 
 By contrast, grounded utopias both emerge organically out of, and contribute to 
the further development of, historical movements for grassroots social change. As a 
result, they are emphatically not fantasized visions of perfection to be imposed 
upon an imperfect world, but an integral feature of that world representing the 
hopes and dreams of those consigned to its margins. Part and parcel of dynamic 
and open- ended processes of struggle, and grounded in immediate everyday needs, 
such utopias challenge dominant conceptions of reality not by measuring them 
against the transcendent ethical standard of a fixed vision of an ideal society, but by 
opening a utopian space for thinking, feeling, debating, and cultivating the 

HISTORY, POLITICS, AND UTOPIA 137
 possibility of historically rooted (and thus historically contingent) alternative social 
relations. 
 Grounded utopias may take a variety of forms. In their fictional literary guise, 
they are intended to fire the imagination by engaging the reader in a complex dia-
logue about what is, what might be, and the relationship between the two. They are 
thus neither purely escapist fantasies, nor narrowly didactic constructions meant to 
secure the reader’s unquestioning assent to a particular sociopolitical agenda, but 
thought experiments that invite the reader to participate in a time-sensitive journey 
of the utopian imagination complete with fundamental moral conflict, meaningful 
choice, and continuing change, by the end of which she or he may return to the non-
fictional present with a broader perspective on its latent emancipatory possibilities. 
In their most grounded literary forms— notable recent examples of which include 
Starhawk’s  The Fifth Sacred Thing  and Le Guin’s  Always Coming Home—  such uto-
pias evoke a strong sense of place and recall the lived experience of active partici-
pants in social movements resisting systems of oppression and domination. They 
may also serve as a source of inspiration for, and function as a catalyst for critical 
reflection by, these same movement activists, as in the case of Le Guin’s  The 
Dispossessed  (itself inspired by the rebellions of 1968) and the anarchist- influenced 
contemporary global anticapitalist movement. 
 Grounded utopias are by no means restricted to fictional literary creations, how-
ever, nor even to the other species of written work typically analyzed by students of 
utopian social and political theory. They find expression in an almost endless variety 
of cultural practices, from unorthodox lifestyles to experiments in alternative educa-
tion. Within the context of protest cultures, one may detect the distinctive traces of 
grounded utopianism in upsurges of social creativity ranging from neighborhood 
assemblies and climate camps, to direct actions arising out of participatory demo-
cratic campaigns, to high points of revolutionary struggle. What all such instances of 
grounded utopianism share in common is their creation of utopian spaces in con-
crete social or political practices intended to cultivate the possibility of alternative 
social relations. 
 Consider by way of an illustrative and particularly salient example the case of 
contemporary grassroots movements of farmers or landless people (such as the 
Zapatista in Mexico, the Landless Workers Movement in Brazil, and the  Mukti 
Sangarsh  in India) seeking to reclaim their right to use common land to meet their 
subsistence needs. In the face of the prevailing “common sense” that “there is no 
alternative” to market- driven corporate globalization, these very diverse grassroots 
social movements demonstrate by their very existence that “another world is pos-
sible.” Their grounded utopianism consists not in some sort of blueprint- style 
embodiment of the way the world should be— few if any movement participants 
would make such extravagant claims— but rather in stubbornly living lives at odds 
with the relentlessly homogenizing and destructive logic of global capitalism. By 
daring through collective action to reclaim the power and responsibility for organ-
izing their own lives, such movement activists contest dominant understandings of 

138 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
what is  possible and open up utopian spaces for imagining and practising peaceful, 
ecologically sustainable, egalitarian, and radically democratic alternative ways of 
living. 
 Consider, more specifically, the case of opposition to mega- dam construction 
projects in India. Ever since their inception these projects have consistently been 
opposed by strong people’s movements composed primarily of peasants, tribals, and 
others whose ancestral lands and livelihood bases would be flooded or submerged by 
the dams. One such movement, the  Narmada Bachao Andolan  (Save Narmada 
Movement), has attracted the support of middle- class social activists and concerned 
urban dwellers, and conducted a widely publicized campaign against the Narmada 
Valley Project, a massive undertaking (originally financed by the World Bank) to 
construct two mega- dams and numerous large dams on the River Narmada. 
Proponents of the ongoing project point to its potential contribution to modern 
industrial development by means of land irrigation, production of electric power, 
and the supply of drinking water. Opponents argue that all the benefits of the project 
will accrue to people and interest groups outside the flood areas, while the costs have 
been and will continue to be borne by the environment and the hundreds of thou-
sands of people displaced by the flooding of their ancestral land. 
 By way of an alternative to the mega- dam projects, numerous grassroots social 
movements have emerged seeking different solutions to the water and energy prob-
lems of drought- prone regions, solutions that would restore both ecological and 
social balance without sacrificing the future for short- term gains. In Khanapur in 
Sangli district in Maharashtra, for instance, an organization of workers and poor, 
landless peasants— the  Mukti Sangarsh  (the name means Liberation Struggle)— was 
formed in order to protect people’s livelihoods and study the reasons for the recur-
ring droughts in the area. Their investigations revealed that until the 1970s three 
rivers flowed perennially through Khanapur Taluka, and there were sufficient wells 
and drinking water. Starting in the mid- 1970s, however, the area was transformed 
from more or less subsistence- oriented agriculture to Green Revolution capitalist 
farming. Old subsistence crops such as  bajra  and  jowar were replaced by commercial 
crops like sugar cane, which not only require chemical fertilizers and pesticides, but 
also vast quantities of water. As a result, the peasants became dependent on seed, 
fertilizer, and chemical companies, as well as on banks and market fluctuations. 
Small peasants became increasingly indebted and many had to migrate to the city in 
search of work. The big farmers survived and used up most of the water. Moreover, 
in the 1980s private contractors began excavating sand from the dried- up riverbeds 
in order to sell it to construction firms in the cities. Water percolation was thus fur-
ther reduced and the wells dried up (Mies and Shiva 306–8). 
 Drawing on the neglected resources of local history, the  Mukti Sangarsh  and the 
People’s Science Organisation of Maharashtra organized science fairs and discus-
sions in the villages during which people studied water management from an histori-
cal perspective. The old cropping methods, the geological conditions, and the 
vegetation in the area were also examined, and viable schemes for an alternative 

HISTORY, POLITICS, AND UTOPIA 139
agriculture proposed. In addition, in the mid- 1980s peasants of two villages pro-
duced a plan to build a small people’s dam, which eventually was completed in 1990. 
The water collected from the dam was to be distributed equally, with every person— 
including landless people and women— receiving the same share. Thus the people 
struggled not only to regain control over their own resources, and to restore the eco-
logical balance in the area, but also to change unequal social relationships between 
the classes and genders. They organized themselves democratically, recovered their 
subsistence knowledge and skills, developed eco- friendly alternative technologies, 
and created at the local level a genuinely participatory, egalitarian, and sustainable 
“grounded utopian” alternative to the dominant transcendent utopia of capitalist 
globalization (Mies and Shiva 308–12). 
 Research Gaps and Open Questions 
 In closing, I want to acknowledge the need for extensive additional theoretical and 
empirical research on the subject matter that I have explored in this essay. To date the 
now well- established scholarly field of utopian studies has focused primarily on 
three broad varieties of utopianism: literary utopias, utopian social thought, and 
communal experiments. By comparison, the study of the dynamic relationship 
between utopia and historical and contemporary grassroots social movements has 
been relatively neglected. There is, in particular, a pressing need for interdisciplinary 
research that successfully combines philosophical and historical analysis of the con-
cept of utopia with an empirical understanding of social movement processes. 
 In any such research, the student of utopia will need to steer a careful course 
between two epistemological extremes: on the one hand, the Scylla of capitulation to 
dominant understandings of political possibility; and on the other hand, the 
Charybdis of reinforcing the prevailing association between utopia and deeply prob-
lematic ideas about human perfectibility. One of my primary aims in this essay has 
been to facilitate balanced scholarship of this sort, by excavating the hidden history 
of the relationship between utopia and history; drawing a theoretical distinction 
between transcendent and grounded utopias; and arguing the case for the far greater 
explanatory power of the latter with respect to contemporary grassroots subsistence 
movements opposed to market globalization. 
 


 CHAPTER 11 
 A Practical Utopia for the Twenty- First Century  1 
 Robert  Albritton 
   In historical periods when radical changes are required, utopias may free the mind 
from the despair of remaining entrapped by seemingly unalterable reified structures 
of thought and practice. When existing systems begin to break down or unravel, a 
practical utopia can serve the need to consider and to debate a broad range of alter-
natives. 2   Believing that the existing system of global capitalism has been in a process 
of unravelling for some time and that in the future there likely will be powerful glo-
bal mass movements for change, I offer this utopia as food for thought in the coming 
period of transformation. 3 
 I recognize the host of meanings given to “utopia,” and the resulting negative or 
positive connotations that attach to it. In this essay, it is not my intention to bury or 
praise the concept, to analyze the relative merits of more temporally oriented (as in 
Sorel’s [1961] “myth”) as opposed to spatially oriented utopias, or finally to grapple 
with the difficulties of outlining some future direction that is too radically different 
to be describable in existing languages, except when used poetically. Instead, I want 
to present an initial sketch of a few ideals and some possible socioeconomic relations 
that could help us move toward them. What I write is not particularly original, and 
it is not impossible (practical), though it is difficult to achieve (utopia). 
 For purposes of this chapter, a utopia is a cluster of concepts that overlap or are 
mutually supportive in their approach toward future ameliorations of current social 
problems. This is clearly a positive take on “utopia,” as a  practical  utopia. And let me 
add, that when the current capitalist system really starts to break down, radical 
changes that may have seemed quite impossible (utopian?), may suddenly become 
real possibilities.  4   While currently there is no global agent of change that could con-
ceivably bring about many policies that I shall advocate, the mobilizing potentials of 
new communication technologies have only just started to become manifest. Further, 
local organizing has succeeded in bringing about important changes, particularly in 
the food sector, and it is always possible for local movements to link themselves to 
create larger movements. 
 Common sense suggests that in phases of transition between one social order and 
another, there would be more utopias written, and they would have greater impact. 

142 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
Considering the economic crisis, the health crisis, the ecological crisis, and the food 
crisis, to mention a few of the current mutually exacerbating crises, many observers 
of the present as history would conclude that we are now in a phase of transition away 
from the capitalist order that has been more or less hegemonic for the last two centu-
ries. Moreover, we seem to be approaching an ecological turning point in human 
history that will impact upon life on earth much more radically than any previous 
turning point. One would expect, then, to see an outpouring of highly original and 
imaginative utopias. The need may be there, but from where I stand, utopian thinking 
seems to be blocked by an excessive emphasis on “pessimism of the intellect.” 5   
 Perhaps the reason lies in the unparalleled accumulation of power that has 
accrued to enormous economic, political, and ideological structures— structures 
that seem to have too much inertia to change direction. These immense corporations 
and states have a vested interest in maintaining the system within which they are 
powerful; and they have the capacity to reproduce and enlarge themselves while they 
maintain or expand the system. As we have recently witnessed, the larger the eco-
nomic entity the more it cannot be allowed to fail for fear of bringing down the 
whole system. The current bailouts have similarities with paying bribes, ransoms, or 
“protection money.” 
 Another reason for a lack of utopian thinking is the failure of past efforts to con-
struct utopias. In many cases the pursuit of impractical utopias has landed in dysto-
pia. I believe that there are two main reasons for this. First, the more or less religious 
zeal that is often unleashed by utopian movements substitutes fanaticism for open 
and reasoned debate. Second, this religious zeal has often been focused on a charis-
matic elite that, despite initial good intentions, ends up crushing democracy. 
 The chief opposition to the dominant capitalist structuring of power over the past 
century and a half has come from socialism, but the primary center of global “social-
ism,” the former Soviet Union, tried to beat out capitalism by creating a monstrous 
caricature of it. The Soviet aim was to outgrow the United States through economies 
of scale and the technological domination of nature. From the point of view of today’s 
looming ecological disasters, the USSR’s effort to outgrow U.S. style capitalism places 
both systems in the camp of unsustainable economies. By being more capitalist in 
some respects than the United States, the Soviet- Union simply accelerated its own 
demise and discredited socialism. One result of this is the relatively unopposed 
hegemony of neoliberalism, whose market fundamentalism (neoliberalism displays 
aspects that make it similar to both a religion and a utopia) posed the basic option as 
one between a free market economy and a totalitarian command economy seen as a 
choice between good and evil (Albritton,  Let Them Eat Junk, 202). 
 Such starkly dualistic thinking has perhaps proceeded the furthest in the United 
States, which remains the hegemonic capitalist power. Given the extent to which it is 
dependent upon some of the world’s most powerful corporations and is beholden to 
market fundamentalism, the United States will likely be one of the least able of the 
world’s powers to deal effectively with the deepening crises that will unfold in the 
twenty- first century. The power of U.S. corporations and special interests is great 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 143
enough to block the substantial changes that will be required. The ensuing paralysis 
is likely to increase polarization, resulting in political instability and uprisings. In 
such circumstances, the possibility of a revolutionary uprising, military coup, or 
civil war in the United States cannot be ruled out. 
 It is likely that any hegemonic socioeconomic order will be backed by at least one 
utopia or integrated set of ideals. Since the French Revolution’s utopian slogan 
“Liberté , Egalité , and Fraternité ” (henceforth I shall replace “fraternité” with the 
more gender neutral “community” and the French concepts with the English), the 
most influential global utopias can be considered as expanding on this slogan more 
or less in line with the ideals of capitalism or socialism. 
 In  The Great Transformation , Karl Polanyi argues: “Our thesis is that the idea of 
a self- adjusting market implied a stark utopia. Such an institution could not exist for 
any length of time without annihilating the human and natural substance of soci-
ety” (3). I mention Polanyi because central to neoliberalism is the idea of competi-
tive markets regulating themselves in accord with the inner preference schedules of 
individuals, such that ultimately individual consumers are sovereign. Polanyi thinks 
this is a “stark utopia” in the sense that no economy could ever come close to operat-
ing in this way, and that if it did, it would destroy social life. Clearly, he has a very 
negative take both on “utopia” and market- governed societies. 6 
 It was in the 1970s that neoliberal utopias gained ideological traction in opposition 
to the previous Keynesian utopias. Keynes had introduced a degree of concern for 
equality into capitalist thinking, represented ideologically and institutionally by social 
democracy and the welfare state. To a large extent, the mild egalitarianism of neo- 
keynesianism was made possible and even necessary by the “community” required to 
successfully pursue the Second World War. When citizens of all classes, races, and 
sexes are mobilized to the point that they are willing to give their lives to the pursuit of 
a war, a certain communitarian and egalitarian thrust must also be created. 
 The unravelling of welfare state capitalism began with the serious stagflation of 
the early 1970s and continues to this day.  7   Neoliberalism is the utopia inspiring this 
unravelling, and arguably it is the most extreme dominant utopia in the history of 
capitalism. It is extreme in its one- sided emphasis on radically possessive individuals 
and the freedom of such individuals, and its nearly total neglect of the other two ide-
als of the French Revolution. But it is also extreme in other ways. Its true believers 
seem to think that reality can approximate their utopia, and that nearly all problems 
will be solved when such an approximation occurs. These beliefs are held in a world 
which is rapidly moving away from neoliberalism— a world capitalist economy that 
is in part unravelling precisely because of attempts to implement a neoliberal utopia. 
As the crisis of their utopia deepens in the real world (becomes ever more unworka-
ble and divorced from reality), some neoliberals have become more strident in turn-
ing their market utopianism into an ever more rigid religious fundamentalism that 
denounces all nonbelievers. 8 
 “Liberty, Equality, and Community” was a utopian slogan that expressed the 
deep aspirations of the hungry masses as they rose up to overthrow a feudal order. 

144 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
Marie Antoinette’s infamous “Let Them Eat Cake” symbolizes the contempt for the 
masses held at the highest level of Louis XVI’s monarchy. Today may not be so differ-
ent. Nearly half the world’s population is living in a state of food insecurity, in the 
sense that they are already hungry or that any significant rise in food prices will 
increase hunger (Albritton,  Let Them Eat Junk ). Further, to the extent that global 
food corporations are expanding in poor countries, it is as purveyors of junk food. It 
is as if they were saying “Let Them Eat Junk.” 
 What particularly interests me about the slogan of the French Revolution, is how 
little the capitalist world order has been able to realize the Revolution’s ideals. 
Capitalism’s main achievement with regard to the slogan of the French Revolution 
has been to advance, to some degree, forms of individual freedom, and shallow 
degrees of equality for a minority of the world’s population. Freedom has primarily 
been the freedom to compete against one another in an economic game, a game, the 
outcome of which is to continually expand the huge number of losers and to increase 
the wealth differential between winners and losers (Raventos 2007). On a global 
scale this means that for well over a billion people, “freedom” means the freedom to 
feel continual hunger and to be free to desperately scrounge for food. What many 
neoliberals fail to see is the extent to which both freedom and community are based 
on equality. 
 Given the possessive individualism that capitalism tends to produce, capitalist 
states must go to extremes when it is necessary to mobilize the population. The 
cost of creating a sense of community then becomes the demonization of the other: 
the other state, the other nation, the other ethnic group, the other gender, the other 
sexual orientation, the other religion, the other political party.  9   That which unites 
people becomes hatred. Capitalism is not the first socioeconomic order to resort to 
such unifying tactics, though its technological achievements give it greater means 
to indoctrinate people. Having made such advances in technology, a core mantra 
of capitalism has become “progress,” yet it seems as if a real sense of community 
achieved without negating the other has escaped it altogether. 
 In this chapter I want to present a few basic principles of a practical utopia, a 
utopia that in principle is achievable in this world. Though achievable, I still call it 
a utopia, because the deep structural changes required would take great effort over a 
considerable period of time. Further, it is my belief that the key to the slogan of the 
French Revolution is the middle term, equality. The ideals of freedom and commu-
nity are undermined unless all people are viewed as sufficiently equal as humans to 
have access to and support from those humans, other life forms, and material 
resources that make a flourishing life possible. 10 
 Current Crises 
 Utopias are usually constructed against a background of severe problems or crises 
that the utopias are meant to at least partially address.  11   The main problems that 
motivate this utopia are: the health crisis, the environmental crisis, the crises of 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 145
social justice, the crises of democracy, and the crises of “externalities” as social costs. 
Increasingly these are not separate problems, but instead feed into one another, each 
exacerbating all the others. I will give examples of each. 
 Obesity rates are skyrocketing globally as are the 30 or so conditions or diseases 
for which obesity is a major risk factor. Given current trends, one in three children 
born in the United States after 2000 will get diabetes (Pollan 102). Already 14 percent 
of the population in Mexico have diabetes and 11 percent of the urban population 
over 15 in India (Popkin). Risk factors for heart disease and strokes, such as high 
blood pressure and high cholesterol, are becoming ever higher at younger ages. 
 According to the American National Institute for Mental Health, in any given 
year, 25 percent of Americans can be diagnosed as mentally ill. While no doubt part 
of the reason for this is the expansion of the definitions of mental disorders, which 
not so incidentally gives a huge boost to the pharmaceutical industry, in many 
instances there is a very real behavioral impairment. One could speculate on many 
reasons for this high incidence of mental disorders but, whatever the reasons, such 
statistics indicate a sick society.  12 
 Three ecological problems stand out: global warming, pollution, and the exhaus-
tion of nonrenewable resources.  13   These problems have been apparent for at least 25 
years, and yet the United States, the hegemonic capitalist power in the world, has 
taken little initiative to address them either nationally or internationally.  14 Global 
warming will increasingly lead to extreme weather, the destruction of life in the 
oceans, the decline of food production, mass extinctions, rising oceans, and deserti-
fication. The world will become a much less hospitable place for human survival, 
much less for human flourishing. The exhaustion of fossil fuels will make everything 
much more expensive, and will lead to very high prices for the commodities depend-
ent on these fuels. Severe shortages of food and other commodities are likely unless 
renewable sources of energy can be harnessed to a much greater degree than is pos-
sible now or in the foreseeable future. 
 The third crisis, that of social justice, has to do with the obscene degree of ine-
quality in the world, an inequality that also impacts upon human and environmen-
tal health.  15   Forty- five percent of the world’s children live in poverty, and 50 percent 
of the 1 billion young people between 15 and 24 live in poverty ( State of the World , 
153). It is not surprising, then, to find that, as of 2004, 50 percent of the world’s 
unemployed are persons under 24.  16 Were accurate statistics available, we would have 
also found a much higher percentage of persons under 24 doing part- time or low- 
paid work. An entire generation must start their careers starring into the emptiness 
of unemployment and poverty. 
 Poverty nearly always means malnutrition and all the health problems that fol-
low, including physical and mental stunting. Sixty percent of the malnourished 
worldwide are women, and on average 300 women die each day in childbirth as a 
result of being anaemic (Pinstrup- Andersen and Cheng 98). Every 30 minutes 360 
children under the age of 5 die primarily from malnutrition (Pinstrup- Andersen and 
Cheng), and it is estimated that by 2020 1 billion people will have impaired mental 

146 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
health due to malnutrition (Lang and Heasman 61). Over 40 percent of the world’s 
population tries to live on $2 or less a day, such that if food prices go up significantly 
(as is already happening), malnutrition and starvation will shoot up at a high rate of 
increase. Finally, “between 1998 and 2003, net transfers from poor to rich countries 
were from $51 to $132 billion per year” (Kohonen and Mestrum 37). This means that 
rich countries have extracted far more wealth from poor countries than they have 
given back as foreign aid. These transfers take the form of debt repayment, terms of 
trade, repatriation of profits, tax evasion, and the flight of dirty money (Kohonen 
and Mestrum 189). 
 Democracy is being undermined by the powers of large corporations, by the pow-
ers of large wealth, and by the powers of large states. For example, these powers to a 
large extent shape political policy, legal policy, media policy, and scientific research 
in the United States. Later in this essay, I will argue that we need radical changes in 
order to democratize corporations, democratize markets, and democratize 
governance. 
 Finally, there is the problem of “externalities,” a problem that can remove from a 
market whatever rationality it may possess. Capitalists have always tried to privatize 
profits and socialize costs. If capital needs trained workers, they can increase their 
profits if a publicly supported educational system will do the training, thus saving 
them the money of doing it themselves. Similarly, it saves them money if they can 
simply dump a toxic effluent into a stream, rather than paying for some safe and pos-
sibly expensive ecological means of getting rid of it. Recently, rainforests have been 
cut down in order to grow palm oil, which is primarily used for producing bio- diesel. 
The costs of losing much of the remaining rainforests in South East Asia are far 
greater than any profits that can be made. Now we are in a period of history when 
ecological costs have become so enormous that profits pale into insignificance in 
comparison, and yet the small profits are still pursued even at the cost of placing 
enormous social and environmental burdens on future generations.  17 For example, 
according to the Center for Science in the Public Interest, if the social costs (exter-
nalities) of a hamburger made from beef raised on a clear- cut rainforest were added 
to the price of the burger, it would cost $200 (qtd. in Patel 44).  
 Economics and Utopia 
 Mainstream academic economics has played a central role in developing and 
 promulgating the utopia called “neoliberalism” complete with its competitiveness, 
totally informed consumer sovereigns, market equilibriums, and Pareto optimali-
ties. 18   In this chapter, my aim is to take a few steps toward a counter political eco-
nomic utopia. 
 A first step is to move away from fundamentalist dualisms. For example, instead 
of the dualism: nationalized property versus private property, we can think about 
different types of property with degrees of control and degrees of accountability tai-
lored to its uses and the consequences of its uses (see Diane Elson in Panitch and Leys 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 147
[1999]). Even under capitalism private property is seldom absolute. For example, the 
private owner of a piece of land in an area zoned for residential use is not free to build 
a factory on this land. Similarly, a publically owned National Park would not nor-
mally be sold to a mining corporation planning a major strip mine operation within 
the Park. Finally, no one would advocate the public ownership of tooth brushes. All 
depends upon the type of property, its uses, and the needs for public input or account-
ability. For example, in the utopia I am proposing, state controlled land might be 
leased free of charge to a farmer, as long as it is farmed in ways that enhance both 
human and environmental health. The family would have the use of the land, but 
that use would be conditional, such that they could not, for example, sell the land to 
a developer or farm in ways that destroy the fertility of the land or result in chemical 
run- off. 
 Another move beyond simplistic dichotomies is to use the pair “commodifica-
tion versus decommodification” as two processes that are a matter of degree 
(Albritton,  Economics Transformed ). This enables us to consider many types of 
property and many types of commodity as partially governed by markets and par-
tially governed by various types of public input and democratic planning. The com-
modification of labour- power, land, money/finance, and innovation are particularly 
difficult for the market logic of capitalism to manage (Albritton,  Economics 
Transformed ). If we take Marx’s conception of land which includes all natural 
resources, then the current crisis of global warming, pollution, and the exhaustion 
of nonrenewable resources has and will show the utter futility of trying to rely on 
markets alone to deal with problems of land use. For example, a market- based way 
to reduce the dependency on petroleum is to make it very expensive through the use 
of surtaxes, but as long as food production is as dependent as it is on petroleum, the 
cost of food would skyrocket creating mass global starvation. It follows that such 
taxation would need to be at least accompanied by a significant increase in a basic 
income for everyone, a partial decommodification of food (e.g., subsidized to keep 
prices low), or a much more organic food system (less dependent on petro- chemicals) 
than we now have. 
 Increasingly, markets have become manipulated by large corporations and pow-
erful states, but usually through behind- the- scene manoeuvres to increase profits, 
and not to advance human flourishing (sometimes there is an overlap between 
these two, but in the current era they are increasingly at odds). Policy makers need 
to get over the mental block that commands them not to interfere in markets except 
in extreme situations. The Second World War resulted in massive state intervention 
into markets, and after the war, the “cold war” justified continued intervention but 
at a lower level. The idea that markets might be deficient in ways that invite us to 
intervene for our own good, and not simply to combat some enemy, was rarely artic-
ulated in the United States during the cold war, for it could place one in the camp of 
the enemy. Recently, financial markets have proven to be very deficient, but this is 
to be expected when the primary driver of the global economy has become debt 
expansion (Jackson 22). 

148 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 In the discussion that follows, I shall propose four basic principles that might 
guide the construction of a practical utopia in the twenty- first century. They are:  The 
Principle of Human and Environmental Flourishing; The Egalitarian Principle; The 
Cooperative Principle; and The Democratic Principle. 
 The Principle of Human and Environmental Flourishing 
 Those modern ethical theorists who utilize the concept of human flourishing derive 
it primarily from the Ancient Greeks— Aristotle in particular (Nussbaum). Implied 
by the concept is a social and natural environment that would enable the human spe-
cies to become the best that it can be in all the diverse ways that are praiseworthy and 
can be sustained indefinitely (Albritton,  Economics Transformed,  163–4). Flowers 
grown in the right conditions thrive and achieve their best blossoms. The similarity 
of the verbs “to flower” and “to flourish” suggests a very close connection between 
environmental and human flourishing, a similarity that we need to fully appreciate 
before it is too late. It is all too apparent that capitalism achieves luxury for the few at 
the cost of the many and at the risk of leaving behind a far less inhabitable planet. 
Insofar as capital’s unbridled profit orientation overrides all considerations for the 
environment and all other human values, capital cannot help but become the bull in 
our “china shop” of a planet. 
 It has become increasingly clear that human genes by themselves only determine 
some limits and some possibilities as compared to the natural and social environ-
ments, which together largely determine whether or not an individual will flourish. 
Environments that are toxic to humans, that lack the basic resources needed for 
human development, that indoctrinate people with ideas that undermine the possi-
bilities for dialogue and peaceful problem solving, that are violent or extremely 
unstable, such environments can play a huge negative role by limiting the possibili-
ties for human flourishing. 
 Many ethical theories would claim that all human beings should in some initial 
sense, in their very being as humans, be viewed as equal. This is well and fine as an 
abstract ideal, but what does it mean when translated into material institutional 
forms? Surely, it must at least imply that all citizens of a society should have access to 
the basic necessities that can make human flourishing possible— such things as a 
good diet, shelter, clothing, health care, education, and sanitation. These things can 
be viewed as basic economic, social, and cultural rights, but viewing them this way is 
desirable only to the extent that we actually put them in place as material realities. 
All too often declarations of rights are ghettoized in some abstract formal space and 
then ignored, or they are restricted to political rights (e.g., free speech) while ignor-
ing social rights (e.g., right to education). 
 As for environmental flourishing, global warming threatens life as we know it, 
and yet political leaders are for the most part so beholden to large corporations that 
they are paralyzed when it comes to taking the sort of decisive steps required to slow 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 149
it down and stop it before it is too late. While global warming is a world- historic 
threat to human life, there are also many other forms of pollution that are making 
the environment more toxic and less supportive of all life forms. For example, nitro-
gen fertilizers can damage the environment in a number of ways. Their run- off into 
bodies of water causes “dead zones” (between 2004 and 2008 dead zones in oceans 
increased from 149 to 400, see Venkataraman). When they run off into drinking 
water the nitrates that result can cause miscarriages and premature births (Roberts 
216). When nitrogen fertilizers break down, they give off nitrous oxide, a powerful 
and persistent green house gas. Not only is the world as a whole seriously threatened 
by global warming, but also some areas of the world are becoming so polluted that 
humans are getting sicker as a result. 
 The other main ecological problem is the using up of both the life forms and 
materials that nature offers. This can include the drying up of fresh water sources, 
the breaking down of hydrological cycles, the degradation of oceans, the degradation 
of land, deforestation, species loss, and the exhaustion of fossil fuels and of mineral 
resources. The very difficult problem that we face is how to establish a stewardship 
over the planet that will protect what needs to be protected in order for species and 
bio- regions to have healthy and sustainable life cycles. Our aim should be to pass on 
the planet to the next generation in a healthier state than our generation found it. 
Clearly, there is a great need to redirect huge amounts of public funding toward deal-
ing with well- known ecological problems and toward advancing human and envi-
ronmental flourishing.  
 The Principle of Equality 
 The principle of equality flows immediately from the principle of human and envi-
ronmental flourishing. In order for humans to flourish, they need a secure floor that 
will ensure them access to the basic necessities of life. If we truly respect and care for 
our fellow humans, then it follows that each individual should receive a basic income 
well above a reasonable poverty line, whether they work or not. The right to exist in 
ways that do not block the possibilities of flourishing is the most basic of all rights 
(Raventos 60). In other words, every person, because they are human, is owed this 
floor to stand on, regardless of anything they do or do not do. Unless some such basic 
practical measures accompany the ideal of equality, it will remain a purely formal 
and empty ideal. I agree with Robespierre, one of the leaders of the French Revolution 
of 1789, who claimed that inequality is the root cause of the destruction of freedom 
(Raventos 59). 
 And so it is with capitalist ideologies. Capitalist ideologies have largely taken the 
idea of equality and emptied it of meaning. Often the notion of capitalist equal 
opportunity is taken to be proven by the relatively few that rise from “rags to riches.” 
While the old overdeveloped rich capitalist countries have achieved some equality 
through the rule of the law, and this is important, radical economic and social ine-
qualities undermine the rule of law even within these countries. 

150 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
 Historical analysis demonstrates that, if not strongly resisted by human agency, 
capitalism, by itself, generates ever deepening inequalities. The principal underlying 
reasons for this are low wages and unemployment: profits require cutting costs, 
including labour costs, and labour- saving productivity adds to unemployment, 
which places a downward pressure on wages and impoverishes the unemployed. For 
example, not long ago the wages and working conditions were so poor in Florida 
sugar plantations, that in response to criticisms, the sugar companies switched to 
machine harvesting. At the same time, some of the same companies were paying 
600,000 Haitian workers $2 for a 12- hour day cutting cane in the hot sun of the 
Dominican Republic. Here there was little pressure to switch to expensive harvesting 
machinery. In one instance the workers became unemployed, and in the other they 
were so cheap that they were kept on. 
 Precapitalist inequalities based on differences in social status often get translated 
into economic inequalities under capitalism. Patriarchy, racism, and religious forms 
of oppression far predate capitalism, but once capitalism gets into gear, its powerful 
directionalities tend to reshape precapitalist forms of discrimination to fit its needs. 
For instance, women have made some headway toward equality in some parts of the 
world, yet as long as women hold only 1 percent of the wealth worldwide, our com-
mitment to women’s equality seems pretty hollow (Schönpflug 171). Claims by capi-
talist ideologues that existing inequalities are simply the result of the best rising to 
the top, do not stand up to even the most basic cross- examination. Few existing 
inequalities can be rationally justified from the point of view of distributive justice 
(Baker 61). 
 I believe that any society committed to human flourishing must be able in prin-
ciple to justify any significant economic inequalities, and that any such inequalities 
need not be great to serve as a basis for motivation and for rewarding efforts and 
achievements. For example, a  difference of ten to one between highest and lowest income 
might be useful as an initial goal . 19   I am proposing this not simply as a goal within rich 
countries, but as a long- term goal globally. I would envision most of the redistribu-
tion of wealth to take place gradually through progressive taxation, a redistribution 
that would give people a chance to adjust to changes that, in some cases, would be 
quite radical (Kohonen and Mestrum). 
 A second policy of economic equality is that  every individual should receive a basic 
income indexed to the cost of living and set significantly above a reasonable poverty line 
(Raventos). 20   In response to those who might think that this would remove the moti-
vation to work,  the minimum wage for those who work full time (say a minimum of 25 
hours a week) could be at least twice the basic income.  Further, it should be noted that, 
at this time in history, the problem is not that people are lazy and do not want to 
work, rather they cannot find work. Capitalism is failing to provide jobs for the 
majority of young people who would like to enter the work force. It should therefore 
either pay them not to work, or it should find ways and means of expanding the job 
market. A basic income would enable people not to work, which they may choose 
to do for any number of good reasons. Maybe they have always wanted to learn 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 151
 carpentry skills. Maybe they are poets whose work has yet to be discovered. Or maybe 
they just want to think or rest for a while. Whatever the case, a basic income for all 
would remove the stigma from unemployment, would end welfare altogether, and it 
would realize a right to an adequate standard of living for everyone (Buitenweg 51). 
Limiting income differentials combined with providing a basic income: these two 
policies together would be a huge step toward decommodifying labour power and 
realizing the ideal of equality. 21 
 Income differentials could be decided through trial and error and democratic 
debate. For example, it may be that society can only get enough people to collect 
garbage by rewarding them with a wage that is three or four times the basic income. 
The discoverer of a cure for tuberculosis or malaria might receive ten times the basic 
income for life in recognition of their immense contribution to human flourishing. 
 The existing system of patents that gives discoverers exclusive rights to monopoly 
profits from a discovery for a period of time (often 15 years) needs to be scrapped for 
a number of reasons. First, all discoveries are essentially social in the sense that they 
largely rest upon previous discoveries by countless other persons. Second, discover-
ies that so obviously advance human flourishing should be made available to all at 
the lowest possible prices or even free of charge as quickly as possible. Yes, discover-
ers or inventors should be rewarded, but not by artificially creating the high prices 
and the huge profits that come from a patent monopoly, a monopoly that is likely to 
make the scientific breakthrough available only to the relatively rich or those lucky 
enough to live in a health care system that subsidizes expensive drugs. Indeed, the 
existing U.S. system of drug patenting works against finding a cure for tuberculosis 
or malaria because, as diseases mainly of the poor, such a drug would not yield prof-
its. 22   Why would pharmaceutical corporations invest millions in trying to discover 
an unprofitable drug? In other words, the current system of patents promotes ine-
quality by rewarding discoveries, such as lifestyle drugs, that the well- to- do can 
afford, rather than cures for malaria, tuberculosis or other infectious diseases, 
mainly of the poor, that kill millions every year. 
 A person who is a skilled neurosurgeon might make seven or eight times the basic 
income in recognition of their years of training and as a reward for a widely recog-
nized health enhancing ability. These examples are simply meant to give an idea of 
the sort of criteria that society would need to debate in deciding upon a just distribu-
tion of income and wealth according to the need for motivation or for contributions 
to social life. Currently, existing differences in accumulated wealth are enormous, 
but even these differences can gradually be reduced by steeply progressive taxation 
on wealth, such as taxes on inheritance. 
 A third economic policy promoting equality is that  involuntary unemployment 
should become minuscule . The capitalist labour market has always been a very inef-
fective way of connecting human capacities with human needs. In a system geared 
for private profit, education needs to distance itself from the private sector for fear of 
being simply used to expand someone’s profit.  23   The exposure to particular lines of 
work now occurs rather late, and the connection between supply and demand in the 

152 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
labour market becomes haphazard. But the separation between education and work 
is much less needed in an economy geared to advance human flourishing rather than 
private profit. Assuming that social needs will always exceed the resources and 
capacities to meet them, there should never be substantial involuntary unemploy-
ment. As long as there are unmet needs (and they will always exist), work can be 
organized to meet them. Markets are supposed to equilibrate demand and supply, 
but when the demand for workers exceeds supply, there is no capitalist industry that 
can meet this demand by developing an assembly line for producing workers of a 
particular type. As a result, wages can be bid up to the point that capitalism itself 
could be threatened. To avoid this threat, capitalism has always tried to maintain 
some sort of industrial reserve army of unemployed workers. However, if this army 
becomes very large, it may also threaten capitalism itself unless there is an effective 
and costly safety net, costly military, or costly prison system. 
 Computer technology offers new and much more effective ways of connecting 
social needs with both human and material resources. Social needs can be priori-
tized and networks that involve educational and training institutions can help to 
mobilize persons to form networks of resources to meet needs whether local, regional, 
national, or global. Financial institutions such as banks can be transformed so that, 
instead of just offering money to finance new projects, they can offer expertise and 
facilitate networking as well. 
 Within capitalism it is often difficult for individuals to start a needs provision-
ing operation or what is called a “business.” For the most part, they need to be 
independently wealthy or to have the wherewithal to convince banks or other inves-
tors that they can make a profit. In the system that I am proposing, it could be much 
easier to be an “entrepreneur.” Banks, for example, could facilitate networking 
among individuals who have similar proposals or who have previous experience or 
expertise in a particular area of endeavor, whether it’s running a restaurant or find-
ing ways of reducing the fossil fuel dependency of various industries. Banks might 
lend money to networks that profit because they advance human or environmental 
flourishing, but there might also be public sector banks for provisioning that is so 
beneficial that its goods or services become completely subsidized. For example, 
assuming publically funded preschool day care for all, someone may have ideas that 
could improve day care, or may want to start a day- care facility that would put some 
of these ideas to the test. Given that in a society dedicated to advancing human 
flourishing the quality of early child care and education would be high priorities, 
meritorious proposals for improvement would have high priority for public 
funding. 
 As presently constituted, labour markets place workers in an insecure posi-
tion. Losing a job can be a very depressing and even devastating experience. Under 
the system that I am proposing this would not be the case. The basic income would 
provide a floor placing everyone well above the poverty line, whether employed or 
not. The basic income would provide the security that would enable people to 
retrain or pursue their dream. People who wanted to contribute to needs 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 153
 provisioning, could join a network, could retrain in order to join a network, could 
do their own provisioning, or start their own network. In short, anyone who 
wanted to “work” could either do so or prepare themselves to do so through 
 education or networking. 
 The increasingly endemic problem of unemployment can also be dealt with by 
shortening the work week. Efforts to shorten the work week can be attempted on a 
trial and error basis, starting with a 30- hour work week and eventually attempting a 
25- hour work week. Similarly, paid holidays could start at one month a year. 
Generally, the goal would be to slow down the pace of consumption, the pace of 
work, the pace of life, and the throughput of the economy.  24 The result may be a lei-
sure time less committed to escape from the pace and pressures of work and more 
committed to meaningful sociality or creativity. 
 Under capitalism a good deal of caring work is either underpaid or not paid at all. 
Whether the work is domestic labour, parenting, caring for sick relatives, or helping 
out a friend in need, income differentials should be the same as so- called productive 
labour. For instance, pay could be adjusted according to stress level or difficulty. 
Caring for a severely disabled child, for example, would receive more income that 
caring for a less demanding child. 
 The equality that is being imagined here might be funded in various ways. First, 
would be a sharply progressive tax on wealth (and inheritance) income, and profits 
(Kohonen and Mestrum). Second, money would be shifted away from military 
spending, as the acceptance of difference and more meaningful global citizenship 
moves us toward peaceful modes of conflict resolution.  25   Third, money would be 
shifted from health care, as a result of proactive cradle-to-grave preventive medicine 
and the end of poverty (poverty is the primary predictor of ill health). Fourth, as the 
economy becomes more transparent through the use of computers, and as we develop 
more effective modes of global governance, the estimated $500 billion annual income 
tax evasion could be redirected toward meeting social needs.  26   Fifth, a steeply pro-
gressive tax placed on all forms of speculation could increase revenues. Sixth, a sur-
tax placed on commodities such as junk foods that have high social costs not included 
in their market price could also be a basis for raising money to redistribute wealth. 
Seventh, in a less commercialized society far less need be spent on advertising and 
marketing.  
 The Cooperative Principle 
 Capitalism fosters intense competition for money, and when good jobs are not avail-
able it fosters fraud and criminality. Human capacities for cooperation and generos-
ity still appear, but it is against a dark background of obscene inequality that by way 
of contrast makes acts of “charity” shine forth. For the charitable one, this can mean 
a great boost on the goodness scale. Charity becomes a great way for corporations or 
politicians to get “good” press that can serve to increase profits or votes. Of course, 
charity is better than nothing when inequalities are obscene, but in a world where 

154 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
wealth and social status tend to go together, receiving charity can be demeaning or 
patronizing. Unless something like a major war brings people together, capitalism 
promotes an every- person- for- themselves mentality resulting in a decline in coop-
eration and in a sense of community (Putnam; Albritton “Marx’s Value”; Albritton, 
“Socialism”). Doubtless there is a connection between these tendencies and increases 
in forms of alienation that give rise to mental disorders. 
 To propose a more cooperative world is not to do away with competition, but 
rather it is to make cooperation the more fundamental of the two. Capitalism tends 
to crush or discourage the closely connected strong human capacities for coopera-
tion and generosity. Competition is so deeply entrenched in our upbringing and our 
daily lives that it is rather difficult to imagine a society in which cooperation is 
given a greater emphasis. Yet, we face immense global problems that require global 
solutions, while at the same time there is a lack of strong traditions of global coop-
eration. Instead, there are intense feelings of nationalism that feed and feed off of 
imperialism and war. Territorial sovereignty and the nation- state are by themselves 
no longer adequate to the tasks of security in a warming world that is running out 
of many basic natural resources and that has to deal with an increasingly polluted 
and toxic environment. A strong sense of global citizenship based on cooperation 
and generosity is needed to generate both thought and action that really engage with 
the problems of human and environmental flourishing at a global level. This is 
already happening to some extent, but because nation- states still cling to an out-
moded “sovereignty,” the UN must proceed on the basis of unanimity, something 
difficult to achieve even when faced with such a severe global problem as global 
warming.  
 The Democratic Principle 
 Democracy exists to the extent that those most affected by a decision have at least 
some opportunity to influence the making of it. It is likely to be enhanced by at least 
some institutionalization of the previous three principles. Another important 
dimension of democracy would be equal access to a secular education that prepares 
students to be knowledgeable about global problems. As a result, we will be able to 
begin addressing the relative vacuum of democratic governance that too often 
emerges at the international level. I want to emphasize the importance of a “secular” 
education. The idea of the separation of church and state going back to the sixteenth 
century has perhaps become more important today than at any other time in human 
history. Any kind of fundamentalism, but particularly the religious kind, places great 
obstacles in the path of peaceful conflict resolution and of a sense of truly global 
citizenship. 
 As long as we cling to the degree of state sovereignty that continues to exist, it will 
be difficult for the UN to move beyond the extreme difficulties associated with prob-
lem solving that currently requires something close to unanimity. A good example is 
the problem of global warming and the Kyoto Accord, which was never signed by 

A PRACTICAL UTOPIA 155
some great powers and was simply ignored by others. At the time of its proposal, the 
Kyoto Accord seemed like a weak and minimal step forward, but in retrospect even 
it appears to be utopian. It stipulated that by 2010 green house gas emissions should 
be 5 percent below 1990 levels, when in fact they are now 40 percent above that level 
(Jackson 12). 
 While state sovereignty is certainly a serious obstacle to the development of dem-
ocratic global governance, it would be misleading not to point out that state sover-
eignty is exacerbated by a corporate sovereignty that usually pulls the strings that 
produce state policy. As a result, state policy is often confined to a narrow range that 
major corporations, major industrial sectors, or wealthy special interest groups find 
congenial to their interests. As previously mentioned, the cold war opposition 
between “free market economies” and “command economies” is outdated, for today 
corporations have become so powerful that to a large extent we live in highly manip-
ulated market economies that have essentially become corporate command econo-
mies. The intervention of planning into markets is already widespread, but it is 
largely undemocratic and one- sidedly advances the interests of the largest corpora-
tions and industries. 
 It follows that we need ways to break up the corporate dictatorship. In many 
cases, small is not only “beautiful” but also it is more facilitating of democracy 
(Schumacher). A first step could be to break up corporations into much smaller 
units, unless there are significant economies of scale, or there is a need for natural 
monopolies (e.g., urban subways). It would be easier for workers, communities, and 
democratic political units from the local level to the global level to hold corporations 
accountable, were they smaller. Accountability would also be enhanced by utilizing 
computer technology and legal reforms to make important corporate decisions and 
transactions transparent and open to democratic public oversight and input. Basic 
legal reforms might include: to no longer consider corporations to be like private 
legal persons with all the secrecy implied by “private,” and to alter the law that makes 
the primary legal responsibility of corporations to advance profits for share- holders. 
Transparency also could be enhanced by ending tax havens, by laws inhibiting the 
use of “transfer payments” to hide profits, by ending numbered bank accounts, end-
ing shell corporations, and by finding other means not only to stop tax evasion, but 
also to open up corporations to much greater democratic control. Corporations 
would then become quasi- public institutions, and we could avoid the situation in 
which small groups of unaccountable corporate elites can make decisions with enor-
mous impact on the future of the planet. The larger the corporation and the greater 
impact its decisions have, the more important democratic controls become. 
 Market fundamentalists think that markets are the ultimate democratic institu-
tions in which shoppers cast dollar ballots to reward corporations that produce what 
the consumer wants.   Certain small- scale, local markets may operate this way if there 
is substantial equality among consumers; however, as previously pointed out, we live 
in a period of history in which externalities— particularly those social costs that 
impact heavily on social justice and on human and environmental health, and those 

156 EXISTENTIAL UTOPIA
that impact heavily on future generations— for the most part far exceed the profits 
of large corporations that derive from market prices and subsidies. In other words, 
markets now primarily serve the function of shifting every kind of debt— financial 
debts, ecological debts, and health debts— on to the backs of future generations, who 
will have to pay them back in a world far less supportive of human flourishing. 
 What a difference it would make if markets became planning mechanisms sub-
ject to democratic intervention whenever necessary in order to advance environmen-
tal and human flourishing. Surtaxes could discourage those forms of economic 
activity that add to social costs, and subsidies could be used to reward economic 
activity insofar as it contributes to human flourishing. 
 I have referred to my suggestions as a “practical utopia,” while they must appear 
as thoroughly utopian to many people. In response, I would say that the ideas put 
forward here did not originate with me, but rather have a history that in some cases 
is quite long. What is different is simply the way I have patterned them to draw out 
certain interrelations and emphases. Further, I did not want to simply write about 
the four principles in the abstract and in general without some concrete policy sug-
gestions. I am only too well aware of the fact that most of the concrete policy sugges-
tions that I have made would be ferociously opposed by the powers that be. Yet the 
dominant powers are looking worse by the day. A time will come when they are so 
discredited that radical alternatives will become realistic alternatives to hundreds of 
millions of people around the world. When that occurs, perhaps some of these pro-
posals will be debated and will influence the transformative thought and action that 
must take shape if we are to flourish. 
 

 Notes 
 Chapter 1 
 1.  Translated from French by Patrícia Vieira and Michael Marder. This text was published in 
French as “Au Lieu de L’Utopie” in a collection titled,  Les Utopies et Leurs Représentations: 
Colloque Franco- Japonais, Tokyo, 2000 (Paris: Le Quartier, 2000) and is made available 
here in our English translation with the permission of the author.  
   2.     In January 2000, one could find on the Internet at least 100 sites that included the word 
“utopia” in their title (and this is limited to the word in Latin or English) and that were 
dedicated to activities as varied as tourism, lesbian associations, or graphic design, not to 
mention also the availability of the complete Latin text of Thomas More.  
 Chapter 2 
   1.     Translated from Italian by Patrícia Vieira and Michael Marder. This text was first published 
in Italian as “Utopia, Controtopia, Ironia” in a collection titled  Etica dell’Interpretazione 
(Turin: Rosenberg and Sellier, 1989, 63–73). It was subsequently published in our English 
translation in the special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary Thought  on “Utopias 
Today!” (Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael Marder. It is reproduced 
with the permission of the author and the chief editor of the journal.  
 2.  See Ernst Bloch’s  Sogetto- Oggetto. Commento a Hegel , pages 495 and following. 
   3.     About these issues, see also my essay “Il Tempo nella Filosofia del Novecento” (“Time in 
the Philosophy of the Twentieth- Century”). 
 4.  I follow here the reflections of K. Löwith, in his work  Significato e Fine della Storia . 
   5.     For a more detailed discussion of this issue, also in connection with the notion of 
 Verwindung (recuperation- maintenance- distortion [ ripresa- mantenimento- distorsione ]) 
in Heidegger, please refer to my book  The End of Modernity . 
   6.     For an introduction to the history of the term “secularization” see H. Lübbe’s study  La 
Secolarizzazione .  Storia e Analisi di un Concetto . 
 Chapter 3 
 1.   Translated from Portuguese by Alexandra Ionescu. This chapter has been previously 
published in a special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary Thought  on “Utopias Today!” 
(Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael Marder. It is reproduced with 
the permission of the author and the chief editor of the journal.  
   2.     The quotes of books and articles cited in this chapter and listed in the Bibliography in the 
original version in German were translated into English by the author. The page numbers 
following these quotes refer to the German edition. 
   3.     See Jacques Rancière’s extremely interesting description of the concept of “democracy” 
based on the disappearance of differences: “The republican schoolmaster, conveyor of 

158 NOTES
the universal knowledge that renders virgin souls equal simply becomes, then, the rep-
resentative of an adult humanity in the process of disappearing at the hands of a gener-
alised reign of immaturity; the schoolmaster becomes the last witness of civilization, 
vainly opposing the ‘subtleties’ and ‘complexities’ of his thought to the ‘impenetrable 
wall’ of a world doomed to the monstrous reign of adolescence [. . .] Before him stands, 
‘the adolescent punk who, against Kant and Plato, demands the right to his or her own 
opinion’ that is, the representative of the inexorable spiral of democracy [. . .]” ( Hatred, 
26–7). “Democracy is not a type of constitution, nor a form of society. The power of the 
people is not that of a people gathered together, of the ‘majority’, or of the working classes. 
It is simply the power ascribed to those who have no more entitlements to govern than to 
submit” ( Hatred, 46). 
   4.     This “im- possible” is described by Derrida as follows: “This im- possible is thus not 
a (regulative)  idea  or  ideal.  It is what is most undeniably  real . And sensible. Like the 
other. Like the irreducible and non- appropriable différance of the other” ( Rogues, 84). 
However, as this im- possible future remains always “to come,” its reality does not 
allow any projection or deliberation. Far from being an anticipative representation 
of what shall come, it emerges as essentially criticism and protest: “The expression 
‘democracy to come’ does indeed translate or call for a militant and interminable 
political critique. A weapon aimed at the enemies of democracy, it protests against 
all naïveté and every political abuse, every rhetoric that would present as a present or 
existing democracy, as a de facto democracy, what remains inadequate to the demo-
cratic demand [. . .]” (89).  
 Chapter 4 
   1.     This chapter has been previously published in a special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary 
Thought  on “Utopias Today!” (Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael 
Marder. It is reproduced with the permission of the authors and the chief editor of the 
journal. 
 2.  The initial formulations of hermeneutics in  Being and Time  firmly ground it in a phe-
nomenological ontology: meaning- making and interpretation are not abstract theoreti-
cal activities but functions of our being- in- the- world, down to the levels of perception 
itself. Since all stimuli from the environment already reach us with a “pre- interpretation” 
(for instance, the sound I am hearing now is that of a passing train, not mere undiffer-
entiated noise), meaning presents itself as soon as— and in the shape of— beings that 
appear before me in everyday life. Whether Dasein is satisfied with this “automatic” pre-
 interpretation, or whether it takes the next step in the direction of the explicitation and 
thematization of meaning is another question. 
   3.     According to Heidegger’s interpretation of the Aristotelian metaphysical categories, the 
thing, such as a stone, is “worldless,” the animal is “poor in the world,” while human 
beings are “world- forming.” It follows that, if meaning- making acts are no longer avail-
able to humans, they are deprived of the world and, at the height of alienation, demoted 
to the status of worldless things. 
   4.     Following the political philosophy of Carl Schmitt, in  Homo Sacer,  Giorgio Agamben casts 
the abandonment and extreme vulnerability of Dasein in terms of “bare life,”  propelled 
outside of the order of legality by a sovereign decision on the exception. 

NOTES 159
 5.  On “deformalization,” see Heidegger’s  History of the Concept of Time , 200–4. 
   6.     On the “productiveness” of existential failure, see Michael Marder’s “Heidegger’s 
‘Phenomenology of Failure’ in  Sein und Zeit ” (2007). 
 7.  Mutatis mutandis , we borrow these terms from the political philosophy of Jacques 
Rancière, for whom the ideal of equality is effective only if it paradoxically demands the 
“part of those who have no part” in the current political order ( Disagreement,  65).  
   8.     The work of mourning, for Derrida, “can only displace, without effacing, the effect of a 
trauma” ( Specters , 91). The promise of “The New International” is empty in the absence 
of such work. 
 Chapter 5 
 1.  See §72 of  Being and Time . 
   2.     Unless otherwise specified, all subsequent quotations from T. S. Eliot are drawn from the 
text of this extended poem ( Collected Poems , 83–96). 
   3.     “Le schéma de la trahison.” Jean- Luc Nancy refers here to Georges Bataille who in 1933 
observed that “Le moindre espoir de la Révolution a été décrit comme le dépérissement 
de l’Etat: mais ce sont au contraire les forces révolutionnaires que le monde actuel voit 
dépérir et, en même temps, toute force vive a pris aujourd’hui la forme de l’Etat totali-
taire” (quoted in Nancy 12). 
   4.     The quotes of books cited in this chapter and listed in the Bibliography in the original 
version in French were translated into English by the author. The page numbers following 
these quotes refer to the French edition. 
 5.  See also Blanchot 1983, in particular the chapter “La Communauté Negative,” 10–12. 
   6.     This “nothing” written after the “nothing” again (and before the next verse) is very 
important. 
   7.     “Mas isso (triste de nós que trazemos a alma vestida!), /Isso exige um estudo profundo/ 
Uma aprendizagem de desaprender” (151).  
 8.  For a discussion about “exilic existence” developed from Heidegger’s concept of ecstatic 
temporality, see Vallega 2003. 
 9.  On the political dimension of groundless existence see Marder 2010.  
 Chapter 6 
   1.     The “Statement of Principles,” translated by Maja Buszewicz and Judy Barba, contains ten 
principles elaborated in as many short sections, and was meant for the students training 
at Grotowski’s Theater Laboratory. It was eventually published in  Towards a Poor Theater 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1968), 255–62.  
   2.     “Qu’est- ce que l’acte de creation?” (“What is the Act of Creation?”) was delivered on May 
17, 1987 at the Fondation Femis (Fondation européenne des métiers de l’image et du son). 
The transcription of the recording is published online at  www.webdeleuze.com  (there is 
no pagination). A slightly edited transcription appeared in  Trafic  27 (Fall 1998). Here and 
throughout the present essay the translation is my own. 
   3.     A parallel statement is to be found in a notebook entry from 1870–71, cast in a language 
reminiscent of Schopenhauer: “That the world of representation is more real than actuality 

160 NOTES
is a belief which Plato, as an  artistic nature , has theoretically laid down. Practically it is 
the belief of all productive geniuses: this belief is the view of the will. These representa-
tions, as the births of instinct, are in any case just as real as things; hence their unheard- of 
power” (Nietzsche, vol. III 3, 114; my translation). 
 4.  This and all subsequent translations of “Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” are mine.  
 5.  The French edition,  Superpositions , appeared in 1979 (Paris: Editions de Minuit). The 
essay by Deleuze appeared in English as “One Less Manifesto,” trans. E. dal Molin and 
T. Murray, in T. Murray, ed.,  Mimesis, Masochism, and Mime: The Politics of Theatricality 
in Contemporary French Thought  (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997), 
239–58. A previous translation (“One Manifesto Less”) by Alan Orenstein was included 
in Constantin V. Boundas, ed.,  The Deleuze Reader  (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1993), 204–22. Throughout the present essay I translate from the original Italian 
edition. 
 6.  There are a few noteworthy exceptions, and they are in the area of performance studies. 
Let me mention a volume edited by Laura Cull,  Deleuze and Performance throughout 
but especially the editor’s Introduction; an essay by Mohammed Kowsar, “Deleuze on 
Theatre: A Case Study of Carmelo Bene’s  Richard III ”; and a book by Ronald Bogue, 
 Deleuze on Literature , especially chapter V.  
 7.  In “The Theater of Cruelty and the Closure of Representation,” on Artaud, Derrida dis-
cusses “the idea of a theater without representation” as “the idea of the impossible,” and 
therefore states that such an idea “does not help us to regulate theatrical practice.” And 
again: “Artaud kept himself as close as possible to the limit: the possibility and impos-
sibility of pure theater. Presence, in order to be presence and self- presence, has always 
already begun to represent itself, has always already been penetrated. Affirmation itself 
must be penetrated in repeating itself” (Derrida,  Writing and Difference , 314). 
   8.     See also the discussion in Pierre Montebello,  Deleuze: la passion de la pensée , especially 
chapter VI. 
   9.     Woolf’s text reads: “Did it matter, then, she asked herself, walking towards Bond Street, 
did it matter that she must inevitably cease completely; all this must go on without her; 
did she resent it; or did it not become consoling to believe that death ended absolutely? 
but that somehow in the streets of London, on the ebb and flow of things, here, there, she 
survived, Peter survived, lived in each other, she being part, she was positive, of trees at 
home . . . part of people she had never met; being laid out like a mist between the people 
she knew best, who lifted her on their branches as she had seen the trees lift the mist, but 
it spread ever so far, her life, herself” ( Mrs. Dalloway,  11–12).  
  10.     Here I am importing into English the adjectival forms “majoritarian” and “minoritar-
ian” to translate the Italian pair “maggioritario” and “minoritario,” corresponding to the 
French “majoritaire” and “minoritaire.” In both Italian and French, the terms designate 
belonging in or pertaining to: belonging in a majority or minority, but also in something 
major or minor, greater or lesser, of higher or lower profile, etc. The adjective “maggiori-
tario” (“majoritaire” in French) also refers to the way of calculating the correspondence 
between number of votes and number of elected representatives in an electoral system. 
 11.  The phrase is Woolf’s, from a journal entry dated August 22, 1922 ( The Diary, 193). 
 12.  The Greek  skene  (“scene, stage”) is related to  skia  “shadow, shade.” The glow of the 
stage is the place of shadows. But, in turn,  skia  must be referred back to the proto- Indo-
 European base  ska(i) , “to shine, flicker, glimmer” (consider in fact the Sanskrit  chaya , 
which designates both “brilliance, luster,” and “shadow,” all the way to the O. E.  scinan , 

NOTES 161
“to shine”). The shining and the shadowy share the same root. That which is luminous is, 
from another point of view and in another relation, opaque, shadowy (the most splendid 
phenomenon is but the shadow of light). Conversely, that which appears dense and dark is 
traversed by light. After all, it is that which appears, the radiant, the phenomenon, which 
casts a shadow. It is that which shines that is pervaded by a shadow, that which shows 
itself (i.e., shows some facets of itself) that also withdraws (i.e., withdraws other facets 
of itself), that which is living that is also dying. And if this body is to be understood in 
terms of the vibrating revolutions and intermittences of being, then we are pointed in the 
direction of the proximity of physics and phantasmatics.  
  13.     This erotic dynamic is lucidly acknowledged and developed by Jerzy Grotowski, among 
others, to the point that his entire line of research (from the “poor theater” to the “theater 
of sources”) can be seen as a variation on this theme. 
 14.  Nietzsche and Kierkegaard, Deleuze says, in their movement away from Hegel, “want to 
put metaphysics in motion, in action. They want to make it act, and make it carry out 
immediate acts. It is not enough, therefore, for them to propose a new representation 
of movement; representation is already mediation. Rather, it is a question of producing 
within the work a movement capable of affecting the mind outside of all representation . . . 
of substituting direct signs for mediate representations; of inventing vibrations, rotations, 
whirlings, gravitations, dances or leaps which directly touch the mind. This is the idea of a 
man of the theatre. . . . They no longer reflect on theater in the Hegelian manner. Neither 
do they set up a philosophical theatre. They invent an incredible equivalent of theatre 
within philosophy. . . .” They speak “the language of a director who poses the highest the-
atrical problem, the problem of a movement which would directly touch the soul, which 
would be that of the soul” ( Difference and Repetition , 8–9).  
  15.     Deleuze will have returned to “the people which is lacking” in a number of other con-
texts (with and without Guattari), which we cannot examine closely at this time. Let us 
merely mention  Mille Plateaux , already cited;  Kafka. Pour une littérature mineure ; and 
with Guattari,  Critique et clinique . 
  16.     But then, again, utopia may not be “a good concept” (“Qu’est- ce que la philosophie?” 
106). For it remains too implicated in history, reinscribed within it in terms of the “ideal” 
or “motivation.” “But becoming is the concept itself. It is born in History, and falls back 
into it, but is not a part of it. In itself, it has neither beginning nor end, but only a middle 
( un milieu ). In this way, it is more geographical than historical.” As revolution, the con-
cept is a “pure event,” and history is constitutively unable to capture it (“Qu’est- ce que la 
philosophie?” 106). 
 Chapter 7 
   1.     This chapter has been previously published in a special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary 
Thought  on “Utopias Today!” (Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael Marder. 
It is reproduced with the permission of the author and the chief editor of the journal.  
   2.     For my reflections on Bloch’s Marxism, see Kellner and O’Hara’s “Utopia and Marxism 
in Ernst Bloch” and Kellner’s “Introduction to Ernst Bloch, ‘The Dialectical Method’.” 
   3.     This study will mainly focus on the use for cultural criticism and ideology critique of 
Bloch’s magnus opus, though I also draw on some of his other writings and my previous 
research into Bloch’s thought. 

162 NOTES
   4.     There is, of course, a library of books on Marx’s concept of ideology, not to mention the 
heated debates over which aspects of this ideology to emphasize and its relative merits 
and limitations. For my position within these debates, which I will not rehearse here, see 
Kellner, “Ideology, Marxism, and Advanced Capitalism.” 
   5.     Bloch’s starting point is always the everyday life and existential situation of the individ-
ual. Thus his approach is similar to Henri Lefebrve and the French situationists who also 
undertook a critique of everyday life and were concerned with the existence of concrete 
individuals. 
 6.  Bloch’s  Natural Law and Human Dignity expands on this notion.  
 7.  See Reich’s  Sex- Pol  and, on French Freudo- Marxism, see Poster’s  Existential Marxism in 
Postwar France. 
 8.  See Bloch’s  Heritage of Our Times . 
   9.     Wikipedia has a detailed and well- sourced entry on Alfred Adler at  http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Alfred_Adler (accessed on March 12, 2010). 
  10.     Bloch was an early and consistent critic of Heidegger, perceiving the link between his 
philosophy and fascism which later historiographic and ideological critiques discovered. 
See, for example, Faye’s  Heidegger. The Introduction of Nazism into Philosophy. 
 11.  Compare this, for example, to Lukàcs’s  The Destruction of Reason . 
  12.     For further discussion of Bloch’s philosophy, see Hudson’s  The Marxist Philosophy of 
Ernst Bloch. 
  13.     This is a motif of many films dealing with the dilemmas of black youth, including  Straight 
Out of Brooklyn, New Jack City, Boys N’ the Hoods, Juice , and the earlier cycle of blaxploi-
tation films that celebrated drug dealers and gangs. The other utopia offered for young 
black audiences is that of success in the music industry, as evidenced in the films of Prince 
and the ubiquitous rock videos of Michael Jackson, various rap groups, and others.  
  14.     An exile from fascist Germany, Bloch lived in the United States from 1938–49. Yet he 
learned little English and mainly immersed himself in the writing of his major works and 
in German exile politics, while he was supported by his wife who worked as an architect 
(interviews with the Blochs during the summer of 1974). Like the Frankfurt school exiles, 
he thus had a predominantly negative view of American culture.  
  15.     For my own concept of a multi- perspectival cultural studies, see my recent books  Media 
Culture and  Cinema Wars. 
  16.     For my take on the Obama phenomenon, see Kellner’s “Barack Obama and Celebrity 
Spectacle.” 
  17.     See Bloch’s “Nonsynchronism and Dialectics.” The text is now also translated in  Heritage 
of Our Times. 
 Chapter 8 
   1.     This chapter has been previously published in a special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary 
Thought  on “Utopias Today!” (Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael 
Marder. It is reproduced with the permission of the author and the chief editor of the 
journal. 
   2.     For more extended discussions of Bloch, see Geoghegan,  Ernst Bloch , and Levitas,  The 
Concept of Utopia . 

NOTES 163
   3.     There are of course different translations of the quotation from Marx (which appears 
also in Christopher Hitchens’s  God is Not Great  9–10). In particular, the “suppression” 
of religion is often translated as “abolition,” and “soul” may be translated “spirit,” giving 
“the spirit of spiritless conditions.” 
   4.    These recur throughout Bloch’s work. For a discussion see Geoghegan (36).  
 Chapter 9 
  1.  Translated from Spanish by Patrícia Vieira. 
  2.     Translator’s note: The quotes of books or essays cited in this chapter and listed in the 
Bibliography in their English translations, are reproduced according to the English ver-
sion of these texts. The page numbers following the quotes also refer to the English ver-
sion. The quotes of books or essays listed in the Bibliography in other languages, have 
been translated into English by me based on the Spanish quotes in the original article. 
The page numbers after these quotes refer to the editions listed in the Bibliography. 
 Chapter 10 
   1.     This chapter has been previously published in a special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary 
Thought  on “Utopias Today!” (Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael 
Marder. It is reproduced with the permission of the author and the chief editor of the 
journal. 
 Chapter 11 
   1.     This chapter has been previously published in a special issue of the  Journal of Contemporary 
Thought  on “Utopias Today!” (Summer 2010), coedited by Patrícia Vieira and Michael 
Marder. It is reproduced with the permission of the author and the chief editor of the 
journal. 
 2.   See Panitch and Leys (1999) for more on practical utopias. 
   3.     For more on the twenty- first century as the century of transition away from capitalism 
see my article in Albritton et al. (2001). 
   4.     Five years ago who would have thought that we would hear proposals to nationalize the 
banks coming from the mainstream media. 
 5.   “Pessimism of the intellect and optimism of the will” comes from Gramsci (Letter from 
prison, December 19, 1929). 
 6.  See Schönpflug for a more extended discussion of this point.  
   7.     See Albritton (1991) for a fuller discussion of the post- Second World War phase of 
capitalism. 
   8.     This is particularly the case in the United States where religious fundamentalism has to 
some extent hooked up with the ideas of Milton Friedman and their populist rendering 
by Ann Rand. 
   9.    A good example is the disastrous invasion of Iraq. 
 10.  I recommend Baker as a general text on equality. 

164 NOTES
 11.  One concern of St. Thomas More’s  Utopia  (published 1516) was the enclosure of com-
mons, which led to fat sheep and hungry humans. Biofuels today feed petrol hungry SUVs 
while over a billion people in the world go hungry. In short, there is a striking similarity 
between at least one major problem that St. Thomas More dealt with and today’s world. 
  12.     For more on health problems see Panitch and Leys (2009). A toxic environment, hyper 
commercialization, extreme competitiveness, lack of good jobs, junk food, a declining 
sense of community— all of these probably contribute to the rising incidence of mental 
illness. 
  13.     It has been estimated that within 40 years there will be severe shortages of many of the 
most important minerals utilized by industry (Jackson 10). On environmental health see 
Albritton (2009) and Panitch and Leys (2006). 
 14.  Some European countries have made headway in addressing them. 
  15.     For more on this issue see The United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) 
“Human Development Reports.” Also see Albritton (2009). 
  16.     See recent statistics from the International Labour Organization.  www.ilo.org/global/
Themes/Youth_Unemployment/lang- - en/index.htm 
  17.     “If humanity had to pay for the consequences of a degraded ecosystem, the bill could, 
according to one recent study, run to about $47 trillion” (Patel 49).  
  18.     According to Pareto, an economy in a state of equilibrium will allocate resources to opti-
mally meet social demand. The problem with this is that social demand may be hugely 
unequal so that “optimal” refers to efficiency relative to a given demand and not social 
justice. Indeed, one might argue that the whole problem is really not optimality at all, 
but instead distributive justice, which would require a fairly equal distribution of wealth 
(Kohonen and Mestrum 25).  
  19.     It is a pragmatic issue whether it is three to one or ten to one. Were it ten to one, the basic 
income might be $25,000 per year, and the highest income $250,000 per year. In time the 
ratio between highest and lowest might be further decreased.  
  20.     The idea of a Basic Income or Guaranteed Annual Income has been around for a long 
time, but it has never been fully implemented for any length of time.  
  21.     For more on the importance of decommodifying labour- power see Albritton,  Economics 
Transformed: Discovering the Brilliance of Marx . 
 22.  Malaria alone kills over one million Africans a year (Patel 75). 
  23.     It is now being so used as private sector marketing penetrates education because it is 
underfunded. See Albritton,  Let Them Eat Junk: How Capitalism Creates Hunger and 
Obesity , 172–7. 
 24.  These are some of the aims of the slow food movement. 
  25.     The United States spends on average $1 trillion on the military annually, or nearly one-
 half of the global total (Patel 79). 
  26.     One- third of global assets are held off shore and one- half of global trade passes through 
tax havens (Kohonen and Mestrum xiii). An estimated $11.5 trillion in private assets are 
held in off- shore tax havens (Kohonen and Mestrum 15). 
 

 Bibliography 
 Agamben, Giorgio.  Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
1998. 
 — .  Potentialities. Collected Essays in Philosophy . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999. 
 Albritton, Robert.  A Japanese Approach to Stages of Capitalist Development . Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 
1991. 
 — .  Economics Transformed: Discovering the Brilliance of Marx . London: Pluto Press, 2007. 
 — .  Let Them Eat Junk: How Capitalism Creates Hunger and Obesity . London: Pluto Press, 2009. 
 — . “Marx’s Value Theory and Subjectivity.”  Value and the World Economy Today.  Ed. Richard Westra 
and Alan Zuege. Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2003: 205–24. 
 — . “Socialism and Individual Freedom.”  New Socialisms: Futures Beyond Globalization . Ed. Robert 
Albritton, et al. London: Routledge, 2004: 17–32. 
 Albritton, Robert, et al.  Phases of Capitalist Development. Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001. 
 Althusser, Luis.  For Marx . Trans. Ben Brewster. New York and London: Verso, 2006. 
 Améry, Jean.  At the Mind’s Limits: Contemplations by a Survivor on Auschwitz and its Realities . 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1980. 
 Andrew, Geoff.  The Slow Food Story: Politics and Pleasure.  Montreal: McGill Queens Press, 2008. 
 Arendt, Hannah. “Truth and Politics.”  Between Past and Future: Eight Exercises in Political Thought . New 
York: Penguin Books, 1993: 227–64. 
 Aristotle.  The Physics . Vols. I–IV. Cambridge, Mass. and London, England: Harvard University Press, 
2005. 
 Armstrong, Karen.  The Case for God: What Religion Really Means . London: The Bodley Head, 2009. 
 Baker, John.  Arguing for Equality. London: Verso, 1987. 
 Ballard, J. G.  Crash . Barcelona: Minotauro, 2008. 
 Bammer, Angelika.  Partial Visions: Feminism and Utopianism in the 1970s . New York and London: 
Routledge, 1991. 
 Bene, Carmelo and Gilles Deleuze.  Sovrapposizioni . Milan: Feltrinelli, 1978. 
 Benjamin, Walter. “Theses on the Philosophy of History.”  Illuminations . Trans. Harry Zohn. London: 
Fontana, 1992: 245–55. 
 Bennett, Phillippa.  The Last Romances and the Kelmscott Press . London: William Morris Society, 2009. 
 Berlin, Isaiah.  The Crooked Timber of Humanity . Ed. Henry Hardy. London: Fontana, 1991. 
 Bernays, Edward.  Propaganda . New York: Ig Publishing, 2005. 
 Blanchot, Maurice.  La Communauté Inavouable . Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1983. 
 Bloch, Ernst.  Atheism in Christianity. London and New York: Verso, 2009. 
 — . “Differentiations in the Concept of Progress.”  A Philosophy of the Future . New York: Herder and 
Herder, 1970: 112–41. 
 — .  Heritage of Our Times. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990. 
 — .  Natural Law and Human Dignity . Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1986. 
 — . “Nonsynchronism and Dialectics.”  New German Critique 11 (Spring 1977): 22–38. 
 — .  The Principle of Hope . Three Volumes. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1986. [referred to as Bloch 
1986a] 
 — .  The Principle of Hope . Trans. Neville Plaice, Stephen Plaice, and Paul Knight. Vol. 1. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1986. [referred to as Bloch 1986b] 
 — .  Sogetto-Oggetto. Commento a Hegel . Trans. R. Bodei. Bologna: Il Mulino, 1975 (1949).
  Bogue, Ronald.  Deleuze on Literature . London: Routledge, 2003. 

166 BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Brod, Max.  Franz Kafka: A Biography . Trans. G. Humphreys Roberts and Richard Winston. New York: 
Schocken Books, 1960. 
 Brown, Peter G.  Ethics, Economics and International Relations: Transparent Sovereignty in the 
Commonwealth of Life . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2000. 
 Brown, Peter G. and Geoffrey Garver.  Right Relationship: Building a Whole Earth Economy.  San Francisco: 
BK Currents, 2009. 
 Bruckner, Pascal.  The Temptation of Innocence . New York: Algora, 2000. 
 Buber, Martin.  I and Thou . London: Simon and Schuster, 2000. 
 Buitenweg, Rob.  Human Rights, Human Plights in a Global Village . Atlanta: Clarity Press, 2007. 
 Celan, Paul.  Collected Prose: Paul Celan.  Trans. Rosmarie Waldrop. New York: Routledge, 2003. 
 Cox, Laurence. “Building Utopia Here and Now: Left and Working- Class Utopias in Ireland.”  Ecopolitics 
Online Journal 1.1 (Autumn/Winter 2007): 123–32. 
 Cox, Stan.  Sick Planet: Corporate Food and Medicine . London: Pluto Press, 2008. 
 Critchley, Simon.  Very Little, Almost Nothing: Death, Philosophy, Literature . London and New York: 
Routledge, 2004. 
 Cull, Laura, ed.  Deleuze and Performance . Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press, 2009. 
 Dante.  The Divine Comedy . Trans. Henry Longfellow. Edison, NJ: Chartwell Books, 2008. 
 Dardot, Pierre and Christian Laval.  La Nouvelle Raison du Monde . Paris: Editions La Decouverte, 2009. 
 Davis, Devra.  The Secret History of the War on Cancer.  New York: Basic Books, 2007. 
 Davis, Laurence. “Isaiah Berlin, William Morris, and the Politics of Utopia.”  Critical Review of 
International Social and Political Philosophy 3.2–3 (2000): 56–86. 
 Davis, Laurence and Peter Stillman, eds.  The New Utopian Politics of Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Dispossessed . 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005. 
 Davis, Laurence and Ruth Kinna, eds.  Anarchism and Utopianism . Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 2009. 
 Dawkins, Richard.  The God Delusion. London: Black Swan, 2007. 
 de la Boétie, Étienne.  Discours sur la Servitude Voluntaire . Paris: Payot, 2002 [1549]. 
 Deleuze, Gilles.  Difference and Repetition . Trans. Paul Patton. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1994. 
 — .  Kafka. Pour une Littérature Mineure . Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1975. 
 — .  Qu’est- ce que la Philosophie? Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1991. 
 — . “Qu’est- ce que l’Acte de Création?”  www.webdeleuze.com. 
 Deleuze, Gilles and Claire Parnet.  Dialogues . Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1987. 
 Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari.  Critique et Clinique . Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1993. 
 — . Mille Plateaux . Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1980. 
 Derrida, Jacques.  The Politics of Friendship . Trans. George Collins. London: Verso, 1997. 
 Rogues: Two Essays on Reason . Trans. Pascale- Anne Brault and Michael Naas. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 2005.
  — . Specters of Marx:  The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning and the New International . Trans. Peggy 
Kamuf. London and New York: Routledge, 1994. 
 — .  Writing and Difference . Trans. Alan Bass. London: Routledge, 2001. 
 Dickens, Charles.  Hard Times . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2009. (1854) 
 Dickinson, Emily.  The Complete Poems . Boston and Toronto: Little, Brown & Co., 1960. 
 Eliot, T. S.  Collected Poems ,  1909–1962. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1963. 
 — . “Dante.” In  Selected Prose . Ed. Frank Kermode. New York: Ferrar, Staus and Giroux, 1975. 
 Elson, Diane. “Socializing Markets, Not Market Socialism.”  Socialist Register 2000.  Ed. Leo Panitch and 
Colin Leys. Suffolk: Merlin Press, 1999: 67–86. 
 Engels, Friedrich. “Socialism: Utopian and Scientific.”  Marx- Engels Reader . Ed. Tucker, Robert C. New 
York: W.W. Norton, 1978: 683–717. 
 Faye, Emmanuel.  Heidegger. The Introduction of Nazism into Philosophy.  New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2009. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 167
 Ferns, Chris.  Narrating Utopia: Ideology, Gender, Form in Utopian Literature . Liverpool: Liverpool 
University Press, 1999. 
 Foucault, Michel. “Theatrum Philosophicum.”  Language, Counter- memory, Practice . Trans. Donald F. 
Bouchard and Sherry Simon. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977: 165–96. 
 Fournier, Valérie. “Utopianism and the Cultivation of Possibilities: Grassroots Movements of Hope.” 
 Utopia and Organization . Ed. Martin Parker. Oxford: Blackwell, 2002. 
 Freyer, Hans.  Die Politische Insel: Eine Geschichte der Utopien von Platon bis zur Gegenwart . Leipzig: 
Bibliographisches Institut, 1936. 
 Fukuyama, Francis.  The End of History and the Last Man . New York: Avon Books, 2006. 
 Gehlen, Arnold. “Die Säkularisierung des Fortschritts.”  Einblicke . Gesamtausgabe. Vol. 7. Frankfurt am 
Main: Klostermann, 1978: 403–12. 
 Geoghegan, Vincent.  Ernst Bloch . London and New York: Routledge, 1996. 
 Geras, Norman.  Marx and Human Nature: Refutation of a Legend . London: Verso, 1983. 
 Gray, John.  Black Mass: Apocalyptic Religion and the Death of Utopia . London: Penguin, 2008. 
 Grotowski, Jerzy. “Statement of Principles.”  Towards a Poor Theater . Ed. Eugenio Barba. New York: 
Routledge, 2002. 
 — . “Tu es le Fils de Quelqu’Un.”  The Grotowski Sourcebook . Ed. Lisa Wolford and Richard Schechner. 
London: Routledge, 2001: 294–305. 
 Habermas, Jürgen.  Über Ernst Bloch . Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1968. 
 Heidegger, Martin.  Being and Time . New York: HarperCollins, 1962. 
 — .  Being and Time . Trans. Joan Stambaugh. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1996. 
 — .  The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude . Bloomington and Indianapolis: 
Indiana University Press, 1995.
 — .  History of the Concept of Time: Prolegomena . Trans. Theodore Kisiel. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1985. 
 — . “Letter on Humanism.”  Basic Writings.  Ed. David Farrell Krell. New York: HarperCollins, 1993: 
213–65. 
 — . “The Origin of the Work of Art.”  Basic Writings.  Ed. David Farrell Krell. New York: HarperCollins, 
1993: 139–203. 
 Hill, Christopher.  The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English Revolution . 
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991. 
 Hitchens, Christopher.  God is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything . London: Atlantic Books, 
2007. 
 Hoffman, John.  John Gray and the Problem of Utopia . Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2008. 
 Horkheimer, Max and Theodor Adorno.  Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments . Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2002. 
 Hudson, Wayne.  The Marxist Philosophy of Ernst Bloch. New York: Saint Martin’s, 1982. 
 Husserl, Edmund.  Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenology of Philosophy . Book 
I. Dordrecht, Boston and London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998. 
 Jackson, Tim.  Prosperity without Growth: Economics for a Finite Planet . London: Earthscan, 2009. 
 Jacobs, Naomi. “Beyond Stasis and Symmetry: Lessing, Le Guin, and the Remodelling of Utopia.” 
 Extrapolation  29.1 (Spring 1988): 34–45. 
 Jameson, Fredric. A rchaeologies of the Future. The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions . 
London and New York: Verso, 2007. 
 — .  Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham: Duke University Press, 1999. 
 — . “Reification and Utopia in Mass Culture.”  Social Text 1 (Winter 1979): 130–48. 
 Kellner, Douglas. “Barack Obama and Celebrity Spectacle.”  International Journal of Communication 
3 (2009): 1–20.  http://ijoc.org/ojs/index.php/ijoc/article/view/559/350  (accessed on March 12, 
2010). 
 — .  Cinema Wars: Hollywood Film and Politics in the Bush/Cheney Era . Malden, Mass. and UK: Blackwell, 
2010. 

168 BIBLIOGRAPHY
 — . “Ideology, Marxism, and Advanced Capitalism.”  Socialist Review  42 (November–December 1978): 
37–65. 
 — . “Introduction to Ernst Bloch, ‘The Dialectical Method’.”  Man and World 16 (1983): 281–4. 
 — .  Media Culture. Cultural Studies, Identity and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern . London 
and New York: Routledge, 1995. 
 Kellner, Douglas and Harry O’Hara. “Utopia and Marxism in Ernst Bloch.”  New German Critique  9 (Fall 
1976): 11–34. 
 Kohonen, Matti and Francine Mestrum, eds.  Tax Justice: Putting Global Inequality on the Agenda . 
London: Pluto Press, 2009. 
 Kojève, Alexandre.  Introduction to the Reading of Hegel . Trans. James H. Nichols, Jr. New York: Basic 
Books, 1969. 
 Kolakowski, Leszek.  Modernity on Endless Trial . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1990. 
 Kowsar, Mohammed. “Deleuze on Theatre: A Case Study of Carmelo Bene’s  Richard III. ”  Theatre Journal 
38.1 (1986): 19–33. 
 Kumar, Krishan.  Utopianism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1991. 
 Kümmel, Friedrich. “Time as Succession and the Problem of Duration.”  The Voices of Time . Ed. J. T. 
Fraser. London: Allen Lane, Penguin Press, 1968. 
 Lang, Tim and M. Heasman.  Food Wars: The Global Battle for Mouths, Minds and Markets . London: 
Earthscan, 2004. 
 Le Guin, Ursula K.  Always Coming Home . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2001 
(1985). 
 — .  Dancing at the Edge of the World: Thoughts on Words, Women, Places . New York: Grove Press, 1989. 
 — .  The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia . London: Millennium, 1999 (1974). 
 Levinas, Emmanuel. “Dying For . . .”  Entre Nous. Thinking- of- the- Other . New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1998: 207–17. 
 — .  Totality and Infinity .  An Essay on Exteriority . Trans. Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne 
University Press, 2001. 
 Levitas, Ruth.  The Concept of Utopia . Hemel Hempstead: Philip Allan, 1990. Oxford: Peter Lang, 2010. 
 — . “Pragmatism, Utopia and Anti-Utopia.”  Critical Horizons: A Journal of Philosophy and Social Theory 
9.1 (May 2008): 42–59. 
 Liakos, Antonis. “Utopian and Historical Thinking: Interplays and Transferences.”  Historein  7 (2007): 
20–57. 
 Locke, John.  Two Treatises of Government . Ed. Peter Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1999. 
 Löwith, K.  Significato e Fine della Storia . Trans. F. Tedeschi Negri. Milan: Comunità, 1963. 
 Lübbe, Hermann.  La Secolarizzazione. Storia e Analisi di un Concetto . Trans. P. Rossi. Bologna: Il Mulino, 
1970 (1965). 
 Lukàcs, Georg.  The Destruction of Reason . London: Merlin, 1980. 
  Magris, Claudio.  Utopia y Disencanto: Historias, Esperanzas y Ilusiones de la Modernidad . Barcelona: 
Anagrama, 2001. 
 Mannheim, Karl.  Ideology and Utopia . London and Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976. 
 Marder, Michael.  Groundless Existence: The Political Ontology of Carl Schmitt . London and New York: 
Continuum, 2010. 
 — . “Heidegger’s ‘Phenomenology of Failure’ in  Sein und Zeit .”  Philosophy Today  51.1 (Spring 2007): 
69–78. 
 Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. “The Communist Manifesto (1848).”  Karl Marx: Selected Writings . Ed. 
David McLellan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977: 221–47. 
 Mayne, Michael.  This Sunrise of Wonder: Letters to My Grandchildren . London: Darton, Longman and 
Todd, 2008. 
 McLennan, Gregor. ‘Postsecularism: A New Global Debate.’  Globalization and Utopia: Critical Essays . Ed. 
Patrick Hayden and Chamsy el- Ojeili. New York and Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009: 82–98. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 169
 McManus, Susan. ‘Theorizing Utopian Agency: Two Steps Toward Utopian Techniques of the Self.’ 
 Theory and Event 10.3 (2007). 
 McNally, David.  Another World is Possible: Globalization and Anti- Capitalism . 2nd ed. Monmouth: The 
Merlin Press, 2006. 
 Mies, Maria and Vandana Shiva.  Ecofeminism . London and New Jersey: Fernwood Publications and Zed 
Books, 1993. 
 Montebello, Pierre.  Deleuze: La Passion de la Pensée . Paris: Vrin, 2008. 
 Nancy, Jean- Luc.  La Communauté Désouvrée . Paris: Christian Bourgois Éditeur, 1999. 
 Neusüss, Arnhelm, “Schwierigkeiten einer Soziologie des utopischen Denkens.”  Utopie: Begriff und 
Phänomen des Utopischen . Ed. Arnhelm Neusüss. Berlin: Luchterhand, 1968: 13–122. 
 Nietzsche, Friedrich.  The Gay Science . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
 — . “On Truth and Lie in a Nonmoral Sense.”  On Truth and Untruth. Selected Writings . Ed. Taylor 
Carman. New York: HarperCollins, 2010: 15–49. 
 — .  Werke: Kritische Gesamtausgabe . Ed. Giorgio Colli and Mazzino Montinari. Berlin: Walter de 
Gruyter, 1967–. 
 Notes from Nowhere, ed.  We are Everywhere: The Irresistible Rise of Global Anticapitalism . London and 
New York: Verso, 2003. 
 Novalis.  Fragmentos de Novalis . Lisbon: Assírio e Alvim, 1992. 
 Nussbaum, Martha.  Frontiers of Justice. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2006. 
 Panitch, Leo and Colin Leys, eds.  Socialist Register 2000, Necessary and Unnecessary Utopias. Suffolk: 
Merlin Press, 1999. 
 — . Socialist Register 2007, Coming to Terms with Nature . Suffolk: Merlin Press, 2006. 
 — .  Socialist Register 2010, Morbid Symptoms: Health under Capitalism . Suffolk: Merlin Press, 2009. 
 Patel, Raj.  The Value of Nothing: Why Everything Costs So Much More Than We Think . Toronto: 
HarperCollins, 2009. 
 Patočka, Jan.  Heretical Essays in the Philosophy of History . Ed. James Dodd. Chicago and La Salle, IL: 
Open Court, 1996. 
 Pessoa, Fernando. “O Guardador de Rebanhos.”  Obra Poética . Rio de Janeiro: Nova Aguilar, 1983. 
 Phillips, Adam and Barbara Taylor.  On Kindness . London: Hamish Hamilton, 2009. 
 Pinstrup- Andersen, P. and F. Cheng. “Still Hungry.”  Scientific American . Sep. 2007: 96–101. 
 Plato.  The Republic . Trans. Paul Shorey. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999. 
 Polanyi, Karl.  The Great Transformation . Boston: Beacon Press, 1957. 
 Pollan, Michael.  The Omnivore’s Dilemma. New York: Penguin, 2006. 
 Popkin, B. “The World is Fat.”  Scientific American . Sep. 2007: 92–5. 
 Popper, Karl.  The Open Society and its Enemies . London: Routledge, 2002. 
 Poster, Mark.  Existential Marxism in Postwar France.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975. 
 Putnam, R. D.  Bowling Alone . New York: Touchstone Press, 2000. 
 Ramoneda, Josep.  El Sentido Intimo: Crítica del Sentido Común . Barcelona: Muchnik, 1982. 
 Rancière, Jacques.  Disagreement: Politics and Philosophy.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1999. 
 — .  Hatred of Democracy . Trans. Steve Corcoran. London: Verso, 2006. 
 Raventos, Daniel.  Basic Income: The Material Conditions of Freedom . London: Pluto Press, 2007. 
 Reich, Wilhelm.  Sex- Pol: Essays, 1929–1934 . New York: Vintage, 1972. 
 Ricoeur, Paul.  Lectures on Ideology and Utopia . Ed. George H. Taylor. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1986. 
 Roberts, Wayne.  The No- Nonsense Guide to World Food.  Toronto: New Internationalist Publications, 
2008. 
 Rorty, Richard.  Achieving our Country . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999. 
 Rossiter, Clinton.  Constitutional Dictatorship . New Brunswick and London: Transaction Publishers, 
2004. 

170 BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Scheuerman, William.  Liberal Democracy and the Social Acceleration of Time . Baltimore and London: 
John Hopkins University Press, 2004. 
 Schmitt, Carl.  The Nomos  of the Earth . Trans. G. L. Ulmen. New York: Telos Press, 2003. 
 Schönpflug, Karin.  Feminism, Economics and Utopia: Time Travelling Through Paradigms . London: 
Routledge, 2008. 
 Schumacher, Friedrich E.  Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered . London: Abacus, 
1974. 
 Shestov, Lev.  Apofeoz Bespochvennosti [The Apotheosis of Groundlessness ]. Moscow: ACT, 2004. 
 Singer, Daniel.  Whose Millennium? Theirs or Ours? . New York: Monthly Review Press, 1997. 
 Smith, Rick and Bruce Lourie.  Slow Death by Rubber Duck: How the Toxic Chemistry of Everyday Life 
Affects Our Health . Toronto: Alfred A. Knopf, 2009. 
 Sorel, Georges.  Reflections on Violence . New York: Collier Books, 1961. 
 Starhawk.  The Fifth Sacred Thing . New York and Toronto: Bantam Books, 1993. 
 State of the World  2004, Worldwatch Institute. New York: W.W. Norton, 2004. 
 Taylor, Charles.  A Secular Age . Cambridge, Mass. and London: Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press, 2007. 
 Thompson, Peter. “Introduction.” Ernst Bloch.  Atheism in Christianity . London and New York: Verso, 
2009: ix–xxx. 
 Unger, Roberto.  Democracy Realised: The Progressive Alternative . London and New York: Verso, 1998. 
 — .  Passion: An Essay on Personality. New York: The Free Press, 1984. 
 — .  The Self Awakened: Pragmatism Unbound . Cambridge, Mass. and London: Harvard University Press, 
2007. 
 Vallega, Alejandro.  Heidegger and the Issue of Space: Thinking on Exilic Grounds . Philadelphia: Penn State 
University Press, 2003. 
 Varikas, Eleni. “The Utopian Surplus.”  Thesis Eleven 68 (February 2002): 101–5. 
 Vattimo, Gianni.  The End of Modernity: Nihilism and Hermeneutics in Postmodern Culture . Trans. Jon 
Snyder. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991. 
 — . “Il tempo nella filosofia del Novecento.”  Il Mondo Contemporaneo. Enciclopedia di Storia e Scienze 
Sociali . Ed. Nicola Tranfaglia. Vol. 10, Bk. 2. Florence: La Nuova Italia, Firenze, 1983: 881–95.
 Venkataraman, B. “Ocean ‘Dead Zones’ on the Rise.”  New York Times . Aug. 15, 2008. 
 Verra, V. “Utopia.”  Enciclopedia del Novecento . Vol. 7. Roma: Institute dell’ Enciclopedia Italiana, 1984: 
988–1066. 
 Voegelin, Eric. “Science, Politics and Gnosticism.” Trans. William J. Fitzpatrick.  Modernity Without 
Restrain: The Political Religions, The New Science of Politics, and Science, Politics, and Gnosticism. 
Ed. Manfred Henningsen.  The Collected Works of Eric Voegelin . Vol. 5. University of Missouri Press: 
Columbia and London, 2000: 249–313. 
 Weber, Max.  The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism . Trans. Talcott Parsons. New York: Scribner, 
1958. 
 Williams, Raymond. ‘When was Modernism?’  The Politics of Modernism :  Against the New Conformists . 
London: Verso, 1989: 31–5. 
 Wolin, Sheldon.  Democracy Incorporated: Managed Democracy and the Specter of Inverted Totalitarianism . 
Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2008. 
 Woolf, Virginia.  Mrs. Dalloway . London: CRW Publishing, 2003. 
 — .  The Diary of Virginia Woolf . Vol. 2: 1920–1924. Orlando: Harcourt Brace, 1980. 
 — .  The Waves . New York: Harcourt, 1978. 
 Worsley, Peter.  The Trumpet Shall Sound.  New York: Schocken Books, 1968. 
 

   Contributors 
  Robert  Albritton  is a Professor Emeritus in the Department of Political Science at 
York University, Canada. Some of his most recent publications are  Economics 
Transformed: Discovering the Brilliance of Marx  (2007) and  Let Them Eat Junk: How 
Capitalism Creates Hunger and Obesity (2009). 
  Cláudia  Baracchi     is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the Università degli Studi 
di Milano- Bicocca, Italy, and a Visiting Associate Professor of Philosophy at the 
New School for Social Research, USA. A specialist in Ancient Greek Thought and 
Contemporary Philosophy, she is the author of  Of Myth, Life, and War in Plato’s 
Republic (2002) and  Aristotle’s Ethics as First Philosophy (2007). Her main research 
interests pertain to the ethico- political ground of Ancient Greek thinking.  
  Márcia  Cavalcante- Schuback    is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
Södertörn, Sweden. The translator of Heidegger’s  Being and Time  into Portuguese, 
Professor Cavalcante- Schuback works in the fields of German Idealism, Hermen eutical 
Phenomenology, and Contemporary Philosophy, with special interest in the relation-
ship between philosophy, poetry, and the arts. Her monographs include  O Espaç o-
Entre Poesia e Pensamento ( The Space Between Poetry and Thinking,  1986),  O Começ o de 
Deus (The Beginning of God,  1998), and  Para Ler os Medievais. Ensaio de Hermenê utica 
Imaginativa  (Reading Medieval Authors: An Essay in Imaginative Hermeneutics , 2000).  
  Laurence  Davis     teaches Politics and Sociology at the National University of Ireland, 
Maynooth. His recent publications include  Anarchism and Utopianism  (2009), coedited 
with Ruth Kinna, and  The New Utopian Politics of Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Dispossessed 
(2005), coedited with Peter Stillman. He is a series editor of the  Contemporary Anarchist 
Studies  Series published by Continuum, and the author of numerous articles and book 
chapters on utopian and anarchist thought, democratic and revolutionary theory, as 
well as the politics and sociology of art, work, ecology, and love.   
  Douglas  Kellner     holds the George F. Kneller Philosophy of Education Chair at the 
Graduate School of Education & Information Studies at the UCLA, USA. He has 
most recently published  Guys and Guns Amok: Domestic Terrorism and School 
Shootings from the Oklahoma City Bombing to the Virginia Tech Massacre  (2008) and 
 Cinema Wars: Hollywood Film and Politics in the Bush- Cheney Era (2009). 
  Ruth  Levitas     is a Professor in the Department of Sociology at the University of 
Bristol, UK. Some of her publications include  The Inclusive Society? Social Exclusion 
and New Labour  (2005) and  The Concept of Utopia  (2010). She is the co-founder and 
immediate past Chair of the Utopian Studies Society—Europe. 

172 CONTRIBUTORS
  Michael  Marder    is Ikerbasque Research Professor of Philosophy at the University 
of the Basque Country, Vitoria- Gasteiz, Spain. The author of  The Event of the 
Thing: Derrida’s Post- Deconstructive Realism  (2009) and  Groundless Existence: The 
Political Ontology of Carl Schmitt  (2010), he published widely in the fields of phe-
nomenology, deconstruction, and political philosophy. He is an Associate Editor of 
the journal  Telos .  
  Jean- Luc  Nancy     is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Strasbourg, France, 
and at the European Graduate School, Switzerland. One of the leading French phi-
losophers today, he has published over 40 books, including, most notably,  The 
Inoperative Community  (1983),  The Experience of Freedom  (1988),  Corpus (1992), 
 Being Singular Plural  (1996),  The Creation of the World or Globalization  (2002), and 
 Dis- Enclosure: The Deconstruction of Christianity I (2005). 
  Josep  Ramoneda     is the Head of the Centro de Cultura Contemporánea de Barcelona 
(Center for Contemporary Culture of Barcelona), Spain. He contributes regularly to 
various newspapers and TV programs, including the Spanish newspaper  El País . He is 
the author, among others, of  Después de la Pasión Política ( After the Political Passion , 
1999) and  Contra la Indiferencia ( Against Indifference , 2010).   
  Alexandre  Franco de Sá     is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
Coimbra, Portugal. A specialist in Political Thought and twentieth- century German 
Philosophy, he is the author of  Metamorfose do Poder ( The Metamorphosis of Power , 
2004),  O Poder pelo Poder: Ficção e Ordem no Combate de Carl Schmitt em Torno do 
Poder ( Power for the Sake of Power: Fiction and Order in Schmitt’s Confrontation with 
Power 2009), as well as articles on the issues related to human rights, the philosophy 
of Martin Heidegger, philosophy of life, and political theology. 
  Gianni  Vattimo     is Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of Turin, 
Italy, and a member of the European Parliament. Professor Vattimo’s original phi-
losophy, known as “weak thought,”  pensiero debole , has been influential in the fields 
of contemporary theology, ethics, aesthetics, and radical political thought. His 
numerous books include, among others,  The End of Modernity: Nihilism and 
Hermeneutics in Post- Modern Culture (1991),  Beyond Interpretation: The Meaning of 
Hermeneutics for Philosophy  (1997),  Art’s Claim to Truth  (2008), and the forthcom-
ing  Hermeneutic Communism: From Heidegger to Marx  (2011), coauthored with 
Santiago Zabala.  
  Patrícia  Vieira    is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Spanish and 
Portuguese of Georgetown University, USA, and a Research Fellow at the Center for 
Comparative Studies of the University of Lisbon, Portugal. She has published  Seeing 
Politics Otherwise: Vision in Latin American and Iberian Fiction  (2011) and  Cinema 
no Estado Novo: A Encenação do Regime ( Cinema in the New State: The Staging of the 
Regime , 2011).         
 

