George Mason University 
FULL TEXT 
A Newsletter from the University Libraries 
http://library.gmu.edu/libinfo/fulltext.html 
Fall 2001 
No. 155 
The Arlington, VA-based American Folklore Society (AFS), in collaboration with the American 
Folklife Center (AFC) of the Library of Congress, George Mason’s English Department, and the Uni-
versity Libraries, was awarded a National Endowment for the Humanities Chairman’s grant in the 
amount of $30,000 for the developmental phase of an ethnographic thesaurus (ET). 
 
The ET will be a standardized keyword list of terms used by librarians and archivists to describe folk-
loric and traditional musical materials; it will help libraries, archives, and cultural institutions “communicate in a 
more careful way,” according to Professor Margaret Yocom, English Department. John Zenelis, University Li-
brarian, added that the “development and adoption of standard, controlled vocabularies are crucial for research 
and scholarly communication” in various academic disciplines.  
 
Yocom was among the group of folklorists, ethnomusicologists, and other scholars who met to plan the thesaurus. 
AFS’s Michael Taft developed a proto-thesaurus with about 5,000 terms, which the working group decided to use 
as a base for the development of the ET. The grant will allow the ET group to continue with plans that include sur-
veying folklorists and ethnomusicologists on their perceptions of and needs for an ET; implementing thesaurus 
software to enhance the proto-thesaurus; incorporating more terms; and making the proto-thesaurus available on a 
searchable website. 
 
University Libraries is contributing work space in Fenwick Library, equipment, and library services for the project 
associate, Sara White, who will work under the joint direction of Yocom and Taft. “We are pleased to support and 
facilitate such an important national scholarly undertaking at George Mason,” noted Zenelis. 
 
The ET planning group includes representatives from leading folklore and ethnomusicology repositories from 
across the country, including the Smithsonian Institution, the New York Folklore Society, and the Center for 
Black Music Research at Columbia College, Chicago. 
Robin Herron 
University Publications  
 
University Libraries Collaborates on Ethnographic Thesaurus Project 
Libraries Collaborates with  
     Ethnographic Thesaurus Project  
  
1 
Did You Know? 
1 
Outstanding Award Recipients 
2 
Library Liaison System 
2 
Tourism and Events Management  
      Program 
 
3 
Arthur Frantzeb Collection Donated 
3 
Introducing MyLibrary@Mason 
4
  
In This Issue 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
Did You Know? 
The Libraries of GMU have: 
♦
404 Bibliographic and Full Text Databases 
♦
2,566,724 Microforms 
♦
11,533 Current Periodical and Serial Subscriptions 
♦
354,098 Government Documents   
♦
219,086 Maps  
♦
24,771 Multimedia Titles 
Volume count to be “revealed” in Spring 2002! 

Library employees Rosemary Chase, Maya Karki, and 
Robert Vay were among fifteen university employees 
who received the University’s Outstanding Achieve-
ment Award. President Alan Merten presented the 
awards at a special ceremony on August 31, 2001.  
 
Rosemary Chase serves as the head of the Copyright 
Assistance Office, which last year became a unit of Uni-
versity Libraries. It serves as the university’s center for 
copyright and fair use issues, and matters related to edu-
cational and research uses of copyrighted materials. It 
also provides copyright workshops and training sessions 
for the university's academic community. She was very 
gratified to receive the award and is pleased that the 
university is supporting awareness in the increasingly 
complex fields of copyright and fair use.  
 
Maya Karki is the Evening Circulation Manager for the 
Law Library. She was honored for her work, which in-
cluded a large relocation project that involved a signifi-
cant quantity of legal reviews. She always enjoys pro-
viding assistance to Law Library patrons, and likes 
working with books.  
 
Robert Vay operates the University Dissertation and 
Thesis Service. His office, which began operations in 
2000, provides essential services to all GMU graduate 
students who must complete a dissertation, thesis, or 
special project. He finds it rewarding to work with    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
people from diverse backgrounds who are completing  
studies on a wide range of topics.  
 
The Outstanding Achievement Award is granted for ex-
traordinary achievement or specific accomplishments 
that improve processes, save time or money, or provide 
customer service that result in significant benefit to the 
university, school, institute or department. The awards 
are granted biannually, based on nominations submitted 
for review by the Human Resources Compensation 
Committee. 
Anne Hakes 
Special Collections and Archives  
Rosemary Chase, Maya Karki, and Robert Vay Honored 
The exchange of information between GMU faculty 
members and librarians helps develop and maintain a 
library collection that can support both university 
teaching and research. To that end, each academic de-
partment has selected a faculty member or members 
who work with a corresponding subject specialist li-
brarian. Each subject librarian may be a liaison for as 
many as six academic departments.   
 
This system works to everybody’s advantage. The 
librarian gains thorough knowledge of department 
curricula, faculty specialties and research, and student 
research interests – information necessary for selecting 
the most appropriate research materials. Likewise, the 
faculty gains a broader view of the Libraries’ available 
resources. And finally, each student and faculty 
member knows that they have a contact person in the 
Libraries who can help with research, instruction, and 
other information-related activities. 
 
For more information about the library/faculty liaison 
program, see:  
 
       http://library.gmu.edu/services/rems/liaisonlib.html  
 
Lene Palmer  
Collection Development  
Library Liaison System at George Mason University 
Page 2 
FULL TEXT 
Fall 2001 
 Brockington 
Maya Karki, Rosemary Chase & Robert Vay 

Page 3 
FULL TEXT 
Fall 2001 
George Mason University Libraries has re-
ceived the library and notes of long-time fund-
raising consultant, Arthur Frantzreb. The core 
of the collection, consisting of over 200 books, 
will be part of the library at the Arlington cam-
pus, where graduate studies in Nonprofit Man-
agement are located. The collection, compiled 
over a career of more than fifty years of con-
sulting with over 850 nonprofit organizations, 
includes numerous out-of-print books. Addi-
tionally, pamphlets, monographs, and notes 
written by Mr. Frantzreb will be maintained in 
the Nonprofit Management Studies offices, all 
available for student and faculty research.   
 
Mr. Frantzreb, of McLean, Virginia, is well 
known in the nonprofit sector for his consulting 
services. He has specialized in directing cam-
paigns for colleges and universities throughout 
the United States. He graduated from Butler 
University in Indianapolis, and started his ca-
reer in 1948 working on Cornell University’s 
ten-year $90,250,000 campaign, an extremely 
ambitious campaign for the time. George Ma-
son University is very grateful for his generous 
contribution, which will help develop the Li-
braries’ resources for student and faculty study 
and research. 
Patricia F. Lewis  
Public and International Affairs 
 
 
 
Collection Donated to University Libraries 
The Prince William Library has 
been planning library services 
for the newest academic pro-
gram on the Prince William 
campus, Tourism and Events 
Management. Beginning in Fall 
2001, the Health, Fitness, and Recreation Re-
sources Department (HFRR) offered courses in 
this program, making it the seventh concentra-
tion in the HFRR B.S. degree. The program 
offers introductory level classes at both the 
Prince William and Fairfax campuses. The cur-
riculum includes courses such as: Introduction 
to Tourism, Community Tourism Develop-
ment, Resort Management, Ecotourism, and 
Conference/Convention Planning and Manage-
ment. 
 
The Prince William Library has been working 
closely with program co-coordinators Dr. Rus-
sell Brayley (formerly of Indiana University) 
and Dr. David Weaver (from Australia’s Grif-
fith University) to build a representative collec-
tion of Tourism and Events Management mate-
rials. As a result, the library has ordered several 
core journals and the most current editions of 
important reference books in the field. The an-
ticipated growth of the circulating collection in 
this area will mirror the increase in the pro-
gram’s course offerings over the next several 
semesters.   
 
The library staff at the Prince William campus 
enthusiastically welcomes Drs. Brayley and 
Weaver to George Mason and looks forward to 
meeting the needs and challenges that the 
Tourism and Events Management program will 
present. 
Bill Fleming 
Prince William Campus Library 
 
 
  
Tourism and Events Management Academic Program 

MyLibrary@Mason has been designed to help patrons create a GMU library website that 
follows individual interests. Modeled after web portals like Yahoo!, MyLibrary@Mason lets 
patrons gather and maintain the resources and services that they need everyday.  
 
To set up a MyLibrary@Mason account, go to http://mylibrary.gmu.edu. The system can  
store links from other Mason sites and from the Internet. MyLibrary@Mason also offers 
special services, like a regularly updated searchable database of new materials.  
 
MyLibrary@Mason may be modified at any time. Although you can always use our traditional website, MyLi-
brary@Mason offers a more individualized gateway to library services.  
 
For questions or suggestions about MyLibrary@Mason, email Wally Grotophorst, Associate University Librarian/
Library Systems at wallyg@mail.gmu.edu or call him at 703-993-9005.  
Wally Grotophorst 
Library Systems 
Introducing MyLibrary@Mason 
Page 4 
FULL TEXT 
Fall 2001 
Full Text 
George Mason University Libraries, 2FL 
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444 
http://library.gmu.edu 
Full Text Contributers 
 Co-editors: Laura Burns & Paul Koda          Associate Editors: Miriam Bridges & Paulina Vaca 
Advisors: John Zenelis, Craig Gibson, Ruth Kifer & John Walsh 

