
False Proﬁ ts

This page intentionally left blank 

False
Proﬁ ts
Recovering from the 
Bubble Economy
Dean Baker

Copyright © 2010 by Dean Baker
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distrib-
uted, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopy-
ing, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations 
embodied in critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses per-
mitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to the publisher, 
addressed “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address below.
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
235 Montgomery Street, Suite 650, San Francisco, CA 94104-2916
Tel: (415) 288-0260   Fax: (415) 362-2512   www.bkconnection.com
O R D E R I N G I N F O R M A T I O N
Quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases 
by corporations, associations, and others. For details, contact the “Spe-
cial Sales Department” at the Berrett-Koehler address above.
Individual sales. Berrett-Koehler publications are available through most 
bookstores. Th ey can also be ordered directly from Berrett-Koehler: 
Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626; www.bkconnection.com
Orders for college textbook/course adoption use. Please con-
tact Berrett-Koehler: Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626.
Orders by U.S. trade bookstores and wholesalers. Please contact 
Ingram Publisher Services, Tel: (800) 509-4887; Fax: (800) 838-1149; 
E-mail: customer.service@ingrampublisherservices.com; or visit www.
ingrampublisherservices.com/Ordering for details about electronic ordering.
Berrett-Koehler and the BK logo are registered 
trademarks of Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
First Edition
Paperback Print eidtion, ISBN 978-0-98241-712-6 (alk. paper)
PDF e-book ISBN 978-1-60994-475-9
IDPF e-book ISBN 978-1-60994-477-3
Mobi e-book ISBN 978-1-60994-501-5
2011-1
Production management: BookMatters
Book and Cover design: George Mattingly, BookMatters

Contents
 
 Acknowledgments 
vii
 
 Introduction 
1
 
1 Economic Collapse: It Is Th eir Fault 
11
 
2 Surveying the Damage 
39
 
3 Th e Terrible Tale of the TARP 
59
 
4  Will Th ey Ever Discover 
the Housing Bubble? 
85
 
5 Stimulus: It Is Just Spending 
99
 
6  Real Stimulus: Progressive Programs 
to Boost the Economy 
119
 
7 Reforming the Financial System 
137
 
8 Remember the Housing Bubble! 
155
 
 Notes 
161
 
 Index 
171
 
 About the Author 
175

 
 Figures
 
2.1   Net Wealth of Late Baby Boomers 
49
 
2.2   Net Wealth of Early Baby Boomers 
51
 
2.3   Percent of Homeowners Needing 
Cash to Sell Th eir Houses 
54
 
2.4   Homeownership Rates 
56
 
5.1   Loss in Annual Demand and 
Net Stimulus 
108

vii
Acknowledgments
I wrote this book as a response to the pervasive eff orts to 
rewrite the facts and history surrounding the worst economic 
downturn in 70 years. I appreciate the support of PoliPoint-
Press, and in particular Peter Richardson and Scott Jordon. 
Th e work has benefi ted from considerable feedback from my 
friends and colleagues, including Eileen Appelbaum, Alan 
Barber, Heather Boushey, Helene Jorgensen, Danilo  Pelletiere, 
Hye Jin Rho, David Rosnick, John Schmitt, Mark Weisbrot, 
and Nicole Woo. I also owe thanks to the never-ending 
patience of Helene, Kiwi, and Walnut.

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Introduction
As the nation struggles to recover from the worst economic 
downturn since the Great Depression, the people who got us 
here are desperately working to rewrite history. Th e basic story 
of this economic collapse is very simple. Th e Federal Reserve 
Board, guided by its revered chairman, Alan Green span, 
allowed an $8 trillion housing bubble to grow unchecked.
Arguably, the Fed even fostered the bubble’s growth, see-
ing it as the only source of dynamism in an economy that was 
suff ering from the aft ershocks of the collapse of a $10 trillion 
stock bubble. Greenspan repeatedly insisted that the housing 
market was just fi ne, even as a small group of economists 
and analysts raised concerns about the unprecedented run-up 
in house prices. He also dismissed concerns about the ques-
tionable mortgages the banks were issuing on a massive scale 
during the bubble years. In fact, he even encouraged people 
to take out adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) at a time when 
fi xed-rate mortgages were near a 50-year low.
As explained in chapter 1, the devastating consequences 
for the economy of the collapse of the housing bubble were 

2 
FALSE PROFITS
inevitable. Housing wealth, unlike stock wealth, is relatively 
evenly distributed among the population. For the vast major-
ity of middle-class families, home equity is their fi nancial 
asset. When the collapse of the bubble resulted in the disap-
pearance of $8 trillion of housing bubble wealth ($110,000 per 
homeowner on average), tens of millions of homeowners had 
no choice but to sharply curtail their consumption.
Th e wealth that homeowners had taken for granted during 
the bubble years was gone. Th is meant that these homeown-
ers could no longer borrow against home equity to support 
their level of consumption and that they would need to hugely 
increase their savings to rebuild the wealth they had lost. Th e 
rapid falloff  in consumption, coupled with the collapse of 
housing construction, guaranteed the onset of a severe reces-
sion. Th ere is no simple way to off set the loss of more than $1 
trillion in annual demand in the economy — $450 billion in 
lost housing construction and between $600 billion and $800 
billion in lost consumption.
A massive wave of foreclosures and mortgage-loan 
defaults are also an inevitable parts of this story. Millions of 
people would have lost their homes even without the tsunami 
of junk loans the banks issued during the bubble years. When 
house prices plunge below the value of the mortgage, home-
owners have less means and incentive to struggle to meet their 
payments. Th e huge job loss from the recession also propelled 
the massive wave of foreclosures.
None of this is complicated or mysterious. Anticipat-
ing this disaster didn’t require brilliant insights or complex 

 
INTRODUCTION 
3
models. In fact, a good student in an introductory economics 
course would have possessed all the knowledge needed to see 
this train wreck coming.
However, the political elites do not want the offi  cial story 
to be that simple. Th ey don’t want the public to know that the 
people holding the top economic policy positions are incom-
petent, corrupt, or both. By burying the story in complexity, 
these elites are trying to confuse the American public.
Th e confusion begins when the media and the politi-
cians routinely refer to the recession as a “fi nancial crisis.” 
Th e implication is that the fi nancial system is at the root of 
the problem and that fi xing the fi nancial system is the way to 
restore the economy to its normal growth path. Although the 
failings of fi nancial regulation certainly allowed the bubble 
to grow much larger than otherwise would have been pos-
sible, and the troubles in the fi nancial system have aggravated 
the downturn, the current economic situation would be little 
changed if the fi nancial system were instantly restored to per-
fect health.
Th e core problem is that the economy developed serious 
imbalances as a result of the growth of the housing bubble. 
In the short term, the only way to off set the loss of demand 
caused by the collapse of the housing bubble is through mas-
sive defi cit spending. In the longer term, a reduction in the 
value of the dollar will be necessary to restore more balance to 
our U.S. trade. However, the political elites, led by the manag-
ers of the fi nancial industry, do not want to allow for a discus-
sion that results in a policy prescription of large defi cits and 

4 
FALSE PROFITS
a lower valued dollar. Such policies would go directly against 
their fi nancial interests and directly indict the policy agenda 
they have promoted for more than a decade.
Rather than let people see the simple story, the political 
elites are anxiously touting the complexity of the situation. 
Th ey want to focus the debate on complex derivative instru-
ments like “credit default swaps” (CDSs) or “collaterized debt 
obligations” (CDOs). In this way they hope to quickly confuse, 
and lose, the public. Th ey can then assert that the problems 
were so complicated no one could be blamed for not having 
foreseen them. Aft er all, we’re only human, and no one can 
predict the future.
Th e foregoing is the main motive for writing this book. It 
is a follow-up to my book explaining the origins of the bubble: 
Plunder and Blunder: Th e Rise and Fall of the Bubble Economy 
(PoliPointPress, 2009). Th e elites should not be allowed to per-
petuate the falsehood that it was not their fault. Th eir failure 
to recognize the housing bubble or to have taken the steps 
necessary to rein it in before it grew to such dangerous levels 
brooks no excuse. Tens of millions of people have lost jobs, life 
savings, or homes because of this incredible failure on the part 
of the country’s top economic policymakers. Th e people who 
are responsible for this disaster should be held accountable for 
the damage they have wreaked on the nation and the world.
In fact, the best way to prevent another bubble would be 
to fi re the people responsible, but such a measure is highly 
unlikely. Th e list is long of people who should have known 

 
INTRODUCTION 
5
better and could have taken steps to counter the bubble before 
it grew to such dangerous proportions. Ben Bernanke, the 
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board during the last phase 
of the bubble, would top that list.
Bernanke was one of the seven members of the Fed’s 
Board of Governors from 2002 until June 2005. In this capac-
ity, he could have challenged Alan Greenspan’s decision to 
allow the bubble to grow unchecked. Bernanke subsequently 
became head of President Bush’s Council of Economic Advi-
sors, where he served for seven months before returning to 
the Fed as chairman in January of 2006. Th e entire time from 
2002 he sat back and allowed the bubble to grow. He never 
took any steps to rein it in, nor did he issue any warnings to 
the public about the potential consequences of its collapse.
It would be diffi  cult to imagine someone with a compa-
rable record of disastrous failures being allowed to remain 
in most jobs. Would a nurse who routinely administers the 
wrong medicine and causes his patients to die be allowed to 
keep his job? Would a bank teller who leaves the cash drawer 
open remain in her position? How about the school bus driver 
who comes to work drunk?
In most lines of work, a certain level of competence is 
expected. Unfortunately, this is not the case for those who set 
U.S. economic policy. In political circles, the idea that Ben 
Bernanke should lose his job because he didn’t take action to 
counter the bubble is considered absurd.
Bernanke was not, by any means, the only one who should 

6 
FALSE PROFITS
have been trying to counter the bubble. Considering the dire 
consequences of the bubble’s collapse, this was the most 
important thing anyone in a policy position should have been 
doing. Washington is chock full of people working on eco-
nomic policy in positions at the Treasury, the Fed, the various 
regulatory agencies, and elsewhere who earn six-fi gure sala-
ries. Th ey all failed to see or issue warnings about the housing 
bubble. Not one of these people has gotten fi red. In fact, not a 
single person involved in economic policy has probably even 
missed a promotion because of this gross failing.
Th is view — that the collapse of the housing bubble caused 
the economic collapse and subsequent recession —  is com-
pletely diff erent from the commonly discussed view that the 
abundance of bad mortgages was the main problem. Bad 
mortgages fed the bubble and allowed it to reach much more 
dangerous proportions. Th e core problem, however, was the 
bubble itself, not the mortgages. If all the mortgages had met 
normal prudential standards, but we had a bubble of the same 
proportions, the economy would still be in pretty much the 
same situation as it is today.
Conversely, if we had the same fl ood of bad mortgages 
and no bubble, the consequences would have been more lim-
ited, even for the homeowners who took out these mortgages. 
In many cases, they would have been able to refi nance into 
standard fi xed-rate mortgages. Even if refi nancing had been 
impossible because of a bad credit or employment situation, 
homeowners might have been able to sell their homes and 
pocket some equity, rather than being forced into foreclosure.

 
INTRODUCTION 
7
In order to assign correct blame and to design proper 
reforms, it is essential to distinguish between the bubble as the 
primary cause of the crisis and the bad mortgages themselves. 
Although the fl ood of bad mortgages was evident to those who 
cared to look, an $8 trillion housing bubble should have been 
impossible to miss for any serious economic analyst. Th e point 
is that we do not need supersleuth regulators and analysts to 
uncover similar problems before those problems crash the 
economy, but we do need policymakers who are smart enough 
to walk and chew gum at the same time.
Creating new agencies is not the answer; forcing the agen-
cies that are responsible for maintaining economic and fi nan-
cial stability (fi rst and foremost the Federal Reserve Board) 
to do their job properly is. Th e Fed could have and should 
have stopped the growth of the housing bubble long before 
it reached such enormous proportions. Its failure to do so 
was perhaps the single most consequential error in economic 
policy in the history of the world.
o
Going forward, the Federal Reserve Board must clearly be 
responsible for preventing asset bubbles  — such as the stock-
market bubble and the housing bubble  — from posing a threat 
to the economy. Contrary to assertions from former Federal 
Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan, recognizing such 
bubbles is not only possible but it is precisely what the Fed is 
supposed to do. And, once it recognizes a bubble, the Fed has 
all the power it needs to defl ate it.

8 
FALSE PROFITS
Many other changes should result from this experience. 
Most importantly, the country needs to rein in a fi nancial 
sector that has grown out of control, nearly quadrupling its 
share of the economy over the last three decades. Th is sector 
accounted for almost 30 percent of all corporate profi ts at the 
peak of the housing bubble.
Ideally, the fi nancial sector funnels money from people 
who want to save it to those who want to borrow it to start 
or expand a business or to pay for a home or a college educa-
tion. Th irty years ago, this country’s fi nancial sector accom-
plished this mission very well, and the economy had a much 
more rapid pace of productivity growth than in the last three 
decades.
A fi nancial sector brought back down to size will carry 
out its economic function much more effi  ciently. Th e United 
States doesn’t need a fi nancial sector that prospers through 
the creation and trading of complex fi nancial instruments 
of little economic value. A reduction in the size of this sector 
would also make it less powerful and prevent it from exerting 
political control over those who are supposed to regulate it.
Part of the problem is that the sector’s control over regula-
tors is actually built into the system. Th e Fed is structured so 
that the private-sector banks dominate the boards that control 
the 12 Fed district banks that comprise the Federal Reserve 
System, along with the Board of Governors located in Wash-
ington DC. Th ese boards then select the Fed district bank 
presidents. Th ese 12 bank presidents sit on the Fed’s Open 
Market Committee, which determines interest-rate policy, 

 
INTRODUCTION 
9
outnumbering the 7 Fed governors who are appointed by the 
President and approved by Congress. (Only 5 of the 12 bank 
presidents vote at any one time.) Th is arrangement is akin to 
the pharmaceutical industry picking members of the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA). Congress must democratize 
the Fed by rewriting its charter.
o
As we push for reform, it is important to avoid framing the 
debate — as conservatives routinely do and progressives fool-
ishly accept  —  as a confl ict between those who want more 
government control versus those who want market control. 
Despite what they say to sell their policies to the public, con-
servatives have never been interested in reducing the role of 
government and “leaving things to the market.” In reality, 
they want the government to structure the market to facilitate 
the redistribution of income upward.
Progressives do the conservatives’ bidding when we denounce 
them as “market fundamentalists.” We should, instead, be expos-
ing their use of government to set up structures that ensure the 
market works to benefi t the wealthy. We could then bring our 
policies into focus as those designed to ensure that market out-
comes will benefi t the bulk of the population.
Th e market is just a tool, like a wheel or a hammer. It 
would be bad politics and bad policy for progressives to make 
a big scene attacking the wheel. It is similarly bad politics and 
bad policy to put these attacks on the market at the center of 
a political agenda.

This page intentionally left blank 

11
S 
ONE
Economic Collapse: 
It Is Their Fault
Imagine if the economy were managed by people who did 
not know basic arithmetic, the stuff  that we all learned in 
third grade. Imagine further that as a result of their inability 
to understand simple arithmetic, huge economic imbalances 
grew to ever more dangerous levels.
If this happened, surely the business and economics 
reporters would be on the job, pointing out the ungodly 
incompetence of the country’s top economic offi  cials and the 
risks that their ignorance posed for us all. Undoubtedly, thou-
sands of economists, all quite skilled at mathematics, would 
be pointing out the errors. Members of Congress, especially 
those sitting on the committees that have major economic 
responsibilities, would be organizing hearings to call attention 
to the mismanagement of the economy.

12 
FALSE PROFITS
If the media, the economics profession, and Congress 
somehow failed to move quickly enough, and disaster struck, 
certainly those most responsible for this calamity would lose 
their jobs and suff er public humiliation. Lengthy news stories 
would denounce problems in our system of governance that 
allowed for extraordinary incompetence at the highest levels.
Not in America.
Th e basic story of the economic crisis is that the top 
economic leaders acted as though they were ignorant of 
third-grade arithmetic. Th e fact is, they are not — these are 
intelligent people — but they ignored enormous imbalances 
in the U.S. economy that could have been easily detected 
with nothing more than a third-grade education and com-
mon sense. Specifi cally, they ignored the growth of a housing 
bubble that eventually expanded to more than $8 trillion. Th ey 
also ignored the inevitability that this bubble would collapse 
and devastate the economy.
One can speculate about the reasons our economic leaders 
ignored this massive threat to the well-being of the economy 
and the country as a whole. For a while, everything seemed 
fi ne, as long as the growth of the bubble expanded the econ-
omy and created jobs. In addition, politically well-connected 
people in the fi nancial sector were making enormous for-
tunes. Th ose responsible for managing the economy had real 
incentives to ignore a looming crisis, even if it was completely 
apparent to them.
Where were the business and economic reporters? Th ey 
generally show extraordinary deference to the Federal Reserve 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
13
Board (Fed) chairman, the Treasury secretary, and other top 
economic offi  cials. In fact, in the late 1990s, a prominent 
Washington Post reporter wrote a glowing account of Alan 
Greenspan’s management of the economy titled “Maestro.” 
Few reporters are confi dent enough about their own analytic 
abilities to directly confront top offi  cials and suggest that they 
are fundamentally mismanaging the economy. Aft er all, the 
Fed chairman, Treasury secretary, and the rest are very smart 
people; otherwise they would not hold these positions.
What about the thousands of independent economists? 
Surely they would have suffi  cient confi dence in their analytic 
abilities to raise the alarm. Simple economic analysis suggests 
that they are unlikely to speak up against a consensus in the 
profession. But even a confi dent and smart economist cannot 
be certain that she is right. Aft er all, we all make mistakes. If 
Alan Greenspan says that black is white, he could be right.
Questioning the status quo becomes even more intimidat-
ing when everyone else seems to agree. When Alan Green-
span says no housing bubble exists, and all the other big-name 
economists more or less concur, then maybe black is white. A 
young economist seeking tenure, or even a more established 
economist looking to move up the profession’s ranks, would 
be taking a great risk by warning about the housing bubble. 
Th e price of being wrong would be ridicule and the likely end 
of any hopes of career advancement. Sticking with the main-
stream of the profession would be far safer.
Th e incentives for conformity created by the sociology 
of the economics profession run deep. Robert Shiller, a Yale 

14 
FALSE PROFITS
economics professor and one of world’s preeminent fi nancial 
economists, began warning of the housing bubble in 2003. 
However, even he noted how constrained he felt he needed to 
be in his warnings.1 Shiller didn’t want to be rude in pushing 
his view, in spite of the fact that he knew that failure to contain 
the bubble could lead to the sort of economic disaster that we 
are now experiencing.
When those within the core of the profession are con-
strained from raising the alarm by the positions they hold, 
the job is left  to those at the margin. And those at the margin 
are, by defi nition, marginalized. So, if Alan Greenspan says 
that everything is fi ne, the public should not be concerned if 
a few economists at the margin of the profession are pointing 
to the storm clouds on the horizon.
As far as the hope that our representatives in Congress 
would raise the alarm  — let’s just state the obvious: politicians 
are rarely leaders. Th e most eff ective politicians detect changes 
in public sentiment and respond to them quickly. Th ey don’t 
get out in front and warn the public of new problems that are 
not yet widely recognized. Very few politicians —  certainly 
none in leadership positions — would challenge the consensus 
within the economics profession.
Th e ignorance of those who should have known better was 
abetted by the fortune that the fi nancial industry was making 
off  the housing bubble. Top executives in the industry were 
off ering substantial rewards to their friends in academia and 
politics who went along for the ride. Th e truth plus 50 cents 
may buy a cup of coff ee, but most of those who could have 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
15
blown the whistle were looking for something more. Th e top 
executives of Citigroup, Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, and 
other fi nancial institutions central in providing the fi nancing 
that propped up the bubble had no interest in bringing the 
party to an early end.
What about aft er the fact? Once the bubble burst and the 
damage had been done, we would expect the people who failed 
at their jobs to be held accountable. Maybe somewhere, but 
not in this country. Th e basic story is that the people who 
failed to warn of the housing bubble are the people in charge 
of repairing the damage.
Th e people reporting on fi nance today are for the most 
part the same people who ignored the bubble in the years 
2002 – 2007. Th ey have little interest in admitting how easy 
it was to both recognize the bubble and predict the resulting 
damage from its collapse. Th e economists who either didn’t 
see the bubble, or didn’t want to stick their necks out by dis-
cussing it, are the same ones charting the economic path going 
forward. Th ey don’t want to call attention to the diffi  culties 
they seemed to have with third-grade arithmetic. And the 
politicians are still listening to the bankers, who still have lots 
of money for campaign contributions.
So, instead of inquests and exposes, we get cover-ups. 
Almost all discussions about how we failed to see catastrophe 
coming focus on the fi nancial aspects of the crisis, many of 
which are complicated, and ignore the fundamental cause: the 
huge overvaluation of the country’s housing stock. Once the 
topic moves from bubble-infl ated house prices to credit default 

16 
FALSE PROFITS
swaps and collateralized debt obligations, nearly everyone 
following the news is safely lost.
In this fi nancial crisis story, the crisis is talked about as if 
it were a rare and highly unlikely event — a black swan — rather 
than one that could be predicted with absolute certainty, even 
if the timing and exact course of events could not be known.2 
Instead of fi ring all the people who didn’t do their jobs, Wash-
ington’s policy elite has instead focused on creating a new 
agency — a “systemic risk regulator” — responsible for detect-
ing such “unlikely” events in the future.
Th e “systemic risk regulator” is the ultimate joke on the 
country. We already have a systemic risk regulator. It’s called 
the Federal Reserve Board. At many points it has staged 
extraordinary interventions whenever it felt that events in the 
fi nancial sector were spinning out of control and threatening 
to seriously harm the economy. Alan Greenspan’s eff orts to 
shore up the stock market aft er the 1987 crash and his inter-
vention in the unraveling of the Long-Term Capital Hedge 
Fund in 1998 provide the two most obvious examples.
Th e problem was not that we lacked a systemic risk regula-
tor but rather that we had one that failed catastrophically at its 
job. Rather than holding our failed regulators accountable, we 
are pretending that their job descriptions were the problem. 
Th is response is akin to creating a new government agency 
to rescue people from burning buildings aft er an especially 
deadly fi re. Th e more obvious solution is to dump the head of 
the fi re department.
Th e assumption would be that if people died in burning 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
17
buildings, it was because the fi re department hadn’t done its 
job. When the economy suff ers a collapse like the housing 
crash recession, failed economic management is the culprit. 
Th e way to improve economic management is to hold the 
managers accountable for their performance, thereby giving 
them an incentive to buck the consensus opinion and say what 
they believe to be correct. Covering up failure is a recipe for 
more failure.
Regulators and others in policy positions certainly face 
risks by stepping out of line. But these people must come to 
know that they face comparable risks by not stepping out of 
line when the situation demands it. In other words, if we want 
good policy, we must let those in policy positions know that 
they will be fi red if they don’t warn us about an enormous 
housing bubble.
Th ose who ignored the housing bubble messed up hor-
ribly and should be fi red. Instead, it appears that they will 
escape virtually any sanction. Left  in place, they will do more 
damage and set the worst possible example for regulators and 
policymakers in the future.
The Story of the Housing Bubble
Th e basic story of the housing bubble and its collapse is simple. 
For 100 years, from 1895 to 1995, nationwide house prices in 
the United States tracked the overall rate of infl ation. Th is 
trend meant that, on average, house prices rose at the same 
rate as the price of other goods: food, cars, clothes, and so on. 

18 
FALSE PROFITS
Diff erences in the rate of price increases among geographic 
areas were large. House prices in places like the New York 
suburbs or San Francisco did rise far more rapidly than the 
overall rate of infl ation. But rapid price increases in these areas 
were off set by prices that trailed the rate of infl ation in areas 
like Gary, Indiana, or St. Louis, Missouri. Th ese areas of fall-
ing house prices were large enough to keep nationwide house 
prices just even with the overall rate of infl ation.
Some price variation by year was also common. Dur-
ing some years, house prices did rise more rapidly than the 
overall rate of infl ation, sometimes for four or fi ve years in a 
row. But even in these cases, the cumulative increase in house 
prices was only slightly greater than the rate of infl ation, in 
the range of 10 to 15 percentage points. Eventually these run-
ups would be off set by house prices that rose less rapidly than 
other prices.
A 100-year trend is an extremely long trend in econom-
ics. Over this same period, the U.S. economy experienced 
huge changes, including the massive immigration wave at the 
beginning of the 20th century, two major wars, and the Great 
Depression. A trend that persists through all these changes, 
especially one that occurs in the largest market in the world, 
should be taken seriously. Prices in smaller markets, for exam-
ple, the market for a mineral like gypsum or quartz, may be 
subject to erratic forces that lead them to fl uctuate in unusual 
patterns. But the housing market in the United States was a 
$10 trillion market in 1995, even before the bubble sent prices 
through the roof.

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
19
In short, given the enormous size of the market and the 
history of house prices, economists had good reason to take 
notice when, in 1995, those prices began to outstrip the overall 
rate of infl ation. When I fi rst wrote about the housing bubble 
in the summer of 2002, house prices had already outpaced the 
overall rate of infl ation by 30 percent, creating more than $3 
trillion of housing-bubble wealth.3 Even by that point it should 
have been evident that the housing market was in a seriously 
expanding bubble. Absolutely nothing on either the demand 
or the supply side of the market— that is, in the fundamen-
tals of the market—  could have explained this unprecedented 
increase in nationwide house prices.
On the demand side, the two main factors are income 
and population. If income grows rapidly, people may want 
bigger and better homes, or even second homes. Other things 
being equal, a more rapidly increasing population will lead 
to more rapid growth in the demand for housing, especially 
if the growth rate is high among people in their 20s, who are 
forming their own households for the fi rst time.
Neither of these factors off ers an explanation for the run-
up in house prices during this period. Income growth had 
been healthy during the late 1990s, but it was not extraordi-
nary. Th e rate of growth of median family income over the 
four years from 1996 to 2000 was no more rapid than the 
growth rate over the long boom from 1947 to 1973. Yet, in 
that era, house prices did not even keep pace with infl ation. 
Furthermore, the country had fallen into a recession in 2001, 
and family income had begun to decrease. Income growth 

20 
FALSE PROFITS
remained weak right through the rest of the bubble period, 
even though some modest gains occurred in 2005 and 2006. 
Income growth alone could not explain the extraordinary 
increase in house prices during this period.
Population growth is an even less plausible explanation. 
Although Alan Greenspan once cited immigration as a factor 
pushing up prices, the reality is that the infl ow of immigrants 
in the 1990s and the following decade was a relatively minor 
phenomenon compared with the demographic bulge created 
by the baby-boom cohort. (In addition, not many immigrant 
families would have been able to aff ord the $400,000 homes 
that were standard in bubble markets like Los Angeles, San 
Francisco, and Washington DC.) Th e rate of household forma-
tion was far more rapid in the 1970s and early 1980s, when the 
baby boomers were fi rst forming their own households, than 
in the bubble years.
By the mid-1990s, the overwhelming majority of the baby 
boomers who would ever be homeowners already owned a 
home. Th ese families were watching their children fi nish 
school and leave home. By the end of the housing bubble, the 
oldest baby boomers were already in their 60s. If anything, the 
baby boomers would be looking to move into smaller homes. 
A population-driven increase in the demand for homes could 
not explain the extraordinary run-up in house prices either.
Economists should have been well aware of the coun-
try’s demographics; the future of Social Security was one of 
the main topics of economic policy debates throughout this 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
21
period. Th e main (and not very accurate) story line for the 
Social Security “crisis” was that the program would soon be 
overwhelmed by the retirement of the baby-boom cohort, 
which would lead to a large increase in the ratio of retirees to 
workers, resulting in benefi t payments vastly exceeding tax 
revenue.
Th e real story of Social Security was less frightening than 
the claims of those who wanted to privatize the program; but 
the basic fact that the ratio of retirees to workers was rising 
should have immediately told any economist that attributing 
the run-up in house prices to demographics was nonsense.
Neither income growth nor population growth, the two 
main factors on the demand side, could explain the run-up. 
Th e supply side of the market off ered no better explanations. 
Alan Greenspan once suggested that environmental con-
straints on building were one cause of the run-up in house 
prices. Th is explanation should have immediately prompted 
derision.
Despite certain environmental restrictions on building 
during the era of the housing bubble, that era was hardly 
the high point of the environmental movement. Th e Repub-
lican takeover of Congress in 1994 would have constrained 
any environmentalist excesses at the national level. More-
over, the Republican takeover of many state legislatures and 
governorships in the same election would have curbed envi-
ronmentalist drives at the state level as well. Th e belief that 
environmental restrictions were imposing more constraints 

22 
FALSE PROFITS
on the supply of housing in this period than in prior decades 
had no basis.
Greenspan also suggested that the limited supply of build-
able land in desirable urban areas was a factor pushing up 
house prices. Land in urban areas is limited, but this reality 
was not new to the mid-1990s. Th is constraint had not led to 
a run-up in house prices over the prior hundred years, so why 
it would have made these prices suddenly rise nationwide in 
1995 is diffi  cult to fathom.
Attributing a rapid rise in house prices to the limited sup-
ply of land in the heyday of the Internet era and the “new 
economy,” when limits of time and space supposedly no lon-
ger applied, is somewhat ironic. Although most of the new 
economy hype was nonsense, the Internet did sideline those 
limits by making telecommuting possible. As a result of the 
Internet, many people can live at great distances from their 
workplace, commuting into work only rarely, if ever. Telecom-
muting jobs might represent a small portion of the total jobs 
in the economy; nonetheless, they would relax the time and 
space limits that might otherwise put upward pressure on 
house prices.
Th e easiest way to assess whether supply constraints were 
causing increases in house prices is to examine the rate of 
housing construction during this period. Th e evidence here 
is straightforward. We were building houses at a rapid pace in 
the 1990s and at an even more rapid pace in the fi rst decade of 
the 21st century. In fact, the country was building new housing 
units at a record rate from 2002 to 2006, when starts averaged 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
23
1,880,000 a year. Th is rate was slightly above the previous fi ve-
year peak rate of 1,870,000 from 1969 to 1973, when those on 
the leading edge of the baby-boom generation were fi rst form-
ing their own households, and the post-war economic boom 
was still in high gear. Supply constraints could not explain the 
run-up in house prices.
Economists who still remained unconvinced that house 
prices were rising due to a bubble rather than to the funda-
mental factors of supply and demand could have examined 
the rental market. House sale prices and rents tend to move 
in the same general direction, although not necessarily at the 
same pace. Fundamental factors pushing up the sale price of 
houses should be pushing up rental prices as well.
Th e story of rental prices during the bubble years is sim-
ple: there was no story. Rental prices outpaced infl ation by a 
small amount in the late 1990s, but in the following decade 
they kept even with the overall rate of infl ation or even trailed 
it slightly. Th is trend was further evidence that fundamen-
tals, the supply and demand factors, were not driving rapid 
increases in house prices.
Economists should have considered one fi nal factor: 
vacancy rates. Th ese data refl ect the underlying supply and 
demand for homes by showing the percentage of the hous-
ing stock that is actually occupied. If the enormous run-up 
in house prices were explained by demand hugely outpacing 
supply, the vacancy rate should have been very low, as empty 
houses would be quickly fi lled. In fact, the vacancy rate was 
hitting record highs as early as 2002.

24 
FALSE PROFITS
Th e rise in vacancies was showing up primarily on the 
rental side of the market: in the fi rst quarter of 2002, the 
rental vacancies rate fi rst surpassed its prior post  – World War 
II peak at 9.1 percent. Th e rate continued to rise until the 
fi rst quarter of 2004, when it hit 10.4 percent. Although the 
vacancy rate for ownership units did not rise substantially 
until the fourth quarter of 2006 (when it rose to more than 
50 percent higher than the previous peak), the record vacancy 
rate for rental units should have clearly indicated an excess 
supply of housing.
Vacant units in the rental market would eventually push 
rents lower. With rents falling relative to sale prices, people 
would opt to rent rather than buy, eventually putting down-
ward pressure on sale prices. Although only a few people 
might sell their homes to take advantage of cheap rents, fami-
lies moving into an area or young people leaving home would 
base the decision to buy or rent, in part, on the relative cost. 
When rents are low, such people will put off  buying until the 
prices of owning versus renting are more in line.
Th e same pattern holds true on the supply side of the mar-
ket. If landlords are unable to rent their properties or can only 
get a low rent in a market with high sale prices, they will con-
vert apartments into condominiums. Although this process 
takes time and can be costly, landlords will fi nd ways to sell if 
the price diff erences are large enough.
In short, the record rental-vacancy rate during this period 
should have been yet another warning sign to economists that 
the housing market was in a bubble and not being driven by 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
25
fundamentals. An enormous oversupply of available housing 
would eventually drag down prices.
Many economists, including Alan Greenspan, also 
tried to explain away the bubble by saying that the extraor-
dinarily low interest rates of the period justifi ed the high 
house prices. In fact, the National Association of Realtors 
regularly published a “housing aff ordability index,” which 
compared the cost of servicing a mortgage on the median 
house with the median family income. Th is index made the 
argument that houses were still relatively aff ordable due 
to the extraordinarily low mortgage-interest rates, even 
as house prices were already way out of line with their 
long-term trend.
Th e problem with this argument is that virtually no one 
expected interest rates to remain at these extraordinarily 
low levels. During the years of unusually low rates, nearly all 
public and private forecasters were projecting that mortgage 
rates would soon return to more normal levels. Th e inter-
est rate on 30-year fi xed-rate mortgages bottomed out at just 
under 5.3 percent in June 2003. Most forecasters projected that 
the rate would soon rise back to the 6.5 to 7.0 percent range, 
which would be consistent with a healthy economy and mod-
est infl ation.
Historically, house prices had not been that sensitive to 
interest rates. In prior decades, house prices did not plummet 
when interest rates rose, nor did they soar when they fell. If 
Greenspan and others believed that low interest rates in the 
2002 to 2003 period explained high house prices, they should 

26 
FALSE PROFITS
have expected house prices to plummet when interest rates 
returned to more normal levels.
In short, this inverse correlation between interest rates 
and house prices was consistent with the existence of a hous-
ing bubble. Th ose who really believed that low interest rates 
explained the run-up in house prices should have been ter-
rifi ed of the inevitable plunge in house prices when interest 
rates returned to normal levels. Th ey should have expected 
the loss of trillions of dollars of housing equity and a situation 
in which millions of homeowners would suddenly owe more 
than the value of their homes.
The Spread of Bad Mortgages
As house prices rose to levels that were increasingly out of 
line with the fundamentals of the housing market — including 
family incomes, which were not rising — fewer families could 
aff ord to buy homes. Nonetheless, home sales and home-
ownership rates were hitting record levels, thanks to the col-
lapse of lending standards and the spread of subprime and 
Alt-A mortgages. Th e explosion in these nonprime mortgages 
should have been yet another very clear warning signal of a 
serious housing bubble.
Subprime mortgages carry substantially higher inter-
est rates than prime mortgages, typically about 2 percent-
age points higher, but sometimes as much as 4. People who 
get subprime mortgages typically have poor credit records 
due to past defaults or irregular work histories, making them 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
27
unable to qualify for prime mortgages.4 Th rough the 1990s 
and the beginning of the following decade, subprime loans 
constituted 6 to 8 percent of the mortgage market. Th e share 
of subprime mortgages exploded to 25 percent by 2006. Th is 
sudden increase should have caught the eyes of regulators.
Th e growth in Alt-A loans was even more suspicious. Alt-A 
loans are typically given to borrowers who have good credit 
records but cannot fully document their income or assets. 
Alt-A borrowers are oft en small-business owners, who oft en 
see substantial year-to-year fl uctuations in their income. In 
addition, Alt-A borrowers may not be able to fully document 
their income because they don’t fully report it, to avoid paying 
taxes. Prior to 2002, the Alt-A market constituted between 1 
and 2 percent of the mortgage market. Th is share jumped to 
15 percent by 2006. Such an increase should have been even 
more alarming than the growth in subprime borrowing; such 
an extraordinary increase in the number of borrowers with 
incomplete documentation for their loans should have been 
investigated.
Th e number of small businesses started during these years 
did not increase greatly. Because Alt-A mortgages typically 
charge interest rates that are one to two percentage points 
higher than prime mortgages, borrowers would have a sub-
stantial incentive to dig up old tax forms if they were, indeed, 
honestly reporting their income. On a $400,000 mortgage 
(many Alt-A loans were used to buy fairly expensive homes 
in bubble markets), this documentation could save the bor-
rower $4,000 to $8,000 a year in interest. Th e most obvious 

28 
FALSE PROFITS
explanation for the increase in Alt-A mortgages during this 
period was that more people were lying about their income on 
mortgage applications, an increase that should have led to real 
concerns about the stability of the housing market.
To make matters worse, the vast majority of the subprime 
mortgages issued were adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs), 
mortgages with interest rates that could be expected to rise 
in the future. Th e standard subprime mortgage was a “2-28,” 
in which the interest rate was fi xed at a relatively low rate for 
the fi rst two years, and reset to a higher level in subsequent 
years, based on market rates at the time. Oft en the reset rate 
was four percentage points or more above the initial low 
“teaser” rate.
Th e Alt-A loans issued during this period were also typi-
cally ARMs, though these mortgages oft en had low rates 
for the fi rst four to fi ve years of the mortgage. Toward the 
end of the bubble, lenders frequently issued “interest-only” 
mortgages, which allowed borrowers to pay only interest for 
this initial period. Borrowers would only have to start paying 
down the principle aft er the reset date. Banks also developed 
“option ARMs,” which allowed borrowers to vary the amount 
of their monthly payment during the initial period. Th ese 
loans generally did not even require that the payment cover 
the monthly interest on the mortgage. Th ese “negative amor-
tization” loans eff ectively allowed the size of the mortgage to 
grow each month, and the borrower didn’t have to start paying 
down the mortgage until aft er the reset date.
All of these loans were, in eff ect, time bombs. Millions of 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
29
subprime and Alt-A borrowers could aff ord the initial teaser 
rates but could not possibly aff ord the reset rates that kicked 
in aft er the initial period. Remarkably, banks issued loans 
based only on the ability of borrowers to aff ord the teaser rate.
Banks paid little attention to their borrowers’ ability to 
repay loans because bank policy was usually to resell the loans 
in the secondary market almost as soon as they were issued. 
Th e secondary market exploded as Wall Street banks began to 
displace Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac as issuers of mortgage-
backed securities. (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are govern-
ment-created companies established to promote a secondary 
mortgage market by buying mortgages from the banks who 
issued them. Both were largely run as private companies prior 
to the crisis and continued to fi ll this public purpose; for this 
reason, they were subjected to special oversight.) Even though 
Fannie and Freddie had maintained reasonably strict stan-
dards on loan quality, private issuers of mortgage-backed secu-
rities — like Merrill Lynch and Citigroup — were prepared to 
package almost any mortgage into a mortgage-backed security.
A brief digression here may help dispel a couple of myths 
about the cause of junk loans made during this period. Any 
conjecture that political pressure to help minorities and low-
income families become homeowners was the reason Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac entered the non-prime market is com-
pletely untrue. Th is is completely untrue. Fannie and Freddie 
did eventually relax their standards and get into the nonprime 
market, but they were motivated to do so by the need to pre-
serve market share.

30 
FALSE PROFITS
Fannie and Freddie began entering the nonprime mar-
ket in 2005, aft er losing almost half of their market share to 
private issuers of mortgage-backed securities. Th eir decision 
to enter this market was a response to competitive pressures 
from the investment banks, not from liberal politicians want-
ing to help the disadvantaged become homeowners. In fact, 
no one in a position of political power could have applied 
such pressure. President Bush was in the White House, and 
the Republicans controlled Congress until January of 2007, 
at which point almost all the bad loans had already gone out 
the door.
Th e other myth that requires debunking is that banks 
issued junk mortgages because of pressure to comply with 
the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Th is myth is 
unfounded no matter how you look at it. Th e CRA requires 
that deposit-taking institutions invest in the communities 
from which they take deposits. Many of the biggest subprime 
lenders were not even covered by the CRA; they were mort-
gage banks that raised their money selling bonds on Wall 
Street. Furthermore, many of the subprime loans would not 
even have fi lled CRA requirements; they were, instead, sup-
porting the construction of new developments in exurbs, not 
the inner city areas that were the target communities for the 
CRA.
In short, the CRA had almost nothing to do with the 
explosion of subprime and Alt-A loans during this period. Th e 
banks issued these loans only because they could be profi tably 
sold in the secondary markets. Th e investment banks eagerly 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
31
gobbled up any loans the banks could issue. Th e investment 
banks considered themselves masters at containing risk and 
developed complex instruments such as collateralized debt 
obligations, which were supposed to allow them to spread risk 
more widely. Th ese assets, in turn, were blessed as investment 
grade by the credit rating agencies, who happened to be paid 
by the banks whose assets they were rating.
Th is system worked fi ne as long as the bubble continued to 
expand, because borrowers facing trouble paying their mort-
gages could always refi nance. And, in fact, many homeowners 
refi nanced multiple times during the bubble. If a mortgage 
became unaff ordable, it was a simple matter of taking out a 
new mortgage with a new two-year teaser-rate period. Prob-
lems only arose once house prices stopped rising, when refi -
nancing was no longer an option because homeowners would 
not have the equity they needed to qualify for a new mortgage.
Th e bubble eff ectively sustained itself by allowing banks 
to issue bad mortgages to buy homes that otherwise would 
not have been aff ordable at their bubble-infl ated prices. Fur-
thermore, as previously noted, infl ated house prices led to 
near-record levels of new home construction. Th is fl ood of 
new homes on the market eventually outstripped demand. 
Th e vacancy rate for ownership units began to rise in 2005, 
matching its prior peak in the third quarter of the year. Th e 
rate continued to rise through 2006, and by the fi rst quarter 
of 2007, the vacancy rate on ownership units was 50 percent 
above its prior peak.
Th is excess supply put downward pressure on prices, 

32 
FALSE PROFITS
sending this self-perpetuating process spiraling in reverse. 
Lower house prices meant that more people were unable to 
refi nance their mortgages. Th e drop in house prices also 
meant that a growing number of homeowners owed more on 
their mortgages than the value of their home. Such a discrep-
ancy hugely increases the likelihood of default, both because 
homeowners have no equity cushion to get through tough 
times and because they have little incentive to struggle to pay 
off  a mortgage that exceeds the value of their homes.
Th e fl ood of foreclosures increased the supply of homes 
coming on the market, putting further downward pressure on 
prices. Lower house prices also directly aff ected the demand 
for houses because most homebuyers are current homeowners 
who sell their old home to buy a new one. With house prices 
plummeting, many current homeowners would have little 
or no equity aft er selling their home, leaving them unable to 
aff ord the down payment on a new home.
Most homeowners work hard to pay their mortgage and 
will cut back on other expenses, take a second job, or do both 
rather than lose their homes. If they fi nd that they still can’t 
make ends meet, they will generally sell their homes and pay 
off  the mortgage rather than lose whatever equity they had 
built up, and risk a serious strike on their credit record from 
defaulting.
As a result, the loan-loss rate on mortgages is typically 
very low, a good reason banks felt comfortable holding mini-
mal loss reserves against their own mortgages, and mortgage-
backed securities (MBSs) generally were thought to be very 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
33
secure assets, even if they were not guaranteed by Freddie Mac 
and Fannie Mae. And Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac them-
selves were very heavily leveraged; their ratios of assets to 
capital were more than 50 to 1. Th ey considered large-scale 
defaults and losses on their mortgages highly unlikely.
In a bursting housing bubble, however, large-scale losses 
on mortgage debt are guaranteed. Not only was the likelihood 
of default and foreclosure far higher than normal, but the loss 
on each foreclosure was far higher. Th e loss is the diff erence 
between the value of the mortgage and what the lender would 
recover from reselling the home aft er deducting realtors’ fees, 
legal expense, and other costs associated with the foreclosure. 
In normal times, the loss on a foreclosed property would be 
close to 25 percent of the outstanding mortgage.
However, when house prices plummeted, the loss ratio 
soared. In some cases, foreclosed properties were selling for 
less than half the value of the outstanding mortgage. Loss 
ratios reached the neighborhood of 70 to 80 percent aft er 
deducting foreclosure-related expenses. Th e number of fore-
closures vastly exceeded normal levels and the loss on each 
foreclosure ran two to three times normal levels—banks and 
holders of MBSs were taking very serious hits.
The Bubble and the Economy
Th e damage the collapse of the bubble wreaked on the fi nancial 
sector was serious, but even worse was the damage it infl icted 
on the real economy. Th e housing bubble had been driving the 

34 
FALSE PROFITS
economy ever since the 2001 recession. Although that reces-
sion was offi  cially short and mild — ending in November 2001, 
just seven months aft er it had begun — its eff ects actually con-
tinued to be felt for the next two years. Th e economy did not 
start creating jobs again until the fall of 2003.
Th e collapse of the stock bubble caused the 2001 recession. 
Although its collapse did not cause nearly as much damage 
as the subsequent collapse of the housing bubble, it took the 
housing bubble itself to eventually lift  the economy out of its 
slump. In eff ect, the growth of a second bubble helped the 
economy recover from the collapse of the fi rst.
Th e housing bubble propelled the economy in two ways. 
First, growth in the housing sector itself became an important 
source of demand. Housing construction averaged close to 
4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) throughout the 
post-war period, expanding to a peak of more than 6 percent 
in 2005. Since the collapse of the housing bubble, the sector 
has shrunk to less than 3 percent of GDP. Th is shrinkage rep-
resents a loss in annual demand of more than $450 billion a 
year and represents the loss of millions of jobs in construction, 
mortgage banking, and real estate.
o
Th e housing bubble also drove the economy by stimulating 
consumption. A well-documented housing wealth eff ect is that 
each additional dollar of housing wealth is associated with an 
increase in annual consumption of fi ve to seven cents. Some 
evidence showed that this wealth eff ect may have been even 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
35
stronger during this period, as banks made it extremely easy 
for homeowners to take money out of their homes through 
refi nancing or home-equity loans.
However, even the modest fi ve-to-seven-cents-on-the-
dollar increase in consumption implies that the $8 trillion 
housing bubble led to additional consumption of $400 bil-
lion to $650 billion a year. Th is increase is consistent with the 
consumption boom we saw at the peak of the bubble, when 
the savings rate fell to less than zero. In addition, the growth 
created by the housing bubble helped to spur a recovery of 
stock prices, which would not otherwise have occurred. Th e 
additional stock wealth was in the range of $6 trillion to $8 
trillion. If the stock wealth eff ect on consumption is in the 
neighborhood of three to four cents on the dollar, the housing 
bubble indirectly caused an additional $180 billion to $320 
billion in annual consumption.
When the housing bubble burst, the bubble-wealth-
induced consumption would also inevitably grind to a halt, 
which is exactly what we have seen in recent quarters. With 
the collapse of the housing bubble and the loss of more than $6 
trillion in stock wealth, the savings rate is now nearly return-
ing to its post-war average of 8 percent, another entirely pre-
dictable result of the collapse of the housing bubble.
In short, policymakers should absolutely have anticipated 
a collapse in demand as a result of the collapse of the housing 
bubble, precisely as we have seen in the last year. Th e decline 
in housing construction has led to a loss in annual demand of 
more than $450 billion, and the loss of consumption, directly 

36 
FALSE PROFITS
or indirectly driven by the bubble, led to a further drop of 
$580 billion to $980 billion. Th e total loss in annual demand 
was between $1,030 billion and $1,430 billion, which does not 
even count the impact of the collapse of a secondary bubble in 
nonresidential real estate. All told, output has fallen between 
8 and 10 percent of GDP.
Th ose in policymaking positions, fi rst and foremost Alan 
Greenspan and the Federal Reserve Board, have no excuse for 
being caught by surprise either by the collapse of the housing 
bubble or the impact that its collapse had on the economy. It 
was a disaster waiting to happen. As diffi  cult as it is to believe 
they did not see it coming, even more incredible is that they 
saw it and chose to do nothing to prevent it.
What They Could Have Done
Academics, reporters, and  people in policy positions have 
devoted much effort to obfuscating the issues, yet the 
Fed could have taken clear and concrete steps to stem 
the growth of the housing bubble before it reached such 
dangerous proportions. First and foremost, the Fed could 
have issued clear warnings about the existence and dan-
gers of the bubble.
Issuing a warning doesn’t mean muttering “irrational 
exuberance,” as Greenspan famously did in 1996, at the peak 
of the stock bubble years.5 It means explicitly laying out the 
evidence for the existence of a housing bubble. Th e Federal 
Reserve Board employs hundreds of economists. Given the 

 
ECONOMIC COLLAPSE: IT IS THEIR FAULT 
37
enormous danger presented by the bubble, the most important 
thing economists should have been doing during the bubble 
years was to show the public and the fi nancial sector that a 
bubble existed and would have disastrous consequences when 
it burst. 
Alan Greenspan should have used every one of his testi-
monies before Congress and every public-speaking engage-
ment to warn about the bubble. He should have instructed 
all Fed staff ers to do the same, constantly highlighting the 
evidence for a bubble and vigorously challenging any econo-
mists who contested this view.
If the Fed had engaged in such a determined eff ort, the 
fi nancial markets and individual homebuyers would not have 
been able to ignore it. At the very least, banks would have been 
more cautious in the loans they issued or bought. Also, mil-
lions of homebuyers almost certainly would have had second 
thoughts before paying two or three times what a home would 
have cost a decade earlier.
In addition to pressing the case everywhere for the exis-
tence of a housing bubble, the Fed could also have used its 
regulatory authority to crack down on the proliferation of bad 
loans. Th is course was recommended to Greenspan by fellow 
Fed governor Edward Gramlich.6 He was worried about the 
proliferation of adjustable rate subprime loans as early as 2002. 
Greenspan did not share his concern and did nothing to rein 
in the growth of these loans.
At the very least, the Fed could have issued mortgage 
guidelines — promised since the 1990s  — for banks to follow 

38 
FALSE PROFITS
when issuing loans. Such guidelines  —  which included, for 
example, that banks should evaluate the borrower’s ability 
to pay ARMs based on likely reset rates rather than teaser 
rates — were fi nally issued in preliminary form in December 
2007, but did not become fi nalized until the summer of 2008.
Th e Fed could have likely reined in the housing bubble by 
documenting the evidence and warning loudly of the risks, as 
well as aggressively using its regulatory authority. If the Fed 
had done everything it could and the bubble had still contin-
ued to expand, it should have raised interest rates as much as 
necessary to burst the bubble. Such an explicit commitment 
by the Fed to burst the bubble would likely have amplifi ed the 
eff ect of raising interest rates and been extremely eff ective in 
reining in house prices.
Raising interest rates has the undesirable consequences of 
slowing the economy and throwing people out of work. Even 
so, such consequences would have been preferable to letting 
the bubble continue to grow and ending up with the severe 
recession we now face. Th e economic collapse was the worst 
possible result of a decade of Fed policy. Th e Fed simply failed 
disastrously in its conduct of monetary policy — a reality that 
should by now be very clear to everyone.

39
S 
TWO
Surveying the Damage
The collapse of the housing bubble has produced a more 
severe downturn than most economists would have ever 
imagined possible and more serious than all but the oldest 
Americans have seen in their lifetime. By the middle of 2009, 
the unemployment rate had already hit 9.5 percent. As of this 
writing, the economy was still shedding several hundred 
thousand jobs a month. And although the rate of decline had 
slowed from earlier in the year (largely as a result of the impact 
of the stimulus package), when the economy was shedding 
close to 700,000 jobs a month, the unemployment rate is still 
virtually certain to cross 10 percent in 2010 and could very 
well reach 11 percent before it peaks.
Since the Great Depression, the unemployment rate only 
approached these levels in the 1981  –  82 recession, when it 
peaked at 10.8 percent. As bad as that recession was, the hous-
ing crash recession is, in fact, much worse for two reasons.

40 
FALSE PROFITS
First, it is likely to last far longer than the 1981  – 82 reces-
sion because the economy lacks any easy way to rebound from 
the downturn. Th e 1981 – 82 recession was a classic post-war 
recession brought on by the decision of the Fed to raise interest 
rates to control infl ation. Th e Fed wanted to slow the economy 
and reduce employment in order to reduce infl ationary pres-
sures. Higher interest rates have this eff ect fi rst and foremost 
by discouraging new car purchases and house buying, because 
both kinds of purchases are very sensitive to interest rates. 
Th e resulting reduction in demand throws people out of work 
in the auto and construction industries. A multiplier eff ect 
ensues as these industries demand less material and fewer sup-
plies from other industries, and the workers laid off  in these 
sectors start to cut back on their consumption.
Th ese two sectors took an especially harsh hit during the 
1981 – 82 recession as the Fed raised interest rates to their high-
est level on record in an eff ort to rein in double-digit infl ation. 
Although the resulting downturn was indeed painful, the Fed 
held the key to reviving the economy. When it did so, by lower-
ing interest rates, it kicked off  a huge surge in car purchases and 
home buying because substantial demand had built up during 
the recession. Th is surge led, in turn, to a sharp drop in the 
unemployment rate, which fell by 2.5 percentage points over 
the course of 1983 and another percentage point the following 
year. Th e unemployment rate fell back to its prerecession level.
Th e current downturn was not caused by the Fed raising 
interest rates but rather by the collapse of a housing bubble. 
By the summer of 2009, interest rates were already as low 

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
41
as they could possibly be. Jump-starting demand, as in 1983, 
would not be easy, especially given the enormous overhang 
of consumer debt. In past recessions, consumers could set off  
a recovery by borrowing on their credit cards or against their 
homes. Th is magic pill was not an option because so many 
consumers had reached the limits of their ability to borrow.
According to the Federal Reserve Board’s data, the aver-
age homeowner’s equity was equal to 41.4 percent of the value 
of their home at the end of the fi rst quarter of 2009.1 By com-
parison, this ratio was over 67 percent in the early 1980s. Tens 
of millions of homeowners had little or no equity in their 
homes, and other forms of consumer debt were at near-record 
levels (relative to income); a burst of credit-fi nanced consump-
tion would not be enough to spur a recovery.
As a result, the unemployment rate will not turn around 
and head down rapidly once it peaks, and it may not peak until 
several months into 2010. In the absence of a large stimulus 
package, the unemployment rate is unlikely to fall very much 
before 2011, and unemployment may not return to its pre-
recession level until 2013 or even later. Th e current downturn 
is sure to last longer than the one the economy experienced 
in 1981 – 82.
Th e changed demographics of the labor force is another 
reason the housing crash recession is more severe than the 
1981 – 82 recession. In 1981 – 82, the huge baby-boom cohort was 
still mostly in its teens and twenties, and the oldest boomers 
were just over 30. Workers in that age group are far more likely 
to be unemployed than older workers. Most younger workers 

42 
FALSE PROFITS
are relatively new to their jobs, making it easier for them to 
quit and look for diff erent work if they are dissatisfi ed. In addi-
tion, they are less likely to have a family and own a home with 
a monthly mortgage payment. For all these reasons, it is easier 
for younger workers to change jobs, which oft en involves peri-
ods of unemployment between jobs.
By contrast, in 2009 the youngest baby boomers were 
already in their mid-forties, with the bulk of the cohort in their 
fi ft ies. Workers at this age are typically reluctant to change jobs, 
having oft en built up seniority and developed commitments 
that make quitting more diffi  cult. As a result, the unemploy-
ment rate for older workers is typically much lower than for 
younger workers. Th is means that for an economy operating 
near normal levels of output we should expect a considerably 
lower unemployment rate in 2009 than in 1982.
It is possible to “age-adjust” the unemployment rate by 
assuming that the age composition of the workforce does not 
change.2 Th is adjustment removes the impact of the changing 
age structure of the workforce from the unemployment rate. 
An age adjustment that assumes a similar age composition 
of the workforce in 2009 and in 1982 shows an unemploy-
ment rate of 10.9 percent for July of 2009. In other words, 
aft er adjusting for age, the unemployment rate was already 
higher in July than at its peak in 1982. Considering that the 
unemployment rate is almost guaranteed to keep rising, this 
recession’s age-adjusted unemployment rate will almost cer-
tainly reach a far higher level than its peak in the 1981
 –
 82 
recession.3

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
43
Unemployment is not the only problem facing workers. 
Many employers have met slack demand by reducing hours 
of employment. Th e number of people involuntarily working 
part-time has soared during this downturn, rising above 9 
million during the spring of 2009, more than twice the pre-
recession level. As of July 2009, more than 15 percent of the 
labor force was either unemployed or underemployed. Th is 
percentage will undoubtedly rise considerably higher over 
the next year.4
The Distribution of Unemployment
As is always the case in a downturn, those who are most dis-
advantaged get hit the hardest. Although the overall unem-
ployment rate stands at 9.5 percent, the unemployment rate 
for Hispanics is 12.2 percent and for African Americans is 14.7 
percent. Th is contrasts with an unemployment rate among 
whites of 8.7 percent. Th e unemployment rate for black teens 
is over 37 percent. Th ese numbers will rise even higher as the 
overall unemployment rate surpasses 10 percent in the months 
ahead. And if underemployment follows the same pattern as 
unemployment, we can assume nearly 25 percent of African 
American workers are already either unemployed or under-
employed. In the case of Hispanics, more than 20 percent are 
probably either unemployed or underemployed.
Wages are also likely to weaken in the downturn. In the 
fall of 2008, when oil and other commodity prices were fall-
ing rapidly, real wages were actually rising just as quickly. 

44 
FALSE PROFITS
Workers’ paychecks suddenly went much further when the 
price of gas fell from $4.00 to less than $2.00 a gallon, and the 
price of many other staples also fell. However, the weakness 
in the labor market has brought nominal wage growth to a 
halt. As gas and other prices rise, workers’ paychecks will no 
longer keep pace, which is bad news for the workers and their 
families as well as for the economy. If workers’ purchasing 
power declines, they will be less able to purchase goods and 
services, further depressing demand in the economy.
Th e best prospect for economic recovery would be for 
wages to continue to grow at a modest pace, ideally outstrip-
ping infl ation by 1 to 2 percentage points a year. Th is would 
allow for a healthy pace of consumption growth even if work-
ers decide to maintain a higher savings rate following the loss 
of housing equity in the wake of the housing-bubble collapse.
Lost Output and the 
Beneﬁ t of Pain Theory
Th e economy is operating at a level way below its capacity, 
which corresponds to the huge number of unemployed and 
underemployed workers. As a rule of thumb, the GDP must 
increase by 2 percent to reduce the unemployment rate by 1 
percentage point. Th is means that when a recession raises 
the unemployment rate by 1 percentage point for one year, 
we have lost an amount of output roughly equal to 2 percent 
of the economy’s potential output. If the unemployment rate 
is 1 percent higher than necessary for two years, we will lose 

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
45
4 percent of the economy’s potential. Unemployment is pro-
jected to surpass 10 percent in 2009 and remain high until 
2013 and possibly 2014. Th e cumulative loss in output result-
ing from this sustained period of high unemployment would 
be equal to 40 percent of annual GDP, or $6 trillion, which is 
$20,000 for every man, woman, and child in the country. Th is 
fi gure represents the value of the goods and services that we 
could have produced from 2008 to 2013, but will not produce 
because of the disruptions caused by the collapse of the hous-
ing bubble.
A substantial number of people, including many econo-
mists and people in policy positions, appear to view the pain 
caused by a downturn as a virtue, and caution against eff orts 
to stimulate the economy to lower the unemployment rate or 
cushion the shock in other ways. Th e idea is that somehow 
the pain will benefi t the economy in the future, as if it were 
analogous to what athletes endure in training, which makes 
them stronger and faster.
Th e pain of high unemployment and wasted resources by 
no means achieves any comparable goal. People without jobs 
for long periods of time lose skills and become less suited for 
employment when the economy recovers. Th e impact of the 
recession can aff ect their whole careers. Th e same holds true 
for young people just entering the labor market. Many will 
fi nd that the delay in starting on a career path will aff ect them 
for years to come.
Such hardship also has an important intergenera-
tional eff ect. When parents are forced to move because of 

46 
FALSE PROFITS
unemployment, the loss of their homes, or both, their chil-
dren’s school performance is adversely aff ected. Children have 
diffi  culty keeping up with their classmates when their home 
life is disrupted. Along with tens of millions of people unem-
ployed, underemployed, or losing their homes to foreclosures, 
millions of children are struggling to adjust to family crises. 
Th ese children may bear the impact of these disruptions long 
into adulthood.
Undoubtedly, we must make certain adjustments in this 
downturn. Most importantly, we must get the economy off  its 
bubble-driven growth path. We also must get off  an unsustain-
able environmental path. But neither of these goals is advanced 
in any way by forcing tens of millions of workers to endure 
a sustained period of unemployment or underemployment. 
Unlike the athlete in training, this pain causes no gain. Th e 
government is acting irresponsibly by not doing everything in 
its power to prevent this pain and try to get the unemployment 
rate back down to more normal levels as quickly as possible.
The Collapse of the Housing Bubble 
and the Loss of Household Wealth
Th e run-up in house prices at the peak of the bubble created 
more than $8 trillion in housing wealth. Th is wealth was illu-
sory because the bubble could not be sustained, but homeown-
ers, nonetheless, viewed it as real wealth. Th ey had no obvious 
reason to think otherwise. Aft er all, nearly all the economists 
they heard on television and read in the newspapers, starting 

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
47
with Alan Greenspan, assured them that house prices were 
being driven by fundamental factors of supply and demand, 
and that the prices could never fall.
Based on this perception of wealth, people changed their 
saving and consumption patterns, mostly by hugely increas-
ing their levels of consumption. In many cases they borrowed 
directly against the equity in their homes, either taking out 
home-equity loans or refi nancing for amounts that were 
larger than the original size of the mortgage. In other cases, 
they opted not to save, believing their houses were saving for 
them — adding $4,000 or $5,000 a year to a 401(k) account 
might have little point if the rise in house prices is adding 
$20,000 a year to the equity in your home. As a result, savings 
rates fell to zero and people stopped accumulating any wealth 
other than their home equity.
Th e world looks very diff erent aft er house prices adjusted 
to their post-crash levels. Tens of millions of middle-class 
households have seen much or all of what they thought of 
as their savings disappear. In many cases, people who had 
substantial equity in their homes at bubble prices suddenly 
found themselves underwater, owing more on their homes 
than the value of their mortgages. Assuming that the hous-
ing bubble fully defl ates, the loss of $8 trillion in wealth will 
be equal to $110,000 per homeowner. In addition, the stock 
market has lost more than one-third of its value compared 
with the prerecession peak. Th e relatively small share of the 
population that had substantial amounts of stock also took 
a big hit there.

48 
FALSE PROFITS
Although all segments of the population have been 
aff ected by this enormous loss of wealth, the group hit hardest 
is the baby-boom cohorts who are on the verge of retirement. 
Most baby boomers were already poorly prepared for retire-
ment. Relatively few baby boomers had access to tradition-
ally defi ned benefi t pensions  —  pensions that pay out a fi xed 
sum of money as long as a retiree or her spouse lives  —  as 
these disappeared rapidly over the course of their working 
lifetimes. Th e exceptions would be those who worked in the 
public sector.
Many who had defi ned contribution pensions  —  tax shel-
tered accounts like 401(k)s  —  were not able to earn enough 
to contribute adequately to these accounts. And few work-
ers were lucky enough to work for an employer that made 
generous employer-side contributions. For these reasons, 
most baby boomers would have faced fi nancial diffi  culties 
in retirement even if the housing bubble had not collapsed. 
Th e collapse made the retirement situation for these cohorts 
much more dire.
Figure 2.1 shows the net wealth for late baby boomers 
(those between the ages of 45 and 54 in 2009) in 2007 along 
with a projection for 2009 that takes into account the fall in 
house prices and the drop in the stock market.5 In 2007, typi-
cal people in this age group had $215,000 in net wealth. Th is 
means that if they cashed out all retirement benefi ts, savings, 
and checking accounts; sold all stocks and home(s); and paid 
off  their mortgage, credit cards, and other debts, they would 
have $215,000.

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
49
Figure 2.1: Net Wealth of Late Baby Boomers (ages 45–54)
Source: FRB 2007 SCF and author’s calculations.
In comparison, the price of a typical home in the United 
States in 2007 cost $219,000. In eff ect, if late baby-boomers 
took all their wealth, including everything held in retirement 
accounts, it would be just about enough money to fully pay off  
the mortgage on the house. Aft er retirement, nothing would 
be left  to support them, making them completely dependent 
on Social Security and, if they are very lucky, defi ned benefi t 
pensions.
Note that this describes the situation of the typical or 
median late baby boomer in 2007. Half of this age group had 
even less wealth. Roughly a fi ft h of this group had zero net 
wealth, including equity in their homes, which means that 
their mortgage, credit card debt, and other liabilities equaled 
or exceeded the value of their homes and their other assets.
Th e situation has become markedly worse for this age 
0
50
100
150
200
250
2007
2009 (projected) 
$ thousands

50 
FALSE PROFITS
cohort in the wake of the collapse of the housing bubble. Th e 
typical or median late baby-boomer household is projected to 
have only $88,000 in wealth aft er the collapse of the housing 
bubble and the stock market’s plunge. Th is is a bit more than 
enough to pay off  half the mortgage on the median home, 
which now sells for approximately $170,000. Again, half of 
late baby boomers have even less wealth than this. Close to a 
third of this age cohort now has zero net wealth.
Even the upper-middle-class families in this age cohort 
(those in the fourth quintile of the wealth distribution) are 
poorly prepared for retirement. Th eir total wealth is projected 
to average just over $240,000 in 2009. Th is would be suffi  cient 
to pay off  the mortgage on the median home and have about 
$70,000 to spare.
Just $70,000 will not go very far toward supporting a 
couple through a 20-year retirement; it would provide only 
an annual retirement income of about $4,000 a year to sup-
plement Social Security payments. Th is extra income will be 
important to these families, but the bulk of their income will 
almost certainly come from Social Security. In short, these 
fi gures suggest that all but the wealthiest families in this age 
group are likely to be almost totally dependent on Social 
Security to support them in retirement, to a large extent as a 
result of the destruction of wealth caused by the collapse of 
the housing bubble.
Th e retirement picture is not very diff erent for the early 
baby-boomer households. Figure 2.2 shows the net wealth 
for early baby boomers (those between the ages of 55 and 64 

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
51
in 2009) in 2007 along with a projection for 2009 that takes 
into account the fall in house prices and the drop in the stock 
market.
Figure 2.2: Net Wealth of Early Baby Boomers (ages 55–64)
Source: FRB 2007 SCF and author’s calculations.
In 2007, typical people in this age group had $268,000 in 
net wealth. Th is means that if they cashed out all retirement 
benefi ts, savings, and checking accounts; sold all stocks and 
home(s); and paid off  their mortgage, credit cards, and other 
debts, they would have $268,000.
Th is amount is somewhat more than what the typical 
late baby boomer had in 2007. For most workers, wealth rises 
somewhat through their 50s, peaking around age 60. At that 
point, many workers are either retired or have switched away 
from their peak-earning job, if they are still working. As a 
result, they stop saving and oft en start dipping into their 
retirement funds. Because the collapse of the housing bubble 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2007
2009 (projected) 
$ thousands

52 
FALSE PROFITS
occurred aft er these workers had reached their peak wealth, 
this older cohort would be left  with somewhat more wealth 
than the late baby boomers.
Th e $268,000 net wealth of typical early baby boomers 
in 2007 would be reduced to about $50,000 aft er paying off  
their mortgages. Th is amount would be enough to provide a 
very modest supplement of around $3,000 a year to a family’s 
Social Security benefi ts. Th ose in the upper-middle class (the 
fourth wealth quintile) in this age cohort were reasonably well 
situated in 2007. Th eir wealth averaged $592,000—enough to 
provide a retirement income of approximately $20,000 a year, 
aft er paying off  the mortgage on a typical home.
In the wake of the housing crash, the wealth for a typi-
cal family in this age group is projected to fall to $168,700, 
roughly enough to pay off  the mortgage on the median home 
and have nothing to spare. Almost a fi ft h of the families in 
this age group — people at their peak ages for wealth — will 
have zero wealth in 2009. Even many better-off  families 
among this age group will have relatively few assets to sup-
port them in retirement. Th ose in the upper-middle class (the 
fourth wealth quintile) are projected to have wealth equal to 
$397,000 in 2009, which would leave about $230,000 aft er 
paying off  the mortgage on a typical home. Th eir accumu-
lated wealth would be suffi  cient to generate a retirement 
income of about $12,000 a year, a very meager supplement to 
their Social Security benefi ts.
In short, the collapse of the housing bubble has created 

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
53
a situation in which the vast majority of baby boomers will 
be almost completely dependent on Social Security in their 
retirement. Even upper-middle-class baby boomers will likely 
rely on Social Security for the bulk of their retirement income, 
as their accumulated savings in most cases will only be suf-
fi cient to provide a modest supplement to their Social Security 
checks.
Many baby boomers will attempt to work more years to 
off set this loss of wealth. Th eir ability to accumulate savings 
in these additional years will depend on the state of the labor 
market. If the period of high unemployment drags into 2012, 
and even 2013  —  which many forecasts now show to be the 
case  —  the opportunities for baby boomers to make up for 
the wealth lost in the housing crash will be severely limited. 
Baby boomers will likely be struggling to fi nd work along with 
everyone else. Any employment they do fi nd will more likely 
be part-time (even if they want full-time work), and the wages 
might be considerably lower than what they had expected.
Ironically, homeownership, instead of being a source 
of wealth, is proving to be an albatross around the necks of 
many baby boomers. Th e non-homeowners in each of the 2007 
wealth quintiles had more wealth in 2009 than the home-
owners in the same quintile. Homeowners losing money in 
a housing crash is not surprising, but even many of these 
relatively older homeowners are now underwater in their 
mortgages.
Figure 2.3 shows the percentage of homeowners in each age 

54 
FALSE PROFITS
group who will have to actually bring cash to fi nalize the sale of 
their homes, because the sale price will not be suffi  cient to pay 
off  the mortgage and cover the closing costs. Th ese calculations 
conservatively assume 6 percent closing costs, the standard 
realtor’s fee, but oft en additional expenses accrue when selling 
a home, such as state or local transfer taxes or lawyers’ fees.
Figure 2.3: Percent of Homeowners Needing Cash to Sell Their Houses (2009)
Source: FRB 2007 SCF and author’s calculations.
Figure 2.3 shows that 32.4 percent— almost one-third— of 
younger baby boomers would need to bring cash to fi nalize 
the sale of their homes. Th e situation is much worse for low- 
and moderate-income homeowners in this age group. Almost 
three-quarters of these families would have to bring money to 
a closing. Even many upper-middle-income families in this 
age group would have to pay out cash to sell their homes; more 
than 20 percent of families in the fourth wealth quintile would 
be in this situation.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
age 45–54
age 55–64
percent

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
55
o
Th e situation is slightly better for the older baby boomers 
but still rather bleak. Overall, 19.5 percent, almost a fi ft h, 
of older baby boomers would have to pay money to sell 
their homes. Among moderate income homeowners in this 
age group (the bottom wealth quintile of homeowners), 64 
percent will need to put up cash to sell their homes. Obvi-
ously, homeownership has not proven to be a path to wealth 
accumulation for this group. Even among upper-middle-
class homeowners (the fourth wealth quintile homeowners) 
in the agegroup, 14 percent would have to bring money to 
a closing.
Th ese homeowners will have no equity from their current 
homes to apply to the purchase of a new home or to meet other 
expenses in retirement—an extraordinary situation for older 
workers to be facing. At this point in their lives, home owners 
typically will have accumulated substantial equity. However, 
the distortions created by the housing bubble have led to a 
very diff erent outcome.
Th e lack of equity can also undermine these workers’ 
eff orts to seek employment. In a dynamic economy, jobs are 
always shift ing between sectors and regions. Many workers 
may be forced to commute long distances to reach areas that 
are generating new jobs, or they may have to leave a region 
altogether to fi nd employment. In both cases, being tied to 
homes they cannot sell may be a serious impediment. In short, 
homeownership may also obstruct employment in addition 

56 
FALSE PROFITS
to having misled the baby boomers with trillions of dollars of 
imaginary housing-bubble wealth.
Trends in Homeownership Rates
Baby boomers were not the only ones who did not fare well by 
being homeowners during the collapse of the housing bubble. 
Many people took advantage of the seemingly low-cost mort-
gages available during this period to buy their fi rst homes. 
Peaking at 69 percent in the third quarter of 2006, homeown-
ership rates rose to record levels, especially among African 
Americans and Hispanics.
Figure 2.4: Homeownership Rates
Source: Census Bureau.
Homeownership rates among African Americans rose 
from 44.1 percent at the start of the bubble era to a peak of 49.1 
percent in 2004, as shown in Figure 2.4. Homeownership rates 
40
45
50
55
1995
2000
2005
2009 
(first 
half)
percent
African Americans
Hispanics

 
SURVEYING THE DAMAGE 
57
for Hispanics rose from 42.8 percent at the start of the bub-
ble to 49.7 percent in 2005. Ownership rates for both groups 
have since fallen, though the decline is far sharper for Afri-
can Americans. By the fi rst half of 2009, the homeownership 
rate for African Americans had fallen back to 46.3 percent, 
the same as in 1999, putting the homeownership rate below 
where it was when subprime lending began to explode. In 
other words, the fl ood of subprime mortgages, which dispro-
portionately went to African Americans, did not lead to any 
enduring increase in their homeownership rates.
By the fi rst half of 2009, the homeownership rate for His-
panics had also fallen, but only by 1.3 percentage points to 48.4 
percent. Hispanics were probably aff ected by the fl ood of junk 
mortgages to roughly the same extent as African Americans. 
However, the negative eff ect of many Hispanics losing their 
homes because they were unable to pay mortgage reset rates 
was partially off set by the increasing prosperity of many new 
immigrants as they stayed longer in the United States.
Overall, the homeownership rate in the fi rst half of 2009 
fell back to 67.4 percent, the same as the 2000 level, erasing 
all the gains in homeownership made in this decade. With 
foreclosures still running at the rate of more than two million 
a year in the second half of 2009, homeownership rates will 
almost certainly fall further in the next few years.
We do not yet know how the people who bought homes in 
the bubble years and subsequently lost them will be aff ected 
in the long run by this experience. Lenders usually hold a 
default or foreclosure against a person for many years when 

58 
FALSE PROFITS
assessing their creditworthiness. On the other hand, lenders 
may recognize this period as extraordinary and be somewhat 
more forgiving of homeowners who defaulted in the years 
2006 – 2010. Th is willingness to forgive need not be the result 
of any humanitarian impulse; banks need people to lend to 
so they can make a profi t.
Conclusion: Bursting 
Bubbles Are Bad News
Th is section looked briefl y at some of the damage caused by the 
collapse of the housing bubble. An exhaustive examination of 
all the consequences would require another book. Analysis of 
events such as the collapse of the Detroit auto manufacturers or 
the California budget disaster could fi ll a book by themselves. 
Th is discussion has not even mentioned the international 
ramifi cations of the crisis, which are also huge.
Th e recession that has resulted from the collapse of the 
housing bubble is a humanitarian disaster. Better economic 
policy could easily have prevented it.

59
S 
THREE
The Terrible Tale 
of the TARP
The passage of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, 
in the fall of 2008 was a demonstration of the extraordinary 
power of the fi nancial industry and what it will do when 
its fundamental interests are threatened. Th e industry was 
quickly able to unite the leadership of both political parties 
behind a massive $700 billion bailout program that imposed 
few serious constraints on the industry. Th e industry was also 
able to enlist the media in this eff ort, turning many reporters 
into TARP cheerleaders until the bill passed Congress. Th e 
opponents of the bill, which included many of the country’s 
most prominent economists, were portrayed as knuckle-
scraping Neanderthals.
Th e American public must clearly understand the forces 
at play in the passage of the TARP, as the industry will 

60 
FALSE PROFITS
undoubtedly muster similar forces in the future to prevent 
major reforms that threaten its profi tability. Th e passage of 
the TARP was, in fact, a remarkable political accomplishment 
deserving of a certain kind of respect. Although Wall Street 
banks were never very popular institutions, they managed to 
get themselves a massive bailout when the country was suf-
fering from a serious recession that was a direct result of their 
greed and incompetence.
The TARP Timeline: From Calm 
Reassurance to Complete Panic
Beginning in 2007, the fi nancial sector experienced a series 
of earthquakes, each one stronger than the last. Th e initial 
response from the leadership at the U.S. Treasury Depart-
ment and the Federal Reserve Board was to call for calm, 
insisting that everything was under control. Federal Reserve 
Board Chairman Ben Bernanke famously assured the public 
in March of 2007 that the problems in the fi nancial sector 
would be confi ned to the subprime market. Th e following 
year, aft er the collapse of the giant investment bank, Bear 
Stearns, he told the Joint Economic Committee that he didn’t 
see another Bear Stearns out there.
As it turned out, many Bear Stearnses were out there. As 
default and foreclosure rates rose rapidly through the course 
of the year, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two govern-
ment-created mortgage giants, came under increasing strain. 
In early July, the Treasury took steps to shore up their fi nances 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
61
and reassure the public that everything was okay. (Remark-
ably, in February, Congress raised the loan limits on Fan-
nie- and Freddie-insured mortgages in an eff ort to support 
housing prices in bubble-infl ated markets, apparently com-
pletely ignorant of the fi nancial situation of these companies.)
Less than two months later Fannie and Freddie were fac-
ing bankruptcy. Th e Treasury put the mortgage giants into 
conservatorship, each with a $100 billion government line of 
credit. Th is amount was later doubled to $200 billion for each.
Before the fi nancial sector and the country could fully 
absorb the impact of Fannie and Freddie’s demise, the “next” 
Bear Stearns appeared in the form of another huge investment 
bank, Lehman Brothers. When Lehman collapsed on Mon-
day, September 14th, and the huge insurer AIG was poised to 
follow the next day, the nation’s political leadership did an 
abrupt about-face on the state of the economy. Aft er repeat-
edly assuring the public that everything was under control 
and that the economy would, at worst, face a minor recession, 
Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Federal Reserve Board 
Chairman Ben Bernanke suddenly began warning of complete 
economic collapse. Th ey held a well-publicized meeting with 
the congressional leadership; the Congress members came out 
shaken, showing how dire the situation was.
Suddenly, the news was fi lled with warning of “economic 
collapse” and another Great Depression. Congress would 
have to act immediately, the American people were told, and 
any delay would wreck the economy. On a personal note, 
this situation put me in a peculiar situation. Aft er fi ve years 

62 
FALSE PROFITS
of warning of the dangers that the housing bubble posed to 
the economy (and being dismissed as a shrill alarmist), I was 
now the one saying that things were not as bad as others were 
claiming, and repeating that the Fed had the ability to directly 
counteract most of the serious immediate eff ects of the fi nan-
cial panic.
Th e fi nancial system was facing enormous strains. Th e 
best measure of this strain was the “TED Spread.” Th e TED 
Spread measures the gap between the 90-day London Inter-
Bank Off ered Rate (LIBOR) interest rate  — the rate at which 
major banks lend money to each other  — and the interest rate 
on 90-day Treasury bills, the most common form of short-
term loan to the government. Th is gap, usually in the range of 
0.1 to 0.2 percentage points, refl ects the ordinarily very slim 
possibility of a major bank going out of business in the follow-
ing 90 days and therefore not being able to repay the money 
it owed— an extremely rare event since the Great Depression 
and thus not considered a major risk. However, when Lehman 
Brothers collapsed in the wake of Bear Stearns’s failure six 
months earlier, and many other fi nancial institutions were 
obviously in serious trouble, default on a 90-day loan sud-
denly seemed to be a very real possibility.
Th e TED Spread refl ected this increased risk, rising 
almost one percentage point in the summer of 2007 when it 
fi rst became evident that banks would suff er large loan losses 
on mortgage-backed securities. Th e spread jumped again, to 
more than two percentage points, following the collapse of 
Lehman, and rose to more than four percentage points over 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
63
the following weeks. Banks simply could not trust each other, 
each assuming that the others that borrowed money were in 
desperate shape and would be unlikely to pay it back.
Th is situation posed two immediate threats to the econ-
omy, threats that Paulson, Bernanke, and the TARP cheer-
leaders in the media actively broadcast in order to scare the 
public into supporting Congressional approval of the TARP. 
In reality, the Federal Reserve Board had the ability to pre-
vent both. Th e fi rst threat was that the heightened level of 
distrust between banks would make normal fi nancial trans-
actions, such as check cashing and other routine transfers, 
unfeasible. In that case, the economy would quickly grind 
to a halt as people were unable to access the money in their 
bank accounts. No one would accept checks, and ATM cards 
would be worthless.
A bit less extreme but a lot more likely is this story involv-
ing the commercial paper market. Commercial paper is gen-
erally a very short-term debt, typically 30 to 90 days (though 
sometimes as short as 1 to 2 days). Because banks and inves-
tors lacked confi dence in the ability of corporations to repay 
their commercial paper, this market would shut down. Most 
corporations sell commercial paper to meet their normal busi-
ness expenses. So if the commercial paper market were to 
shut down, most corporations would soon lack the ability 
to meet their payroll or pay their bills. Th ey would have to 
lay off  workers and shut down their business, a quick path to 
economic collapse.
Th e mechanism for averting the fi rst disaster — a breakdown 

64 
FALSE PROFITS
of normal inter-bank transactions — was a Fed takeover of the 
nation’s largest banks. Virtually no discussion of this occurred 
in Congress or the media, but it was a plausible solution and, 
in fact, a likely one if the fi nancial system actually froze. Bill 
Isaacs, who was chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC) in the 1980s, reported that the Fed actually 
had such contingency plans in place during his tenure.1 At that 
time, the major banks were severely strained because they had 
made huge loans to developing countries, many of which were 
not being repaid.
Th e Fed was concerned that a full debt default by one of 
the major Latin American countries would bankrupt one or 
more of the major banks. In this event, the Fed would use its 
emergency powers to seize the banks and keep the fi nancial 
system operating. Considering that the fi nancial crisis had 
been growing for more than a year, it would be inconceivable 
that the Fed had not developed similar contingency plans in 
the event of a freeze-up. In other words, if the system of pay-
ments really did break down, as was threatened, the Fed would 
have had no choice but to temporarily take over several of the 
country’s largest banks.
In this scenario the value of the banks’ stocks likely would 
be wiped out, which would be very bad news for the banks’ 
shareholders and top executives. Most of those top execu-
tives would probably be fi red, and the remaining ones would 
have to live with drastically reduced salaries. Th e government 
would not pay bank executives tens of millions of dollars a 
year to run a bankrupt bank.

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
65
Th ough a very dire picture for bank shareholders (and 
possibly bondholders, who may not be repaid in full), this 
scenario would not necessarily be detrimental to the public. 
Th e freezing of the fi nancial system for 24 to 48 hours, fol-
lowed by a Fed takeover of major banks, would undoubtedly 
be unnerving, but in principle the fi nancial system could be 
running more or less normally once this process was com-
pleted. Although it was worth taking steps to avoid this set of 
events, the potential risks would have been far greater for the 
big banks — Citigroup, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and the 
rest — than for the economy and the American public.
Th e Fed also had the ability to address the other great 
risk to the economy, the collapse of the commercial paper 
market. In his eff ort to sell the TARP, Ben Bernanke issued 
dire warnings that the market had, in fact, shut down and 
that fi rms were no longer able to raise money through this 
channel. Th e New York Times quoted Bernanke as saying, “I 
see the fi nancial markets as already quite fragile. Th e credit 
markets aren’t working. Corporations aren’t able to fi nance 
themselves through commercial paper.”2
Th e data, however, did not support this claim. Th e interest 
rate on commercial paper, especially for fi nancial institutions, 
had risen, but it was not extraordinary by historical standards. 
Th e amount of paper being issued had fallen, but not by more 
than would be expected in a recession.3
However, the more important part of the story is that the 
Fed had the ability to address this problem directly. Under its 
emergency powers, the Fed could directly buy commercial 

66 
FALSE PROFITS
paper from nonfi nancial corporations. Th e weekend aft er 
Congress approved the TARP, Bernanke announced the cre-
ation of a special lending facility (one of more than ten new 
lending facilities that the Fed created in the crisis), the Com-
mercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), to buy commercial 
paper directly from nonfi nancial corporations.
For some reason, the media never called attention to the 
fact that aft er warning about the collapse of the commercial 
paper market, Bernanke still waited until aft er Congress 
approved the TARP before taking steps to address the prob-
lem. Most members of Congress likely did not even know that 
the Fed had the ability to directly buy commercial paper at 
the time that they voted on the TARP, but it probably made 
little diff erence to the outcome.4 Members of Congress were 
responding to political pressure, not making reasoned judg-
ments about the state of the economy. In any case, one of the 
most oft en-cited arguments for the urgency of the TARP was 
untrue (in other words, a lie), a fact that drew little attention 
at the time or subsequently.
Structuring the TARP: 
What Were the Options?
In mid-September, following the collapse of Lehman, the 
entire fi nancial industry was on its knees. Its spokespeople, 
these incredibly rich proselytizers for “free market capital-
ism,” were at the government’s doorstep, begging for hand-
outs. But they didn’t want the sort of small change that 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
67
mothers on welfare get to support their families; they wanted 
hundreds of billions of dollars. And, most importantly, they 
wanted it with as few strings attached as possible. By giving a 
few hundred dollars a month to welfare mothers, the govern-
ment claims the right to dictate how they live their lives, for 
example, requiring them to search for jobs, or extolling the 
virtues of marriage. Conversely, bankers felt entitled to bil-
lions without any conditions at all.
Th e overriding public interest was to keep the fi nancial 
system operating. Th e American people had no reason to 
reward either the bank executives for driving their banks into 
the ground or the banks’ stockholders and bondholders for 
exercising such bad judgment in their investments.
To serve the public interest, the banks could be given 
the money necessary to keep them afl oat, but with enough 
strings attached to ensure that the shareholders, bondholders, 
and bank executives did not reap undeserved rewards. Such 
strings would have included serious restrictions on executive 
compensation for banks that received public money, as well 
as a possible ban on dividend payments to shareholders for as 
long as the banks borrowed from the government. (Th e United 
Kingdom and other governments imposed such restrictions 
as part of their bank bailouts.)
It is not diffi  cult to design mechanisms that keep the 
banks operating while ensuring that their top executives and 
shareholders do not become the main benefi ciaries of the 
public’s largesse. Doing so, however, was not on the agenda 
as Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson pushed the TARP. His 

68 
FALSE PROFITS
goal was to get the money for the banks as quickly as possible 
with as few conditions as possible.
Paulson’s opening shot was a three-page draft  that essentially 
called for Congress to turn over $700 billion to the Treasury to 
buy bad assets from the banks. Much of the three pages was 
devoted to wording that ensured that the Treasury’s decisions 
on how to spend this money could never be challenged in court. 
In itself, this request was extraordinary, both because Congress 
does not usually approve even a fraction of this amount without 
serious restrictions and because Paulson did not make clear his 
plan for addressing the real problem. Th e banks were in trouble 
because they held hundreds of billions of dollars worth of mort-
gage debt or mortgage-backed securities that were going bad at 
an extraordinary rate, and this would mean large write-off s, 
which wiped out much of the capital at most of the major banks.
Th e Paulson plan, as originally proposed, would have 
the government buy up a large portion of the bad or “trou-
bled” assets held by the banks. In theory, this would remove 
these assets from the banks’ balance sheets and allow them 
to resume normal lending practices. However, if the banks 
were really short of capital, buying the troubled assets at the 
market price would not help them; it would simply change 
the type of assets they held, substituting cash for mortgages 
or mortgage-backed securities.
In order for this transaction to improve the banks’ capital 
situation, the government would have to pay too much for the 
troubled assets, a very indirect and ineffi  cient way to achieve 
the goal of getting more capital for the banks. Rather than 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
69
deliberately overpaying for the banks’ troubled assets, giving 
the banks capital in return for an ownership stake in the bank 
would have made much more sense. In fact, this is the route that 
Paulson ended up pursuing. At the time that Congress passed 
the TARP, however, everyone in Congress assumed that the 
primary use of the funds would be to buy the banks’ bad assets.
Th e poor understanding of the basic design of the pro-
gram typifi ed the haste with which Congress dealt with the 
bill. Many clauses in the fi nal bill addressed many of the 
objections of the bill’s critics, but in almost every case the 
clauses were written in ways that ensured they would be inef-
fective. For example, a clause about executive compensation 
was included that restricted golden parachutes —  large pay 
packages for departing executives  —  at banks that benefi ted 
from taxpayer dollars. Several members of Congress even 
trumpeted this measure as an important change in bank 
practices. In reality, almost no serious restrictions on execu-
tive compensation appeared in the bill, a fact that was only 
reported in the Washington Post, the Wall Street Journal, and 
other major news outlets aft er Congress approved the bill. 
Until the bill was approved, criticism was downplayed, and 
everything was done to heighten the sense of urgency sur-
rounding its passage.
Also included in the bill was wording that encouraged 
banks to modify the terms of mortgages rather than pursue 
foreclosures in cases where homeowners fell behind on their 
payments. Th e bill stopped short of requiring banks receiv-
ing government money to modify mortgages, simply stating 

70 
FALSE PROFITS
that such a move would be a good idea. Banks do what they 
think will maximize their profi ts, not what some members of 
Congress think would be a good idea for the taxpaying public.
Th e Congressional leadership added to the bill the provi-
sions on golden parachutes and the wording on loan modifi -
cations as part of an eff ort to win Democratic support. In the 
end, the leadership of both parties, including both presidential 
candidates, supported the TARP and stressed its urgency. 
John McCain even briefl y suspended his campaign (or, at least 
said he did) and returned to Washington to take part in the 
discussions about the bill. Barack Obama also returned to 
Washington to join McCain at the table, where they ostensibly 
helped hammer out the details of the bill.
In harmony with the leadership of both parties, the media 
kept up a steady drumbeat of news stories stressing TARP’s 
urgency. Terms like “economic collapse” and references to the 
Great Depression became commonplace. Critics of the bill 
were virtually silent. In fact, several University of Chicago 
economics professors initiated an economists’ sign-on letter 
against the TARP, which garnered more than 230 signatures, 
including many of the country’s top economists.5 Th is letter 
went almost unnoticed in the reporting on the issue.
But the media wasn’t alone in not wanting opponents of 
the TARP to be heard. Th e congressional leadership worked 
hard to make sure that members only heard from economists 
who would insist on the urgency of the TARP.
At that moment, members of Congress faced a diffi  cult 
situation. Tens of millions of people around the country 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
71
somehow had the impression that the TARP was about hand-
ing $700 billion of the taxpayers’ dollars to the bankers who 
had just wrecked the economy. Outrage ran high. Th e phones 
at congressional offi  ces were ringing off  the hooks; more than 
90 percent of the calls, by some accounts more than 99 per-
cent, opposed the TARP.
Th e elite’s opinion was that the public was simply ill-
informed and that the unwashed masses did not appreciate 
how the TARP was utterly crucial to saving the economy. To 
avoid undermining belief in this elite opinion, the Democratic 
congressional leadership did not allow any economists who 
were not supporters of the TARP to address the Democratic 
caucus.
In response to the restrictions imposed by the leadership, 
a group of about 50 Democratic members formed a “skeptics 
caucus.” A similar-sized group formed on the Republican side. 
Th is skeptics caucus arranged to hear from several experts 
(including me) who were critical of the TARP. Th e experts 
both proposed alternative mechanisms for dealing with the 
fi nancial crisis and disputed the urgency with which the bill 
was being pushed through Congress.
Even though the skeptics caucus included roughly one- 
fi ft h of the Democrats in the House, the leadership refused to 
allow any experts who questioned the TARP to speak to them. 
Finally, one day before the fi rst TARP vote, the leadership 
allowed members who wanted to hear from the TARP critics 
to stay into the evening, aft er an already-long day of meetings.
In spite of the strength of the popular opposition to the 

72 
FALSE PROFITS
TARP and the strong arguments against the bill as it was actu-
ally structured, nearly everyone in Washington expected the 
TARP to be approved by the House when it came to a vote on 
September 29th. Remarkably, however, enough Republicans 
resisted their leadership’s call, and the bill went down to a 
narrow defeat.
Th e political elites were appalled and outraged that Con-
gress would actually respond to public sentiment rather than 
the consensus among the elite. New York Times columnist 
Th omas Friedman summarized this view beautifully in a col-
umn written the day aft er the bill’s defeat: “We have House 
members, many of whom I suspect can’t balance their own 
checkbooks, rejecting a complex rescue package because some 
voters, whom I fear also don’t understand, swamped them 
with phone calls.”6 A similar sentiment was expressed in a 
lead Washington Post editorial titled “Congressional Neroes: 
Republicans and Democrats Fiddle as the Economy Burns” 
(9/30/08).
Th e initial defeat of the TARP was truly a remarkable 
event. I happened to be on a public radio show the day fol-
lowing the defeat of the TARP. Although this was not the 
topic of the show, during the breaks the host repeatedly 
complained that ignorant constituents were strong- arming 
members of Congress to vote against a measure that was 
essential for the country’s economic health. Th e host was 
appalled when he discovered that both the other guest and 
I were pleased that the TARP had been defeated. How could 
two well-educated people who walked on two legs and whose 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
73
knuckles didn’t scrape the ground possibly think like that? 
He expressed exasperation about how the credit system was 
shutting down, how General Motors and United Airlines 
were not sure they could raise the money needed to meet 
their payrolls. When we pointed out that both General 
Motors and United Airlines had serious problems that had 
nothing to do with access to credit, he desperately fi shed 
for some other company that allegedly could not raise the 
money to pay its bills.
Our well-educated host knew that he was supposed to 
support the TARP as a measure that was desperately needed 
for the health of the economy, even if he was not quite sure 
why. Th at distinguished him from the less well-educated 
people across the country who were screaming at their rep-
resentatives in Congress that they did not want to see their 
tax dollars going to the bankers who were responsible for 
the disaster.
I was also treated to another great example of this 
unthinking consensus among intellectuals. I wrote a col-
umn for the Guardian newspaper with the title “Th e banks 
have a gun pointed to their heads and they are threatening 
to shoot.” Th e column appeared with the title “Wall St. held a 
gun to our heads [emphasis added].” Th e idea that the coun-
try was facing an economic disaster, and that giving huge 
amounts of money to the banks was therefore necessary, was 
so deeply implanted among the more educated segments of 
the population that they could not even conceive of it not 
being true.7

74 
FALSE PROFITS
The Elite Regroups
Th e popular excitement following the initial defeat of the 
TARP was short-lived. Th e elites still held all the cards and 
they had no intention of crying uncle. Th eir strategy had two 
parts. Th e fi rst was to use the full power of the media to drive 
their story home to the American public that the defeat of the 
TARP would lead to economic collapse. Th e other part was to 
apply a full-court press to members of Congress, letting them 
know that they would not be forgiven if they voted against 
the TARP.
Th e fi rst part of this strategy was obviously the more vis-
ible one. Th e stock market played center stage here. It had 
plunged by more than ten percent on the day the TARP went 
down, led by sharp declines in the price of fi nancial stocks. 
Th is fall corresponded to the loss of more than $1 trillion of 
stock wealth.
Any economist would agree that making policy based on 
day-to-day movements in the stock market would be incred-
ibly foolish, but the elite proponents of the TARP did not 
care about logic or rational policymaking rules. Th ey eagerly 
blamed TARP opponents for the destruction of more than $1 
trillion of wealth. Th is argument had resonance among the 
public. A substantial portion of the public does actually hold 
some stock through retirement accounts. Th ese people were 
not happy to see the value of their accounts plunge, and they 
accepted the story that the defeat of the TARP was responsible 
for this happening.

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
75
Th e stock plunge argument also had resonance because 
many people in this country have been conditioned to believe 
that the health of the stock market is in some way a mea-
sure of the overall health of the economy. In principle, stock 
prices refl ect the value of future profi ts. Th is means that if we 
increase individual taxes to pay for a cut in corporate taxes, 
we should expect to see the stock market rally. And though 
this redistribution has no obvious benefi t to the economy, an 
increase in aft er-tax corporate earnings will likely increase 
stock prices. Th is upward redistribution of wealth to large 
shareholders will, in fact, harm most people.
Sometimes the stock market overshoots or undershoots 
fundamentals as a result of psychological factors, such as the 
“irrational exuberance” that pushed the NASDAQ above 5000 
at the peak of the stock bubble. (In July 2009, NASDAQ was 
at 1800.) A bubble-driven stock market redistributes wealth 
from those who don’t hold much stock to those who do, and 
it is not good for the economy or anyone who does not hold 
large amounts of stock.
In spite of these economic realities, business reporting has 
for decades pounded home the notion that the stock market 
is the economy. Th e stock market’s performance is the one 
piece of economic data that appears on the news every eve-
ning. TARP proponents were realistically able to link the ten-
percent market plunge to the TARP’s defeat and thus plausibly 
argue to the country that the defeat of the TARP would lead to 
economic disaster. Frequent references in news stories to the 
Great Depression and the bank runs of the 1930s continually 

76 
FALSE PROFITS
drove this point home. Th e media’s eff orts on behalf of TARP 
led to a sharp shift  in public sentiments. According to several 
members of Congress, the calls shift ed from more than nine 
to one against the TARP, to close to an even split.
Another important aspect of the TARP strategy was the 
congressional insider game. Some members got special pork 
barrel projects added into the bill in exchange for their votes. 
More importantly, members were told that they would face 
serious consequences if the bill went down to defeat, and they 
had voted against it. Th e reaction following the stock plunge 
made the outlines of this story very clear. If members voted 
against the TARP and it was defeated, they would be blamed 
for all the inevitably bad economic news to come, whether or 
not the TARP was approved.
By contrast, those who voted for the TARP could immu-
nize themselves against such blame. Because the elites had 
dubbed the TARP good economic policy, no member of 
Congress could be held responsible if the economy crashed 
aft er they had voted for good policy. Th e apparent choice for 
members of Congress was between being held responsible for 
the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression or 
being considered blameless because they had done the right 
thing and voted for the TARP. Politicians will almost always 
do what is best for their career, and the leadership got the votes 
they needed to pass the TARP.
Nevertheless, the economy still spiraled downward in 
the months following the passage of the TARP. Th e stock 
market fell to levels far below those reached the day the TARP 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
77
was initially defeated. However, none of the TARP’s backers 
have been blamed for the economy’s subsequent performance 
or the loss of several trillion dollars of wealth in the stock 
market.
Subsequent events proved the validity of many of the 
points the TARP critics raised. First, the urgency surround-
ing the bill’s passage was exaggerated. Treasury Secretary 
Henry Paulson waited ten full days aft er the bill had been 
passed and signed by President Bush before announcing any 
decisions about allocating funds. No one in the major news 
outlets pointed out that this waiting period was inconsistent 
with prior claims that every day’s delay was putting the econ-
omy at more serious risk. Furthermore, when Paulson fi nally 
began to spend the TARP money, he did it by directly giving 
capital to banks — exactly the route advocated by many TARP 
critics. His plans to buy the banks’ bad assets were placed on 
indefi nite hold.
Many of the issues surrounding the structure of the TARP 
later came back to haunt the administrators of the program. 
For example, widespread public outrage followed revelations 
that executives of AIG, the bankrupt insurance company, were 
going to receive $165 million in bonuses. It is very diffi  cult to 
make either an economic or moral argument in favor of tax-
payer dollars being used to further enrich millionaires who 
mismanaged huge fi nancial companies and made them depen-
dent on the public trough. (Th e Obama administration was in 
the absurd situation of defending these bonus payments based 
on the need to respect the sanctity of contract. Th is came up 

78 
FALSE PROFITS
at the same time the administration was insisting that union 
members at General Motors and Chrysler surrender the retiree 
health benefi ts for which they had already worked 30 years and 
which they were guaranteed under union contracts.)
Many TARP critics also wanted to include in the TARP 
bill a requirement that banks receiving public funds modify 
loans rather than rush into foreclosure. As noted before, how-
ever, the TARP included no binding wording on mortgage 
modifi cations. As a result, the pace of foreclosures continued 
to accelerate in 2009. House prices continued to fall across 
the country, and in some former bubble markets prices were 
falling below their long-term trend levels.
Policies that limited this overshooting would be useful. 
Restricting foreclosures, by requiring modifi cation of mort-
gage terms, would be one method of preventing excessive price 
declines. (Giving homeowners facing foreclosure the right 
to rent is another.) However, the nation’s political elite was 
focused on getting money to the banks as quickly as possible 
rather than laying the groundwork for an economic recovery. 
Th us, the banks got their TARP money, and the rest of the 
country was left  to deal with the consequences.
The Fed Side of the Bailout
Congress authorized the TARP to allow the Treasury to 
lend $700 billion to the banking system. Despite there being 
grounds for objecting to the conditions, or lack of conditions, 
under which this money was lent, at least a public record of 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
79
the transactions existed. Anyone could go on the Treasury’s 
Web site and fi nd out how much money had been lent to which 
banks and under what terms.
By contrast, the Fed lent out considerably more money 
during this period. At the peak, the Fed had more than $1.6 
trillion in loans outstanding through ten diff erent special 
lending facilities. Unlike the Treasury, the Fed provided no 
information whatsoever about specifi c loans they were giv-
ing; it only provided aggregate data on the volume of loans 
through each facility. Th e public had no way to know if a small 
number of institutions accounted for the bulk of the Fed loans, 
if this money had been divided more or less evenly among 
hundreds of institutions, or the extent to which the Fed was 
subsidizing specifi c corporations with these loans by extend-
ing them credit at below-market interest rates.
Th e potential subsidies from the Fed to the banks through 
these facilities could have been quite large. Suppose that Citi-
group or some other major bank borrowed $30 billion through 
one of these facilities in the fall of 2008. It would have paid 
near-zero interest, as the Fed had pushed its short-term rates 
to record low levels. However, Citigroup could have then 
turned around and lent this money at a much higher interest 
rate. At that time, the LIBOR 90-day rate was over four per-
cent. Th is four-percentage-point spread meant that Citigroup 
could earn $300 million off  the Fed’s money if it lent the bor-
rowed money for 90 days in the LIBOR market. Of course, it 
could have earned even more money if it was willing to invest 
in more risky lending. Even for a huge fi nancial corporation 

80 
FALSE PROFITS
like Citigroup, a $300 million boost to quarterly profi ts (or 
reduction in losses) would be a very big deal.8
In short, the special lending facilities the Fed created 
during the crisis may have provided very substantial sub-
sidies to the banks, allowing them to earn enough profi t on 
the Fed’s money to return to solvency and again pay out the 
large bonuses that top bank executives expect. Because of 
the shroud of secrecy around this lending, taxpayers do not 
know the size of the subsidies given to the banks through 
this channel.
Th e banks also received substantial taxpayer subsidies 
through a special system of loan guarantees established by 
the FDIC, called the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program 
(TLGP). Th e TLGP guaranteed banks’ borrowings for loans 
issued for as long as three and a half years. Although the banks 
paid a modest fee for this guarantee (0.5 percentage points on 
borrowing for fewer than 180 days, and 1.0 percentage point 
on borrowing for longer than a year), this cost was almost cer-
tainly less than the diff erence between the interest the banks 
would have paid on a normal loan and the interest they paid 
on a loan guaranteed by the government.
Several major banks borrowed tens of billions from the 
general public with the FDIC’s guarantee. If a bank was able 
to have a net saving of two percentage points in interest on $20 
billion borrowed for a year, the FDIC would have eff ectively 
handed the bank $400 million. Like the Fed, the FDIC dis-
closed only aggregate data on the amount of loans outstand-
ing. At the end of May 2009, it had guaranteed almost $350 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
81
billion in loans under the TLGP. As with the Fed’s special 
lending facilities, the TLGP provided an important source of 
government subsidies to the banks with no conditions and no 
public disclosure.
Th e fi nal important source of government subsidies was 
the bankrupt insurer AIG. AIG was posed to collapse on 
September 16th, 2008, the day aft er Lehman went into bank-
ruptcy. Facing an entire fi nancial system shaken to its core, 
Paulson and Bernanke made the decision to keep AIG from 
going under, extending a credit line of $85 billion and eff ec-
tively taking over the company.
AIG’s problem was that it issued trillions of dollars of 
credit default swaps (CDSs), many against mortgage-backed 
securities (MBSs). AIG had enough money to cover a limited 
number of defaults, but it had nowhere near enough capital 
to deal with a situation in which large numbers of MBSs went 
bad at the same time. As the plunge in house prices led to 
a rapid rise in the rate of defaults, AIG was swamped with 
claims it could not honor. Rather than let another major fi nan-
cial institution fail at a time of crisis, Paulson and Bernanke 
agreed to provide AIG with the capital it needed to fulfi ll its 
commitments.
In subsequent months, the federal government, through 
AIG, made more than $150 billion in payments to banks and 
other fi nancial institutions based on AIG’s commitments 
from CDSs and other derivative instruments. In eff ect, these 
CDSs and derivatives were debts of AIG, a bankrupt com-
pany. Ordinarily, those who make loans to a company that 

82 
FALSE PROFITS
goes bankrupt end up losing much or all of the money they 
lent. However, the Fed and Treasury handed AIG the money 
it needed to repay its loans.
Th is act was very generous on the part of the U.S. gov-
ernment. Derivative instruments issued by AIG were not the 
same thing as insured deposits at banks covered by the FDIC. 
Th e government had no legal or moral obligation to fulfi ll 
commitments made by AIG. Th e instruments issued by AIG 
were complex and speculative, and the buyers were large and 
supposedly sophisticated institutions like Goldman Sachs and 
Morgan Stanley. Th ese institutions should have been aware of 
the risks they were taking in their dealings with AIG. Despite 
this, the Treasury saved these apparently naive fi nancial giants 
from the consequences of their own actions. Goldman Sachs 
alone pocketed $13 billion in taxpayer dollars through AIG, 
allowing it to begin to pay out massive bonuses to its top exec-
utives by the summer of 2009.
Noteworthy in this context is that Treasury Secretary 
Henry Paulson had been the CEO of Goldman Sachs immedi-
ately prior to becoming Treasury secretary. He also consulted 
with Lloyd Blankfein, his successor as CEO at Goldman Sachs, 
just before making the decision to rescue AIG. Paulson was 
well aware of the fact that AIG owed Goldman close to $20 
billion.
In short, the $700 billion in loans from the TARP may 
have been the least important route through which taxpay-
ers subsidized failed banks and bankers. Th is portion of the 
bailout involved the most disclosure and was subject to direct 

 
THE TERRIBLE TALE OF THE TARP 
83
congressional scrutiny; larger subsidies were given through 
the Fed, the FDIC’s special loan guarantee program, and the 
abovementioned handouts through AIG.
Th e vote on the TARP was a way to get Congress’s fi nger-
prints on the policy of subsidizing the banks, just as the war 
authorization bill approved in October 2002 implicated Con-
gress in President Bush’s subsequent decision to wage war on 
Iraq under false pretenses. Th e Fed always had the authority to 
hand over to the banks as much money as it chose; Bernanke 
just wanted a congressional stamp of approval for going this 
route. Th e vote on the TARP gave him this stamp.
Conclusion: 
Lessons from the TARP
In order to ever seriously challenge the power of the banks, it 
will be necessary to design a political strategy that can resist 
the sort of power that TARP proponents used to pass the bill. 
Th is strategy would fi rst require preventing the sort of fram-
ing that TARP proponents were able to impose, especially 
aft er the bill’s initial defeat. Few politicians will openly sup-
port a policy that is identifi ed as being responsible for a near 
depression. Th e fi nancial industry cannot be allowed to con-
trol the terms of the debate to the extent that such extraor-
dinary misinformation gets accepted by much of the public.
Th e growth of alternative media and the decline of the 
traditional media may make it possible in the future to coun-
teract the sort of unthinking reporting that characterized 

84 
FALSE PROFITS
coverage of the TARP. A much greater diversity of voices will 
be heard, and the bad reporting of the fi nancial industry’s 
hacks will cease to go unchallenged.
Th e other problem will be dealing with the insider game. 
As major contributors to both political parties, the fi nan-
cial industry can count on a prominent seat at the leaders’ 
tables. Th ey will have the ears of the power brokers in both 
parties. Th ese are the people who decide which members 
get large amounts of fund-raising support, which get favors 
for their states or congressional districts, and which face 
serious primary challenges for not playing ball the fi nancial 
industry’s way.
Politicians care fi rst and foremost about getting reelected. 
If the people who can help them in this eff ort — or, on the con-
trary, make their lives more diffi  cult — work for the banks, the 
banks will be able to count on getting their way. Only if those 
in the fi nancial industry can be exposed as the political pari-
ahs they are — like porn distributors or tobacco companies — 
and politicians can be shamed into shunning their support, 
will the public be able to overcome the enormous power the 
fi nancial industry has in shaping public policy.
With the passage of the TARP, the banks were eff ectively 
able to secure for themselves hundreds of billions of dollars 
in taxpayer subsidies with few strings attached. Th ey accom-
plished this feat aft er the economy had been thrown into the 
worst downturn since the Great Depression because of the 
greed and incompetence of the bankers—a truly impressive 
political feat.

85
S 
FOUR
Will They Ever Discover 
the Housing Bubble?
The country’s top economic policymakers and leading econ-
omists somehow managed to ignore the housing bubble as it 
expanded to more than $8 trillion. Remarkably, even as its 
collapse has led to the worst downturn since the Great Depres-
sion, many people still don’t understand the housing bubble 
and its impact on both the housing market and the economy.
Over the last two years, frequent calls have been made in 
policy circles suggesting that stabilizing house prices would 
be both possible and desirable in the current housing mar-
ket. Rather than recognize the bubble and adjust housing 
policy accordingly, policymakers still seem intent on ignor-
ing that it exists.

86 
FALSE PROFITS
Bubble-Inﬂ ated House 
Prices: Who Gains?
To better understand the impact of a housing bubble, one 
needs to know a bit about the housing market. At the most 
basic level, one should recognize the implication of house 
prices that are hugely out of line with the fundamentals of the 
market. Suppose that the houses in a bubble-infl ated market 
are selling for twice the price warranted by the fundamen-
tals of the market . For instance, a house that would sell for 
$200,000 based on the fundamentals is instead selling for 
$400,000 due to the bubble.
Th e homeowners who purchased their homes before the 
bubble-driven run-up in house prices have gotten enormous 
gains. And though this increase in value might be good news 
for them, it is a claim on society’s wealth, a boon for those who 
own homes in a bubble-infl ated market at the expense of those 
who do not — generally the less wealthy segment of the popula-
tion. It would be as if these homeowners had $200,000 worth 
of counterfeit money that they could pass off  as the real thing. 
Wealth is transferred from people who do not own homes in 
bubble-infl ated markets to people who do, which is not neces-
sarily a good thing.
As long as a bubble persists, these homeowners will 
likely view their bubble-generated, or counterfeit, wealth 
as real wealth. Th erefore, they will make saving and con-
sumption decisions on the assumption that the home equity 
they temporarily possess will persist indefi nitely. As noted 

 
WILL THEY EVER DISCOVER THE HOUSING BUBBLE? 
87
in chapter 3, the run-up in house prices in the fi rst decade of 
the 21st century led to a consumption boom that provided 
the basis for the economy’s growth since the last recession. 
However, it also meant that families were saving far too little 
for their retirement. As a result, the collapse of the bubble 
meant that millions of middle-class baby boomers now have 
almost no wealth saved as they approach the end of their 
working years.
Th e bubble also does the opposite of encouraging the 
spread of homeownership. If houses sell for twice the price 
justifi ed by fundamentals, it will be far harder for young fami-
lies or people currently renting to become homeowners. Poli-
cies designed to sustain a housing bubble are directly at odds 
with policies intended to promote homeownership. A housing 
bubble is eff ectively an unaff ordable housing policy.
Even if the government were to try to sustain bubble-
infl ated prices, how such a policy could be successful in the 
long term is diffi  cult to see. Th e fact that prices are bubble-
infl ated means they are out of line with fundamentals, such 
as building costs and rents. Bubble-infl ated house prices give 
builders an incentive to build additional homes as rapidly as 
possible, as occurred from 2002 to 2005, when the country 
saw near record rates of housing construction.
Th e large gap between sales prices and rents will also give 
landlords an incentive to convert rental units into ownership 
units, another trend that increased during the bubble years 
as apartments in many bubble markets were turned into con-
dos. Eventually the fl ood of additional supply will overwhelm 

88 
FALSE PROFITS
the demand side of the market and push house prices down. 
Unless the government severely restricts homebuilding and 
the conversion of rental units, sustaining bubble-infl ated 
housing prices indefi nitely will be impossible.
In short, sustaining bubble-infl ated prices is neither desir-
able nor possible. Th e best policy would be to bring prices back 
toward their trend levels as quickly as possible. An argument can 
be made against temporarily depressing prices below trend lev-
els, but this is very diff erent from attempting to sustain bubble-
infl ated prices. Remarkably, even aft er the bubble began to 
burst, leaving wreckage everywhere, virtually nobody made an 
eff ort to distinguish between housing policy in bubble-infl ated 
markets and in markets where prices either did not diverge from 
trend levels or had already seen their bubble defl ate.
Rent-Based Appraisals
One simple way to push house prices toward their trend level 
would be to have Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac adopt a policy 
of using rent-based appraisals in their purchases of mortgages. 
Aft er the collapse of the private portion of the secondary 
mortgage market, these two mortgage giants became more 
important than ever in the housing market. Few banks will 
issue mortgages that do not conform to Fannie and Freddie’s 
standards, and the banks will charge substantially higher 
interest rates on the nonconforming mortgages they do issue. 
And, because the government now eff ectively owns Fannie 
and Freddie, it is in a position to set their lending standards.

 
WILL THEY EVER DISCOVER THE HOUSING BUBBLE? 
89
Th e basic idea is straightforward: Fannie and Freddie 
would set appraised prices as a multiple of appraised annual 
rent, rather than basing appraisal directly on selling prices. 
Th is would remove most of the bubble’s eff ect on the appraisal. 
Over the course of the decade from 1996 to 2006, real house 
prices increased by more than 80 percent, according to the 
Case-Shiller national index. Over the same period, real rental 
prices increased by just 4 percent.1 Th is gap suggests the extent 
to which house prices were driven by speculation rather than 
the fundamentals in the housing market.
By using rent-based appraisals, Fannie and Freddie can be 
sure that the prices on which mortgage loans are based are sup-
ported by the fundamentals in the market, not bubble-driven 
exuberance. Over the long term, house sale prices nationwide 
have averaged approximately 15 times the annual rent on a 
comparable home. Fannie and Freddie can use this multiple of 
appraised rent to determine whether to buy a specifi c mortgage.2 
In some areas it may be appropriate to use a slightly higher or 
lower ratio of sale to rental prices based on factors specifi c to that 
metropolitan region, factors that may have caused a long-term 
divergence from the nationwide average ratio.3
The Impact of Rent-Based Appraisals
If Fannie and Freddie insisted on rent-based appraisals, getting 
fi nancing to sell houses at bubble-infl ated prices would almost 
immediately become impossible. As a result, prices in the mar-
kets that are still bubble-infl ated (primarily those on the West 

90 
FALSE PROFITS
and East Coasts) would very quickly adjust to their trend levels, 
dropping by 10 to 20 percent from their levels in the summer 
of 2009. Th is drop would save Fannie and Freddie, and there-
fore the taxpayers, from large loan losses. Mortgages issued on 
houses purchased at bubble-infl ated prices are likely to go bad 
at far higher rates than other mortgages. When prices decline 
to their trend level, homebuyers will have little or no equity in 
their home, making them far more likely to default in the event 
of a job loss or some other hardship. For this reason, responsible 
lenders should either demand much higher down payments 
in bubble-infl ated markets, or simply withdraw from these 
markets altogether until prices return to more normal levels.
If Fannie and Freddie had followed such a policy during 
the run-up of the bubble, they would not be in conservatorship 
today. Th ey would have avoided fi lling their portfolios with 
loans or guarantees on loans that were destined to go bad at 
very high rates when the bubble burst. (As noted earlier, the 
problem was not that Fannie and Freddie were trying to serve 
low-income or minority populations. Th e problem was simply 
that it was bad business judgment to buy or guarantee loans on 
houses when it was reasonable to expect that the price would 
fall in the not-distant future.)
By quickly bringing prices in the bubble markets back 
down to their trend levels, this policy could go far toward 
stabilizing house prices nationwide. Many potential home-
buyers — who have been waiting for the price decline to stop — 
might then re-enter the market, eff ectively boosting demand in 
defl ating bubble markets and reducing the record vacancy rate.

 
WILL THEY EVER DISCOVER THE HOUSING BUBBLE? 
91
By shift ing mortgage capital, at least temporarily, away 
from bubble-infl ated markets, this policy should also help 
to shore up non-bubble housing markets. Such a shift  should 
lower mortgage interest rates and boost demand in the non-
bubble markets. In addition, these non-bubble markets would 
get a psychological boost as a direct result of Fannie and Fred-
die’s willingness to make loans based on current market prices, 
providing homebuyers with greater confi dence that they are 
unlikely to incur large losses on their houses. Th e eff ect of the 
increased fl ow of mortgage loans to the non-bubble markets 
should help to place a fl oor on house prices in these markets 
and prevent a downward spiral below trend levels. Th e policy 
would also prevent downward overshooting in the bubble 
markets once house prices have returned to trend levels.
A sharp drop in house prices in the bubble-infl ated mar-
kets would also benefi t the overall economy. Homeowners 
would have a better sense of their real wealth and would be 
able to adjust their consumption and saving decisions accord-
ingly. Homeowners who stand to lose most of their home 
equity over the next year should recognize this fact as soon as 
possible so that they can better prepare themselves. Th is sharp 
drop greatly aff ects the huge baby-boom cohorts approaching 
retirement, many of whom are discovering that, due to the 
loss of home equity, they have virtually no wealth other than 
their Social Security benefi ts to support them in retirement 
(see chapter 3).
Th e only people who stand to lose from rent-based 
appraisals would be homeowners in bubble-infl ated markets 

92 
FALSE PROFITS
who might otherwise have been able to limit the loss on their 
houses by selling them before the bubble completely defl ated. 
Th e fl ip side of this story is that prospective homeowners are 
saved from buying homes at bubble-infl ated prices on which 
they will subsequently lose money.
Th e rapid decline in house prices will undoubtedly 
increase the number of mortgages that default, but this would 
mostly be hastening the inevitable. Homeowners are not obvi-
ously worse off  if their house price falls 20 percent tomorrow 
than if it falls 20 percent over the next year. Th e main dif-
ference is that in the former case, the homeowner has more 
opportunity to adjust to her lost equity.
Th ose in policy positions, as well as the management of 
Fannie, Freddie, and nearly all banks, acted as though the 
housing bubble did not exist during its decade of expansion. 
As a result of its inevitable collapse, Fannie and Freddie 
are eff ectively bankrupt, and the country is facing its worst 
economic downturn since the Great Depression. However, 
Fannie and Freddie, apparently with the full support of the 
Obama administration and Congress, continued through 
the fall of 2009 to carry out their lending policy as though 
the bubble did not exist. Th e result will be further unnec-
essary losses to taxpayers and a slower adjustment in the 
housing market.

 
WILL THEY EVER DISCOVER THE HOUSING BUBBLE? 
93
Helping Homeowners: The 
Complicated Way and the Simple Way
Both the Bush and Obama administrations have developed 
plans to modify mortgages to help homeowners keep their 
homes. President Bush put forward plans calling for volun-
tary modifi cations that did not involve any public funds. Th e 
Obama administration developed proposals that are volun-
tary on the part of lenders but can include several thousand 
dollars from taxpayers as an inducement to banks and loan 
servicers to modify mortgages.
Th us far, neither the Bush nor the Obama administration’s 
plans have had much impact on reducing the rate of foreclo-
sures. Banks still fi nd it far easier to carry out foreclosures 
than go through the process of modifying mortgages. As a 
result, the pace of foreclosures has continued to accelerate. 
Foreclosures were being carried out at an annual rate of more 
than two million in the fi rst half of 2009.
Plans to give banks incentives to modify mortgages will 
inevitably be complex and will give money to banks, not 
home owners. (Bank stocks rallied the day the details of Presi-
dent Obama’s mortgage modifi cation plan were announced.) 
Designing rules that banks will not circumvent is diffi  cult. For 
example, if the banks can get a large subsidy for modifying a 
mortgage, and they get to pick which mortgages are included 
in a program, they may choose mortgages that they would 
have modifi ed anyway. Th is will result in the government 
handing taxpayer dollars to banks for modifi cations that they 

94 
FALSE PROFITS
would have performed in any case. In this scenario, the num-
ber of foreclosures would not be aff ected, but potentially large 
amounts of money could be going from taxpayers to banks. 
Th is kind of gaming is impossible to prevent, though good 
rules that are tightly enforced could limit the extent.
Th e alternative to trying to give banks suffi  cient incentive 
to avoid foreclosures is to simply change the balance of power 
between banks and homeowners. Th ere are two ways to do 
this. Th e fi rst is through bankruptcy reform, whereby judges 
would be allowed to modify home mortgages in the case of 
a bankruptcy. Th e second is through “right to rent,” a policy 
that would give homeowners facing foreclosure the option 
to remain in their homes for a substantial period of time as 
renters paying the market rent. Both of these measures would 
require almost no new bureaucracy and could immediately 
benefi t millions of homeowners at risk of losing their homes.
Th e bankruptcy reform measure would change, at least 
temporarily, the rules on bankruptcy to allow home mort-
gages to be treated like any other debt in a bankruptcy pro-
ceeding. Under the law as of 2009, home mortgages are given 
special status. With any other debt, judges have the option to 
modify the terms of payment, but not with home mortgages. 
Homeowners who declare bankruptcy and are unable to meet 
the terms of their mortgage lose their houses.
Th is bankruptcy reform would benefi t homeowners 
through two routes. Th e more obvious route is that a certain 
number of homeowners would actually declare bankruptcy 

 
WILL THEY EVER DISCOVER THE HOUSING BUBBLE? 
95
and have a portion of their mortgage debt relieved by the 
bankruptcy judge. Th is would allow some who would other-
wise face foreclosure to stay in their homes.
However, the larger impact of the change in the bank-
ruptcy law is likely to be the indirect eff ect of an increase 
in the homeowners’ bargaining power. If homeowners knew 
that they were able to get their mortgage debts reduced by fi l-
ing bankruptcy, they would have a powerful bargaining chip 
in dealing with lenders. Lenders would be far more likely to 
make a modifi cation — where they can at least be certain of 
the terms they would get — than take a chance with the terms 
a bankruptcy judge sets. If Congress were to pass bankruptcy 
reform, lenders would be more likely to voluntarily off er 
modifi cations, even if the number of people who go through 
bankruptcy and get their mortgages altered by a judge did not 
substantially increase.
Nonetheless, the benefi ts from these changes are likely to 
be limited. Going through bankruptcy can be costly for many 
homeowners. Bankruptcy generally requires hiring a law-
yer and involves a legal process most people are not familiar 
with. Furthermore, bankruptcy judges will not necessarily be 
especially generous toward homeowners. Bankruptcy judges 
are not social workers. Many may require homeowners to 
meet their full mortgage, or something close to it, in order to 
keep their houses. If judges tended to make rulings that did 
not reduce debt substantially, the value to homeowners of the 
threat to declare bankruptcy would be diminished.

96 
FALSE PROFITS
o
Th e logic of “right to rent” legislation is very similar to that of 
bankruptcy reform.4 Th is legislation would give home owners 
facing foreclosure the right to stay in their homes as rent-
ers, paying the market rent, for a substantial period of time 
(for example, 5 – 20 years). Th is legislation would provide an 
important degree of housing security to homeowners facing 
foreclosure. If they like their homes, their neighborhood, and 
the schools for their kids, they would have the option to stay 
as long as they could aff ord the market rent. Because a large 
number of vacant properties tends to bring down property 
values, the whole neighborhood would benefi t if renters were 
to stay in the foreclosed houses.
Given the extraordinary run-up in house prices in the 
bubble markets (in some markets, price-to-rent ratios reached 
almost 30 to 1 at their peaks), the market rent in many cases 
would be far below the monthly mortgage. For example, if a 
homeowner was paying seven percent interest on a house that 
sold at 25 times its annual rent, the sum of mortgage costs, 
taxes, and insurance could easily be more than twice the rent. 
Many families who were hopelessly behind on their mortgage 
would therefore have little diffi  culty paying the market rent.
However, the more important eff ect of “right to rent” 
legislation would be the greater incentive that it would give 
lenders to modify mortgages so that homeowners could stay 
in their homes as owners. It is reasonable to assume that most 
lenders do not want to become landlords. Lenders could, and 

 
WILL THEY EVER DISCOVER THE HOUSING BUBBLE? 
97
most undoubtedly would, contract out the management of 
rental property, but this is not likely to prove very profi table 
for them. Th ey will be collecting considerably less in rent than 
they would have from the mortgages, especially aft er deduct-
ing management fees.
Under the provisions of “right to rent” proposals, lenders 
would still have the option to sell a home aft er they foreclosed. 
However, the homeowner in the foreclosure process would 
continue to have the right to remain in the house as a ten-
ant paying the market rent. A house with a renter attached is 
worth far less than a house that can be sold with no restric-
tions. Th erefore, foreclosure would be a much less attractive 
option if homeowners had the right to stay in their home as 
renters.5
For this reason, the enactment of “right to rent” laws 
would likely lead to large increases in the number of mort-
gages voluntarily modifi ed by lenders. Unlike the modifi ca-
tion proposals put in place by Presidents Bush and Obama, 
“right to rent” legislation would not require any taxpayer 
dollars. Th e only government expense would be the expense 
of the courts administering the process. Th e courts would 
require a list of appraisers (courts already order appraisals all 
the time) who could determine the market rent for a home 
that is being foreclosed. Th e cost of the appraisals themselves 
could be borne by the homeowner and the lender, as could any 
other costs associated with the administration of the program.
Unfortunately, neither bankruptcy reform nor “right to 
rent” appears likely to get through Congress any time soon. 

98 
FALSE PROFITS
Th e banks continue to wield extraordinary political power, 
and they are prepared to use it to block any measure that they 
perceive as seriously damaging their interests. Banks can also 
count on ready access to the media to put forward their argu-
ments. One such argument is an attempt to scare the public by 
claiming that these proposals, especially bankruptcy reform, 
will lead to large increases in mortgage interest rates. Th is 
threat is implausible on its face. Both measures are proposed 
as one-term changes in rules in recognition of the extraordi-
nary situation in the housing market. Neither has the inten-
tion of permanently changing the rules either for bankruptcy 
or foreclosure. Once the housing market has returned to a 
more normal state, the incentives for banks issuing mortgages 
should be the same as they had been before the collapse of the 
bubble; therefore, the cost of mortgages would be the same.
Th e spokespeople for banks could argue that having made 
this temporary change once, lenders would always fear similar 
circumstances arising in the future, and they would therefore 
demand a premium on mortgage loans. Th is would, in fact, be 
desirable. If the housing market were to again be enveloped in 
a bubble, we would want the lenders to start charging higher 
mortgage rates because that would help slow the growth of the 
bubble and ideally prevent it from ever reaching such danger-
ous proportions. Yet another argument for the desirability of 
bankruptcy reform and “right to rent” rules is that lenders 
will pay attention to the market in which they are making 
their loans.

99
S 
FIVE
Stimulus: It Is
Just Spending
When the economy began to deteriorate more rapidly fol-
lowing the fi nancial panic in September 2008, the economy’s 
desperate need for another dose of stimulus became increas-
ingly clear. And although the economy had been shedding 
jobs since December 2007, the rate of job loss quickened fol-
lowing the collapse of AIG and Lehman. Th e economy lost 
380,000 jobs in October and another 1.3 million in Novem-
ber and December. Th e unemployment rate hit 7.2 percent in 
December 2008, a full percentage point above its September 
level.
While the economy was deteriorating, Washington was 
largely paralyzed because of the election. President Obama 
won a decisive victory on November 4, but it was still two 
and a half months before he would take offi  ce. In principle, 

100 
FALSE PROFITS
Congress could have pushed through a stimulus package pro-
viding for tax cuts or spending in areas where it could reach 
agreement with the Bush administration.
Aid to state and local governments would have seemed 
an obvious choice. At that point, collapsing house prices were 
already leading to a big hit on property tax collections, in addi-
tion to the falloff  in sales and income tax revenue due to the 
downturn. And governments at all levels were fi nding borrow-
ing much more costly due to the chaos in fi nancial markets. In 
response, local governments across the country were cutting 
services and jobs, and raising taxes, all steps that would worsen 
the recession. Funding commitments from Washington could 
have relieved some pressure from these governments.
An agreement on additional funding for state and local 
governments did not seem obviously impossible; Republi-
cans have long pushed for devolving more money and power 
to state and local governments. A quick stimulus patch that 
was focused on aiding these governments would seem to be 
in keeping with this principle. Also, as the pain was being 
felt everywhere, in states controlled by both Democrats and 
Republicans, it seemed reasonable to believe that the Repub-
licans in Washington might want to help their fellow Repub-
licans back home.
Unfortunately, no such stimulus patch arrived. In Bush’s last 
two and a half months in offi  ce, members of his administration 
virtually went out of business when it came to economic policy. 
Th ey were not interested in working out a compromise stimulus 
package that limited the economy’s slide until President Obama 

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
101
could take offi  ce and put together a more comprehensive plan. 
As the economy declined at its fastest pace since the Great 
Depression, the government in Washington did nothing. No 
help would come until President Obama took offi  ce.
Developing a Stimulus Package
President Obama’s team used the transition period to craft  a 
stimulus package that would give the economy a boost. Th ey 
wanted a package that was large enough to have a substantial 
impact on the economy but that could also pass Congress 
quickly. In addition, they tried to structure the package to pro-
vide a boost as quickly as possible while ideally also providing 
lasting benefi ts to the economy. Th e outcome was mixed.
First, Obama’s team went to Congress with a package that 
was clearly inadequate to meet the loss of demand resulting 
from the housing crash. Th ey proposed a package of spending 
and tax cuts, most of which would be paid out in 2009 and 2010, 
which was just over $800 billion. Th is package would have been 
inadequate to make up for the lost demand in the economy 
even if they managed to get Congress to accept it in full.
Th e shortfall in annual demand for 2009 and 2010 was in 
the neighborhood of $1.3 trillion: roughly $450 billion from 
lost housing construction, $600 billion to $800 billion in 
reduced consumption, and $200 billion from the collapse of 
the bubble in non-residential real estate. Because some of the 
proposed stimulus would not take place until 2011 or later, 
the proposal would try to fi ll this gap with $350 billion a year 

102 
FALSE PROFITS
in spending. Making matters even worse, close to half of the 
proposed stimulus at the federal level would subsequently 
be off set by spending cuts and tax increases at the state and 
local level.1 In short, the stimulus package was far too small 
to do the job.
Th e Obama package was too small in part because the 
administration continued to underestimate the severity of 
the downturn. It used a baseline projection that showed the 
unemployment rate peaking at just over 9 percent in 2010, 
in the absence of any stimulus. Th is projection was consis-
tent with the consensus of private forecasters at the time (the 
Congressional Budget Offi  ce [CBO] had a slightly more pessi-
mistic baseline), but considering that these forecasters had all 
missed the housing bubble and altogether failed to anticipate 
the recession that would ensue aft er its collapse, treating their 
forecasts with a bit more skepticism might have been appro-
priate. However, even if the baseline forecast had proven cor-
rect, the Obama administration’s package was still too small 
to make up the projected shortfall in demand, as can be seen 
with some very simple arithmetic.
Th e baseline projection assumed that the unemployment 
rate would peak at just over 9 percent. Normally, unemploy-
ment falls at a rate of 4.5 to 5 percent. Th is range implies that 
at the peak of unemployment the economy would have an 
additional 4 to 4.5 percentage points of unemployment. A 
standard rule of thumb is that it takes 2 percentage points of 
GDP growth to reduce the unemployment rate by 1 percent-
age point. Th erefore, the Obama administration’s projection 

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
103
implied that the economy would need a boost equal to roughly 
9 percentage points of annual GDP to bring the economy back 
to full employment.
Nine percentage points of GDP is equal to $1.35 trillion. If 
each dollar of stimulus increases demand by $1.50 (the mul-
tiplier on stimulus spending is 1.5), the economy would need 
$900 billion a year in stimulus, or $1,800 billion over two 
years, to bring the economy back to its full employment level 
of output. Th is amount is more than twice as much as Presi-
dent Obama proposed in his initial stimulus package.
Politics was the obvious reason for caution. Both par-
ties had been preaching the virtues of balanced budgets for 
decades and the Democrats, under President Clinton, had 
actually put their words into practice. In the late 1990s, the 
bubble economy fi rst took form, as the stock bubble made 
up the lost demand from lower government spending and 
higher taxes. No one engaged in public debates at the time 
pointed out that the strength of the late-1990s economy was 
due to an unsustainable stock bubble rather than the virtues 
of defi cit reduction. As a result, spending restraint and fi scal 
responsibility came to be seen as the greatest economic vir-
tues, and almost no one in a leadership position challenged 
this view.
Remarkably, even as the economy was collapsing due to 
imbalances associated with these policies, nobody was rais-
ing fundamental questions about the desirability of balanced 
budgets. Th is meant that President Obama had to push his 
plan in a political environment where the bulk of the political 

104 
FALSE PROFITS
leadership, as well as newspaper columnists and editorial writ-
ers, instinctively thought that defi cits were very bad, even if 
they did not have a clue why that was so. As a result, President 
Obama felt the need to be cautious in the size of the stimulus 
he requested to prevent a jihad against his stimulus package 
that could derail the fi rst major initiative of his presidency.
Th e perceived political constraints limited the size of the 
stimulus, but the package still included several items that 
addressed longstanding problems. For example, the package 
both increased the generosity of unemployment benefi ts and 
changed the benefi t formula so that many more part-time 
workers would be eligible. Th e prior formulas (they vary from 
state to state) typically required too many hours of work for 
most part-time workers to be eligible. Th ese restrictive rules 
disproportionately excluded women, especially mothers of 
small children, from getting unemployment benefi ts.2
Th e stimulus also covered 65 percent of the cost of health-
care insurance for unemployed workers. It had been almost 
25 years since Congress fi rst passed legislation requiring 
employers to allow workers to remain covered by their health 
insurance aft er they lost their jobs. However, this right was 
meaningless for workers who were laid off , because few could 
continue to aff ord to pay their premiums.
Th e stimulus package also provided funding for investment 
in several areas, including modernizing the country’s electric 
grid, computerizing medical records, and retrofi tting public 
and private buildings to make them more energy effi  cient. 
Also included was more than $80 billion for “shovel-ready” 

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
105
infrastructure projects, most of which were repairs to existing 
infrastructure that could be undertaken quickly.
In addition, the package included more than $200 billion 
in assistance to state and local governments, which would 
make it easier for them to cope with the huge budget shortfalls 
most were facing. Th is part of the stimulus money was ideal 
because it would have an immediate impact. As soon as they 
knew that money was coming from the federal government, 
state and local governments could reverse plans for layoff s, 
service cutbacks, and tax increases. Th e plan also included 
approximately $200 billion in tax cuts, most of them directed 
toward low- and moderate-income families. Directing tax 
cuts toward these families made sense not only because these 
were the people most in need but also because they would be 
most likely to spend their tax cut, in contrast to higher-income 
families, who would more likely save much of any cut.
In spite of President Obama’s popularity and solid Demo-
cratic control over both houses, the stimulus package proved 
to be a tough sell. President Obama tried to gain bipartisan 
support, saying that he wanted to pass the package with 80 
votes in the Senate. However, his eff orts to reach out to Repub-
licans were largely unsuccessful; the stimulus package didn’t 
get a single Republican vote in the House. Aft er much nego-
tiating, he was able to pull over three Republicans in the Sen-
ate, giving him one vote more than was needed to overcome 
a fi libuster.
Th e Republicans managed to put up a very eff ective 
opposition to the stimulus package, taking advantage of the 

106 
FALSE PROFITS
misleading views about budget defi cits that both parties had 
routinely promoted. Th ey complained that the package would 
impose an enormous burden on our children and grandchil-
dren because it would add $800 billion to the debt and further 
enlarge an already sizable defi cit for fi scal years 2009 and 2010.
Th ey also picked on some specifi c items in the package for 
special derision. For example, the original package had $200 
million set aside to resod the Mall between the White House 
and Congress. For some reason, resodding was viewed as an 
especially wasteful expenditure. (Th ose of us who live in DC 
tend not to make much use of the Mall; it is mostly used by 
folks from the hinterlands.) Stimulus opponents also attacked 
money for modernizing the Smithsonian museums.
One of the frequent refrains was that one item or another in 
the original proposal “was just spending, not stimulus.” Osten-
sibly serious news shows put this proposition up for debate.3
Such debates are absurd. Spending is stimulus. During 
the Depression, Keynes pointed out that if we could not fi nd 
anything even partially useful for people to do, we could still 
boost the economy by paying people to do completely use-
less tasks. (He suggested paying people to dig holes and fi ll 
them up again.) His point was that in a severe downturn, the 
economy has a vast number of unemployed workers and large 
amounts of excess capacity in most sectors. If the government 
can pay a worker to do anything, it would be creating a job that 
would not otherwise exist. In addition, because this worker 
will have more money to spend, she will in turn help boost 
employment when she spends the bulk of her paycheck.

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
107
Keynes preferred that people be employed doing use-
ful work, but noting the propensity of critics of government 
spending to fi nd waste, he suggested that such waste would 
still be better than doing nothing. In response to President 
Obama’s plan, the reasonable question was whether his pro-
posed spending off ered benefi ts in either the short or the long 
run, or whether it was simply make-work projects. Without 
a doubt it was stimulus. Unfortunately, this basic point about 
the meaning of stimulus was never made clear to the public, 
and most voters probably still have no idea of the basic logic 
behind the stimulus.
Th e fact that President Obama had been a strong sup-
porter of the TARP did not help matters. Th e public remained 
resentful of the money the government had given to the banks, 
and most people did not make a clear distinction between 
the TARP and the stimulus. (Th e fact that the TARP and the 
stimulus package were roughly the same size no doubt further 
added to the confusion.)
Seeing that the public was mixed about the stimulus, 
Republicans felt little pressure to support the new president. 
In order to win over the votes needed to get the bill through 
the Senate, President Obama had to trim back his already 
inadequate proposal. Th e fi nal package came in at $780 bil-
lion, only slightly less than the originally proposed amount, 
and included a one-year adjustment to the Alternative Mini-
mum Tax (AMT) for the eff ects of infl ation. Th e AMT adjust-
ment, which cost roughly $80 billion, really was not stimulus, 
because Congress makes this adjustment for infl ation every 

108 
FALSE PROFITS
year, and probably not a single person in the country ever 
expected to pay tax at the unadjusted rate.
Th e new package included only $700 billion in real stimu-
lus money, less than $600 billion ($300 billion a year) of it to 
be paid out in the fi rst two years. Taking into account that 
state and local governments were off setting approximately 
half of this boost with budget cuts and tax increases needed to 
balance their budgets, the net stimulus from the government 
sector came to only about $150 billion a year, a bit more than 
one-tenth of what was needed to off set the demand lost due 
to the collapse of the housing bubble, as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Loss in Annual Demand and Net Stimulus (from the government sector, 
federal stimulus minus state and local cutbacks). Source: author’s calculations.
Ironically, the area that was cut back most in the nego-
tiations to gain Republican support in the Senate were the 
funds for supporting state and local governments. Th ese funds 
were reduced by almost $100 billion, approximately half the 
amount President Obama had requested. Few areas of spend-
ing could more directly and eff ectively boost the economy.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
lost demand
stimulus 
(proposed) 
stimulus 
(approved) 
net of state and 
local cutbacks
$ billions
lost residential construction
lost consumption
lost nonresidential construction
stimulus

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
109
Reviewing the Battle 
over the Stimulus
In some ways, the passage of the stimulus package was an 
impressive accomplishment. Even if the package was far too 
small to counteract the downturn, the fact that a new presi-
dent could get a substantial package through Congress was 
impressive. And certain benefi ts from this package, like the 
change in unemployment eligibility, are likely to be perma-
nent. Unfortunately, the debate surrounding the stimulus did 
not lay the groundwork for further stimulus spending, which 
was quite obviously necessary even at the time.
President Obama never gave the people of the United 
States the basic economics lesson they badly needed to under-
stand the rationale for the stimulus. In a country that had 
been conditioned by both parties and the media to think that 
defi cits are always bad, the idea that the government would 
deliberately run very large budget defi cits didn’t make sense 
to most people.
In fact, the last senators who were pulled on board 
behind the stimulus were proud of the fact that they had 
reduced its size. Th e whole point of stimulus is to spend lots 
of money; reducing the size of a stimulus package is a bit 
like fi nding a shortcut on your jogging route. It might be 
possible, but what is the point? Instead of expressing ridi-
cule, many in the media applauded these senators for being 
fi scally responsible.
One line of argument stimulus opponents used to great 

110 
FALSE PROFITS
eff ect was that the stimulus would impose a crushing tax burden 
on our children, the implication being that government debt is 
a reasonable measure of our fairness to our children. In reality, 
government debt is an absurd measure of intergenerational fair-
ness. Th e government debt is not the only thing we will pass on 
to our children; we will also pass on government bonds. In other 
words, our children will own government bonds and receive 
the interest being paid out on these bonds.4 Th e debt is not even 
remotely a measure of generational equity and tells us literally 
nothing about how fair we are being to future generations.5
Th e well-being of future generations will depend on the 
health of the economy and the society that we pass on to them. If 
we maintain and improve the physical capital stock, ensure that 
our children get a good education, and act to protect the environ-
ment, they will be prosperous even if the United States has a large 
public debt. Th is country’s period of greatest prosperity was in the 
three decades following World War II, when the ratio of debt to 
GDP began at 120 percent. Such a ratio translates into a national 
debt of $18 trillion given the size of the economy in 2009.
Th e political battle over the stimulus left  President 
Obama and the Democratic leadership in Congress ill-
prepared to make the case for a larger stimulus package 
when the unemployment rate continued to rise and it became 
increasingly clear that the original package was insuffi  cient. 
Th ey were anxious to tout the importance of the stimulus 
victory without adding the cautions that it could be insuf-
fi cient and without warning of the possible need for more 
stimulus down the road.

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
111
The Debt and Inﬂ ation 
Scare Stories
To buoy up their anti-stimulus case, many conservative and 
centrist economists and politicians began arguing that the 
2009 and projected future defi cits and accumulated debt were 
making the United States a questionable credit risk. Standard 
and Poor’s, the credit rating agency that had blessed many of 
the worst mortgage-backed securities as investment grade, 
chimed in with dire warnings that it may have to downgrade 
U.S. debt in the near future. In addition, economists and 
reporters began to raise the alarm about looming infl ation 
even as wages were fl at, many prices were falling, and the 
unemployment rate approached 10 percent. Th ese arguments 
deserve ridicule, even if they were (and are) taken seriously 
in policy circles.
Let’s start with the question of debt default, that is, the 
status of the U.S. government’s creditworthiness. Th e issue 
is whether the United States possesses the means to continue 
to pay the interest and principle on its debt. At present, the 
interest burden is a bit less than 2 percent of GDP. Th e inter-
est burden had peaked at 3.3 percent of GDP back in 1991. In 
2009, the CBO projected that the United States won’t reach 
that same interest burden for more than a decade. Standard 
and Poor’s did not downgrade the debt in 1991, nor did it even 
threaten to do so. Standard and Poor’s warning was almost 
certainly more a political act than a serious assessment of the 
creditworthiness of the U.S. government.

112 
FALSE PROFITS
Another scare story about the U.S. debt pointed to the 
fact that the price of credit default swaps (CDSs) on U.S. Trea-
sury bonds had risen sharply. CDSs are eff ectively insurance 
against a debt default. When the price of CDSs on a com-
pany’s bonds rises, it ordinarily means that investors assign 
increased risk to the possibility that the company will default 
on its debt, which means that they are willing to pay more 
for insurance.
However, this story doesn’t work when the CDS is issued 
against U.S. government debt. As those familiar with AIG 
know, a CDS is only as good as the company that issues it. 
Th e holder of a CDS is eff ectively making two bets: fi rst, that 
a bond will default, and second, that the bank that issued the 
CDS will survive to honor its commitment.
If the United States actually defaulted on its debt, it is 
diffi  cult to imagine that very many banks would survive to 
honor commitments on CDSs. A default on U.S. debt would 
almost certainly trigger a massive chain reaction of defaults. 
Th ere would be nothing that could stop the carnage if the 
government was by defi nition unable to support banks and 
other fi nancial institutions since it had defaulted on its own 
debt. Every major bank in the United States would be virtually 
assured to fail, as would almost every major fi nancial institu-
tion in Western Europe and elsewhere. 
In other words, if the U.S. government defaulted on its 
debt, a CDS issued against its bonds would almost certainly 
be worthless because the fi nancial institution that issued the 
CDS would also be bankrupt. For this reason, the specula-
tion driving the increased price of CDSs issued against U.S. 

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
113
government debt almost certainly had nothing to do with real 
fears of default. Th e rise in CDS prices did, however, help to 
push the crisis mongers’ case in the media.6
As a practical matter, the amount of debt the U.S. govern-
ment can take on has limits. However, there is no reason to 
believe that the debt in 2009 is anywhere near these limits. 
With total debt standing at less than $11 trillion (this includes 
the debt owed to Social Security and federal employee pen-
sion funds), the country has very far to go before it reaches 
the same debt-to-GDP ratios it saw following World War II.
Even though the media found large numbers of “experts” 
(all of whom could not see an $8 trillion housing bubble) who 
warned that fi nancial markets were getting nervous about U.S. 
debt levels, the fi nancial markets themselves were saying the 
opposite. Th e most immediate measure of the risk associated 
with holding U.S. government debt is the interest rate. Th is 
shows how much investors are demanding in exchange for the 
risk of lending to the U.S. government.
Th rough the fi rst half of July 2009, the interest rate on 
10-year U.S. Treasury bonds never exceeded 4 percent, and 
the rate was closer to 3 percent for most of the post-stimulus 
months. Th is is an extremely low rate by historical standards. 
It was over 5 percent in the years when the federal government 
was running surpluses. Th is low rate indicates that investors — 
people who vote with their pocketbooks —  were expressing 
very little concern about the risk of a default on government 
debt, even if the experts were arguing otherwise.
Holding government debt in the current situation does 
have its risks. One is that the dollar will fall against other 

114 
FALSE PROFITS
currencies. For foreign investors, who presumably intend to 
convert dollars back into their own currency at some future 
date, this could pose a problem. Despite the lack of evidence to 
back them up, some experts say that the Chinese government, 
a major buyer of U.S. government debt, is very concerned 
about this risk. China’s government has an explicit policy of 
propping up the dollar relative to its currency. It maintains 
a fi xed exchange rate of the yuan against the dollar, buying 
up more dollars when its currency begins to rise too much in 
value. Th e notion that China’s government does not under-
stand that it would lose money if it were to sell its dollar hold-
ings is hard to fathom. In fact, no one in the world can buy 
up the trillions of dollars it currently holds. Any substantial 
sell-off  of dollars by the Chinese government would certainly 
depress the value of the dollar.
China’s government has, nonetheless, been willing to 
hold dollars because the high value of the dollar sustains its 
export market in the United States. If the dollar fell against the 
yuan, China’s goods would be more expensive in the United 
States, leading U.S. consumers to switch from Chinese goods 
to domestically manufactured products or to goods produced 
in other exporting countries. In eff ect, China’s government 
is subsidizing U.S. consumers’ purchases of Chinese exports. 
Th ey know they will lose money on the dollars they must buy, 
but the benefi t is that the subsidy helps build up the country’s 
manufacturing base.
Th e dollar will almost certainly fall against the yuan and 
other currencies in the years ahead, but this is not due to the 

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
115
budget defi cit or to accumulated debt. Th e United States has 
been importing much more than it has been exporting, which 
has led to enormous trade and current account defi cits. Th e 
dollar was overvalued, and this sitution can only be corrected 
by a large reduction in its value. Even if the country were to 
have a budget surplus, substantial overvaluation of the dollar 
would still need to be corrected. 
Th e American public needs to understand the risk of infl a-
tion, hyped so much by the anti-stimulus crowd, in the context 
of the falling dollar. If interest rates were to begin to rise, for 
example due to the decision of foreign investors to stop buying 
dollars, the Federal Reserve Board could act to keep interest 
rates down by buying up more long-term Treasury bonds. Th e 
Fed’s purchase of long-term bonds (this essentially amounts 
to printing money) would keep interest rates down, but would 
pose some risk of infl ation.
However, infl ation does not come about just because the 
Fed prints money. Auto dealers and food stores will not raise 
prices because they hear that the Fed is printing money. Infl a-
tion will come about because businesses are seeing strong 
demand for their products, experiencing rising costs, or both. 
With ten percent unemployment and vast overcapacity in 
most areas of the economy, fi rms are unlikely to see either 
strong demand or rising costs any time soon.
Th e one exception is with imported goods. A rise in 
import prices due to a lower-valued dollar would be a source 
of cost pressure in the economy. Higher import prices are 
likely to lead to some increase in infl ation in the years ahead. 

116 
FALSE PROFITS
Before the crisis, imports were close to 16 percent of U.S. GDP. 
If import prices rise an average of 20 percent due to a decline 
in the dollar, this would imply an increase of approximately 3 
percentage points in the rate of infl ation.
In the context of an infl ation rate that is otherwise near 
zero, this is not a very scary prospect. Certainly an infl ation 
rate in the range of 3 to 4 percent will not do any great harm 
to the economy. Th e United States and many other countries 
have enjoyed decades of solid growth with infl ation rates that 
were considerably higher.
In fact, in the current economic situation, an infl ation 
rate of 3 to 4 percent should be welcomed. A modest rate of 
infl ation is the best way to ameliorate the debt burden of tens 
of millions of homeowners. If home prices were to rise in step 
with a 3.5 percent infl ation rate, aft er 5 years the cumulative 
rise in prices would be almost 20 percent. Th is rise in home 
prices would be enough to give a substantial equity cushion 
to many homeowners who are currently underwater.
Infl ation would also erode the real value of the government’s 
debt, an eff ective way of reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio. In the 
years from 1945 to 1980, the debt-to-GDP ratio fell from 120 
percent to 29 percent even though the government ran defi cits in 
all but three of these years. Infl ation, along with exceptional eco-
nomic growth, was a key factor in bringing about this reduction.
o
Th e other important point about infl ation under these condi-
tions is that it would not stem from either the budget defi cit or 

 
STIMULUS: IT IS JUST SPENDING 
117
the Fed printing money. Th e cause of infl ation would be the 
fall in the dollar, which was overvalued and led to an unsus-
tainable trade defi cit. A drop in the value of the dollar is inevi-
table in the long run. Th e economy will be best served if the 
drop occurs sooner rather than later so that the economy can 
begin to adjust to a properly valued dollar and embark on a 
sustainable growth path more quickly.
Lest anyone forget, the reason the dollar must fall is that 
bad economic policy allowed it to become overvalued in the 
fi rst place. Th e irresponsibility lies with those who promoted 
the high dollar policy in the 1990s, not those who want to 
bring the dollar down to sustainable levels now.
In short, the opponents of stimulus have invented a num-
ber of bogeymen to try to scare the public away from policies 
that can alleviate the pain of the downturn. Th ey hope to leave 
people so confused that most will believe we have no choice 
but to sit around with years of near double-digit unemploy-
ment — as though tens of millions of workers had some obliga-
tion to suff er because of the ineptitude of the people charged 
with managing the economy.
It is also important to remember that the people who are 
arguing against stimulus are the same people who insisted 
either that no housing bubble existed or that an $8 trillion 
housing bubble was no big deal and that we could easily deal 
with the consequences of its collapse. Why should anyone 
believe these people have a better understanding of the econ-
omy today than they did before the collapse of the housing 
bubble?

This page intentionally left blank 

119
S 
S I X
Real Stimulus: 
Progressive Programs 
to Boost the Economy
The country having to endure long periods of high unem-
ployment is wholly unnecessary for the simple reason that we 
know how to prevent it. Ever since Keynes, we understood that 
high unemployment, as occurred in the Great Depression or 
what we are experiencing in the housing crash recession, is 
caused by a lack of demand in the economy. Th e way to address 
high unemployment is to create demand. In other words, the 
answer was and still is to throw money at the problem.
Th at solution is not meant facetiously. Typically, we think 
that the economy’s ability to meet the needs of the nation 
or the world is limited by the supply of resources: the num-
ber of workers; the output capacity of our factories and car-
rying capacity of our transportation system; the amount of 

120 
FALSE PROFITS
retail, offi  ce, and residential space; and availability of natural 
resources, such as land, water, and oil. Th ough this thinking 
may be true in normal times (even then, the limits are not as 
hard and fast as is oft en portrayed), it clearly is not true during 
a period when the unemployment rate is in the double digits. 
Th e main economic problem in that situation is to generate 
demand for the huge amounts of excess capacity in almost 
every area.
An increase in demand, from whatever source, would 
mean more people would be employed to meet this demand, 
leading in turn to more output and more employment. As 
Keynes clearly argued, if the government spends money 
employing people, this is a net boost to the economy. And, 
though it is better to employ people to do something useful 
rather than useless, both will increase demand and growth 
in the short-term.
Potential Sources of Stimulus
Th e government can usefully spend money on a long list of 
items to boost employment during the downturn. In fact, 
the downturn provides an opportunity to experiment with 
new programs because the constraints of scarcity do not 
apply and taking risks that might not otherwise be justifi ed 
makes sense. In other circumstances, risky projects might 
come at the expense of spending what we know to be valu-
able, or might require higher taxes, but the present goal 
should be to fi nd ways to generate demand in the economy. 

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
121
Th at goal gives our country an extraordinary opportunity 
to be adventurous.
Following is a quick list of areas where the federal govern-
ment can provide a useful boost to the economy with addi-
tional spending. Th e goal is, on the one hand, to quickly get 
money into the economy, and on the other, to advance longer-
term progressive change.
Aid to State and Local Governments
At the top of any stimulus agenda should be the very mundane 
eff ort to get more money to state and local governments. State 
governments are facing a collective budget shortfall for fi scal 
years 2010 and 2011 of more than $300 billion.1 Th e shortfalls 
of local governments are perhaps from a third to half as large. 
(It is diffi  cult to get a precise number of the total shortfalls 
because of double counting
 — budget shortfalls for state gov-
ernments are oft en met with cutbacks to local governments.) 
Most state and local constitutions or charters require gov-
ernments to balance their budgets, which means that these 
shortfalls will immediately result in spending cuts, layoff s, 
tax increases, or all three. Nothing is more harmful to the 
economy presenting a downturn than government spending 
cuts and tax increases that amplify the downturn’s impact. 
Furthermore, many of the cuts are to essential services, such 
as health care for low-income families or special school pro-
grams for children who are having diffi  culties. Government 
support for these programs is needed more than ever during 
the downturn.

122 
FALSE PROFITS
Th e federal government can prevent a great deal of unnec-
essary pain among ordinary citizens by getting more funds 
to state and local governments to allow them to balance their 
budgets. Because of some waste at the state and local levels, the 
federal government should not simply make up 100 percent of 
whatever shortfall states encounter. It can, however, certainly 
provide enough funds so that state and local governments do 
not have to abandon their core responsibilities to their popu-
lations. Additional funding for state and local governments 
should be a top priority of any future stimulus.
Extension of Health Insurance 
As this book went to press, Congress was struggling with a 
health reform package that would hopefully constrain cost 
growth while providing universal coverage. President Obama 
has insisted that the program be paid for over Congress’s 
10-year budget horizon. However, concern that spending in 
the next two years will be off set with later spending cuts or tax 
increases is unjustifi ed; this spending could provide a useful 
boost to the economy.
An easy way to accomplish the goal of jump-starting the 
extension of health insurance would be to off er a sizable — 
$2,000 to $3,000 — tax credit for any fi rm that gives health 
insurance to employees not currently covered. To be fair to 
businesses that already provide coverage, the government can 
off er a tax credit where it matches at a 70 percent rate any 
improvements in health-care coverage (for example, the low-
ering of employee premiums) up to $1,000.

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
123
Th is off er could be extended to cover the years we expect 
the economy to be seriously depressed  — through 2011, based 
on the latest projections. Aft er that point, the tax credit would 
disappear, but hopefully the structure of a new program 
passed by Congress would remain in place so that high levels 
of coverage can be maintained.
If 20 million workers get coverage, with a tax credit of 
$2,500 per worker, it will cost $50 billion a year. If another 50 
million workers get added benefi ts that average $800 per year 
(and the government picks up 70 percent), this will cost the 
government another $28 billion for a total cost of $78 billion 
a year. Th e expenditure would provide a substantial boost to 
the economy, which could be felt soon. Businesses would have 
an incentive to try to act as soon as possible to take advantage 
of the tax credit so as to avoid wasting money that the govern-
ment has made available to them. 
Publicly Fund Clinical Drug Trials 
Th e current system of patent-fi nanced prescription drug 
research is a disaster. A direct result of government-granted 
patent monopolies is that prescription drugs are oft en incred-
ibly expensive. Drugs that would sell in a competitive market for 
three to four dollars per prescription instead can sell for hun-
dreds or even thousands of dollars per prescription due to patent 
protection. Such huge markups can make drugs unaff ordable 
for low- and moderate-income families, and impose an enor-
mous burden on the economy. Th e United States is projected to 
spend more than $300 billion a year on prescription drugs by 

124 
FALSE PROFITS
2012, nearly 2 percent of GDP. Th ese drugs would probably cost 
no more than $30 billion in the absence of patent protection.
Patent monopolies also lead to enormous waste and inef-
fi ciency in the research process itself. Most research goes to 
develop copycat drugs that duplicate the function of existing 
drugs rather than to develop drugs that will treat diseases and 
conditions for which cures or treatments are not currently 
available. Th is sort of wasteful research would have no incen-
tive in the absence of patent protection.
In addition, drug companies keep tight control over their 
research fi ndings. Th ey usually only release results that help 
them market their drugs. Th is impedes the research process 
as scientists may pointlessly pursue paths that proprietary 
research fi ndings have already shown to be fruitless. In some 
cases, drug companies conceal results that refl ect poorly on 
their drugs, that show them to be less eff ective than adver-
tised, or possibly even harmful. For all these reasons, the 
current system of patent-supported drug research leads to 
bad research and bad medicine. Switching to a more effi  cient 
system would likely lead to both better health care and enor-
mous savings to the economy.
Most of the alternatives to patent-supported drug research 
would involve direct commitments of public funding.2 Gov-
ernment spending for research would almost certainly be 
more than recouped in the form of lower prices for drugs pur-
chased by government health-care programs like Medicare 
and Medicaid, but initially, public funding for prescription 
drug research would likely add to costs.

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
125
For this reason, the need for stimulus provides a great 
opportunity to take the fi rst steps toward an alternative system 
for fi nancing prescription drug research. Th e obvious place to 
begin is by creating a system of publicly funded clinical trials.3 
Such a system could be established fairly quickly by taking 
advantage of the existing infrastructure for conducting clinical 
trials. Only the source of funding for the trials would change.
Th e government could contract out with pharmaceutical 
companies or independent testers to carry through clinical 
trials under long-term contracts, about 10 to 12 years. Th e con-
tracts would be renewable, contingent on the performance of 
the testers. Th e major diff erence between tests fi nanced with 
public funds and the tests performed under the current sys-
tem is that all the results would be fully public and available 
to all researchers as soon as practical. Th e prime contractors 
would be free to subcontract, and likely would, but the rules on 
openness would carry over to all subcontractors. In addition, 
the government would pay much lower prices for the drugs 
for which it funded the clinical tests. Clinical trials account 
for more than half the cost of developing new drugs, so the 
industry could easily get by with much lower prices if it no 
longer had to cover the costs of clinical trials. If the contractors 
bought up rights at the point of testing, any new drugs could 
be sold as generics, with no patent protection whatsoever.
Public funding of clinical trials would also remove the 
worst source of abuse in the current system. Any misleading 
information about the results of preclinical tests a researcher 
provides would be detected during the clinical trials, long 

126 
FALSE PROFITS
before the drug is brought to the market. Unfortunately, as 
things stand now, misrepresentations of results of clinical tri-
als may only be uncovered due to the impact that a drug has 
on the people who take it.
Another benefi t of publicly funded research is that cheap 
drugs would also be available for people in developing coun-
tries. By having stronger patent protections, we could put an 
end to “free-trade” agreements that try to jack up drug prices 
in poor countries. Th e government could fund the clinical 
trials currently funded by the pharmaceutical industry by 
spending $20 billion a year. For $40 billion, the government 
could also cover the cost of preclinical research.
Subsidies for Public Transportation 
People in the United States take more than ten billion trips 
on public transportation each year. Using public transporta-
tion has enormous environmental benefi ts. Not only does it 
consume much less energy, but by not driving, public trans-
portation users are also reducing congestion, and therefore 
reducing the amount of energy wasted in traffi  c jams. 
Th e government can encourage public transit and get 
money into the pockets of the people who use it (dispropor-
tionately low- and moderate-income people) by off ering a 
one-dollar subsidy to local transit agencies for each trip taken. 
Th e condition for receiving the subsidy would be that these 
agencies fully pass on the subsidy in lower fares to the riders. 
(Additional funding to allow transit agencies to cover overhead 
expenses associated with increased ridership could be added.)

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
127
A system of transit subsidies like this could be instituted 
fairly quickly. Th e subsidy would both encourage increased 
use of public transportation and eff ectively serve as a tax cut. 
For someone taking a subway or bus twice a day, the sav-
ings will amount to $500 a year. Th e government can include 
some additional funding to buy more buses and train cars, 
thereby providing an additional stimulus if the train cars and 
buses were produced in the United States. Th e cost would be 
approximately $13 billion a year. 
Internet-Age Support for Writers,
Artists, and Other Creative Workers 
Th e New Deal included both a federal arts project and a fed-
eral writers project. Th ese programs employed thousands of 
young artists and writers. A creative stimulus package can 
extend this idea for the Internet Age. Suppose Congress voted 
to make $10 billion a year available for state and local govern-
ments to support various types of creative and artistic work, in 
the fi elds of music, movies, writing, even journalism. Th e one 
condition for the support would be that all material produced 
with the funding be freely available in the public domain.
Th e advantage of a stipulation of this sort is that it is 
entirely self-enforcing. Funding recipients would have to be 
registered on a centralized list available on the Web, which 
would mean they could not receive copyright protection for 
any work produced in the period covered by the grants. If 
people ignored this prohibition and sought copyright pro-
tection anyhow, their copyrights would be meaningless: they 

128 
FALSE PROFITS
would be unable to take action against anyone who ignored 
the copyright and freely reproduced the material.
Th e basic idea is simple: the government subsidizes cre-
ative work once, not twice. Creative workers could either turn 
to this system of public funding, or they could get copyright 
protection, but they would not be able to do both.
Th e proposed $10 billion in funding would be suffi  cient to 
employ 200,000 people a year at an average of $50,000 each. 
Th is program would place in the public domain an enormous 
amount of creative work that people all over the world could 
download at no cost. In the fi rst year or two, the program 
could be administered through public agencies, but in later 
years people could choose for themselves which work they 
want to support through a tax credit.4
A successful program of this kind would provide an eff ec-
tive method for supporting creative work that is free from the 
waste and abuses associated with the copyright system. Rather 
than fi ghting the ability of the Internet and digital technology 
to transfer music and other creative work for free, this system 
would exploit this ability to the fullest possible extent. 
Funding for the Development
of Open Source Software 
In addition to putting up money for supporting creative and 
artistic work that is placed in the public domain, the gov-
ernment can also create a fund to develop open source soft -
ware that would be placed in the public domain or subject 
to “copyleft ” protection.5 Th is fund can be used to further 

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
129
develop and simplify open source operating systems such as 
Linux, as well other forms of free soft ware. Th e payoff s from 
this spending would be enormous. Imagine that every com-
puter buyer in the world would be able to get a computer and 
have a free operating system, as well as almost all the soft ware 
that they would ever use. 
Th is fund could save consumers an average of more than 
$200 per computer. With sales of computers at close to 20 mil-
lion a year, the savings in the United States alone could easily 
exceed the cost of supporting soft ware development. If we add 
in the benefi ts to — and presumably some contributions from — 
other parts of the world, the United States would be way ahead 
by going the route of publicly funded open soft ware. Most of 
the development of mass-produced soft ware could probably 
be funded for as little as two billion dollars a year.
Th e quickest route to get this money out the door would 
be to establish a group of soft ware users, including major 
computer manufacturers, who could designate projects that 
would most likely benefi t from this sort of support. Over time, 
such a group could be restructured to ensure that the govern-
ment was distributing money in ways that best benefi ted the 
economy and society.
Paid Time Off Tax Credit: 
The Other Route to Full Employment
One way to view a period with an extreme shortfall in demand, 
like the housing crash recession or the Great Depression, is as 
a period in which we don’t know what work we want people 

130 
FALSE PROFITS
to do. Given the levels of demand in the economy, ten per-
cent of the workforce would go unemployed. We can develop 
stimulus packages in an eff ort to fi nd at least somewhat useful 
ways to employ our excess labor force. If good projects can be 
placed on the stimulus list, this route can be an eff ective way 
to reach full employment.
However, we can also go in the opposite direction. If 
we lack enough useful ways to employ our workforce, we 
could simply work less. Instead of having ten percent of the 
workforce unemployed, we could have the whole workforce 
employed, but working ten percent fewer hours.6 If everyone 
got paid the same as when they worked ten percent more hours 
(a situation that we can bring about using government money, 
because of a shortfall in demand), everyone should be better 
off  and we will have eliminated unemployment. Th e real world 
will never be this simple, but we can follow this logic to try to 
bring the economy to full employment by shortening working 
hours and leaving total pay unchanged.
Reducing unemployment through a reduction in aver-
age work hours can be accomplished by giving a tax credit to 
employers to give their workers paid time off , which can take 
the form of paid family leave, paid sick days, paid vacation, 
or a shorter work week. Th is tax credit would both provide 
short-term stimulus and an incentive to restructure work-
places in ways that are more family friendly. It is likely that 
many workplaces will leave in place changes enacted to take 
advantage of this tax credit long aft er the credit has expired.
Th e amount of money designated for a credit should be 

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
131
modest, but still enough to cover a substantial period of paid 
time off  for a typical worker. Something in the realm of $3,000 
per worker would be suffi  cient to cover approximately 150 
hours of compensation for a median wage earner, or 7.5 per-
cent of the time of a worker employed for 2000 hours a year.7 
In the interest of equity and to limit the opportunities for 
gaming, the credit should also be limited to cover no more 
than 10 percent of a worker’s time. (Th e credit can also be 
limited by employer size, although the more fi rms that are 
eligible, the more stimulus it could provide.)
Not all employers will opt to take advantage of this tax 
credit, for it will require some restructuring of work arrange-
ments. However, many employers will see it as an opportunity 
to provide valuable benefi ts to workers at little or no cost to 
themselves. If a substantial number of employers opt to take 
advantage of this tax credit, the impact on employment could 
be substantial.
Th e arithmetic on this is very straightforward. Suppose 
employers of 100 million workers reduced work time by 5 per-
cent. Demand would be little changed because most workers 
are still getting paid the same in spite of their shorter hours. 
If workers are putting in 5 percent fewer hours, and demand 
remains unchanged, employers should want to hire roughly 
5 percent more workers, or 5 million workers.8
In addition, increased employment will lead to a second-
round eff ect. Assuming that the net increase in wages is 
roughly equal to the money paid out for the tax credit, and 
that the government pays out $250 billion a year (100 million 

132 
FALSE PROFITS
workers at $2,500 each), the wage bill will increase by $250 bil-
lion. If workers spend 50 percent of this money on domestic 
products, roughly $125 billion in additional demand would be 
created. Th is additional demand would translate into 1 million 
more jobs, for a total increase in the employment of 6 million 
workers.9
Th e net cost per job on this policy ends up being con-
siderably lower than other forms of stimulus. If the stimulus 
increases GDP by $380 billion (as discussed above), this should 
lead to an increase in tax revenue and a reduction of transfer 
payments (for example, unemployment insurance) of approxi-
mately 25 percent of this amount, or $90 billion. Th is leaves a 
net cost of $290 billion ($380 billion minus $90 billion).
If the policy creates 6 million jobs at a cost of $380 billion, 
the net cost per job is $26,000, which compares very well with 
other forms of stimulus being considered.
A paid-time-off  tax credit also has the advantage that it 
can take eff ect almost immediately and would require very lit-
tle bureaucracy or oversight. Direct government spending, for 
example on health care or infrastructure, directly increases 
employment and provides a boost to the economy. However, 
President Obama’s stimulus package has already pressed the 
limits in expanding many areas of government services. Sub-
stantially increasing spending beyond the amounts appropri-
ated in the last stimulus would not be easy.
By contrast, employers would have incentive to move 
quickly to take advantage of a time-limited paid-time-off  tax 
credit, for the sooner they acted the more they would benefi t. 

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
133
Enforcement should be relatively easy because the government 
can require a public posting on the Internet for all employers 
who take advantage of the tax credit. Th is would mean that 
they would have to identify the paid time off  that they were 
giving to workers.
Th e employees of any company receiving the credit would 
know whether they were getting the benefi t indicated. In other 
words, if the employer claimed to give workers paid family 
leave, workers would know whether or not this was true. 
Presumably, workers would report employers who wrongly 
claimed the tax credit. Such accountability should substantially 
reduce the risk that employers will defraud the government.
Possible Long-Term Beneﬁ ts 
of a Paid-Time-Off Tax Credit
Labor practices in the United States have diverged sharply 
from those in other wealthy countries over the last three 
decades. During this time other countries have passed laws 
requiring that workers get several weeks of paid vacation each 
year — in addition to paid family leave and paid sick days — but 
workers in the United States still have no such legal guar-
antees. Tens of millions of workers have no paid time off  
whatsoever.
A government tax credit that largely covers the cost for 
paid time off  will encourage employers to experiment with 
alternative work arrangements. Any such tax credit will pre-
sumably be temporary (two years would be a reasonable target, 

134 
FALSE PROFITS
given the severity of the downturn), but if the new arrange-
ments prove better for workers and employers, many employ-
ers will opt to keep them even aft er the tax credit has expired. 
In this way, the tax credit may go far toward making some 
benefi ts universal, such as paid family leave or paid sick days, 
and moving the United States in the direction of a shorter 
work year.
Changing government policy in this area is especially 
appropriate considering it was government policy in the fi rst 
place that played an important role in pushing hours worked 
in the opposite direction. Th e vast majority of workers receive 
their health-care insurance through their employers. Because 
health-care insurance is typically paid as a per-worker benefi t 
rather than a per-hour benefi t, employers have an incentive 
to try to get the most work out of each worker, rather than 
hiring more workers. As a result, employers will oft en opt to 
pay a worker time and a half or even double time for overtime 
hours, rather than hire a second worker.
Th is pattern of health-insurance provision is a direct out-
growth of a series of government policies beginning with wage 
controls in World War II and including the tax deductibility of 
employer-provided health insurance. A paid-time-off  tax credit 
would at least temporarily provide an off setting incentive for 
employers to push hours per worker in the opposite direction.
o
At this point, few people in Congress are actively discussing 
further stimulus. Congress has underestimated the severity of 

 
REAL STIMULUS: PROGRAMS TO BOOST THE ECONOMY 
135
this downturn all along, passing a stimulus package in 2008 
that everyone now concedes was inadequate. When Congress 
again realizes its mistake about the 2009 stimulus package, 
interest in a paid-time-off  tax credit might grow as the quick-
est and best way to get the economy back to full employment.

This page intentionally left blank 

137
S 
SEVEN
Reforming the 
Financial System
The U.S. fi nancial system is badly in need of reform. Th is 
country is paying an incredibly high price for abuses and mis-
management within the fi nancial sector. However, reform will 
not be an easy task. In spite of all the damage the banks have 
wreaked, in spite of the fact that they were forced to run to 
the government begging for bailouts, they are still prepared 
to fi ght tooth and nail against any reform that will limit their 
power and profi tability. And given their enormous political 
power, this is a battle they still have a chance to win.
Th is chapter lays out a reform agenda that focuses on the 
two most important reforms that need to be enacted as soon 
as possible: restructuring the Federal Reserve Board and insti-
tuting a fi nancial transactions tax (FTT). Although many 
other important reforms are necessary to have a fi nancial 

138 
FALSE PROFITS
system that genuinely serves the rest of the economy, these 
two stand out as fundamental.
Reform of the Fed is crucial because of its control of 
monetary policy and its central role in fi nancial regulation. 
An FTT is an important tool to limit the size of the fi nancial 
sector. Both reforms will reduce the waste associated with a 
bloated fi nancial sector and, by reducing the size and profi t-
ability of the fi nancial sector, restrict its political infl uence. 
Such a restriction is essential because no set of regulations will 
be eff ective without the political will to enforce them.
Reform of the Fed
Th e Federal Reserve Board, as it is currently structured, is 
largely under the control of the fi nancial industry. Th e banks 
dominate the process of choosing the presidents of the twelve 
Federal Reserve district banks. In the current system, each 
district bank has nine directors, who have ultimate control 
over the district bank. Th e member banks within the district 
directly choose three of the nine directors. Another three 
directors, who are supposed to represent the larger com-
munity, are selected by the fi rst three directors. Th e fi nal 
three directors, who are also supposed to represent the larger 
community, are appointed by the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System. Th e nine directors select the 
regional bank president, who is the chief executive offi  cer 
for the bank.
All of these bank presidents sit on the Federal Open 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
139
Market Committee (FOMC), which controls the country’s 
monetary policy. Th e FOMC makes the key decisions about 
interest rates, which to a large extent determine the country’s 
short-term growth path. In addition to the 12 bank presidents, 
FOMC includes the seven members of the Board of Gover-
nors, who are appointed by the president for 14-year terms. 
Five of the bank presidents actually vote on monetary policy 
(four spots rotate among the district banks, except for the 
president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, who is a per-
manent voting member). In short, 12 of the 19 members of the 
FOMC and 5 of the 12 voting members are selected through 
a process dominated by the fi nancial industry rather than by 
democratically elected offi  cials.
In addition to their enormously important role in deter-
mining monetary policy, the district banks also have substan-
tial regulatory powers, especially the New York bank because 
of its importance to the nation’s fi nancial system. Th e current 
structure of the Fed allows the banks to decide for the most 
part who regulates them.
In no other sector is the regulator as much under the con-
trol of the industry it regulates. Th ere is always a risk that 
a regulatory body like the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) will fall too much under the sway of the pharmaceuti-
cal industry or the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) will become overly responsive to the interests of the 
broadcast industry. Th is is the well-known regulatory prob-
lem of “industry capture.” Th e pharmaceutical companies, 
however, do not get to appoint members of the FDA, and the 

140 
FALSE PROFITS
broadcasters do not appoint members of the FCC. Only in 
the case of fi nancial regulation do we allow the industry itself 
to actually appoint a signifi cant number of the individuals 
responsible for regulating it.
Th e Fed also shrouds itself in mystery: it keeps many of 
its actions secret or delays announcing them until long aft er 
they’ve been carried out. In the course of the fi nancial crisis, 
the Fed became much more directly involved in supporting 
the economy. It helped to arrange the takeover of Bear Stearns 
by J.P. Morgan, putting up $29 billion in guarantees to sweeten 
the deal. It also put up tens of billions of dollars to keep AIG 
alive. In addition, it created a variety of special lending facili-
ties to maintain liquidity in various markets, as discussed in 
prior chapters. As a result of these facilities the Fed’s lending 
has expanded by more than $1.6 trillion since its precrisis 
levels. However, unlike the Treasury’s conduct of the TARP, 
information regarding who benefi ted from the Fed’s loans 
and under what terms is not publicly available. In fact, the Fed 
has even refused to turn over this information to the relevant 
committees in Congress.
Th is secrecy is not unusual for the Fed. Meetings of the 
FOMC are held every six weeks. Aft er a meeting, the Fed typi-
cally issues a brief statement of the committee’s assessment of 
the economy. Six weeks later, summary minutes of the meet-
ing are made public. Only aft er a fi ve-year lag is a full tran-
script of the meeting made available.
Even this limited disclosure only came about as the result 
of the determined eff orts of Henry Gonzalez, the long-time 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
141
chairman of the House Banking Committee. Despite the Fed’s 
considerable eff orts to conceal that it kept recordings of FOMC 
meetings, Gonzalez discovered that it did. Aft er he threatened 
to subpoena the tapes, then chairman Alan Greenspan agreed 
to make the transcripts available to the public aft er a fi ve-year 
lag. Aft er this standoff , Greenspan did change course slightly 
and support increased disclosure. As a result, the summary 
minutes now provide far more information about the FOMC 
meetings than was the case two decades ago.
Nonetheless, the country’s monetary policy, which is 
arguably the most important channel through which the gov-
ernment aff ects the economy, continues to be conducted in 
secret by a committee that is dominated by representatives of 
the fi nancial industry. Th is obvious confl ict of interest should 
raise serious concerns in a democracy.
Th e most obvious path for reform would be to take away 
the fi nancial industry’s power to directly select members of 
the district Feds. All the people who sit on the FOMC should 
be presidential appointees subject to congressional approval. 
Currently the governors serve 14-year terms. Such a long ten-
ure is desirable, for it assures that the governors will overlap 
presidential administrations and be free to make judgments 
on monetary policy without being immediately concerned 
about reappointment.
However, the Fed should be subject to more direct con-
gressional oversight, especially regarding the conduct of mon-
etary policy. Monetary policy is not a science. It involves many 
judgment calls. In particular, FOMC members will oft en be 

142 
FALSE PROFITS
concerned about the risks of infl ation versus the cost of unem-
ployment. Diff erent segments of society will not view these 
issues the same way.
Because infl ation erodes the value of outstanding loans, 
it tends to be very costly to the fi nancial sector. For this rea-
son, the fi nancial industry would oft en be willing to sacrifi ce 
employment in order to ensure that infl ation remains at a 
low level. By contrast, most working people might be more 
concerned about the risk of losing their jobs than the pos-
sibility of a modest uptick in the rate of infl ation. Th e close-
ness of members of the FOMC (even those not appointed by 
the banks) to the fi nancial industry makes it likely that they 
share the industry’s concern for keeping infl ation low, even if 
it means sacrifi cing jobs.
Congress can provide an eff ective off set to pressure from 
the fi nancial industry. If Federal Reserve Board governors 
knew that they had to justify their policies to Congress at 
regular intervals, disregarding concerns about unemployment 
would be more diffi  cult. To this end, Congress could establish 
a committee with the explicit purpose of reviewing the Fed’s 
conduct of monetary policy.
Many economists believe that it is essential that the public 
and its elected representatives in Congress have no voice in 
the conduct of monetary policy. Th ey are worried that public 
pressure can lead to bad decisions, most importantly higher 
rates of infl ation. Th eir view is that we, the people, should trust 
the nation’s monetary policy to the experts. But for decades we 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
143
did just that, and the outcome was disastrous. Tens of millions 
of people are losing their jobs or being forced to work shorter 
hours. Millions are losing their homes and tens of millions 
are losing their life savings. If a valid argument that monetary 
policy should be left  to the experts was every made, it has been 
destroyed by the collapse of the housing bubble.
Th e experts obviously lack the independence and com-
petence to eff ectively run the country’s monetary policy. 
Increasing the scope for democratic input might fail to lead 
to better policy, but it could hardly make matters worse. More 
importantly, in a democracy, the most important decisions 
are supposed to be made through the democratic process, not 
worked out in the back rooms by bankers and their delegates.
Financial Transactions Taxes: 
Reining in Bankers and Speculation
Th e recent economic turmoil has generated renewed interest 
in Congress and among the general public in the creation of a 
fi nancial transactions tax (FTT). Although such a tax will be 
vigorously opposed by the fi nancial industry, it off ers a very 
attractive mechanism for raising revenue in a way that may 
actually make the economy more effi  cient. Calculations based 
on the volume of trading in stock, bonds, futures, and other 
fi nancial assets in 2000 showed that a set of scaled transac-
tions taxes, imposed on transfers of stock and other fi nancial 
assets, could raise more than $100 billion a year, even if such 

144 
FALSE PROFITS
a tax greatly reduced the amount of trading. In addition, an 
FTT would also reduce the size and profi tability of the fi nan-
cial industry, thereby lessening its political power and making 
it easier to eff ectively regulate the sector.
Financial transactions taxes sound like an alien concept 
to most people, even though many countries, including the 
United States, have had them in place for long periods of time. 
In fact, most fi nancial markets had substantial transactions 
taxes until the last two decades, when political pressure from 
the fi nancial sector, coupled with the threat from increased 
global competition, led most countries to substantially reduce 
or eliminate them. Nonetheless, many still remain in place, 
most notably the 0.5 percent stamp tax imposed on each trade 
on the London Stock Exchange. Th is tax raises more than 4 
billion pounds annually, the equivalent of almost $40 billion 
in the U.S. economy.1
Th e fact that the United Kingdom continues to impose its 
tax on stock trades and manages to raise a substantial amount 
of revenue is noteworthy for two reasons. First, it indicates 
that the tax is, indeed, collectible, despite FTT opponents’ 
claims that such taxes are uncollectible in a modern global-
ized economy, where trades can take place anywhere in the 
world. Th e amount of revenue collected through this tax in the 
United Kingdom even shows that collection is not especially 
diffi  cult. Th e tax’s success is especially striking considering 
that only stock trades are taxed; people can avoid the tax by 
trading in stock options or futures, yet the United Kingdom 
still manages to collect a sizable amount of revenue.

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
145
Th e other important point that is demonstrated by the 
UK stamp tax is that a modest FTT is not inconsistent with 
maintaining a vibrant stock exchange. Th e London market 
remains one of the largest stock exchanges in the world, in 
spite of the stamp tax. Obviously, its benefi ts outweighed the 
burden of the tax and maintained it as an attractive venue for 
raising capital and trading shares.
Th e stamp tax has two important features that are worth 
emulating. First, the dealer, as the party best able to ensure 
that the tax be paid, is responsible for collecting the tax. In the 
United States, the dealer already has the obligation to collect 
the very small transactions taxes that are charged to fi nance 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Com-
modities and Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).
A second important feature of the UK law is that a security 
cannot be legally transferred unless the tax is paid. Th e stamp 
is eff ectively proof of the transfer of the security (which can 
also be done electronically). Evasion of the tax would trigger 
ambiguity around the ownership of the asset. Most investors 
are willing to pay a 0.25 percent fee to ensure their proper 
claim to the shares of the stock they purchased.
One criticism of the stamp tax in the United Kingdom is 
that it applies only to a narrow class of assets (stock shares) 
and therefore can be readily avoided by traders wishing to 
speculate on other assets, or even those wishing to speculate 
on stock through the purchase of futures or options. Th e obvi-
ous remedy to this problem is to have a more broadly based 
tax that applies to transfers of all standardized fi nancial assets. 

146 
FALSE PROFITS
Th e fee structure would be scaled to the expected life of the 
asset so that the disincentive to trading will be roughly equal 
across markets. Nonetheless, the stamp tax still raises a large 
amount of revenue even though speculators can avoid paying 
it fairly easily. A more broad-based set of taxes would off er 
fewer opportunities for avoidance and could be expected to 
collect considerably more revenue.
Th e amount of revenue that could be raised from even 
very low tax rates on fi nancial transactions is enormous. A 
calculation done a decade ago showed that a tax could raise 
close to $100 billion a year (in today’s dollars), even assuming 
a large falloff  in trading as a result of the tax.2 Trading volume 
has expanded hugely since then, with enormous growth of 
trades in instruments such as credit default swaps (CDSs). If 
$100 trillion in CDSs changed hands every year, and each side 
of a trade was taxed at just a 0.01 percent rate, the tax would 
generate $20 billion a year in revenue.
Th e huge expansion of trading and the creation of new 
fi nancial instruments during the fi rst decade of the 21st cen-
tury means that an FTT would likely raise considerably more 
than $100 billion a year, or $1 trillion in a decade. Th is sort of 
revenue is comparable to fi nancial transactions taxes in other 
countries.3
Financial transactions taxes are also very progressive. 
Many middle-class households own stock, but very few are 
active traders, so they would pay very little tax. For example, if 
parents were to buy $20,000 in stock to pay for their kids’ edu-
cation or some other purpose at the rate suggested here, they 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
147
would pay $50 in tax when they purchased it. If they sold the 
stock for twice the price, or $40,000, ten years later, they would 
pay another $100 for a total of $150 in taxes. Th e stock was held 
for ten years, making the average tax burden $15 a year.
Th e middle class will not face any noticeable burden from 
a set of fi nancial transactions taxes. Only the extremely rich 
or those engaged in a large number of trades would be very 
aff ected by an FTT.
How a Financial Transactions Tax 
Eliminates Economic Waste
Taxation generally leads to economic distortions, which make 
the economy less effi  cient. Th e obvious exception is when the 
tax is imposed on an item or behavior that is harmful, such 
as cigarettes, alcohol, or gambling. Although there are dis-
tortions associated with fi nancial transactions taxes (which 
would have a very small impact on the cost to businesses of 
raising capital in fi nancial markets), much of the economic 
activity that would be lost as a result of the tax is not much dif-
ferent than gambling. Th is loss would have very little impact 
on the eff ectiveness of capital markets.
In this sense, an FTT can actually increase the effi  ciency of 
the fi nancial market, helping it eff ectively fulfi ll its role of fun-
neling money from people who want to save to people who want 
to borrow, while employing fewer workers and requiring less 
capital. In this respect, the explosive growth of the fi nancial sec-
tor over the last three decades is worth noting. In the years from 

148 
FALSE PROFITS
1977 to 2007, the share of private-sector wages in the narrowly 
defi ned securities and investment sector has nearly quadrupled, 
growing from less than 0.6 percent to more than 2.3 percent.4
Growth in the fi nancial sector off ers real economic benefi t 
only insofar as it allows the sector to better serve its economic 
function. Improvements could be made in the allocation of capi-
tal by allowing fi rms to gain better access to capital markets. Indi-
viduals could better adjust their saving and spending patterns 
over their lifetimes. However, if this growth in resource use was 
associated only with additional trading and did not actually lead 
to better allocations of capital, the resources would be wasted. If 
a fi nancial transactions tax reduced the volume of trading, and 
therefore the resources used by this sector, without harming the 
sector’s ability to allocate capital, it would make the sector more 
effi  cient and free up resources for more productive uses. In this 
way, the tax would increase effi  ciency by eliminating waste in 
the fi nancial sector in the same way that we make the economy 
more effi  cient if we eliminate wasteful government bureaucracies.
Th is boost in effi  ciency could potentially be a very large 
benefi t from an FTT. If the tax managed to reduce trading 
volume by 25 percent, leading to a corresponding reduction in 
resource use, it would free up more than $60 billion a year in 
labor and capital for productive uses.5 If trading dropped by 50 
percent, the tax would free up $120 billion worth of labor and 
capital to be used elsewhere in the economy. Th e amount of 
resources freed up as a result of this tax would be only slightly 
less than the cost of the Iraq War in its peak year.
Th e extent to which reduced trading leads to serious harm 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
149
to fi nancial markets would depend on its impact on liquidity 
and market volatility. Th e tax would reduce liquidity by reduc-
ing the volume of trading, but whether less liquidity would 
have much consequence is unclear. For example, if trading 
of the most liquid assets, like government bonds, were cut by 
50 percent, or even 75 percent, these assets would still have 
enormous markets. Such reductions in trading may reduce 
the volume to levels of 20 to 25 years ago, but these markets 
were already highly liquid in the 1980s. No one had to wait 
very long to buy or sell a Treasury bond in 1985.
Although the fi nancial industry will no doubt predict that 
Armageddon will immediately follow implementation of an 
FTT, this horror story has little basis. Th e FTT is a tax that 
imposes a substantial burden on speculators and very little 
burden on anyone else. Low- and moderate-income people 
would barely feel the eff ects at all, for they have no fi nancial 
assets to trade. Middle-income families would face a modest 
tax burden as a result of the tax. In addition, it should make 
the fi nancial sector more effi  cient while reducing the political 
power of the industry. In short, there are few better ways to 
raise $1 trillion over the course of a decade.
Other Reforms of the Financial Sector
Since the onset of the crisis, a long list of items has been pro-
posed for reforming the fi nancial sector, some of which would 
mean substantial improvements in its operations. At the top 
of this list is the Financial Products Protection Agency, which 

150 
FALSE PROFITS
is derived from a proposal by Harvard law professor Elizabeth 
Warren and should command wide public support.
Most people are not particularly familiar with fi nancial 
products like mortgages, which they buy very rarely in their 
lives. Th e contracts to buy such products are lengthy and typi-
cally include many sections written in very small print. Th e 
same is true with other fi nancial contracts, such as car loans 
and the terms of credit card use. Th e public would benefi t 
enormously by having an agency that screens products to 
ensure that their meaning is transparent and that consum-
ers are likely to understand the conditions to which they are 
agreeing.
Such an agency should also help to change the behavior of 
the industry itself. Someone familiar with legal and fi nancial 
terms can easily write contracts that consumers will widely 
misunderstand. Considerable incentives, in the form of large 
profi ts, exist for developing deliberately deceptive fi nancial 
products. If a fi nancial products protection agency made it 
more diffi  cult to pass such products off  on consumers, fi rms 
would be less likely to waste their eff orts developing them. 
Presumably such fi rms could then spend more time designing 
products that actually met consumers’ needs or fi nding ways 
to provide services more effi  ciently than their competitors.
Th e bond rating agencies, such as Moody’s and Standard 
and Poor’s, contributed to the bubble by blessing newly issued 
mortgage-backed securities and various derivative instru-
ments—which should have been rated as junk—as invest-
ment grade. Part of the problem stemmed from the confl ict 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
151
of interest inherent in the current system — these agencies are 
hired by the business whose bonds they are rating. If agencies 
want to get rehired for future work, they have a strong incen-
tive to give investment-grade ratings even when the issues do 
not deserve it.
Th e problem has a very simple solution: take away control 
over the selection of the rating agency from the fi rm and give 
that responsibility to an independent body — for example, the 
stock exchange on which the company is listed. Th e company 
would still pay for the rating, but it would not be able to fi re the 
rating agency, nor would the agency’s rating have any impact 
on its being hired again in the future. Th is should eliminate 
any incentive for the rating agency to skew its ratings.6
Th e economic crisis also exposed a serious problem in the 
incentive structures for top executives in the fi nancial indus-
try. To some extent, exorbitant pay for top executives is a prob-
lem throughout corporate America — executives in the United 
States get paid far more than their counterparts in Europe and 
Japan, even ones who are extremely successful. Th is larger 
problem of executive compensation is probably best addressed 
by increasing shareholder power. One example is a require-
ment that the pay packages for top executives be subject to 
a binding vote of shareholders, where actively voted shares 
count  (this would preclude, for example, unreturned proxies 
being counted as votes in favor of management’s position).
In the case of the fi nancial sector, where the problem is 
especially pronounced, incentive structures that allow large 
bonuses based on short-term profi ts invite risky behavior. 

152 
FALSE PROFITS
Certainly the Fed and FDIC could restrict such practices in 
bank holding companies. Th ese daring executives are taking 
risks that they are eff ectively carrying out with taxpayers’ 
dollars; we pick up the tab when their bets go bad.
If less-regulated hedge funds or private equity funds wish 
to structure their compensation packages this way, the gov-
ernment need not get involved; state and local government 
pension funds that invest in such funds, however, better be 
prepared to answer to the people they represent if these bets 
turn out badly.
Derivatives regulation is another area in need of major 
reform. Th e decision to deregulate derivatives in the 1990s 
opened the door to the massive issuance of CDSs by AIG 
and other fi nancial institutions. Th e lack of oversight meant 
that issuers of these derivatives off ered no assurance they 
could back up their obligations. In the case of both AIG and 
Bear Stearns, the government stepped in to honor the fi rms’ 
commitments.
To ensure that this recklessness does not recur, deriva-
tives should be standardized and exchange-traded so that 
the price and trading volume are immediately available to all 
investors. Th e latter is an important feature for it ensures price 
transparency. Exchange trading is also strongly opposed by 
the fi nancial industry, which prefers clearing houses, because 
the latter are less transparent and allow greater profi t margins 
on each trade.
Th e fi nancial industry also opposed standardizing deriva-
tives, arguing that being able to write customized contracts 

 
REFORMING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM 
153
off ered important gains. Although customization off ers some 
benefi ts — just as we all might like to buy a car built around our 
exact physical characteristics — the potential gains are trivial 
compared to the cost in terms of risk and regulatory eff ort. 
In most instances companies will be able to adequately meet 
their hedging needs or other ends served by derivative con-
tracts without customizing. Although the government cannot 
outlaw nonstandard contracts, it can make enforcement suf-
fi ciently diffi  cult to discourage anyone from going this route. 
Plenty of ways to make bets already exist in fi nancial markets. 
We don’t need to allow betting tables in places that can under-
mine the stability of the fi nancial system.
The Problem Is Regulators, Not Regulations
Th e United States does need a better set of fi nancial regula-
tions to deal with the changes that have taken place over the 
last three decades. However, inadequate regulations are not 
an excuse for the housing bubble and the resulting economic 
collapse. Th e regulators—fi rst and foremost the Fed—had all 
the tools necessary to combat the bubble. Th ey chose not to.
Forcing regulators to do their job, especially when it 
requires clamping down on powerful fi nancial fi rms, is always 
going to be the fundamental problem of fi nancial regulation. 
Good rules are helpful, but even the best rules are worthless 
if they are unenforced.
Th e best way to change regulators’ behavior would be to 
fi re many of the people who looked the other way as the hous-
ing bubble grew to ever-more dangerous proportions. As it 

154 
FALSE PROFITS
is, not one is being fi red; moreover, even raising the issue is 
considered rude in policy circles. As long as this culture of 
impunity surrounds the people who manage the economy, we 
cannot expect good policy or good regulation.
As the study of economics tells us, people respond to 
incentives. If regulators are not required to pay the price for 
going along with powerful fi nancial interests — even when this 
decision leads to disaster, as it did with the housing bubble — 
regulators will always go along with powerful interests. Desir-
able regulatory changes may take place over the next couple 
of years, but if no one gets fi red, we have done almost nothing 
to prevent the next economic crisis. 

155
S 
EIGHT
Remember the 
Housing Bubble!
If a liberal government ever pursued policies that produced 
the sort of disaster caused by the collapse of the housing bub-
ble, liberal ideas would be banished from public debate for 
decades. Conservatives still make reference to policies of the 
1960s, now more than 40 years old, when they want to rev up 
their faithful. But even the most wrongheaded program devel-
oped by the Johnson administration didn’t cause a fraction of 
the damage wreaked by the housing bubble and its collapse. 
Yet, most of the bubble perpetrators continue in their careers, 
almost completely untainted by this incredibly destructive 
mistake, and their ideology largely passes unchallenged.
Th ese perpetrators are able to get away with not paying 
any consequences because the people responsible for letting 
the bubble grow unchecked are still the people who dominate 

156 
FALSE PROFITS
debates over economic policy. Th ey have therefore airbrushed 
the real story away and fi lled the media with accounts of how 
complicated it all was.
Th us far they have been largely successful. Th e public 
doesn’t realize that the vast majority of people currently in 
policymaking positions were either unable to see an $8 tril-
lion housing bubble or too intimidated by the consensus in 
the economics profession to express their opinions. And the 
same holds true for the experts who prognosticate on the 
economy on the evening news shows or write opinion pieces 
in the newspapers.
In fact, in this short time, history has been so completely 
turned on its head that the media is now warning of terrible 
consequences if the bubble perpetrators are subject to more 
oversight. A lead editorial in the Washington Post warned 
against increased congressional oversight of the Federal 
Reserve Board, as though it was conceivable that congressio-
nal oversight could lead to something worse than the catastro-
phe that the Fed had managed to bring on all by itself.1
In this context, the public needs be clear about what has 
taken place. Th e basic facts are as simple as can be. By the early 
part of the fi rst decade of the 21st century, a massive housing 
bubble was easy to recognize. Prices began to diverge sharply 
from a 100-year trend with no remotely plausible explana-
tion based on fundamentals. No change in the fundamentals 
of supply or demand could have explained any substantial 
divergence from trend prices in the housing market. Fur-
thermore, the rental market showed no unusual movement, 

 
REMEMBER THE HOUSING BUBBLE! 
157
which provided further confi rmation that fundamentals did 
not drive the run-up in house prices.
Rather than trying to combat the housing bubble, then 
chairman of the Fed Alan Greenspan seemed to actively pro-
mote its growth. He publicly dismissed concerns raised by 
other economists and at one point even encouraged people 
to take out adjustable-rate mortgages.
Th ough Alan Greenspan almost certainly had the power, 
using the resources of the Fed, to single-handedly defl ate the 
housing bubble, it would be wrong to blame Greenspan exclu-
sively. Th e country has hundreds of independent economists 
in policy-relevant positions. With almost no exceptions, these 
people failed to see or speak out about the most massive eco-
nomic problem facing the country in 70 years. Whatever these 
people do for a living, it has little to do with economic analysis. 
You can’t miss an $8 trillion housing bubble and claim to be 
monitoring the economy.
Th ese people seemed to be just repeating the conventional 
wisdom without ever attempting to independently assess 
whether it was right. Unfortunately, not one of them is suff er-
ing any career consequences for this extraordinary incompe-
tence. Th is means that this highly paid and well-credentialed 
group will continue to espouse the conventional wisdom with-
out independent thought. It’s nice work if you can get it, as the 
Gershwin song says.
When these “experts” warn us against further stimulus 
because the defi cits will be too large, we should keep in mind 
who “they” are. We should also question them when they say 

158 
FALSE PROFITS
that China is manipulating its currency by using its huge trade 
surplus to buy dollars and in the same breath warn us that if 
we don’t get our defi cit under control, China could stop using 
its huge trade surplus to buy our dollars. Or when they warn 
us that the fi nancial markets are worried about infl ation and 
therefore the Fed should run a more contractionary monetary 
policy, even if this means higher unemployment.
And the question we should ask these experts is: “When 
did you stop being wrong about the economy?”
Th e situation is no better when it comes to the fi nancial 
industry. With few exceptions, the people who profi ted from 
issuing the bad loans that fed the bubble are still in place, and 
they are the ones benefi ting from the government bailout of 
the fi nancial system. Th e top executives in the fi nancial sector 
remain incredibly wealthy and incredibly powerful. Congress 
continues to show enormous deference to the fi nancial sector’s 
leaders in every area of public policy.
Th e game is not over yet. As a result of the greed, incom-
petence, and outright corruption of the Wall Street crew and 
their disciples, tens of millions of people in this country are 
really hurting. Th ese people have lost their jobs, their homes, 
their life savings. If these same people come to fully under-
stand the extent to which this suff ering was entirely prevent-
able, and if they recognize the individuals responsible for 
bringing it about, we will see some serious momentum for 
change in this country.
Th is book was written in the hope of making these points 

 
REMEMBER THE HOUSING BUBBLE! 
159
clearly. Th e people in power, who were either too incompetent 
or too corrupt to prevent the crisis, should not be allowed 
to hide from their responsibilities. If we don’t hold them 
accountable for this disaster, we virtually guarantee future 
disasters. Going along with the consensus will always be easy, 
especially when doing so brings no consequences; and without 
consequences, those in policy positions will not think inde-
pendently even when the consensus is disastrously wrong. 
Failing to learn from the housing bubble and how we got there 
is the best recipe for disastrous policy.

This page intentionally left blank 

161
Notes
Chapter 1  Economic Collapse: 
It is their fault
1. Robert Shiller, “Challenging the Crowd in Whispers, Not 
Shouts,” New York Times, November 1, 2008, www.nytimes 
.com/2008/11/02/business/02view.html?_r=2.
2. Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Th e Black Swan: Th e Impact of the 
Highly Improbable (New York: Random House, 2007). 
3. Dean Baker, “Th e Run-Up in House Prices: Is It Real or Is 
It Another Bubble?” Center for Economic and Policy Research 
(Washington DC), 2002, www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/
reports/the-run-up-in-home-prices-is-it-real-or-is-it-another-
bubble/.
4. Many of the people who took out subprime mortgages dur-
ing this period were actually eligible to get prime mortgages. 
Mortgage issuers stood to earn larger fees from selling subprime 
mortgages and therefore pushed borrowers toward these mort-
gages. An analysis by the Wall Street Journal found that more 
than 40 percent of the people who received subprime loans 
might have been eligible for prime loans (Rick Brooks and Ruth 
Simon, “Subprime Debacle Traps Even Very Credit-Worthy: As 

162 
FALSE PROFITS
Housing Boomed, Industry Pushed Loans to a Broader Market,” 
Wall Street Journal, December 3, 2007, A1). African Americans 
and Latinos were disproportionately victimized by the practice 
of steering borrowers toward subprime loans. 
5. Alan Greenspan, “Th e Challenge of Central Banking in a 
Democratic Society,” speech given at the American Enterprise 
Institute, December 5, 1996, www.federalreserve.gov/
boarddocs/speeches/1996/19961205.htm.
6. Edward Gramlich, Subprime Mortgages: America’s Latest 
Boom and Bust (Washington DC: Urban Institute Press, 2007).
Chapter 2 Surveying the Damage
1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2009,  
Flow of Funds, Table B100, Line 51, www.federalreserve.gov/
releases/z1/Current/z1r-5.pdf. 
2. For a description of this sort of age adjustment, see John 
Schmitt and Dean Baker, “Is the U.S. Unemployment Rate 
Today Already as High as It Was in 1982?” Center for Economic 
and Policy Research (Washington DC), 2009, www.cepr.net/
index.php/publications/reports/is-the-us-unemployment-rate-
today-already-as-high-as-it-was-in-1982/.
3. Th e decline in the coverage rate of the Current Population 
Survey (CPS), the source of the unemployment data, is another 
though somewhat less important reason the unemployment 
data for the two recessions are not directly comparable. Th e 
coverage rate for the survey had been over 95 percent, meaning 
that the Census Bureau got answers from more than 95 percent 
of the people it tried to contact. Th e coverage rate dwindled to 
below 90 percent by the beginning of the decade. Coverage rates 
have been especially low for demographic groups with high 

 
NOTES 
163
rates of unemployment. Th e coverage rate for young African 
American men has been less than 70 percent. Th is decline 
in coverage may have lowered the measured unemployment 
rate by a bit more than 0.1 percentage point, meaning that the 
unemployment rate might be 0.1 percentage point higher if 
the CPS had the same coverage rate as in the early 1980s. Th e 
diff erence for some groups, like young African Americans, 
could be several percentage points.  See John Schmitt and Dean 
Baker, “Th e Impact of Undercounting in the Current Population 
Survey” Center for Economic and Policy Research (Washington 
DC), 2006, www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/reports/the-
impact-of-undercounting-in-the-current-population-survey/. 
4. Congressional Budget Offi  ce, “Th e Budget and Economic 
Outlook: An Update” (Washington DC: CBO, 2009), www.cbo.
gov/ft pdocs/105xx/doc10521/08-25-BudgetUpdate.pdf.
5. Th is analysis is taken from David Rosnick and Dean Baker, 
“Th e Impact of the Housing Crash on the Wealth of Baby 
Boomers,” Journal of Aging and Social Policy (forthcoming in 
2009). 
Chapter 3 The Terrible Tale of the TARP
1. Bill Isaacs, conversation with the author, September 28, 2009. 
2. Edmund L. Andrews, “Economic Activity Is Slowing Across 
Many Areas, Fed Chairman Says,” New York Times, September 
24, 2008.
3. For data on the extent to which credit markets had frozen 
up prior to the passage of the TARP, see V. V. Chari, Lawrence 
Christiano, and Patrick J.Kehoe, “Facts and Myths about the 
Financial Crisis of 2008,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 

164 
FALSE PROFITS
Working Paper #666, 2008, www.minneapolisfed.org/
publications_papers/pub_display.cfm?id=4062. 
4. At a talk at the Press Club in February of 2009, Bernanke 
was asked about the reason for delaying the announcement of 
plans for the CPFF until aft er Congress voted on the TARP. In 
response he contradicted his claims from September and said 
that the commercial paper market had not become severely 
strained until October, following the passage of the TARP. 
(National Press Club Luncheon with Ben Bernanke, February 
18, 2009; transcript available at archives@Press.org.)
5. Th e letter and list of signers is available at http://faculty 
.chicago booth.edu/john.cochrane/research/Papers/mortgage_
protest.htm. 
6. Th omas Friedman, “Rescue the Rescue,” New York 
Times, September 30, 2008, www.nytimes.com/2008/10/01/
opinion/01friedman.html?scp=3&sq=thomas+friedman&st=nyt.
7. Dean Baker, “Wall St. Held a Gun to Our Heads,” Guardian .co 
.uk, September 29, 2008, www.guardian.co.uk/commentis
 free/
cifamerica/2008/sep/29/us.economy.wall.street. 
8. Citigroup has actually been the biggest benefi ciary of money 
openly handed out through the TARP. Th e government has lent 
$45 billion to the bank and guaranteed the value of more than 
$300 billion in bad assets. In spite of these handouts, the public 
owns less than 40 percent of a bank with a market value of less 
than $16 billion as of July 4, 2009.  
Chapter 4  Will They Ever Discover the 
Housing Bubble?
1. Th e Case-Shiller National Index is available at www2  
.standard andpoors.com/portal/site/sp/en/us/page.topic/indices 
_csmahp/0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,4,0,0,0,0,0.html. 

 
NOTES 
165
2. Th ey could also use an adjustment to the appraised sale price 
for specifi c markets. For example, if the current sale price-to-
rent ratio for comparable units is 20 to 1 in a metropolitan area 
that is still infl ated by the housing bubble, the appraised sale 
price of any house in this area would be adjusted down by 25 
percent to bring it in line with its trend level. 
3. See Dan Alpert, “Putting a Floor Under American Homes: 
How Low Do We Go?” Westwood Capital, LLC, 2008, www 
.westwoodcapital.com/opinions/images/stories/  reconstructing/
american_homes_alpert_081208.pdf. Alpert examines historic 
price-to-rent ratios in major metropolitan areas. Th is sort of 
analysis can be applied more generally to determine whether 
specifi c factors may warrant a long-term divergence from this 15 
to 1 ratio. 
4. Th ere are several diff erent versions of this proposal. See Dean 
Baker, “Subprime Borrowers Deserve an Own to Rent Transi-
tion,” Th e Economists’ Voice 5, no. 1 (2008), www.bepress.com/
ev/vol5/iss1/art5/. See also Dean Alpert, “Th e Freedom Recovery 
Plan,” Westwood Capital, LLC, www.westwoodcapital.com/
opinion/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&lay
out=blog&id=39&Itemid=61; Bernard Wasow, “A Safety Net for 
Bubble Buyers: Rescuing Homeowners from Collapsing Home 
Values,” Century Foundation, New York, 2008, http://tcf.org/
list.asp?type=PB&pubid=665. Representative Raul Grijalva 
introduced a version of the “right to rent” proposal in the Saving 
Families’ Home Act in the summer of 2008. 
5. Freddie Mac actually has adopted a modest version of “right 
to rent” voluntarily, allowing former homeowners to remain 
as tenants in homes following foreclosure. However, they are 
kept on a month-to-month lease and therefore do not have the 
security that the legislation is intended to provide.

166 
FALSE PROFITS
Chapter 5 Stimulus: It is Just Spending
1. Dean Baker and Rivka Deutsch, “Th e State and Local Drag 
on the Stimulus,” Center for Economic and Policy Research 
(Washington DC), 2009, www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/
reports/the-state-and-local-drag-on-the-stimulus/. 
2. For discussion on the base period for eligibility for unem-
ployment insurance, see Andres Stettner, Heather Boushey, and 
Jeff  Wengner, “Clearing the Path to Unemployment Insurance 
for Low-Wage Workers,” National Employment Law Project 
and Center for Economic and Policy Research (New York and 
Washington DC), 2005, www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/
reports/nelp-and-cepr-clearing-the-path-to-unemployment-
insurance-for-low-wage-workers/. 
3. For example, see “Economic Package Stimulates Quests for 
Change,” National Public Radio, February 3, 2009, www.npr 
.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=100174153; and “Sena-
tors in Both Parties Call for Big Cuts in Stimulus Package,” 
Washington Post, February 6, 2009, A1, www.washingtonpost  
.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/02/05/AR2009020501622  
.html?sid=ST2009020600080&s_pos=.
4. It is true that some of these bonds will be held by foreigners 
and therefore the interest payments will be a net burden to the 
United States. However, our foreign indebtedness is determined 
by the trade defi cit, not the budget defi cit. 
5. Foreign ownership of U.S. debt is an issue, but this bears no 
direct relationship with the budget defi cit. Given a fi xed capital 
stock, we are no better off  if foreign investors hold an addi-
tional $1 trillion of the private capital stock than if they hold an 
additional $1 trillion of government debt. In both cases, interest 
payments will be made to people living outside of the country. 

 
NOTES 
167
Of course, if foreign investors hold $1 trillion of private capital 
in the United States, they can sell it any time they choose and 
buy $1 trillion of government debt. Th us, no important distinc-
tion exists between these two situations.  
6. One possibility is that owners of CDSs were betting that the 
U.S. government could, at least temporarily, exceed its legal 
debt ceiling. It is possible that this would be viewed as a “default 
event,” which would allow CDS holders to collect from issuers. 
Chapter 6  Real Stimulus: Progressive 
Programs to Boost the EConomy
1. Elizabeth McNichol  and Iris J. Lav, “New Fiscal Year Brings 
No Relief from State Budget Problems,” Center for Budget 
and Policy Priorities (Washington DC), 2009, www.cbpp.org/
cms/?fa=view&id=711.
2. Dean Baker, “Financing Drug Research: What Are the 
Issues?” Center for Economic and Policy Research (Washington 
DC), 2004,  www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/reports/
fi nancing-drug-research-what-are-the-issues/. 
3. For a discussion of publicly funded clinical trials see Dean 
Baker, “Th e Benefi ts and Savings of Publicly Funded Clinical 
Trials,” Center for Economic and Policy Research (Washington 
DC), 2008, www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/reports/
the-benefi ts-and-savings-of-publicly-funded-clinical-trials-of-
prescription-drugs; Arjun Jayadev and Joseph Stigltiz,  “Two 
Ideas to Increase Innovation and Reduce Pharmaceutical Costs 
and Price,” Health Aff airs 28, no. 1, W165-168, http://content 
.healthaff airs.org/cgi/content/abstract/28/1/w165.
4. Dean Baker, “Th e Artistic Freedom Voucher: Internet Age 
Alternative to Copyright,” Center for Economic and Policy 

168 
FALSE PROFITS
Research (Washington DC), 2003, www.cepr.net/index.php/
publications/reports/the-artistic-freedom-voucher-internet-
age-alternative-to-copyrights/. 
5. A copyleft  is a type of copyright in which anyone can freely 
reproduce the copyrighted material as long as the resulting 
product is placed in the public domain for open use. If someone 
seeks to use the material in work that is subject to copyright 
protection, they must negotiate with the holder of the copyright. 
A description of copyleft  protection can be found at the GNU 
operating system Web site, www.gnu.org/copyleft /.
6. Economists oft en argue that shortening work hours will 
not lead to higher levels of employment because the increase in 
employment would lead to more upward pressure on wages, and 
therefore more infl ation. Th is, they argue, would force central 
banks to raise interest rates in order to slow the economy and 
push unemployment upward. Whether or not this is true in 
normal times, such a scenario is certainly not likely when the 
economy is in a severe downturn and infl ation is clearly not a 
threat.  
7. Th e hourly wage of the median worker in 2007 was $15.11 
(Lawrence Mishel, Jared Bernstein, and Heidi Shierholz, Th e 
State of Working America, 2007 – 2008, [Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2008], Table 3-5). If non-wage compensation is 
equal to 30 percent of the wage, the hourly compensation of the 
median worker would be approximately $20. 
8. It is oft en argued that employers would push workers to work 
harder, thereby increasing productivity and making the actual 
increase in employment substantially less than the simple arith-
metic implies. If really large productivity gains can be achieved 
by reducing work hours, this would be a very strong argument 
for large reductions in hours. Much of economics is about 

 
NOTES 
169
fi nding ways to achieve oft en modest increases in productivity. 
For example, the argument for trade is all about increasing pro-
ductivity, yet even a very big trade deal is unlikely to increase 
productivity by as much as one percent. If reducing the average 
work week by fi ve percent yielded a gain in productivity of two 
percent, this would be one of the most eff ective growth policies 
economists could imagine. 
9. Th is applies the same rule of thumb as President Obama and 
his economic team used in calculating the impact of their stimu-
lus plan. Th ey assumed that a 1 percent increase in GDP would 
lead to 1 million additional jobs. A $65 billion increase in GDP 
is a bit less than 0.5 percent of GDP (Cristina Romer and Jared 
Bernstein, “Th e Job Impact of the American Recovery and Rein-
vestment Plan,” Council of Economic Advisors [Washington DC], 
2009, http://otrans.3cdn.net/45593e8ecbd339d074_l3m6bt1te
 .pdf). 
Th erefore, this stimulus should be expected to create approxi-
mately 500,000 additional jobs.  
Chapter 7 Reforming the Financial System
1. Data on revenue raised from the tax in the United Kingdom 
can be found at www.hmrc.gov.uk/stats/stamp_duty/table15-1 
.pdf. 
2. Robert Pollin, Dean Baker, and Marc Schaberg, “Security 
Transactions Taxes for U.S. Financial Markets,” Political Econ-
omy Research Institute (Amherst, MA), 2002, www.peri .umass 
.edu/236/hash/aef97d8d65/publication/172/.
3. Prior to the collapse of its stock bubble in 1989, the fi nancial 
transactions taxes in place in Japan raised more than 4 percent 
of all government revenue. Th is would be equivalent to $120 

170 
FALSE PROFITS
billion a year in the United States (Japanese Securities Research, 
1992, p. 244). 
4. Th ese data taken from Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
National Income and Product Accounts, Table 6.3B ([line 55 + 
line 59]/ line 1) and Table 6.3C (line 59/line 1). 
5. Th is calculation assumes that the securities and investment 
sector’s share of private sector output is equal to its share of 
private sector wages and that its size shrinks by 25 percent as a 
result of the imposition of a FTT.  
6. A very similar incentive issue exists with real estate apprais-
ers. During the bubble years, appraisers knew that banks 
wanted to issue mortgages. Appraisers usually work as indepen-
dent contractors, so they knew that they were more likely to get 
hired again if they gave an appraisal that was high enough to get 
a mortgage approved. Th erefore, they had a very strong incen-
tive to bias their appraisals upward. If an independent body, 
for example the local realtors board, chose the appraiser, the 
appraiser would have no incentive to bias their appraisal. 
Chapter 8 Remember the Housing Bubble!
1. “Focus on the Fed,” Washington Post, July 24, 2009, A20. 

171
Index
adjustable-rate mortgages 
(ARMs), 28
option, 28
AIG, 61, 81–83, 152
Alt-A loans, 27–30
Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT), 
107
artists, Internet-age support for, 
127–28
automobile industry, 40
baby boomers, 20, 41, 42
new wealth of early, 50–51, 51f
new wealth of late, 48–50, 49f
bankruptcy reform, 94–96
banks. See also fi nancial sector; 
TARP
transactions and distrust 
between, 63–64
Wall Street, 29
Bear Stearns, 60, 62
benefi t of pain theory, 44–46
Bernanke, Ben, 5, 60, 61, 63, 65, 66, 
81, 83, 164n4
bonds, 150–51
Britain. See United Kingdom
building, 21–22, 87, 88
China, 114, 158
Citigroup, 79–80
commercial paper market, 63, 65, 
66
Community Reinvestment Act 
(CRA), 30
construction industry, 34, 40
creative workers, Internet-age sup-
port for, 127–28
credit default swaps (CDSs), 81, 
112–13, 146
currencies and government debt, 
113–15
Current Population Survey (CPS), 
162n3
debt, government, 110. See also 
defi cit
debt default, 111, 112
debt scare stories, 111–16
debt-to-GDP ratio, 110, 113, 116
defaults. See credit default swaps

172 
FALSE PROFITS
defi cit, federal budget, 3–4. See also 
debt
derivatives, 81–82, 152–53
drug research, patent-fi nanced, 
123–25
drug trials, public funding of, 
123–26
economic collapse, who was 
responsible for, 12–17
employment. See also paid time off  
tax credit; unemployment
home equity and, 55
environmental policy, 21–22
Fannie Mae, 29–30, 33, 60–61, 88–92
Federal Communications Com-
mission (FCC), 139, 140
Federal Deposit Insurance Corpo-
ration (FDIC), 80–81
Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC), 8–9, 138–42
Federal Reserve Board, 156. See 
also Bernanke, Ben; Federal 
Reserve System; Greenspan, 
Alan; interest rates
fi nancial sector and, 60
housing bubble and, 1, 5, 7, 153
preventing asset bubbles, 7
as “systemic risk regulator,” 16
TARP and, 63–66
what they could have done about 
housing bubble, 36–38
Federal Reserve System, 8. See also 
Federal Reserve Board; inter-
est rates
bailout, 78–83
private-sector banks and, 8
reform, 138–43
Financial Products Protection 
Agency, 149–50
fi nancial regulators (not regula-
tions) as the problem, 153–54. 
See also Federal Reserve Board
fi nancial sector, 8, 14–15. See also 
fi nancial transactions tax; 
stock market; TARP
reforms, 137–38, 149–54
fi nancial transactions tax (FTT), 
137–38
how it eliminates economic 
waste, 147–49
reining in banks and specula-
tion, 143–47
foreclosures, 2, 33, 78, 93, 94, 96, 97. 
See also homeowners
Freddie Mac, 29–30, 33, 60–61, 
88–92
General Motors (GM), 73
Goldman Sachs, 82
Gonzalez, Henry, 140–41
governments, state and local
aid to, 121–22
Greenspan, Alan, 13, 14, 141
on house prices, 20–22, 25–26, 47
housing bubble and, 1, 5, 7, 13, 25, 
36, 37, 157
interest rates and, 25, 26
loans and, 37
stock market and, 16
health insurance, 104
extension of, 122–23
home equity, 41, 47, 86–87
home equity loans, 41
homeownerhship, 86–87
homeownerhship rates, trends in, 
56f, 56–58
homeowners. See also foreclosures
complicated vs. simple ways of 
helping, 93–98
percent needing cash to sell their 
house, 53–55, 54f

 
INDEX 
173
house prices. See also rent-based 
appraisals
Alan Greenspan on, 20–22, 
25–26, 47
bubble-infl ated, 86–88
household wealth, loss of
collapse of housing bubble and, 
46–56
housing aff ordability index, 25
housing bubble, 1. See also specifi c 
topics
collapse of, 1–3, 6, 46–56
and the economy, 33–36
preventing future, 4–5
remembering the, 155–59
story of, 17–26
ways to have countered, 5–6
what Federal Reserve could have 
done about, 36–38
housing construction, 34, 40
immigration, 20
import prices, 115–16
income growth, 19–21. See also 
wages
infl ation, 17–19, 40, 142, 168. See 
also housing bubble, story of
infl ation scare stories, 111, 115–17
interest rates, 25–26, 38–40. See also 
mortgages
of 90-day Treasury bills vs. 
LIBOR rate, 62–63
Federal Reserve and, 25, 26, 38, 39
government debt and, 113
Internet era, 22
investment. See fi nancial sector; 
fi nancial transactions tax; 
stock market
Isaacs, Bill, 64
labor force. See also unemployment
changed demographics of, 41
Lehman Brothers, 61, 62
loans, 37. See also interest rates; 
mortgages
Alt-A, 27–30
home equity, 41
London Inter-Bank Off ered Rate 
(LIBOR) interest rate, 62–63, 79
McCain, John, 70
mortgage-backed securities (MBS), 
32–33, 81
mortgage guidelines, 37–38
mortgages
Alt-A, 27–30
spread of bad, 2, 6, 7, 26–33
subprime, 26–30
Obama, Barack, 70, 99, 122. See also 
stimulus package
TARP and, 107
option ARMs, 28
paid time off  tax credit, 129–33
long-term benefi ts of, 133–34
patent monopolies, 123–24
Paulson, Henry, 61, 67–69, 77, 81, 82
pensions, 48. See also retirement
Plunder and Blunder: Th e Rise and 
Fall of the Bubble Economy 
(Baker), 4
politicians, 14
population growth, 19–21
public transportation, subsidies 
for, 126–27
recession, housing crash (2001), 34
vs. 1981-82 recession, 39–40
as “fi nancial crisis,” 3
rent-based appraisals, 88–89
impact, 89–92
rental prices, 23
rental vacancy rates, 23–25, 31

174 
FALSE PROFITS
Republican takeover of Congress 
in 1994, 21
retirement, 48–55
“right to rent” legislation, 96–98
salaries. See income; wages
Shiller, Robert, 13–14
“skeptics caucus,” 71
Social Security, 21, 50
soft ware, open source
funding for development of, 
128–29
stamp tax, 145
stimulus
loss in annual demand and net, 
108, 108f
potential sources of, 120–33
spending and, 106
stimulus package, 99–101, 132, 
134–35, 169
creative, 127–28
development of, 101–8
reviewing the battle over, 109–10
stock market, 74–77. See also fi nan-
cial sector; fi nancial transac-
tions tax, reining in banks and 
speculation
“irrational exuberance,” 36, 75
stock-market bubble, 34, 103
stock wealth, 35
systemic risk regulator, 16
TARP (Troubled Asset Reform 
Program)
elite regroups following initial 
defeat of, 74–78
lessons from, 83–84
options for structuring, 66–73
passage, 59–60
stimulus package and, 107
TARP timeline, 60
from calm reassurance to com-
plete panic, 60–66
taxation, 107. See also fi nancial 
transactions tax; paid time off  
tax credit
TED Spread, 62
Temporary Liquidity Guarantee 
Program (TLGP), 80, 81
transit subsidies, 126–27
Treasury Department, U.S., 
60–61
Troubled Asset Reform Program. 
See TARP
unemployment. See also 
employment
distribution of, 43–44
prevention of, 119
unemployment data, 162n3
unemployment rate, 102, 119, 130
age-adjusted, 42
collapse of housing bubble and, 
39–43
GDP and, 44, 45, 102–3
lost output, benefi t of pain the-
ory, and, 44–46
United Airlines, 73
United Kingdom (UK), 145
taxation in, 144–45
vacancy rates, 23–25, 31
wages, 43–44. See also income 
growth
Wall Street banks, 29
work hours, shortening, 168n6, 
168n8
writers, Internet-age support for, 
127–28

Dean Baker is the author of Plunder and Blunder: Th e Rise and Fall 
of the Bubble Economy, Th e United States Since 1980, Th e Conservative 
Nanny State: How the Wealthy Use the Government to Stay Rich and Get 
Richer, Social Security: Th e Phony Crisis (with Mark Weisbrot), and Th e 
Benefi ts of Full Employment (with Jared Bernstein). He was the editor 
of Getting Prices Right: Th e Debate Over the Consumer Price Index, 
which won a Choice Book Award as one of the outstanding academic 
books of the year. 
Co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research in 
Washington DC, he appears frequently on TV and radio programs, 
including CNN, CBS News, PBS NewsHour, and National Public Radio. 
His blog, Beat the Press, features commentary on economic reporting. 
He received his B.A. from Swarthmore College and his Ph.D. in eco-
nomics from the University of Michigan.

