
Famous First
Bubbles

This page intentionally left blank

Famous First
Bubbles
The Fundamentals of
Early Manias
Peter M. Garber
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

©2000 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
writing from the publisher.
This book was set by Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong.
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Garber, Peter M.
Famous ﬁrst bubbles: the fundamentals of early manias / 
Peter M. Garber.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN 0-262-07204-1 (hc : alk. paper)
1. Speculation—History.
2. Tulip mania, 17th century.
3. Law, John, 1671–1729.
4. Compagnie des Indes—History.
5. South Sea Bubble, Great Britain, 1720.
I. Title.
HG6005.G37
2000
332.63¢228—dc21
00-027297

Contents
Preface
ix
I
The Bubble Interpretation
1
II
The Tulipmania Legend
15
1
A Political and Economic Background
19
2
The Traditional Image of Tulipmania
25
3
Where Does the Tulipmania Legend Come 
From?
29
4
Establishment Attitudes toward 
Futures Markets and Short Selling: The Source of
the Pamphlets
33
5
The Bubonic Plague
37
6
The Broken Tulip
39

vi
Contents
7 The Bulb Market, 1634–1637
43
8 Some Characterization of the Data
49
9 Post-Collapse Tulip Prices
61
10 Bulb Prices in Later Centuries
65
11 Was This Episode a “Tulipmania”?
75
III The Macro Bubbles
85
12 A Preliminary View: The Mississippi and South Sea
Bubbles
87
13 John Law and the Fundamentals of the Mississippi
and South Sea Bubbles
91
14 John Law’s Finance Operations
95
15 A Rehash of Mississippi Market 
Fundamentals
105
16 Law’s Shadow: The South Sea Bubble
109
17 South Sea Finance Operations
115
18 Fundamentals of the South Sea Company
121
19 Conclusion
123
Appendix 1: The Tulipmania in the Popular and 
Economics Literature
127

Contents
vii
Appendix 2: The Seventeenth-Century Tulip Price 
Data
133
Notes
145
References
149
Index
155

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
Bubbles lie at the intersection between ﬁnance, econom-
ics, and psychology. Recent explanations of large-scale
asset price movements have leaned toward placing psy-
chology ﬁrst in the list, not only for episodes from the
dim past but also for most events in the crisis years of
1997, 1998, and 1999. The evidence that will be developed
in this book, however, indicates that the early bubbles at
least were driven by fundamentals. They stem from the
more basic intersection of ﬁnance and economics, with
psychology at most in the background.
This book is about the three most famous bubbles—
the Dutch tulipmania, the Mississippi Bubble, and 
the South Sea Bubble—all of which have served as 
examples of private capital markets gone haywire. On the
contrary,
• The high prices of rare bulbs in the tulipmania—
emphasized in most stories as the prima facie evidence
for its madness—is a standard feature of markets in
newly developed varieties, as is a rapid price decline.

• Even now, rare bulb varieties carry a price equal in
value to a substantial house.
• Little economic distress was associated with the end of
the tulipmania.
• The stories that we have now stem mainly from a single
source resulting from a moralistic campaign of the Dutch
government.
• The speculation in common bulbs was a phenomenon
lasting one month in the dreary Dutch winter of 1637. A
drinking phenomenon held in the taverns, it occurred in
the midst of a massive outbreak of bubonic plague and
had no real consequence.
• The Mississippi Bubble was a large-scale money print-
ing operation and a government debt-for-equity swap.
• The South Sea Bubble was also a debt-for-equity swap,
although less well-grounded.
• Both bubbles were grandiose macroeconomic schemes
launched or aided by high government ofﬁcials and sup-
ported by the entire apparatus of the governments of
England and France.
• Nevertheless, they are now interpreted as prime exam-
ples of the madness possible in private ﬁnancial markets
and of the need for government control and regulation.
Acknowledgments
This book results from my research on the early bubbles
undertaken over the years. As its basis, it combines two
x
Preface

papers, “Tulipmania” (Journal of Political Economy, 1989)
and “Famous First Bubbles”(Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 1990), and a conference volume chapter, “Who Put
the Mania in the Tulipmania?” (in E. White, ed., Crashes
and Panics: The Lessons From History,
Homewood:
Dow-Jones Irwin, 1990). I am grateful to Robert Flood,
Herschel Grossman, Robert Hodrick, Salih Neftci, Stuart
Parkinson, David Ribar, Rudiger Dornbusch, and James
Peck for useful discussions, to Guido Imbens for
resourceful research assistance, and to Marina van
Dongen and Klaas Baks for helpful translations. Librari-
ans at Harvard’s Houghton, Kress, Arnold Arboretum,
and Grey Herbarium Libraries and at the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society provided valuable guidance.
George Stigler at the Journal of Political Economy provided
extensive editorial comment in developing the basic
paper on tulipmania on which this book is based, and
Joseph Stiglitz and Timothy Taylor at the Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives as well as several anonymous referees
both for journal review and for this book also contributed
helpful suggestions. I have beneﬁted from the comments
of participants in workshops at Brown University, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, CUNY,
Columbia University, Queens University, UCLA, MIT,
the IMF, and Northwestern.
Preface
xi

This page intentionally left blank

I
The Bubble
Interpretation

This page intentionally left blank

The Dutch tulipmania, the Mississippi Bubble, the South
Sea Bubble—these are always invoked with every out-
break of great ﬁnancial instability. So implanted are 
they in our literature, that they are now used more as 
synonyms for ﬁnancial instability than as references to
the particular events themselves. Along with words such
as herding and the newly popular irrational exuberance,
they now dominate the policymaking, academic rhetoric,
and market commentary on the crisis years of 1997, 1998,
and 1999.
In general, these events are viewed as outbursts of 
irrationality: self-generating surges of optimism that
pump up asset prices and misallocate investments and
resources to such a great extent that a crash and major
ﬁnancial and economic distress inevitably follow. Only
some bizarre self-delusion or blindness could have pre-
vented a participant from seeing the obvious, so these
episodes are called forth almost as a form of ridicule for
such losers.
This book presents the fundamental history of the three
famous bubbles. But it is necessary ﬁrst to come to grips
with the meaning of the class of words spawned by these
events to understand how these events from so long 
ago serve the modern regulatory rhetoric. In this small
introductory glossary—and I hope not too excessive a
detour—I will ﬁrst work through the meaning of these
words and critique them. Then I will present and discuss
the deﬁnition of the word bubble that can be found in the
authoritative literature on the subject. Finally, I will

4
Part I
return to the important role as rhetorical weapons played
by the three most famous bubbles by looking at how even
the Financial Times employed them to interpret the events
of October 1998.
The Meanings of a Few Words
Bubbles
The classic word for these phenomena is bubble. Bubble
is one of the most beautiful concepts in economics and
ﬁnance in that it is a fuzzy word ﬁlled with import but
lacking a solid operational deﬁnition. Thus, one can make
whatever one wants of it. The deﬁnition of bubble most
often used in economic research is that part of asset price
movement that is unexplainable based on what we call
fundamentals. Fundamentals are a collection of variables
that we believe should drive asset prices. In the context
of a particular model of asset price determination, if we
have a serious misforecast of asset prices we might then
say that there is a bubble.
This is no more than saying that there is something
happening that we cannot explain, which we normally
call a random disturbance. In asset pricing studies, we
give it a name—bubble—and appeal to unveriﬁable psy-
chological stories.
Psychological state of mind is not a measurable
concept, especially years after an event. It does, however,
provide a convenient way of explaining some phenom-

The Bubble Interpretation
5
ena in the market that cannot otherwise be explained.
Our existing or favorite models of fundamentals often
cannot explain important observed phenomena in asset
markets. We know that market psychology or market sen-
timent can be important, so we blame the inadequacy of
our fundamental model vis-à-vis actual outcomes on
unmeasurable market psychology.
Herding
Although used frequently these days to explain large
capital ﬂows, herding is a vague word, projecting the
feeling that speculators are cattle, some kind of prey. The
rigged image here is that investors go grazing passively
from one place to another, following a leader, without
scouting out the grass themselves. In particular, the
herding concept arises in the context of large amounts of
funds ﬂowing into emerging markets.
Of course, herding is not an irrational act. If it is known
that someone is good at analysis and that person makes
a move, it is reasonable to follow. The problem is that
those who call on herding as an explanation for the move-
ment of funds by a large number of institutions or 
individuals into a particular market never provide any
evidence of on what basis investors are making decisions.
That we see large amounts of funds ﬂowing in together
at one time and ﬂowing out together at another does not
mean that herding is going on—that is, that one or two
smart people are doing the analysis and that everyone is

6
Part I
following blindly. Everyone may be doing analysis. 
Alternatively, fund managers may delegate the serious
research and analytical effort to a trusted research 
organization, which in turn advises many clients. That
the individual fund manager does not have a research
department does not mean he is acting blindly.
The future is always shrouded in fog: we never know
what is coming, and yet we have to allocate investment
resources according to our best guess at the future. To ﬁll
the gap, we have theories. Once in a while, a convincing
theory emerges that allows us to visualize the future
“better” than before. That is what economic research is
about: generating concepts that we can use to interpret
observed phenomena and perhaps to forecast phenom-
ena. Every once in a while, a theory becomes dominant
and perhaps convincing. Keynesianism was a convincing
theory once, and governments herded on the basis of 
Keynesian policy prescriptions. These tended to fail in
their more overblown forms, after which governments
shied away from such policies and imposed (herded
around) stringent anti-inﬂationist policies. No one says,
though, that we observed herding behavior on the part
of governments during the 1960s and 1970s when they
bought into Keynesianism and during the 1980s and
1990s when they got out en masse.
Irrational Exuberance
This is a term recently invoked by Alan Greenspan, chair-
man of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. It

The Bubble Interpretation
7
was simply part of a claim, as of December 1996 when
the Dow was at about 6500, that the stock markets might
be getting it wrong and that he might know better what
the right level of stock prices should be (i.e., he gave a
new name to the divergence of market prices from a
theory of where they should be). He concluded that there
might be irrationality afoot.
Three years later, with the stock market ﬁfty percent
higher, in testimony on February 23, 1999, Mr. Greenspan
was asked whether he thought there was still irrational
exuberance. His reply was “That is something you can
only know after the fact.” Thus, he removed all mean-
ingful content from the concept.
Two Other Deﬁnitions of Bubble
To place a ﬁnal emphasis on how tenuous and unusable
the meaning of bubbles can be, let us focus on a pair of
deﬁnitions of bubble that can be found at various stages
in the economics literature.
The premodern deﬁnition of a bubble is from Pal-
grave’s Dictionary of Political Economy (1926): “Any
unsound undertaking accompanied by a high degree of
speculation.” This is basically the irrational exuberance
deﬁnition of a bubble. By this deﬁnition, we cannot 
know if we have a bubble until after it bursts. Commer-
cial undertakings accompanied by a high degree of 
speculation may actually turn out to be quite successful.
It is only after we ﬁnd out that a commercial undertak-
ing did not work that we can conclude it was unsound

8
Part I
and then call it a bubble. This concept is as empty as
Greenspan’s.
It is always possible that a scheme might succeed—if
it does, it would then be described as brilliantly auda-
cious. With the future often very uncertain, the only way
that we can operate according to a purposeful plan is to
postulate theories that allow us to forecast the future,
given the current state of the world. These theories may
be based on past experience but perhaps also on new phe-
nomena that we observe.
If the theory is convincing, it will attract commercial
and speculative activity. To return to the herding concept,
speculators really gather around theories, not each other.
If someone enters with a convincing story and structure
of thought for organizing otherwise confusing phenom-
ena, he will attract speculative capital. For instance, we
know that the Internet stocks are a gamble, but they are
backed by a theory of an epochal change in technology
that will alter the entire economic structure. Normally
careful governments are pushing this view to the extent
that high ofﬁcials even claim to have invented the 
Internet.
When there is a large technological shift, great uncer-
tainty exists about what the future will bring. We do not
know how the economic system will absorb all these
changes, so naturally investment in many commercial
undertakings suddenly becomes speculative, even in the
old established businesses that may suffer if the theory
comes true. These are almost required gambles on the

The Bubble Interpretation
9
future. If there is a convincing theory about the Internet,
we have to bet on it. We must allocate part of our port-
folio to it. Otherwise, we might miss out on the next big
winner or, even worse, be backing a loser. Therefore, we
truly cannot know if the speculation was unsound until
after the fact.
In his popular book on manias and bubbles, Kindle-
berger’s deﬁnition of a bubble is as follows: “A bubble is
an upward price movement over an extended range that
then implodes.” This is an empirical statement about the
pattern of asset prices. A sort of chartist view of bubbles,
this prescribes that we simply give a name to that par-
ticular price pattern. Such patterns can be observed in the
data, so according to this deﬁnition, we cannot deny that
a particular historical episode—for example, tulipmania
or Mississippi Bubble—was a bubble. However, with this
deﬁnition, there can be no necessary conclusion that this
pattern reﬂects any irrationality or excess or was not
based a priori on fundamentals, the usual reason for
calling an event a bubble.
How These Bubbles Are Used to Sway Opinion
The concept of a bubble is a fuzzy one, which is why the
concept itself can be debated incessantly. To short-circuit
this poor deﬁnition, anyone aiming to explain current
market phenomena in terms of bubbles is likely to cite
the most famous historical examples—that is, to list phe-
nomena such as the Dutch tulipmania, the Mississippi

10
Part I
Bubble, and the South Sea Bubble that everyone agrees
were outbursts of irrationality. By analogy, it is easier to
claim that there must be irrationality in the current
episodes.
As an example of how these famous bubbles are
always cited in periods of market stress, we can refer to
the lead editorial of the Financial Times, usually the most
careful of the ﬁnancial press, which reviewed the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook/Capital Markets Interim Report of
December 1998:
• “When everyone rushes in the same direction, it is hard
for ﬁnancial speculators to stand aside and recall the
lessons of past stampedes.”
• “Stories of the Dutch tulipmania in 1636 or the South
Sea Bubble eighty-four years later might have left deriv-
atives traders cold this summer; but the Mexico crisis 
of 1994–1995 certainly should have created a warning
tremor. In an update to its October World Economic
Outlook, the International Monetary Fund draws special
attention to this failure to learn” (Financial Times, “The
Madness of Crowds,” December 22, 1998).
In this editorial, the Financial Times uses the Dutch
tulipmania as the historical template for the global ﬁnan-
cial crisis of October 1998. How accurate is its interpre-
tation of the tulipmania and of the statements of the
IMF’s report? The Interim Report did discuss how risk
control works in the ﬁnancial markets. Usually, when we
think of risk control, we do not think in terms of panic,

The Bubble Interpretation
11
exuberance, or irrationality. We think of correct, prudent
behavior on the part of ﬁnancial institutions. Indeed, that
was the gist of the Interim Report: standard risk control
procedures require that when some disturbance hits,
banks have to adjust their credit positions. It is exactly
such prudent behavior that makes all the contagion
explainable. The thrust of the report was not that there
was irrationality, panic, or mania. Rather, the report was
a fundamental explanation of how the process worked, a
documentation of the interconnections among ﬁnancial
markets. These risk control procedures are, in fact,
imposed by industrial country regulators as a way of 
managing market and credit risk.
• “When the crowd tried to reverse direction after
August 17, as Russia defaulted on its debt, many com-
forting systems for limiting risk broke down. This was
because, like the seventeenth century tulip speculators,
they relied on continuous orderly markets for closing
unsuccessful positions. When everyone panicked the
computerized 
strategies 
only 
exacerbated 
market
turmoil” (Financial Times, “The Madness of Crowds,”
December 22, 1998).
I have spent a great deal of time studying the tulip
speculation, and I have never seen any reference to tulip
speculators’ relying on continuously orderly markets.
This is just something that the Financial Times editorial
writer made up. There can be no more stark example 
of how the tulipmania episode is used: it is simply a

12
Part I
rhetorical device to put across an argument. The story is
now on such a mythological level that anyone feels the
ability to embellish it, however falsely, to make a point.
For what reason is the tulipmania generally invoked?
The argument is always that the existence of tulipmania
proves that markets are crazy. A curious disturbance in a
particular modern market can then be attributed to crazy
behavior, so perhaps the market needs to be more
severely regulated. Thus, these early episodes are the
dream events for those who want to control the ﬂow of
capital.
The Famous Bubbles
History is a rhetorical weapon to be used in inﬂuencing
modern policy outcomes. In particular, the invocation of
bubbles is one such use of history. We now turn to the
histories of the early bubbles to track down what they
actually imply about the behavior of the private capital
markets.
I aim here to supply market fundamental explanations
for the three most famous bubbles: the Dutch tulipmania
(1634–1637), the Mississippi Bubble (1719–1720), and 
the closely connected South Sea Bubble (1720). Though
several authors have proposed market fundamental
explanations for the well-documented Mississippi and
South Sea Bubbles, these episodes are still treated in the
modern view as spectacular outbursts of crowd irra-
tionality. This interpretation is attributable to the inﬂu-

The Bubble Interpretation
13
ence of Charles Mackay’s ([1841] 1852) famous descrip-
tions of the frenzied speculative crowds that materialized
in Paris and London in 1719 and 1720.
I concentrate most on the tulipmania because it is the
event that most modern observers view as obviously
crazy. I brieﬂy discuss the historical background from
which the tulipmania emerged, review the traditional
version of the tulipmania, and trace the sources of the 
traditional version. To understand the nature of tulip
markets, we must focus on how the reproductive cycle of
the tulip itself determined behavior during the mania.
Data on seventeenth-century tulip prices and markets
are too limited to construct “market fundamentals” on
the supply and demand for tulip bulbs. I simply charac-
terize the movement of prices for a variety of bulbs
during and after the mania and compare the results to the
pattern of price declines for initially rare eighteenth-
century bulbs. This evidence can then be used to address
the question of whether the seventeenth-century tulip
speculation clearly exhibits the existence of a speculative
mania.
I conclude that the most famous aspect of the mania,
the extremely high prices reported for rare bulbs and
their rapid decline, reﬂects normal pricing behavior in
bulb markets and cannot be interpreted as evidence of
market irrationality.
The Mississippi and South Sea Bubbles are the other
two examples that appear on everyone’s short list of
spectacular ﬁnancial collapses. They provide the most

14
Part I
popular synonym for speculative mania. Based on the
innovative economic theories of John Law, essentially
what we now call Keynesian theories, both involved
ﬁnancial manipulations, monetary creation, and govern-
ment connivance on a scale that was not matched again
until this century, but which have now become com-
monplace. I will describe the nature of the asset markets
and ﬁnancial manipulations that occurred in these
episodes and cast these also as market fundamentals.

II
The Tulipmania
Legend

This page intentionally left blank

Gathered around the campﬁres early in their training,
ﬂedgling economists hear the legend of the Dutch tulip
speculation from their elders, priming them with a skep-
tical attitude toward speculative markets. That prices of
“intrinsically useless” bulbs could have risen so high and
collapsed so rapidly seems to provide a decisive example
of the instability and irrationality that may materialize 
in asset markets. The Dutch tulipmania of 1634–1637
always appears as a favorite case of speculative excess,
even providing a synonym in our jargon for a specula-
tive mania.
As a nonessential agricultural commodity, the tulip
could have been reproduced rapidly and without limit,
should its relative price have increased. Since market
fundamental prices under any reasonable explanation
should not have attained recorded levels, the tulipmania
phenomenon has made it more likely that a sizable body
of economists will occasionally embrace a rational or 
irrational “bubble hypothesis” in debates about whether
bubbles have emerged in other episodes.

This page intentionally left blank

1
A Political and
Economic
Background
The introduction of the tulip market into the Nether-
lands and the tulipmania occurred in the midst of 
the Eighty Years’ War of independence between the
Dutch and the Spanish.1 Spanish possession of the Low
Countries had arisen through marriage; both the old 
Burgundian possessions in the Low Countries and Spain 
had been melded with Hapsburg territories in Central
Europe in this manner. In trying to centralize and make
organizational sense of this amalgamation of territories,
the Hapsburgs attempted to impose administrative
reforms that initiated the Dutch rebellion in 1567. This
war was waged continuously, with Spain using the
Spanish Netherlands (Belgium) as a base to attack the
United Provinces until the Twelve Years’ Truce was
arranged in 1609. The Spanish were thwarted in their
attempts to subjugate the Netherlands, which con-
solidated its territory and eventually seized control of
most of international shipping. During this phase of the
war, the English and Dutch formed an alliance, under

20
Chapter 1
which the English defeated of the Spanish Armada in
1588.
In 1618, the Thirty Years’ War broke out in Europe,
aligning the Hapsburgs and the Holy Roman Empire,
including the Spanish, on the Catholic side against
various Protestant powers in Central Europe. The Thirty
Years’ War was particularly destructive of the popula-
tions and economies of Central Europe, with many prin-
cipalities in the Holy Roman Empire losing one-third of
their populations. The map from Rich and Wilson (1975,
42) indicates the population declines to the east of the
Netherlands in this period.
With the expiration of the Twelve Years’ Truce in 1621,
the Spanish-Dutch Eighty Years’ War revived as a con-
tinuing parallel of the Thirty Years’ War and did not end
until just before the general peace of 1648. In every year
of the war, the Dutch ﬁelded armies as large as 100,000
men during campaigning seasons and supported large
ﬂeets, though the population of the Netherlands was no
more than 1.5 million. The Dutch provided much of the
strategic planning and ﬁnance for the Protestant effort,
with France negotiating and ﬁnancing the successive
interventions of Denmark and Sweden on the Protestant
side in the 1620s and 1630s.
From 1620 to 1645, the Dutch established near monop-
olies on trade with the East Indies and Japan, conquered
most of Brazil, took possession of the Dutch Caribbean
islands, and founded New York. In 1628, the Dutch West
India Company captured in a Caribbean naval action the

A Political and Economic Background
21
entire year’s output of silver and gold from Spain’s
American possessions, amounting to between 11.5 and 14
million guilders, or about $90 million in today’s gold
prices.2 In 1635, the Dutch formed a military alliance with
Richelieu’s France, which eventually placed the Spanish
Netherlands in a precarious position. In 1639, the Dutch
completely destroyed a second Spanish Armada of a size
comparable to that of 1588. As an outcome of the war,

22
Chapter 1
Spain ceased to be the dominating power in Europe, 
and the Netherlands, though small in population and
resources, became a major power center because of its
complete control over international trade and interna-
tional ﬁnance. The Dutch were to seventeenth-century
trade and ﬁnance as the British were to nineteenth-
century trade and ﬁnance.
Of course, this period was not one of uninterrupted
triumph. Notably, in the years 1634–1637, the Dutch suf-
fered several setbacks. From 1635 to 1637, the bubonic
plague ravaged the Netherlands. In July 1634, the Empire
completely defeated Swedish forces in the Battle of
Nordlingen, forcing a treaty on the German Protestant
principalities in the May 1635 Peace of Prague and releas-
ing Spanish resources for the war against the Dutch.
Along with the growing war weariness in the Nether-
lands, these events forced France to enter the Thirty
Years’ War militarily with the Dutch alliance in 1635. 
Initially unprepared, the French suffered major setbacks,
culminating in an Imperial invasion of northern France
in August 1636. The war did not again turn in favor of
the Dutch until the capture of the important Spanish
fortress of Breda in October 1637.
The expansion of Dutch political power depended on
the rapid development of the Dutch economy. The
Netherlands was a largely urbanized society engaged 
in manufacture, trade, and ﬁnance; the rest of Europe
consisted of peasant societies. The major Dutch indus-
tries were shipbuilding, ﬁsheries, transport, textiles, and

A Political and Economic Background
23
ﬁnance. During the seventeenth century, most ships in
European merchant ﬂeets were built by the Dutch; and
the Dutch merchant ﬂeet outnumbered the ﬂeets of all the
other maritime nations of Europe combined. The Dutch
dominated transport in grains, precious and common
metals, and salt and other bulk goods; as an entrepôt, the
Netherlands provided a natural location for European
markets in all major commodities.
Sophisticated ﬁnance mechanisms evolved with the
establishment of the commodity markets. Amsterdam
became the dominant market for short- and long-term
credit; and markets in stocks, commodity futures, and
options materialized early in the seventeenth century.3
Trading of national loans of many countries centered in
Amsterdam, as did a market in the shares of joint stock
companies. The East India Company, founded in 1602,
gradually gained control over East Asian trade and 
consistently paid out large dividends. The West India
Company, founded in 1622, was given the right to under-
take ventures in the Western Hemisphere, including the
incipient takeover of the Atlantic slave trade.
At the time of the tulip speculation, the Netherlands
was a highly commercialized country with well-
developed and innovative ﬁnancial markets and a large
population of sophisticated traders. Its participation in
innumerable risky ventures had proven so successful that
the era is considered the golden age of the Netherlands.

This page intentionally left blank

2
The Traditional
Image of Tulipmania
Descriptions of the tulip speculation always are framed
in a context of doubt about how the Dutch, usually so
astute in their speculations, could have been caught in
such an obvious blunder. Modern references to the
episode depend on the brief description in Mackay
([1841] 1852). The tulip originated in Turkey but diffused
into Western Europe only in the middle of the sixteenth
century, carried ﬁrst to Austria by a fancier of the ﬂower.
The tulip was immediately accepted by the wealthy 
as a beautiful and rare ﬂower, appropriate for the most
stylish gardens. The market was for durable bulbs, not
ﬂowers. As in so many other markets, the Dutch domi-
nated that for tulips, initiating the development of
methods to create new ﬂower varieties. The bulbs that
commanded high prices produced unique, beautifully
patterned ﬂowers; common tulips were sold at much
lower prices.
Beginning in 1634, nonprofessionals entered the tulip
trade in large numbers. According to Mackay, individual

26
Chapter 2
bulb prices reached enormous levels. For example, a
single Semper Augustus bulb was sold at the height of
the speculation for 5500 guilders, a weight of gold equal
to $33,000 evaluated at $300/oz. Mackay provided
neither the sources of these bulb prices nor the dates on
which they were observed, however.
Mackay emphasized the lunacy of the event through 
a pair of anecdotes about a sailor who mistakenly 
ate valuable bulbs and an unsuspecting English traveler
who experimented with them by peeling off their 
layers. The implausibility of a Dutch businessman
leaving a highly valuable bulb lying about for a loutish
sailor to eat for lunch or for a presumptuous English
experimenter to dissect escaped him. He also described
some barter transactions for acquiring rare bulbs so 
that the monetary expenditure could be translated into
units of goods more meaningful to the modern (1841)
reader.
Mackay then shifted to the ﬁnal speculative frenzy,
stating that large amounts of foreign funds entered the
country to add to the speculation, and people from all
classes hurriedly liquidated other assets to participate in
the tulip market. However, he presented no evidence of
the sources and quantity of these foreign funds.
Finally and inexplicably, the frenzy terminated; and,
overnight, even rare bulbs could ﬁnd no buyers at 
10 percent of their previous prices, creating a long-term 
economic distress, according to Mackay. No evidence of
immediate post-collapse transaction prices of the rare

The Traditional Image of Tulipmania
27
bulbs was produced by Mackay, however. Rather,
Mackay cited prices from bulb sales from 60 years, 130
years, or 200 years later as indicators of the magnitude of
the collapse and of the obvious misalignment of prices at
the peak of the speculation. Moreover, Mackay provided
no evidence of the general economic context from which
the speculation emerged.

This page intentionally left blank

3
Where Does the
Tulipmania Legend
Come From?
Given its strategic position in current views of tulipma-
nia, it is vital to investigate from which sources Mackay
constructed his version of the speculation. While at one
point Mackay includes a minor citation to Johann Beck-
mann, he plagiarized most of his description from Beck-
mann with a little literary embellishment.4
Beckmann, the original source of the sailor and dissec-
tor anecdotes referred to in the previous chapter, cites
Blainville (1743) as his source for the story about the Eng-
lishman. A careful reading of Blainville, however, turns
up only a one-sentence report that a tulip speculation
occurred from 1634–1637 in what is otherwise a baroque
travel log of Haarlem. Indeed, Blainville’s description of
his travels through Holland was a diary of a tour made
in 1705, seventy years after the speculation. For the sailor
story, Beckmann mentions that the incident occurred
while John Balthasar Schuppe (1610–1661) was in
Holland, without other reference. However, the context
of the paragraph in which the story appears seems to

30
Chapter 3
indicate that it happened after the tulip speculation.
Mackay, who greatly dramatizes both stories, cites
Blainville as the source for both, obviously without
having researched beyond Beckmann’s accounts.
Beckmann carefully reported his sources of informa-
tion about the functioning of the markets and bulb sales
prices, using notably the dialogues between Gaergoedt
and Waermondt (“Samenspraeck Tusschen Waermondt
ende Gaergoedt: Flora,” 1637), hereafter denoted G&W,
and Munting’s (1672, 1696) discussions of this episode.
G&W is a series of three pamphlets in dialogue form that
provides details about the markets and numerous prices
of various bulbs, taken mostly from the ﬁnal day of 
the speculation. These pamphlets were motivated by a
moralistic attack against speculation by the authorities,
as were all of the numerous pamphlets that appeared
immediately after the end of the episode.5
Munting was a botanist who wrote a 1000-folio volume
on numerous ﬂowers. Though Mackay claims that the
volume was devoted to the tulipmania, only the six pages
allocated to tulips discuss the episode. Mackay must 
have recorded Beckmann’s reference to Munting without
examining the Munting text at all. All the price data
described in Munting can be found in the G&W dia-
logues, so we must conclude that this is Munting’s
primary source.
The popular version of the tulipmania, to the extent that it
is based on scholarly work, follows a lattice of hearsay fanning
out from the G&W dialogues.

Where Does the Tulipmania Legend Come From?
31
A more careful line of research has had little impact 
on our current interpretation of the tulip speculation.
Solms-Laubach’s (1899) history of tulips in Europe 
provides an extensive description of the available litera-
ture on tulips, including the G&W dialogues. Most of 
his price data originates in G&W, but he also explores
records left by notaries of tulip contracts written during
the mania.
Van Damme documented the tulipmania in a series of
short articles written from 1899 to 1903.6 This series con-
sists of reprints of G&W, reproductions of some pre-
collapse pricing contracts, and details of bulb auctions
from just before the collapse and from six years after the
end of the speculation. Since many of the prices in G&W
are also on the earlier auction list, it provides a key conﬁr-
mation of the validity of the prices in the G&W dialogues.
Posthumus (1927, 1929, 1934), the only economist in
this literature, extended the available data by compiling
and reproducing more of the notaries’ contracts. Most of
his discussion, however, again depends on price infor-
mation in the G&W dialogues and on information com-
piled by Van Damme.
Finally, Krelage (1942, 1946) extensively describes the
markets, though the prices that he reports for the specu-
lation period also seem to come from G&W. Krelage
(1946) does provide tulip price lists from sales in 1708 and
1709 and a 1739 bulb catalogue. In addition, he compiles
a time series of prices for a large variety of hyacinth bulbs
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

32
Chapter 3
Even this line of research accomplishes little more than
gathering additional price data, and those data that we
have are not organized in a systematic time series.
Posthumus attempts to analyze the functioning of the
futures markets that materialized at the end of the spec-
ulation. But in spite of his efforts, we have inherited the
concept of the tulipmania as the most famous of bubbles,
accompanied by no serious effort to describe what might
constitute the market fundamentals of the bulb market.

4
Establishment
Attitudes toward
Futures Markets and
Short Selling: The
Source of the
Pamphlets
In his history of the Dutch Golden Age, Schama 
(1987) discusses the forces that led to the successful
development of the Dutch economy in the seventeenth
century.7 He structures his description around a per-
ceived tension in the ruling oligarchy between “spe-
culation” and safe “investment.” The oligarchy and 
its magistrates sought a balance between “safe” and
“unsafe” areas of economic activity, knowing that sus-
tained economic well-being depended on secure enter-
prises while growth depended on a willingness to
undertake risky new ventures.
Safe areas of economic and ﬁnancial activity were those
regulated by public authorities such as the City Chamber
of Marine Insurance, the Wisselbank, and the trade in
commodities through the Baltic Sea, which the Dutch
effectively monopolized. Riskier though still vital areas
of economic activity were the more distant trades in 
the hands of the Dutch East India Company and the
Dutch West India Company. The East India Company

34
Chapter 4
was enormously successful, earning large proﬁts for its 
shareholders. The West India Company, more an instru-
ment in the military contest with Spain and Portugal, 
performed poorly.
Trading activity in company shares on the bourse was
yet a riskier ﬁnancial activity. Such trades involved spot
transactions, stock options, and futures trades. Soon after
active trading in East India Company shares was initiated
in 1606, organized bear raids were conducted on share
prices under the direction of the noted speculator Isaac
Le Maire. These involved short sales of stock and the
spreading of negative rumors about the affairs of the
company, a tactic employed to this day.
Reaction to these practices led to an edict in 1610 that
prohibited such manipulative activities. Most notably 
for our purposes, the edict banned “windhandel” or
“trading in the wind,” trading in shares not currently
possessed by the seller. Sales for future delivery were per-
mitted to people who actually owned shares. Future sales
that were not obviously for such hedging purposes were
prohibited. The authorities continually regarded futures
trading as immoral gambling, and the edict was reiter-
ated and extended with the renewal of war with Spain in
1621, again in 1630, and most notably in the midst of the
tulipmania in 1636.
The authorities did not prosecute people for partici-
pating in proscribed futures contracts. They simply
refused legal enforcement of such contracts. In a process
known as “an appeal to Frederick” (the Stadholder or

Futures Markets and Short Selling
35
Prince), a buyer of a prohibited futures contract could
repudiate it with the backing of the courts. Thus, the
futures trades and short sales frowned upon by the
authorities could continue as long as contracts could be
privately enforced. A repudiation might lead to the exclu-
sion of an established trader from the bourse and a con-
sequent loss of trading proﬁts in the future, so a buyer
would not likely repudiate a moderate loss on a futures
contract. If the loss were sufﬁcient to bankrupt and
impoverish a trader, he would be likely to repudiate
however.
To the authorities, the tulip speculation represented an
obviously unsafe ﬁnancial speculation in which a legiti-
mate business had suddenly degenerated into a bizarre
form of gambling. The futures trading, which was the
center of the activity, was clearly banned by the edicts;
and in the end, the courts did not enforce deals made in
the taverns where such trading occurred, all of which
were repudiated. It is incomprehensible that anyone
involved in the ﬂuctuating associations of the taverns
would have entered such unenforceable agreements in
the ﬁrst place unless they were merely part of a game.
According to Schama, the speculation frightened the
Dutch elite with a demonstration of how quickly a seem-
ingly safe activity could convert itself into undisciplined
gambling. It was, in their view, money run amok—a kind
of anarchy in which all the conventions and rules for vir-
tuous and sober commercial conduct had been thrown to
the wind (p. 359).

36
Chapter 4
The ruling elite implemented a propaganda drive
against such behavior, described by Shama as follows:
The magistrates of the Dutch towns saw niceties of equity as
less pressing than the need to de-intoxicate the tulip craze. . . .
But they still felt impelled to launch a didactic campaign in
tracts, sermons, and prints against the folly, since its special
wickedness had been leading the common people astray. To the
humanist oligarchs, the tulip mania had violated all their most
sacred tenets: moderation, prudence, discretion, right reason
and reciprocity between effort and reward. (Pp. 361–362)
The objectives of this campaign were to channel spec-
ulative proclivities into the safe areas of economic activ-
ity. Not surprisingly, the safe areas coincided with those
controlled by the ruling elite. Among the numerous anti-
speculative pamphlets launched during this reaction
were the G&W dialogues.

5
The Bubonic Plague
External to the bulb market, one extraordinary event in
the period 1634–1637 may have driven the speculation.
From 1635 to 1637, the bubonic plague ravaged the
Netherlands, killing 17,193 people in Amsterdam alone
in 1636 (one-seventh of the population). It also caused
14,502 deaths in Leiden in 1635 (33 percent of the 1622
population); and it killed 14 percent of the population of
Haarlem, the center of the tulip speculation, from August
to November 1636, the moment when the trading in
common and cheap varieties took off.
The plague had marched westward with the dynam-
ics of the armies in Germany starting in 1630.8 Plague
also broke out from 1623 to 1625, from 1654 to 1655, 
and from 1663 to 1664, killing in Amsterdam one-
ninth, one-eighth, and one-sixth of the population,
respectively.
Van Damme (1976) quotes C. de Koning, who states
that the plague began in 1635 and forced the city author-
ities to take drastic health measures:

38
Chapter 5
These and other precautions could not prevent the progress of
the outbreak that caused 5723 to die during August, Septem-
ber, October and November, 1636, so many that the number of
graveyards was too small. So great was the misery and sorrow
of citizens and inhabitants that the best description would only
be a weak image of the great misery of those unhappy days,
which is why we will end the story by thanking the almighty
God for saving us from this great terror from which our fore-
fathers suffered so much. In the midst of all this misery that
made our city suffer, people were caught by a special fever, by
a particular anxiety to get rich in a very short period of time.
The means to this were thought to be found in the tulip trade.
This trade, so well known in the history of our country, and so
well developed in our city should be taught to our fellow citi-
zens as a proof of forefatherly folly. (Pp. 129–130)
Of the plague in Haarlem, Van Damme notes that “one
can presume that the tulip futures speculation reached 
its peak when the plague was worst.” De Vries (1976)
claims that the plague outbreak of 1635–1636 “perhaps 
by spreading a certain fatalism among the population
kicked off the most frenzied episode of the mania” (226).
The population of the Netherlands faced an increased
probability of imminent death, either from plague or
Spanish invasion, from 1635 to 1637, coincident with the
tulip speculation, and a decline in the probability after-
ward. Although the plague outbreak may be a false clue,
it is conceivable that a gambling binge tied, as we will
see, to a drinking game emerged as a response to the
death threat.

6
The Broken Tulip
An understanding of the tulip markets requires some
information about the nature of the tulip. A bulb ﬂower,
the tulip can propagate either through seeds or through
buds that form on the mother bulb. Properly cultivated,
the buds can directly reproduce another bulb. Each bulb,
after planting, eventually disappears during the growing
season. By the end of the season, the original bulb is
replaced by a clone, the primary bud, which is now a
functioning bulb, and by a few secondary buds. Asexual
reproduction through buds, the principal propagation
method, produces an increase in bulbs at a maximum
annual rate of from 100 to 150 percent in normal bulbs.9
A bulb produced directly from seed requires seven to
twelve years before it ﬂowers. The ﬂowers appear in
April or May and last for about a week. The amount of
time required before the secondary buds ﬂower depends
on the size of the bulb produced from the bud. Hartman
and Kester (1983) state that the time before ﬂowering of
a bulb less than 5cm. in diameter is three years, of a bulb

40
Chapter 6
from 5 to 7cm. is two years, and of a bulb greater than 
8cm. is one year.
In June, bulbs can be removed from their beds but must
be replanted by September. To verify the delivery of a
speciﬁc variety, spot trading in bulbs had to occur imme-
diately after the ﬂowering period, usually in June.
Tulips are subject to invasion by a mosaic virus whose
important effect, called “breaking,” is to produce remark-
able patterns on the ﬂower, some of which are considered
beautiful. The pattern imposed on a particular ﬂower
cannot be reproduced through seed propagation; seeds
will produce bulbs that yield a common ﬂower, since they
are unaffected by the virus. These bulbs may themselves
eventually “break” at some unknown date but into a
pattern that may not be remarkable. Aspeciﬁc pattern can
be reproduced by cultivating the buds into new bulbs.
As another effect, the mosaic virus makes the bulb
sickly and reduces its rate of reproduction. Although 
seventeenth-century ﬂorists thought that breaking was a
normal stage in the maturing process of breeder bulbs
(the stock of bulbs vulnerable to attack by the virus), 
theories arose that broken tulips were diseased. For
example, La Chesnee Monstereul (1654), contrasting the
theory of breaking as “self perfection” with a disease
theory, noted that broken bulbs had smaller bulb and
stem sizes and that they never produced more than three
buds.
Smith (1937, 413) states that broken bulbs do not “pro-
liferate as freely” as undiseased plants but that this 
weakening need not cause broken bulbs to succumb,

The Broken Tulip
41
giving as an example the broken Zomerschoon, which
has been actively cultivated since 1620. Van Slogteren
(1960) claims that the mosaic virus may cause total loss
of a plant or a 10–20 percent reduction in propagation
rates.
Almost all bulbs traded in the tulipmania have by now
completely disappeared. For example, the Royal General
Bulbgrowers Society’s (1969) classiﬁcation of thousands
of actively grown tulips mentions such important bulbs
of the tulip speculation as Admirael Liefkens, Admirael
van der Eyck, Paragon Liefkens, Semper Augustus, and
Viceroy only as historically important names. The only
bulbs still grown were the Gheele Croonen and Lack van
Rijn, despised in the 1630s as common ﬂowers except at
the height of the speculation. Currently, even these bulbs
are grown only by collectors.
The high market prices for tulips, to which the current
version of the tulipmania refers, were for particularly
beautiful broken bulbs. Single-colored breeder bulbs,
except to the extent that they could potentially break,
were not valued; and all important tulip varieties in the
ﬁrst two centuries of European cultivation were diseased.
Broken bulbs fell from fashion only in the nineteenth
century.10 Indeed, since breaking was unpredictable, some
have characterized tulipmania among growers as a
gamble, with growers “vying to produce better and more
bizarre variegations and feathering.”11
Though it is now known that the mosaic virus is spread
by aphids, methods of encouraging breaking were not
well understood in the seventeenth century. G&W 

42
Chapter 6
suggested grafting half a bulb of a broken tulip to half 
a bulb of an unbroken tulip to cause breaking (van
Slogteren 1960, 27). La Chesnee Monstereul (1654, 163)
states that the art of “speeding transformation” was 
controversial among ﬂorists. D’Ardene (1760, 198–217)
devotes a chapter to breaking in tulips, shedding little
light on methods to encourage breaking.

7
The Bulb Market,
1634–1637
The market for bulbs was limited to professional growers
until 1634, but participation encompassed a more general
class of speculators by the end of 1634. A rising demand
for bulbs in France apparently drove the speculation.
In France, it became fashionable for women to array
quantities of fresh tulips at the tops of their gowns.
Wealthy men competed to present the most exotic ﬂowers
to eligible women, thereby driving up the demand for
rare ﬂowers. Munting (1696, 911) claims that at the time
of the speculation, a single ﬂower of a particular broken
tulip was sold for 1000 guilders in Paris. This was a ﬁnal
demand price for a consumption good and not the asset
price of the bulb.
Market participants could make many types of deals.
The rare ﬂowers were called “piece” goods, and particu-
lar bulbs were sold by their weight. The heavier bulbs
had more outgrowths and therefore represented a collec-
tion of future bulbs. The weight standard was the “aas,”
about one-twentieth of a gram. For example, if a Gouda

44
Chapter 7
of 57 azen (plural of aas) were sold for a given price, the
sale contract would refer to a particular bulb planted at
a given location. Once markets developed in common
bulbs, they were sold in standardized units of 1000 azen
or 1 pound (9728 azen in Haarlem, 10,240 azen in Ams-
terdam). Purchase contracts for “pound” goods would
not refer to particular bulbs.
A purchase between September and June was neces-
sarily a contract for future delivery. Also, markets 
materialized for the outgrowths of the rarer bulbs. The
outgrowths could not be delivered immediately, as they
had to attain some minimum size before they could be
separated from the parent bulb to assure the viability of
the new bulb. Hence, the contracts for outgrowths were
also for future delivery.
Formal futures markets developed in 1636 and were
the primary focus of trading before the collapse in Feb-
ruary 1637. Earlier deals had employed written contracts
entered into before a notary. Trading became extensive
enough in the summer of 1636—the peak of the plague—
that traders began meeting in numerous taverns in
groups called “colleges” where trades were regulated 
by a few rules governing the method of bidding and 
fees. Buyers were required to pay one-half stuiver 
(1 stuiver = 1/20 guilder) out of each contracted guilder
to sellers up to a maximum of 3 guilders for each deal for
“wine money.” To the extent that a trader ran a balanced
book over any length of time, these payments would
cancel out. No margin was required from either party, so

The Bulb Market, 1634–1637
45
bankruptcy constraints did not restrict the magnitude of
an individual’s position.
Typically, the buyer did not currently possess the cash
to be delivered on the settlement date, and the seller did
not currently possess the bulb. Neither party intended a
delivery on the settlement date; only a payment of the
difference between the contract and settlement price was
expected. So, as a bet on the price of the bulbs on the set-
tlement date, this market was not different in function
from currently operating futures markets. The opera-
tional differences were that the contracts were not con-
tinuously marked to market—that is, repriced according
to daily price ﬂuctuations, required no margin deposits
to guarantee compliance, and consisted of commitments
of individuals rather than of an exchange. A collapse
would require the untangling of gross, rather than net,
positions.
All discussions of the tulipmania openly criticize the
activity of buying or selling for future delivery without
current possession of the commodity sold or an intention
to effect delivery. They attack futures markets as a means
of creating artiﬁcial risk and do not consider their role in
marketing existing risks.
It is unclear which date was designated as the settle-
ment date in the “college” contracts. No bulbs were deliv-
ered under the deals struck in the new futures markets
in 1636–1637 prior to the collapse because of the neces-
sity of waiting until June to exhume the bulbs. It is 
also unclear how the settlement price was determined.

46
Chapter 7
Beckmann (1846, 29) states that the settlement price was
“determined by that at which most bargains were made,”
presumably at the time of expiration of a given contract.
Again, this is the standard practice in current futures
markets.
Serious and wealthy tulip fanciers who traded regu-
larly in rare varieties did not participate in the new 
speculative markets. Even after the collapse of the 
speculation, they continued to trade rare bulbs for “large
amounts.”12 To the extent that rare bulbs also traded on
the futures markets, this implies that no one arbitraged
the spot and futures markets. Taking a long position in
spot bulbs required substantial capital resources or access
to the ﬁnancial credit markets. To hedge this position
with a short sale in the futures market would have
required the future purchaser to have substantial capital
or access to sound credit; substantial risk of noncompli-
ance with the deal in the futures market would have
undermined the hedge. Since participants in the futures
markets faced no capital requirements, there was no basis
for an arbitrage.
During most of the period of the tulip speculation, high
prices and recorded trading occurred only for the rare
bulbs. Common bulbs did not ﬁgure in the speculation
until November 1636.
Posthumus (1929, 444) hypothesizes the following
timing of events:
I think the sequence of events may be seen as follows. At the
end of 1634, the new nonprofessional buyers came into action.

The Bulb Market, 1634–1637
47
Towards the middle of 1635 prices rose rapidly, while people
could buy on credit, generally delivering at once some article
of value; at the same time the sale per aas was introduced.
About the middle of 1636 the colleges appeared; and soon
thereafter the trade in non-available bulbs was started, while in
November of the same year the trade was extended to the
common varieties, and bulbs were sold by the thousand azen
and per pound.

This page intentionally left blank

8
Some
Characterization of
the Data
To a great extent, the available price data are a blend of
apples and oranges. I cannot separate the prices deter-
mined in the colleges, in which bankruptcy constraints
seem not to have been imposed, from those that may
have been more seriously binding on the transactors.
Moreover, I cannot separate the spot from the futures
deals, although all transactions after September 1636
must have been for future delivery. One natural way to
separate these categories is to split the sample between
“piece” goods and “pound” goods. Posthumus claims
that there was a class difference between those trading in
piece goods and those trading in pound goods, even in
the colleges. Members of the middle classes and capital-
ized workers such as the weavers disdained the pound
goods and traded only in the rarer bulbs.
In charts 1 through 16, I depict the “time series” in
guilders/aas or guilders/bulb that I have been able to
reconstruct for various bulbs. These charts consist of data
gathered from auctions, contracts recorded with notaries,

50
Chapter 8
Chart 1
Semper Augustus
Chart 2
Admirael van der Eyck

Some Characterization of the Data
51
Chart 3
Admirael Liefkens
Chart 4
Gouda mature bulbs

52
Chapter 8
Chart 5
Gouda buds
Chart 6
Switsers

Some Characterization of the Data
53
Chart 7
Scipio
Chart 8
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden

54
Chapter 8
Chart 9
Oudenaerden
Chart 10
Groote Geplumiceerde

Some Characterization of the Data
55
Chart 11
Macx
Chart 12
Nieuwberger

56
Chapter 8
Chart 13
Le Grand
Chart 14
Coorenaerts

Some Characterization of the Data
57
Chart 15
Centen
Chart 16
Viceroy

58
Chapter 8
and the G&W dialogues. Data for Oudenaerden, Scipio,
Nieuwberger, Macx, Groote Geplumiceerde, Coore-
naerts, Centen, Witte Croonen, Gheele ende Roote van
Leyden, and Switsers are in terms of guilders/aas for
standardized weights of pound goods. Data for Semper
Augustus, Admirael van der Eyck, Admirael Liefkens,
Viceroy, and Gouda, are for individual bulbs that vary in
weight from one to many hundred azen. Chart 4 indicates
prices for mature Gouda bulbs; chart 5 is for Gouda of
very low weights, ranging from 1 to 7 aas, which I have
interpreted as bud prices.
The last observations for each series, except for the
Switsers, were recorded on February 5, 1637, apparently
the peak of the mania. For that date, there are usually
several price observations for each ﬂower, but their order
of appearance in the charts has no meaning. Speciﬁcally,
the charts do not indicate a price explosion at an inﬁnite
rate on February 5. I have connected the price lines to the
weighted average of prices for February 5.
The bulbs that can be included among “piece” goods
are Admirael Liefkens, Admirael van der Eyck, Gouda,
Semper Augustus, and Viceroy. Among these, the Gouda
can be considered a standard, since we have the longest
price series for this bulb, starting at the beginning of 
the speculation. The bulbs that can be included among
the “pound” goods, that is, bulbs trading in 1000 aasen
or pound lots are Centen, Coorenaerts, Gheele ende
Roote van Leyden, Groote Geplumiceerde, Le Grand,
Macx, Nieuwburger, Oudenaerden, Switsers, and Witte

Some Characterization of the Data
59
Croonen.13 Other bulbs are more difﬁcult to classify,
encompassing different deals in which either odd
weights or standard weights appear.
Generally, the pound goods sold at much lower prices
per aas than the piece goods. However, in the last few
months of the speculation—at the time of the outbreak of
plague in Haarlem—their prices increased much more
rapidly than did those of the piece goods. Prices of Coore-
naerts, Gheele ende Roote van Leyden, Le Grand, Macx,
Oudenaerden, Switsers, and Witte Croonen rose up to
twentyfold within one month. Over a much longer
period, the prices of the piece goods doubled or perhaps
tripled.
The exception to the relatively slow price movement
for rarer bulbs is for the prices of Gouda buds shown in
chart 5. Apparently, buds attracted speculation of the
same sort as the common varieties. However, the very
sharp rise comes from a single observation of 56 guilders
per aas for a 4 aas bulb on the last day of the speculation,
February 5. Through January 29, the price data for Gouda
buds were about the same as for mature bulbs—14
guilders per aas on January 29 and 5 guilders per aas on
January 2 for buds compared to mature bulb prices of
10.8 guilders per aas on December 12 and a range
between 3.6 and 10 guilders per aas on February 5. This
fourfold increase in Gouda bud price is of the same order
of magnitude as the price jumps for several of the
common bulbs in the last week or two of the specula-
tion—for example, Switser, Centen, and Macx.

This page intentionally left blank

9
Post-Collapse Tulip
Prices
The tulip speculation collapsed after the ﬁrst week of
February 1637, but there is no explanation for this timing.
A general suspension of settlement occurred on contracts
coming due—that is, contracts were not rolled over.
On February 24, 1637, delegates of ﬂorists meeting in
Amsterdam proposed that sales of tulips contracted on
or before November 30, 1636 should be executed. For
later contracts, the buyer would be given the right to
reject the deal on payment of 10 percent of the sale price to
the seller. This may be the source of the claims in Mackay
that bulbs could not sell at 10 percent of their peak prices.
The authorities did not adopt this suggestion.
On April 27, 1637, the States of Holland decided to
suspend all contracts, giving the seller of existing bulbs
the right to sell contracted bulbs at market prices during
the suspension. The buyer in the contract would be
responsible for the difference between this market price
and whatever price the authorities eventually deter-
mined for contract settlement. This decision released 

62
Chapter 9
the growers to market the bulbs that would emerge in
June.
The disposition of further settlement then becomes
murky. Posthumus (1929, 446–447) states that many cities
followed the example of Haarlem where in May 1638, the
city council passed a regulation permitting buyers to 
terminate a contract on payment of 3.5 percent of the 
contract price.
Even the pre-collapse legal status of the futures con-
tracts was unclear. Early price manipulation and bear
raids in East India Company shares led to legal bans on
short sales on the Amsterdam exchange in 1610. Whether
the ban applied to traders on the new tulip futures
market is unclear. Ultimately, the courts did not uphold
any contracts for tulips, but local attempts at settlement
were made.
With the end of large-scale bulb trading after February
1637, records of transaction prices virtually disappeared.
Prices no longer were publicly recorded, and only an occa-
sional estate auction of an important ﬂorist would reveal
the magnitude of prices. Prior to 1634, only a handful of
prices are available from recorded sales contracts: a pair 
of bulbs from 1612 reported by Posthumus (1929) in his
contract numbers 3 and 4; a 1625 sale of three bulbs; and a
1633 sale of a pair of bulbs, both reported in Posthumus
(1934). Even the series in chart 1 for the Semper Augustus
is based on undocumented stories emanating from the 
historical authority Wassenaer in the 1620s, as reported by
Solms-Laubach (1899, 77), among others.

Post-Collapse Tulip Prices
63
Fortunately, van Damme (1976, 109–113) reports prices
from a post-collapse estate auction in 1643. In the estate
auction of the bulb dealer J. van Damme (no relation), 
ﬂ. 42,013 were raised through the sale of bulbs. This
amount reﬂects a bulb value comparable to the ﬂ. 68,553
derived from the February 1637 estate auction from
which we have received most of the tulipmania peak
price data.
This total was not broken down into individual bulb
prices. For those few bulbs sold in which the estate held
a fractional interest, however, the sales prices were
reported (van Damme 1976, 111). The prices were as
follows:
1 Tulpa Meerman
ﬂ. 430
1 Vrouge Brantson
ﬂ. 25
1 General Rotgans
ﬂ. 138
1 Verspreijt
ﬂ. 582
1 Vroege Brantson
1/4 of 1 English Admiral
In addition, the records detailing the settling of the
estate’s accounts contains a list of 1643 cash expenditures
for bulbs purchased in 1642. These prices were as follows:
1/2 pound Witte Croonen
ﬂ. 37 st. 10
1 Admirael van der Eyck
ﬂ. 225
1 English Admiral outgrowth
1 English Admiral
ﬂ. 210

64
Chapter 9
Individual bulbs then could still command high prices
six years after the collapse. Four bulbs whose prices were
listed individually also appear among the bulbs traded
in 1636–1637: Witte Croonen, English Admiral, Admirael
van der Eyck, and General Rotgans (Rotgansen). Witte
Croonen were pound goods, and the others were piece
goods. Table 9.1 presents a comparison of 1636, 1637, and
1642 or 1643 prices.
Even from the peaks of February 1637, the price
declines of the rarer bulbs, English Admiral, Admiral van
der Eyck, and General Rotgans, over the course of six
years was not unusually rapid. We shall see below that
they ﬁt the pattern of decline typical of a prized variety.
Table 9.1
Post-Collapse Bulb Prices in Guilders
Jan.
Feb. 5,
1642 or
Annual %
Bulb
1637
1637
1643
Depreciation1
1. Witte Croonen
64.
1668.
37.5
76
(one-half pound)
(avg.)
2. English Admiral
700.
210.
24
(bulb)
(25 aas bulb)
3. Admirael van der
1345.
220.*
36
Eyck
(bulb)
(wtd. avg.)
4. General Rotgans
805.
138.
35
(Rotgansen)
(1000 azen)
*Adjusted downward ﬂ. 5 to account for the English Admiral 
outgrowth.
1From February 1637 peak.

10
Bulb Prices in 
Later Centuries
Eighteenth-Century Tulip Prices
Though a few prices are available from the years imme-
diately after the collapse, a gap of about seventy years
arises in detailed tulip price data. While price data dis-
appeared, at least the names of the important tulips 
from the speculation remained current thirty-two years
after the collapse. Van der Groen (1669) mentions the
important tulips that a fashionable garden might hold.
Among them were Vroege Bleyenberger, Parragon
Grebber, Gheel and Roote van Leyden, Admirael van
Enchuysen, Brabanson, Senecours, Admirael de Man,
Coorenaerts, Jan Gerritz, Gouda, Saeyblom, Switsers,
Parragon Liefkens, and Semper Augustus.
High tulip prices are available only for much later
periods, and these are an order of magnitude lower 
than those quoted during the speculation. Van Damme
(1976) reproduces numerous announcements of bulb
sales and auctions printed in such periodicals as the 

66
Chapter 10
Haarlemscher Courant in the latter half of the seventeenth
century, but there is no record of prices generated in the
auctions.
Table 10.1 reports prices for bulbs from January 2, 1637;
February 5, 1637; 1722; and 1739. These prices come from
several sources. Krelage (1946) reproduces tulip lists from
Table 10.1
Guilder Prices of Tulip Bulbs Common to 1637, 1722, and 1739 Price
Lists
Jan. 2,
Feb. 5,
Bulb
1637
1637
1722
1739
1. Admirael de Man
18.
209.
0.1
2. Gheele Croonen
0.41
20.5
0.025*
3. Witte Croonen
2.2
57.
0.02*
4. Gheele ende Roote
17.5
136.5
0.1
0.2
van Leyden
5. Switsers
1.
30.
0.05
6. Semper Augustus
2000.
6290.
0.1
(7/1/25)
7. Zomerschoon
480.
0.15
0.15
8. Admirael van Enchuysen
4900.
0.2
9. Fama
776.
0.03*
10. Admirael van Hoorn
65.5
0.1
11. Admirael Liefkens
2968.
0.2
Note: To construct this table, I have assumed a standard bulb size of
175 azen. All sales by the bulb are assumed to be in the standard
weight, and prices are adjusted proportionally from reported prices.
When more than one bulb price is available on a given day, I report
the average of adjusted prices.
*Sold in lots of 100 bulbs.

Bulb Prices in Later Centuries
67
auctions on May 17, 1707, in the Hague (542) and on 
May 16, 1708, in Rotterdam (541), on which a 
participant fortuitously annotated the ﬁnal sales 
prices. While the 1707 auction list contains eighty-
four different bulb names and that of 1708 contains
twelve, no bulb name of the hundreds commonly traded
in 1637 appears in the lists. Krelage reproduces only 
the ﬁrst page of the 1708 price list. The entire list was 
sold 
to 
British 
buyers 
with 
the 
breakup 
of 
Krelage’s library, and I have been unable to examine it.
Bradley (1728) reproduces the 1722 bulb catalogue of a
Haarlem ﬂorist. The majority of the hundreds of bulbs in
this catalogue were offered at prices less than one guilder,
and only one, Superintendent Roman, sold for 100
guilders. The list, however, does contain prices for twenty-
ﬁve bulbs that appeared in the 1637 tulip speculation.
Krelage (1946) also reproduces a 1739 Haarlem price
catalogue of hyacinth and tulip bulbs. Of its several
hundred different bulbs, only six names match those of
bulbs traded in 1637. Interestingly, it offers Semper
Augustus bulbs for 0.1 guilders.
Even starting in January 1637, before the peak of the
speculation, the price decline is remarkable. Prices fall to
levels of 1 percent, 0.5 percent, 0.1 percent, or 0.005
percent of the January 1637 values over a century. Also
noteworthy is the convergence of prices of all individu-
ally sold bulbs to a common value, regardless of the
initial bulb values.

Table 10.2 contains prices of bulbs common to the 
1707 auction and either the 1722 or the 1739 price 
lists. While this was not a period known for a tulip 
speculation or crash, prices display the same pattern 
of decline. Bulbs appearing on an auction list were 
for recently developed rare varieties that commanded 
relatively high prices. None of the bulbs on the 1739 
list carried a price greater than eight guilders, while 
most prices were much lower. Rare and valuable 
bulbs would not have appeared on a standard dealer’s
list. Conversely, auctions would not have bothered 
with common, inexpensive bulbs. Because the 1637 
rare bulbs had become common by 1707, it is not 
surprising that their names had disappeared from
auction lists.
By the time they appeared in a general catalogue, they
had diffused sufﬁciently to become relatively common.
Again, in thirty-two years, prices declined to 3 percent,
0.25 percent, 0.35 percent, or 0.04 percent of their original
values, repeating the pattern of decline of the bulbs from
the tulipmania. Indeed, the valuable bulbs of 1707 even
converged approximately to the same prices as the 
valuable bulbs of 1637.
We now have a pattern in the evolution of prices 
of newly developed, fashionable tulip bulbs. The 
ﬁrst bulbs, unique or in small supply, carry high prices.
With time, the price declines rapidly either because 
of rapid reproduction of the new variety or because of 
the increasing introduction of new varieties. Anyone 
68
Chapter 10

Bulb Prices in Later Centuries
69
Table 10.2
Guilder Prices of Tulip Bulbs, 1707, 1722, and 1739
Annual % Depreciation
Bulb
1707
1722
1739
1707–22
1722–39
1. Triomphe d’Europe
6.75
0.3
0.2
2. Premier Noble
409.
1.0
19*
3. Aigle Noir
110.
0.75
0.3
33
4. Roi de Fleurs
251.
10.0
0.1
22
27
5. Diamant
71.
2.5
2.0
22
6. Superintendent
100.
0.12
40
7. Keyzer Kazel de VI
40.
0.5
26
8. Goude Zon, bontlof
15.
10.0
2
9. Roy de Mouritaine
15.
2.0
12
10. Triomphe Royal
10.
1.0
14
Sources: Krelage (1946) and Bradley (1728).
*1707–1739.

70
Chapter 10
who acquired a rare bulb would have understood this
standard pattern of anticipated capital depreciation, at
least by the eighteenth century.
To apply this pattern to the post-collapse period, I 
treat as rare all eighteenth-century bulbs selling for 
at least 100 guilders (Premier Noble, Aigle Noir, Roi 
de Fleurs, and Superintendent. For example, Roi de
Fleurs would be counted as rare when its price was 
ﬂ. 251 in 1707. By 1722, its price was ﬂ. 10, so it would 
no longer be considered rare. The price declined between
1707 and 1722 by 96 percent, and the average 
annual decline was 21.5 percent. This 21.5 percent 
annual decline was averaged with similarly computed
declines for other rare bulbs to produce an overall
average.
Prices for these bulbs declined at an average 
annual percentage rate of 28.5 percent. From table 9.1, 
the three costly bulbs of February 1637 (English Admiral,
Admirael van der Eyck, and General Rotgans) had an 
average annual price decline of 32 percent from the 
peak of the speculation through 1642. Using the 
eighteenth-century price depreciation rate as a bench-
mark also followed by expensive bulbs after the mania,
we can infer that any price collapse for rare bulbs in 
February 1637 could not have exceeded 16 percent of
peak prices. Thus, the crash of February 1637 for rare
bulbs was not of extraordinary magnitude and did not
greatly affect the normal time series pattern of rare bulb
prices.

Bulb Prices in Later Centuries
71
Eighteenth-Century Hyacinth Prices
As further evidence of this standard pattern in bulb
prices, I now turn to the market for hyacinths. Krelage
supplies prices of hyacinths during the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. Hyacinths replaced tulips at the
start of the eighteenth century as the fashionable ﬂower,
and once again a large effort arose to innovate beautiful
varieties. A speculation similar to that for tulips occurred
from 1734 to 1739, leading to the production of reprints
of G&W as a warning against unconstrained ﬁnancial
contracting. Table 10.3 indicates the magnitude of the
price declines for a few of the more expensive bulbs
during the hyacinthmania. The price decline to as low as
10 percent of 1735 prices in some cases was of similar
magnitude to the 1637 crash for common tulip bulbs.
Krelage provides long price series for many hyacinths
after their introduction. In table 10.3, I have mainly
selected the price patterns for bulbs carrying particularly
high prices at the time of introduction. Note that the
pattern is similar to that for prized tulips in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth century. Within three decades,
prices of even the highest priced bulbs usually fell to 1–2
percent of the original price. Both originally highly priced
and inexpensive bulbs converged to a price of from 0.5
to 1 guilder. The average annual rate of price deprecia-
tion for bulbs valued at more than 100 guilders (8 
observations) was 38 percent, somewhat faster than the
depreciation rate for tulip bulbs. For bulbs valued at

72
Chapter 10
between 10 and 80 guilders, the annual price deprecia-
tion averaged 20 percent.
Modern Bulb Prices
In modern times, new ﬂower bulb varieties can also be
highly valuable. Typically, however, new varieties are
Table 10.3
Hyacinth Price Patterns (Guilders)
Bulb
1716
1735
1739
1788
1802
1808
1. Coralijn*
100
12.75
2
0.6
—
—
2. L’Admirable
100
—
1
1.
—
—
3. Starrekroon
200
—
1
0.3
—
0.3
4. Vredenrijck
—
80
16
1.5
—
—
5. Koning Sesostris
—
100
8
1.
1
—
6. Staaten Generaal
—
210
20
1.5
2
—
7. Robijn
—
12
4
1
1
0.5
8. Struijsvogel
—
161
20
—
—
—
9. Miroir
—
141
10
—
—
—
Bulb
1788
1802
1815
1830
1845
1875
10. Comte de la Coste
200
50
1
0.75
0.5
0.15
11. Henri Quatre
50
30
1
3
5
1
12. Van Doeveren
50
—
1
2
1.2
0.75
13. Flos Niger
60
20
10
—
0.25
(1860)
14. Rex rubrorum
3
1.5
0.3
1
0.35
0.24
Source: Krelage, 645–655.
*Krelage (645) notes that the Coralijn bulb originally sold for 1000
guilders, though he does not include a year.

Bulb Prices in Later Centuries
73
reproduced in mass by the bulb’s developer and mar-
keted at relatively low prices only when a large quantity
of bulbs has been produced. Hence, prices for prototype
bulbs are usually unavailable. In the few cases where a
prototype bulb does change hands, transaction prices are
not announced. Information provided in 1987 by ofﬁcials
at the Bloembollencentrum in Haarlem indicates, how-
ever, that new varieties of “very special” tulip bulbs sold
for about 5000 guilders ($2400 at 1987 exchange rates) per
kilo. A small quantity of prototype lily bulbs was sold for
1 million guilders ($480,000 at 1987 exchange rates,
$693,000 at 1999 consumer prices), namely, the price of a
ﬁne house, a car, a suit of clothes, several tons of wheat,
rye, butter, and so forth. Such bulbs can now be repro-
duced rapidly with tissue growth techniques, so they also
would be marketed at relatively low prices.

This page intentionally left blank

11
Was This Episode a
“Tulipmania”?
I now examine whether the evidence demands a mania
interpretation for the tulip price movements. First, I will
dispose of two nagging issues: (1) the absence of descrip-
tions of economic distress in accounts of the period not
engaged in antispeculative moralizing, and (2) the claims
that the disappearance of renowned bulbs or their
extreme price declines over long time periods signal the
lunacy of the event. Next, I will isolate the aspect of the
speculation for which the evidence provides no com-
pelling explanation, the trading in common bulbs in the
period from January 2, 1637, to February 5, 1637.
Where Was the Purported Economic Distress?
Economic histories of the important events and institu-
tions in the Netherlands during this period are detailed,
but they hardly mention the tulip speculation. For
example, volumes IV and V of The Cambridge Economic
History of Europe (Rich and Wilson 1975, 1977) do not

76
Chapter 11
mention tulips, though the seventeenth-century Dutch
are the leading players in these narratives. The period is
characterized as a sequence of Dutch commercial and
ﬁnancial triumphs, and economic distress seems not to
have materialized in the Netherlands until after the
Thirty Years’ War ended in 1648. Cooper (1970, 100) does
mention the tulip speculation, in one sentence, as an
example of the speculative proclivity of the Dutch during
this period. Schama (1987) provides a detailed discussion
of the events based primarily on Posthumus and Krelage,
but he does not depart from the standard interpretation
of the mania.
It is not difﬁcult to understand why general economic
studies of this period take little notice of “economic dis-
tress” arising from the speculation. Because the longer-
term price rise occurred only in the rare bulbs, no
signiﬁcant agricultural resources were devoted to expand
their cultivation. Krelage (1946, 498) states that all ﬂorists
in Haarlem maintained their gardens within the city
walls until the second half of the eighteenth century.
Gardens could be small, since concentrations of large
numbers of identical ﬂowers were not valued highly,
unlike current fashion.
Because the spectacular price rise in the common 
bulbs occurred only after the bulbs were in the ground in
September 1636, rises in these prices could also have 
had little effect on the allocation of resources during
1636–1637. To the extent that the speculation had 
any impact, it would have had an effect only through the

Was This Episode a “Tulipmania”?
77
distribution of wealth. Little wealth was actually 
transferred, however; the fees paid out by buyers in 
the colleges must have evened out over the course of
many transactions, though the “wine money” may 
have indicated a transfer to tavern owners. In addition,
after the collapse, only small settlements were required;
and of these, few were made. Even the period of uncer-
tainty about the percentage of settlement required 
could have had little impact; people with little credit 
to begin with would not have been affected by a cut 
off of credit until the contracts were straightened 
out.
Kindleberger, in his new edition of Manias, Panics, and
Crashes (1996), which dominates the popular mind on the
history of bubbles, added a chapter on tulipmania, which
had not been in previous editions, to critique my view
that the tulipmania was based on fundamentals. He
argued that in fact there were signs of continuation of the
tulip exuberance because the share prices of the Dutch
East India Company doubled between 1630 and 1639,
which is three years after the end of the mania. (In nine
years, the Dow has quadrupled; but this is not necessar-
ily the sign of irrationality.) But most of this occurred
after 1636, rising from 229 in March 1636 to 412 in 1639,
nearly a doubling in three years. Of course, the Spanish
armies were on the march in 1636, which would have had
some effect on East India shares, and by 1639 had been
pushed away. When a second Armada that threatened
East India trade was destroyed in 1639, things looked

78
Chapter 11
rather good again. Trolling for an impact on the real
economy from the tulipmania, Kindleberger (1996) then
stretches the timing for possible distress from tulipmania
into the 1640s: “This perspective undermines one of
Garber’s points that there could have been no tulipma-
nia because there was no depressed aftermath. In fact the
Dutch economy slowed down to a degree in the 1640s
before putting on a tremendous spurt from 1650 to 1672”
(101).14
Bulb Prices Decline Fast: It Is in Their Nature
That the valuable tulips of 1634–1637 later either disap-
peared or became common is typical of the market
dynamics for newly developed bulb varieties, as indi-
cated by price patterns for eighteenth-century tulip and
hyacinth bulbs and for modern bulbs. As the bulbs prop-
agate, their prices naturally fall with expanding supply;
however, the original bulb owner’s bulb stock increases.
The discounted value of bulb sales can easily justify
extremely high prices for the unique bulb of a new
variety. Even the magnitudes of prices for valuable bulbs
and their patterns of decline are not out of line with later
prices for new varieties of rare bulbs. Single bulbs in 
the eighteenth century commanded prices as high as 
1000 guilders. In this context, the 1000–2000 guilder 
price of Semper Augustus from 1623 to 1625 or even its
5500 guilder price in 1637 do not appear obviously 
overvalued.

Was This Episode a “Tulipmania”?
79
The Common Bulbs
The only facet of the speculation for which an explana-
tion does not emerge from the evidence is the one-month
price surge for common bulbs in January 1637, when
prices rose up to twentyfold. After February 9, 1637, the
ﬁrst price observation for a common bulb, the Witte
Croonen, is available only in 1642.
Claims that prices dropped to less than 10 percent of
peak values after the crash must have originated in the
ofﬁcially proposed 3.5 percent contract settlement fee.
This did not necessarily reﬂect the true price decline but
simply provided a means of relieving buyers of most of
their losses. For example, suppose that a futures contract
had established a price of ﬂ. 500 for a bulb but that its set-
tlement price had been ﬂ. 350 after the collapse. This is 
a substantial loss of ﬂ. 150 that may even have wiped 
out the buyer if the contract had been taken seriously.
Instead, the ofﬁcial proposal would have required a
payment on the lost bet of ﬂ. 17.5, but we learn nothing
of the post-collapse price of the underlying bulb from the
proposed settlement percentage. Because they never cite
a speciﬁc transaction price (none exist from trades imme-
diately after the crash), authors citing massive price falls
must have inferred them from the percentages proposed
for contract buyouts, to the extent that they researched
the issue at all.
Table 9.1 contains the price data for one-half pound of
Witte Croonen bulbs. From February 1637 to 1642, the

80
Chapter 11
price depreciated at an annual rate of 76 percent. As an
eighteenth-century benchmark rate, I have used 17
percent per year, the average rate of depreciation of all
bulbs priced between ﬂ. 10 and ﬂ. 71 in table 10.2. Assum-
ing that after February 1637 Witte Croonen depreciated
at this benchmark rate, the price must have collapsed in
the crash to 5 percent of its peak price to have attained a
1642 price of ﬂ. 37.5. Thus, Witte Croonen prices rose by
about twenty-six times in January 1637 and fell to one-
twentieth of their peak value in the ﬁrst week of Febru-
ary. The eighteenth-century benchmark pattern of price
depreciation, however, would have justiﬁed a peak price
of ﬂ. 84; so the January price is not out of line.
That a precipitous price decline for common bulbs
occurred is conﬁrmed by observations on Switsers in
chart 5. The peak price for this bulb of 0.17 guilders/aas
was attained on February 5, the apparent peak of the
market. Data from notarized contracts on February 6 and
9 indicate a sudden decline to 0.11 guilders/aas. This rep-
resents a substantial decline from the prices of the ﬁrst
ﬁve days of February, but it still substantially exceeds the
prices attained on January 23 and is not of the same order
of magnitude as the collapse indicated above for Witte
Croonen.
Since already valuable bulbs rose by no more than
200–300 percent over a longer duration, the increase 
and collapse of the relative price of common bulbs is 
the remarkable feature of this phase of the speculation.
Even if detailed, day-to-day information about market

Was This Episode a “Tulipmania”?
81
events for this period were available, we would be 
hard pressed to ﬁnd a market fundamental explanation
for these relative price movements. It is clear that the
“colleges” generated these prices, although they are
echoed in some written contracts. As noted earlier, the
college futures markets suffered from a lack of internal
control over the nature of contracts, which might have
encouraged a speculation of this sort. These markets 
consisted of a collection of people without equity 
making ever-increasing numbers of “million dollar bets”
with one another with some knowledge that the 
state would not enforce the contracts. This was no more
than a meaningless winter drinking game, played by a
plague-ridden population that made use of the vibrant
tulip market.
In any case, the price movements of the common bulbs
have little to do with the image of the tulipmania that we
have inherited from Mackay and his myriad followers,
which was all about the astoundingly high prices and
bizarre deals for single rare bulbs.
Indeed, discussions on how strange the tulipmania
was have until recently centered on the rare bulbs, espe-
cially on one often cited, particularly bizarre trade men-
tioned in Mackay. On this trade, Krelage (1942, 67)
states:15
In popular articles about the tulipmania the story of a transac-
tion where a whole list of different goods up to a total value of
ﬂ2500 or ﬂ3000 was paid for a single Viceroy bulb lives on.
Even in a foreign book of academic quality it is assumed

82
Chapter 11
without further research that this transaction was indeed
carried out.
The story however relates to a non-existent transaction. The
key can be found in a pamphlet16 discussing the “wind trade”
[i.e., futures speculation] which states “as a wonder for refer-
ence of future generations” that in 1636 one could buy “all the
following goods for the value of one ﬂower [bulb]
2 lasts of wheat
448 guilders
4 lasts of rye
558
4 well-fed oxen
480
8 well-fed pigs
240
12 well-fed sheep
120
2 oxheads of wine
70
4 tons of 8 guilder beer
32
2 tons butter
192
1000 pounds cheese
120
1 bed with accessories
100
1 stack of clothes
80
1 silver chalice 
60
Total
2500 guilders
Add to this a ship to carry all these goods worth ﬂ500. And
one has got ﬂ3000 for which one cannot buy the best tulip bulb
(so the ﬂorists say).”
The intent of this statement is to give the reader an idea of
the real value of the money spent on a single bulb. Someone,
retelling the story, added that this transaction, which he must
have considered as actually having taken place, must have
involved a Viceroy because one of those bulbs sold, according
to other records, for ﬂ3000. Since that day the story goes
around.
Krelage adds that no other records are available of trans-
actions with such different goods and questions whether
any seller would want this kind of transaction in a time
when food was not scarce.

Was This Episode a “Tulipmania”?
83
As an example of yet another author of a “foreign book
of academic quality,” Kindleberger cannot resist passing
on the myth: “Other down-payments consisted of tracts
of land, houses, furniture, silver and gold vessels, paint-
ings, a suit and a coat, a coach and dapple gray pair; and
for a single Viceroy (rare), valued at Fl. 2500, two lasts (a
measure which varies by commodity and locality) of
wheat and four of rye, eight pigs, a dozen sheep, two
oxheads of wine, four tons of butter, a thousand pounds
of cheese, a bed, some clothing, and a silver beaker”
Kindleberger (1996, 100–101, crediting Schama and
Krelage, 67).
Even a serious historian, Schama (1987, 358), citing 
the very page from Krelage quoted above, completely
ignores the context to emphasize only a bizarre transac-
tion that, according to Krelage, never happened. He even
feels free to weave his own ﬁction around the story: “In
all liklihood it was a farmer who paid ﬂ. 2500 for a single
Viceroy in the form of two last of wheat and four of rye,
four fat oxen, eight pigs, a dozen sheep, two oxheads of
wine, four tons of butter, a thousand pounds of cheese, a
bed, some clothing, and a silver beaker.”
The wonderful tales from the tulipmania are catnip
irresistible to those with a taste for crying bubble, even
when the stories are so obviously untrue. So perfect are
they for didactic use that ﬁnancial moralizers will always
ﬁnd a ready market for them in a world ﬁlled with
investors ever fearful of ﬁnancial Armageddon.

This page intentionally left blank

III
The Macro Bubbles

This page intentionally left blank

12
A Preliminary View:
The Mississippi and
South Sea Bubbles
The ﬁnancial dynamics of these speculations assumed
remarkably similar forms. Government connivance was
at the heart of these schemes. Each involved a company
that sought a rapid expansion of its balance sheet through
corporate takeovers or acquisition of government debt,
ﬁnanced by successive issues of shares, and with spec-
tacular payoffs to governments. The new waves of shares
marketed were offered at successively higher prices. The
purchasers of the last wave of shares took the greatest
losses when stock prices fell, while the initial buyers 
generally gained.
Adam Anderson (1787, 123–124) presents a remarkably
lucid description of such speculative dynamics in which
a sequence of investors buy equal shares in a venture:
A, having one hundred pounds stock in trade, though pretty
much in debt, gives it out to be worth three hundred pounds,
on account of many privileges and advantages to which he is
entitled. B, relying on A’s great wisdom and integrity, sues to
be admitted partner on those terms, and accordingly buys three

88
Chapter 12
hundred pounds into the partnership. The trade being after-
wards given out or discovered to be very improving, C comes
in at ﬁve hundred pounds; and afterwards D, at one thousand
one hundred pounds. And the capital is then completed to two
thousand pounds. If the partnership had gone no further than
A and B, then A had got and B had lost one hundred pounds.
If it had stopped at C, then A had got and C had lost two
hundred pounds; and B had been where he was before: but D
also coming in, A gains four hundred pounds, and B two
hundred pounds; and C neither gains nor loses: but D loses six
hundred pounds. Indeed, if A could shew that the said capital
was intrinsically worth four thousand and four hundred
pounds, there would be no harm done to D; and B and C would
have been obliged to him. But if the capital at ﬁrst was worth
but one hundred pounds, and increased only by subsequent
partnership, it must then be acknowledged that B and C have
been imposed on in their turns, and that unfortunate thought-
less D paid the piper.
Should we, as outside observers, interpret such a se-
quence of transactions and prices as a bubble? The in-
trinsic value of the venture from the point of view of the
new investors is the crux of the matter.
First, if the original investor falsely claimed that the
venture promised great dividends, though as yet unreal-
ized, he would be committing fraud. The new investors,
however, would be basing their decisions on their per-
ception of market fundamentals. This is a situation of
asymmetric information in which one player has an
incentive to dissemble.
Second, the original investor might use some of 
the proceeds from the stock sales to pay high dividends
to the early investors. This would provide concrete 

A Preliminary View
89
evidence of the great prospects of the venture to new
investors. Of course, this twist on the original fraud is
known as a Ponzi scheme; but since the “pigeons” are
acting on their view of market fundamentals, there is still
no bubble.
Third, the great future earnings may actually material-
ize, thereby satisfying all investors. This result is typical
of the early stages of successful companies; and the
sequence of stock issues at increasing prices would
neither surprise a modern investment banker nor raise
the eyebrows of the SEC. In this case, the promised
market fundamentals would actually materialize.
Fourth, the projected future earnings, though based on
the best available evidence, may fail to materialize. If the
evidence of failure appears suddenly, the share price will
suffer a precipitous decline, causing late buyers vocifer-
ously to regret their purchases. Hindsight will readily
identify the blind folly of the investors and, if it is extreme
enough, perhaps categorize the event as a bubble. In fact,
the traditional deﬁnition of a bubble, as in Palgrave (1926,
181), is “any unsound commercial undertaking accom-
panied by a high degree of speculation.” If the under-
taking appeared sound at the start, however, and only
looks foolish in hindsight, economists should classify this
event as being driven by market fundamentals.
Finally, all investors may understand perfectly well
that the venture has no chance of paying large dividends
but that a sequence of share buyers at ever increasing
prices is available. Investors buy in on a gamble that they

90
Chapter 12
will not be in the last wave of buyers. The modern eco-
nomics literature refers to this scenario as a bubble or
chain letter. We now consider whether the Mississippi
and South Sea episodes can ﬁt only in the last category.

13
John Law and the
Fundamentals of the
Mississippi and
South Sea Bubbles
John Law’s Financial System
Both the Mississippi and South Sea Bubbles can best be
understood in the context of the monetary theory and
system created by John Law.17 Law is not well known
today, but Schumpeter (1954, 295), for example, is unre-
served in praising him: “He worked out the economics
of his projects with a brilliance and, yes, profundity
which places him in the front ranks of monetary theorists
of all times.”
Law sketched a monetary theory in an environment of
unemployed resources. In such an environment, he
argued ([1705] 1760, 190–191), an emission of paper cur-
rency would expand real commerce permanently,
thereby increasing the demand for the new currency 
sufﬁciently to preclude pressure on prices. To ﬁnance a
great economic project, an entrepreneur needed only 
the power to create claims that served as a means 
of payment. Once ﬁnanced, the project would proﬁt 

92
Chapter 13
sufﬁciently from the employment of previously wasted
resources to justify the public’s faith in its liabilities.
Economic policy advocates and their ideas, good or
bad, ﬂoat to the surface only when they provide a con-
venient pretext for politicians to impose their preferred
schemes. Law’s idea got its chance in France in 1715.
France had been bankrupted by the wars of Louis XIV. In
a situation recently repeated by Russia in 1998, France
had repudiated part of its internal debt, forced a reduc-
tion in interest due on the remainder, and was still in
arrears on its debt servicing. High taxes, combined with
a tax system full of privileges and exemptions, had seri-
ously depressed economic activity.
The French economic environment was well suited for
Law’s scheme, and he quickly convinced the Regent to
permit him to open a conventional, note-issuing bank in
June 1716, the Banque Generale. In August 1717, Law
organized the Compagnie d’Occident to take over the
monopoly on trade with Louisiana and on trade in Cana-
dian beaver skins. This line of business is the source of
the word “Mississippi” in characterizing Law’s system.
To ﬁnance the company, Law took subscriptions on
shares to be paid partly in cash but mostly in government
debt. He then converted the government’s debt into long-
term rentes, offering the government an interest-rate
reduction.
The idea was to establish a solid “fund of credit,” a
certain cash inﬂow that, when capitalized, could be lever-
aged to undertake the grand commercial schemes that lay

Mississippi and South Sea Bubbles
93
at the heart of Law’s economic theory. The nature 
of Law’s scheme was that ﬁnance of the operation 
came ﬁrst; expanded commercial activity would result
naturally once the ﬁnancial structure was in place.
In effect, the French privatized the treasury under
Law’s plan and had only to wait for the general 
commercial expansion promised by Law’s theory to
materialize and to support the market prices of the
company’s shares.

This page intentionally left blank

14
John Law’s Finance
Operations
The Compagnie d’Occident did increase its commercial
activity, obtaining the tobacco monopoly in September
1718 and the Senegalese Company for trade with Africa,
that is, the slave trade, in November 1718.18 In January
1719, the Banque General was taken over by the regent
and renamed the Banque Royale, with a note issue 
guaranteed by the crown. Law remained in control of the
new bank. In May 1719, he acquired the East India
Company and the China Company; and he reorganized
the entire conglomerate as the Compagnie des Indes, an
organization that monopolized all French trade outside
Europe.
On July 25, 1719, the Compagnie purchased the right
to mint new coinage for ﬁfty million livres tournois to be
delivered in ﬁfteen monthly payments. The livre tournois
was the unit of account and was ofﬁcially valued at
weights of gold or silver that varied during Law’s regime.
To ﬁnance this expenditure, Law issued 50,000 shares at
1000 livres per share to cover this acquisition, requiring

96
Chapter 14
share buyers to hold ﬁve previously issued shares. Share
prices rose to 1800 livres.
In August 1719, the Compagnie bought the right to
collect all French indirect taxes for a payment to the gov-
ernment of 52 million livres per year. The takeover of the
administration of the tax system was in line with Law’s
views that a simpliﬁed ﬁscal regime would beneﬁt com-
merce and reduce the costs of collection. Law thought
that taxes should be broad-based and few, with no
exemptions or privileges. He set about reorganizing the
personnel of the tax system, because a reduced collection
cost would be a source of company proﬁt. In October
1719, he took over the collection of direct taxes. Share
prices rose to 3000 livres.
Finally, Law determined to refund most of the national
debt through the Compagnie des Indes, an amount with
a face value of 1.5 billion livres. The face value of the
entire debt was estimated by Harsin (1928) at about 
two billion livres; the market value of the debt was well
below the par value because of previous defaults and
arrearages.
To ﬁnance the debt acquisition, Law undertook a
sequence of three stock sales on September 12, Septem-
ber 28, and October 2, 1719. In each offering, the 
Compagnie sold 100,000 shares at 5000 livres per share
payable in ten equal monthly payments. Payment could
be made either at par in rentes or in the notes of the
Banque Royale. Thus, by August 1720, enough would
have been raised to acquire the face value of the debt.

John Law’s Finance Operations
97
Of the 540,000 shares then outstanding of the Com-
pagnie des Indes, the King held 100,000 shares and there-
fore was counted a powerful backer of the scheme. In
addition, the Compagnie itself held 100,000 shares that it
could sell. Researchers of the Mississippi and South Sea
episodes treat the quantity of own shares held by the
companies as signiﬁcant. There was a limitation on
authorized share issues, so shares held by the company
provided a source of cash to fuel company ﬁnance activ-
ities as prices rose.
Acquiring the debt would create a huge “fund of
credit,” a steady income ﬂow from the government,
which could be used as equity against any potential com-
mercial venture of the Compagnie. Simultaneously, the
Compagnie would reduce the interest paid by the state
to 3 percent per year. After these operations, share prices
rose to 10,000 livres in October 1719.
The shares outstanding would then have had a market
value of 5.4 billion livres, somewhat less than four times
the face value of the rentes that were the most tangible
assets of the Compagnie. For perspective, Law estimated
the national wealth of France at 30 billion livres.
Law attained maximum power in January 1720 when
he was made France’s Controller General and Superin-
tendent General of Finance. As an ofﬁcial, he now con-
trolled all government ﬁnance and expenditure and the
money creation of the Banque Royale. Simultaneously, he
was the chief executive ofﬁcer of a private ﬁrm that 
controlled France’s overseas trade and the development

98
Chapter 14
of its colonies, collected France’s taxes, minted its coins,
and held the bulk of France’s national debt. The king was
a principal shareholder of the ﬁrm. It must have been
obvious to all that the Compagnie would ﬁnd few gov-
ernment or ﬁnancial obstacles to its undertaking any
commercial scheme that it chose. Surely no economist has
since had a better set of conditions for testing a major eco-
nomic theory than that possessed by Law.
Figure 14.1 illustrates the Mississippi bubble. The
phase of price increase is associated with the expanding
activity of the Compagnie at this time.
In the end, however, the commercial scheme chosen was
to print money. Starting with the July 1719 stock issue, the
Banque Royale had increased its note issue to facilitate the
stock sales. Each government authorization of a share
expansion simultaneously authorized a note emission.
Figure 14.1
Daily South Sea Share Prices, 1720

John Law’s Finance Operations
99
For example, with only 159 million livres in notes previ-
ously authorized, the Banque received authorization to
emit 240 million livres on July 25, 1719. A further 240
million livre expansion was associated with the Septem-
ber and October share sales. Additional note issues of 360
million and 200 million livres occurred on December 29,
1719, and February 6, 1720, respectively, without new
share issues. For comparison, Harsin (1928) estimates the
total specie stock of France at about 1.2 billion livres. The
money creation was used to provide loans to buyers of 
the shares. This reduced the number of ﬂoating shares,
replacing them with bank notes. Because Law regarded
shares as a superior form of currency, this did not increase
the “money supply” in his view.
The ultimate control on such wealth surges through
rising valuation is the attempt by shareholders to convert
their capital gains into current goods or gold. The surge
of goods supply needed to meet this demand did not cur-
rently exist and in Law’s theory would be realized in
amounts adequate to match demand stemming from
high share values only after the fruition of the projects.
Even if there was a chance for his operations to pay off,
the short-term ﬁnance of his operations through the mon-
etization of the shares was to be the fatal ﬁnancial ﬂaw
of the scheme.
By the end of January 1720, share prices had begun to
fall below 10,000 livres because of increasing attempts to
convert capital gains into a gold form. The falling price

100
Chapter 14
of shares threatened Law’s ability to use his “fund of
credit” to begin a commercial expansion.
In January 1720, Law began to act against the use 
of specie in payments by prohibiting payments above 
100 livres in metallic money. On February 22, 1720, the
Compagnie took over direct control of the management
of the Banque Royale; and the Banque Royale’s notes
were made legal tender for payments above 100 livres.
Simultaneously, the King sold his 100,000 shares back to
the Compagnie at 9000 livres per share. Of this amount,
three hundred million livres would be deposited in the
King’s accounts in the Banque immediately with the rest
to be paid over ten years. The Compagnie then ceased
supporting the price of its shares with banknotes, 
precipitating a sharp price decline. Thus, the most 
powerful insider bailed out near the peak of the 
speculation.
Law criticized unsophisticated shareholders trying 
to convert shares to the concrete form of gold because
there was not enough gold in the kingdom to satisfy 
such an attempt. Law stated that the shares had high
value only if they were regarded as a capital investment,
to be bought and sold infrequently, held by people
content to receive their yields as a ﬂow of dividends that
he claimed was somewhat higher than the prevailing
interest rate.19
On March 5, 1720, share prices were pegged at 9000
livres: the Banque Royale now intervened directly to
exchange its notes for Compagnie stock. Effectively con-

John Law’s Finance Operations
101
verting shares into banknotes with a denomination of
9000 livres, this policy was a realization of Law’s theory
that a commercial enterprise could ﬁnance itself with
emissions of circulating debt. Until its termination on
May 21, 1720, the pegging scheme generated legal tender
note expansions of 300 million, 390 million, 438 million,
and 362 million livres on March 25, April 5, April 19, and
May 1, respectively, to absorb sales by shareholders. The
Banque’s legal tender note circulation doubled in about
one month.
This also was a doubling in the money stock, because
the circulating metallic stock of money had by then dis-
appeared. In an effort to drive out metallic currency and
to maintain the facade of note convertibility, Law had
simultaneously imposed a series of drastic devaluations
of specie in terms of livre tournois. As a result of this dra-
matic monetary expansion, the average monthly inﬂation
rate from August 1719 through September 1720 was 4
percent, with a peak of 23 percent in January 1720. The
index of commodity prices increased from 116.1 in July
1719 to 203.7 in September 1720 (Hamilton 1936–37).
Figure 14.2 depicts how the sequence of bank note issues
drove the currency supply and the price level.
Deciding that the price of shares had been ﬁxed at too
high a level, Law proposed a drastic deﬂation on May 21,
1720.20 Share prices would be reduced from 9000 to 5000
livres in seven stages, ending on December 1. Banque
notes would be reduced in value to 50 percent of their
face value—that is, he would force a restructuring on

102
Chapter 14
holders of the Banque Royale’s liabilities. Under this plan
by December, only 2.3 billion livres in paper asset values
(1.3 billion in Banque notes and 1 billion in stock) would
remain. This reduction was actually accomplished by
various other means. Law’s plan simply to write down
the value of the Banque notes in terms of livre tournois
was abandoned when he was thrown from ofﬁce at the
end of May 1720. He was, however, quickly reappointed
and presided over the deﬂation.
By October 1720, only 1.2 billion livres of notes
remained in circulation (of a peak of 2.7 billion) and 1.2
billion livres of specie reappeared. Specie was rapidly
revalued to the deﬁnition that it had at the start of 1720.
Figure 14.2
Mississippi Bubble Money and Price Data

John Law’s Finance Operations
103
By December 1720, the price level had fallen to 164.2.
Thus, the period starting in February 1720 represents an
initial period of share price pegging by the Banque—that
is, the monetization of shares—followed by the purpose-
ful monetary and share price deﬂation undertaken by
Law.
The price of the Compagnie’s shares fell to 2000 
livres in September 1720 and to 1000 livres by December.
Law’s enemies were now in a position to impose policies
hostile to the Compagnie, notably a conﬁscation of two-
thirds of the shares outstanding. The share price fell to
500 livres by September 1721, approximately its value in
May 1719.

This page intentionally left blank

15
A Rehash of
Mississippi Market
Fundamentals
Should economists sum up the increasing stock prices 
of the Compagnie des Indes only as the “Mississippi
bubble”? After all, behind the price rise lies Law’s
program to revitalize the French economy through ﬁnan-
cial innovation and ﬁscal reform. Law’s theory was plau-
sible and even has many modern manifestations, and he
was an effective propagandist. Investors also could
readily observe Law’s astounding rise to power. At each
stage, as the implementation of the economic experiment
became ever more likely, they had to factor the possibil-
ity of success into the share prices of the Compagnie des
Indes.
The downward slide of share prices is even easier to
understand, given the radical shifts in monetary policy
and the intimate connection of Compagnie shares to
Banque Royale note emissions. The ﬁnal fall to original
share values was driven by Law’s fall from power and
the accession of his enemies, who aimed to dismantle the
Compagnie.

106
Chapter 15
That Law’s promised expansion never materialized
does not imply that a bubble occurred in the modern
sense of the word. After all, this was not the last time that
a convincing economic idea would fracture in practice.
One respectable group of modern economists or another
have described Keynesian economics, supply side eco-
nomics, monetarism, ﬁxed exchange-rate regimes, ﬂoat-
ing exchange-rate regimes, and the belief in rational
expectations in asset markets as disastrously ﬂawed
schemes. Indeed, elements of the ﬁrst three were primary
components in Law’s scheme.
Only after the experiment had been run could in-
vestors have known that the idea was ﬂawed. That they
referred to the ensuing collapse and their after-the-fact
foolishness as a bubble should not confuse economists’
interpretation of the event. According to the modern def-
inition in economics, the event is easily explainable on the
basis of market fundamentals. For a ﬁnance operation to
be successful always requires a certain degree of sus-
tained conﬁdence from investors. Finance serves as the
spearhead of corporate rationalization. In any leveraged
buyout or corporate acquisition, high securities prices
come ﬁrst and are followed only gradually by expanded
revenues. If investors suddenly lose conﬁdence, they may
turn a potentially proﬁtable project into a bankruptcy if
it is ﬁnanced with short-term funding.
Law’s scheme was more audacious than the normal
Wall Street operation in that he was attempting a corpo-
rate takeover of France. But Law’s principle was also that

A Rehash of Mississippi Market Fundamentals
107
ﬁnance came ﬁrst; the ﬁnancial operation and the expan-
sion of circulating credit was the driving force for eco-
nomic expansion. From a modern perspective, this idea
is not ﬂawed. It is the centerpiece of most money and
macroeconomics textbooks produced in the last two 
generations and the lingua franca of economic policy-
makers concerned with the problem of underemployed
economies. Indeed, recent pressure on the Bank of Japan
to monetize long-term government bonds is a scheme
that Law would have found familiar.
Law’s mistake was that he recognized the accelerating
price inﬂation as inconsistent with the prediction of his
theory. His launching of the deﬂation was similar to any
modern restructuring effort to eliminate an excessive
debt overhang. Because of the programmed share price
fall and the ensuing declines forced by his removal from
power, his experiment is tarred with the perjorative
“bubble.” When modern economic policymakers’ reach
exceeds their grasp, they simply accommodate the
ensuing tenfold price inﬂation and get the Nobel prize.

This page intentionally left blank

16
Law’s Shadow: The
South Sea Bubble
Following Law’s scheme to reﬁnance the French debt, the
South Sea Company launched a similar plan to acquire
British government debt in January 1720.21 The ﬁnancial
operations of the British scheme, however, were much
simpler than those of Law: the South Sea Company 
was not involved in large-scale takeovers of commercial
companies or of government functions such as the mint,
the collection of taxes, or the creation of legal tender
paper money.
The British debt in 1720 amounted to approximately
£50 million of face value. Of this, £18.3 million was 
held by the three largest corporations: £3.4 million 
by the Bank of England, £3.2 million by the East 
India Company, and £11.7 million by the South Sea
Company. Redeemable government bonds held privately
amounted to £16.5 million; these could be called by 
the government on short notice. About £15 million of 
the debt was in the form of irredeemable annuities: 
long annuities of between seventy-two and eighty-seven

110
Chapter 16
years and short annuities of twenty-two years in 
maturity.22
The Refunding Agreement
In 1720, the assets of the South Sea Company consisted
of monopoly rights on British trade with the South Seas—
that is, the Spanish colonies of America—and its holdings
of government debt. These were treaty rights to trade on
a small scale and especially to export slaves. It was well
known that British trade with Spanish America was 
effectively blocked by the Spanish and in any case
unproﬁtable, so only the holdings of government debt 
are important to the economic story. After competitive
bidding between the South Sea Company and the Bank
of England, the bill permitting the South Sea Company
to refund the debt had its ﬁrst passage in Parliament on
March 21, 1720. To acquire this right, the company agreed
to pay the government up to £7.5 million if it managed
to acquire the £31 million of debt held in noncorporate
hands.
To ﬁnance the debt acquisition, the Company was 
permitted to expand the number of its shares, each of
which had a par value of £100. For each £100 per year of
the long and short annuities acquired, the company could
increase the par value of its shares outstanding by £2000
and by £1400, respectively. For each £100 par value 
of redeemables acquired, it could increase its stock issue
by £100.

Law’s Shadow
111
Quantities of shares were designated in terms of total
par value issued. Most research on the episode has 
continued this convention and has emphasized the 
difference between the market and par value of shares.
The company was free to set the exchange rate between
shares and debt. It valued the shares exchanged at well
above the par value, leaving it an excess of authorized
shares that it was free to market. Scott (1911) labeled these
surplus shares the company’s “proﬁts” from the con-
version. The curious view that a company’s holdings of
its own shares represents an asset has been replicated 
in recent examinations of the South Sea Company; 
for instance, Dickson (1967, 160) lists the company’s 
holdings of its own stock among its assets.
The interest to be paid by the government on the debt
acquired by the company was 5 percent per year until
1727 and 4 percent per year thereafter. This would imply
a substantial reduction in the annual debt servicing costs
of the government.
The Purchase of Parliament
Conditional on the passage of the refunding act, the
South Sea Company paid bribes to leading members of
Parliament and favorites of the king totaling £1.3 million
(Scott 1911, 315). Moreover, in the sequence of stock sub-
scriptions through August 1720, numerous members of
Parliament and of the government participated; and most
received large cash loans from the company on their

112
Chapter 16
shares. For example, 128 members of Parliament acquired
shares in the ﬁrst cash subscriptions for shares, 190 in the
second subscription, 352 in the third subscription, and 76
in the fourth subscription. The total par value of shares
acquired by them was £1.1 million. For peers, the partic-
ipation was 58 in the ﬁrst subscription, 73 in the second
subscription, 119 in the third subscription, and 56 in the
fourth subscription. The total par value for peers was
£548,000. Prior to the refunding operation, the par value
of South Sea shares outstanding was £11.7 million; 
and this was increased to £22.8 million by the end of 
the speculation. Thus, people in powerful positions in 
Parliament took 17 percent of the additional shares
created. In addition, as Dickson (1967, 108–109) explains,
132 members of Parliament received £1.1 million and 64
peers received £686,000 in loans against shares. Members
of the government acquired £75,000 of shares at par value
in these subscriptions.
While these bribes add a sinister appearance to the
episode, they were not themselves a signal of impending
fraud. At the time, bribery was not an unusual practice
for a company seeking favors from a Parliament well
positioned to block any proﬁtable venture unless its
members received their cut.
Indeed, that Parliament and the government sup-
ported the refunding so enthusiastically must have
served as a signal that ofﬁcial cooperation in South Sea’s
ventures had been purchased. To the extent that members

Law’s Shadow
113
of Parliament held shares, they would have no interest in
thwarting any commercial projects that the company
might propose in the future. Given Law’s inﬂuential 
theories of commercial expansion, the equity in the 
South Sea Company could then have been leveraged to
undertake those commercial projects that would drive
the economy to a higher employment equilibrium. The
income generated, accruing to the company without hin-
drance of Parliament, could in theory then have justiﬁed
the initial value of the equity—provided that there were
such projects.

This page intentionally left blank

17
South Sea Finance
Operations
Figure 17.1 depicts the movement of South Sea share
prices during the speculation. Starting at about £120 per
£100 par value share in January 1720, prices moved
upward as the refunding proposal was negotiated. With
the passage of the refunding act on March 21, prices
jumped from about £200 to £300.
To ﬁnance the contracted bribes and to make loans 
to shareholders, the Company offered two subscrip-
tions of shares for cash on April 14 and April 29. 
In the ﬁrst subscription, 22,500 shares were issued 
at a price of £300 per share; one-ﬁfth of the price 
was required immediately in cash with the remainder
due in eight bimonthly installments. In the second, 15,000
shares were subscribed at a price of £400; one-tenth 
was required immediately in cash, with the remainder
due in nine payments at three- or four-month 
intervals. From these issues, the company immedi-
ately realized about £2 million to pay its bribe 
commitments.

116
Chapter 17
The ﬁrst debt conversion aimed at convincing the
holders of the irredeemable annuities to agree to an
exchange for South Sea shares. Subscriptions began on
April 28. The company announced its conversion terms
on May 19, allowing holders of the debt one week to
accept or reject the conversion terms, which depended 
on the type of annuity. As an example, the holders of 
£100 long annuities were offered £700 par value of stock
(7 shares) and £575 in bonds and cash. At the time of the
offer, South Sea shares were selling for about £400, so the
Figure 17.1
Daily South Sea Share Prices, 1720. Data courtesy of Larry Neal.

South Sea Finance Operations
117
value of the offer was about £3375 for a long annuity.
Scott (1911, 311) estimates the market value of the annuity
at about £1600 prior to the conversion attempt. Since
annuity holders would not lose unless share prices fell
below £146, the offer was highly attractive.
All government creditors who had subscribed prior to
the announcement assented to the company’s terms.
According to Dickson (1967, 130–132), the company
therefore absorbed about 64 percent of the long annuities
and 52 percent of the short annuities outstanding in this
subscription. As it became clear that the company would
succeed in accumulating most of the outstanding debt,
share prices rose rapidly to £700.
To permit it sufﬁcient cash to engage in market price
manipulation and to make loans to its shareholders, the
company undertook a third cash subscription on June 17,
1720, in which it sold a par value of £5 million (50,000
shares) for a market price of £1000 per share. Purchasers
had to pay one-tenth down in cash (£5 million), with the
remainder to be paid in nine semi-annual payments.
Share prices immediately jumped from £745 to £950. The
ﬁnal cash subscription occurred on August 24. The
company sold 12,500 shares with a par value of £1.25
million at a price of £1000 per share. One-ﬁfth was
required immediately in cash, with four additional pay-
ments at nine-month intervals. From June 24 to August
22, the transfer books of the company were closed in
preparation for a dividend payment, so the market prices
depicted in ﬁgure 17.1 for this period were future prices.23

118
Chapter 17
Finally, the company offered two additional subscrip-
tions for government bonds; terms for subscribing the
remaining irredeemables and the redeemables were
announced on August 4 and August 12, respectively. Of
the outstanding £16.5 million in redeemables, £14.4
million were exchanged for 18,900 shares of stock. At
market prices of £800 per share, this amounted to a price
of £105 per £100 bond. Redeemables were callable by the
government, so this price, although seemingly low in
comparison to the irredeemables, was generally accept-
able. The remaining irredeemables were to be exchanged
for varying amounts of stock and cash. By means of all
the debt conversions, the South Sea Company acquired
80 percent of the public’s holdings of the irredeemables
and 85 percent of the redeemables.
The Price Collapse
South Sea share prices collapsed from about £775 on
August 31 to about £290 on October 1, 1720. Shares out-
standing or to be issued to the public after subscribers
were entered on company registers numbered 212,012.
Thus, the market value of all shares on August 31 was
£164 million and about £103 million of that total evapo-
rated in one month, an amount exceeding twice the value
of the original, burdensome government debt.
Researchers of the episode like Dickson (1967, 148–
152), Scott (1911, 324–328), and Neal (1988) are vague
about the reason for the speed and magnitude of the

South Sea Finance Operations
119
decline, though they generally attribute it to the appear-
ance of a liquidity crisis. The South Sea speculation had
triggered a simultaneous upsurge in the prices of other
existing companies along with the creation of numerous
“bubble companies.” The emergence of these companies,
many of which were fraudulent, generated most of the
amusing anecdotes that have been transmitted to us
about this speculation. Many of the companies born in
the 1720 speculation were quite sound, however, notably
the Royal Assurance Company and the London Assur-
ance Company. The channeling of capital into these com-
panies alarmed the directors of the South Sea Company,
who, having paid a high price to buy the Parliament, did
not wish to see potential South Sea proﬁts dissipated by
the entry of unauthorized commercial corporations. Con-
sequently, Parliament passed the Bubble Act in June 1720
to ban the formation of unauthorized corporations or 
the extension of existing corporate charters into new,
unauthorized ventures.
When the Bubble Act was enforced against some of the
company’s competitors on August 18, 1720, immediate
downward pressure was placed on the price of shares of
the affected companies. Because the shares were mostly
held on margin, general selling hit the shares of all 
companies, including South Sea shares, in a scramble 
for liquidity. Simultaneously, there was an international
scramble for liquidity with the ﬁnal collapse of Law’s
Compagnie des Indes in September 1720 and of a Dutch
speculation. Liquidity may have been drained from

120
Chapter 17
English markets by these international events. Neal and
Schubert (1985) provide evidence on large-scale capital
movements during this period.
With the collapse of share prices, the South Sea
Company faced the hostility of its shareholders who had
participated in its debt and cash subscriptions. Parlia-
ment quickly turned against the company, eventually
forcing it to sell off part of its debt holdings to the Bank
of England. Parliament eventually stripped the directors
of the company and several government ofﬁcials of their
wealth (£2 million) and directed the payment of the pro-
ceeds to the South Sea Company. Adjustments were also
made to redistribute shares among the different waves of
subscribers, so that losses to later subscribers were
reduced. Finally, Parliament forgave payment of the £7.1
million that the company had contracted on receipt of the
conversion privilege.

18
Fundamentals of the
South Sea Company
At the beginning of September 1720, the market value of
South Sea shares was £164 million. The visible asset 
supporting this price was a ﬂow of revenue from the
company’s claim against the government of £1.9 million
per year until 1727 and £1.5 million thereafter. At a 4
percent long-term discount rate, this asset had a value of
about £40 million. Against this, the company had agreed
to pay £7.1 million for the conversion privilege and owed
£6 million in bonds and bills for a net asset value of £26.1
million. In addition, the company’s cash receivables were
£11 million due on loans to stockholders and £70 million
eventually due from cash subscribers. Thus, share values
exceeded asset values by more than £60 million. Given
the dubious value of the company’s cash claims, share
values exceeded tangible net assets by ﬁve times or 
more.
What intangible assets could have justiﬁed this value
of the company? Again, the answer lies in Law’s predic-
tion of a commercial expansion associated with the 

122
Chapter 18
accumulation of a fund of credit. The company succeeded
in gathering the fund and obviously had the support 
of Parliament in its ventures. On this basis, Scott (1911,
313–314) believed that a price of £400 was not excessive.
It may be added too that the great need of commerce in the ﬁrst
quarter of the eighteenth century was a sufﬁciency of capital,
and so it is scarcely possible to estimate adequately, under the
different conditions of the present time, the many promising
outlets there were then for the remunerative employment of
capital. In fact capital, organized in one single unit, might be
utilized in many directions, where no single fraction of the
same capital could ﬁnd its way, and therefore some premium
on South Sea stock was justiﬁed and maintainable. . . . Thus, it
will be seen that the investor, who in 1720 bought stock at 300
or even 400, may have been unduly optimistic, but there was
at least a possibility that his conﬁdence would be rewarded in
the future.
The experiment was terminated with the liquidity
crisis and the withdrawal of parliamentary support while
it was still in its ﬁnance stage. In retrospect, anyone pro-
jecting commercial returns high enough to justify the
higher prices of South Sea shares was probably too opti-
mistic. Nevertheless, the episode is readily understand-
able as a case of speculators’ working on the basis of the
best economic analysis available and pushing prices
along by their changing view of market fundamentals.

19
Conclusion
The jargon of economics and ﬁnance contains numerous
colorful expressions to denote a market-determined asset
price at odds with any reasonable economic explanation.
Such terms as tulipmania, bubble, chain letter, Ponzi scheme,
panic, crash, and ﬁnancial crisis immediately evoke images
of frenzied and irrational speculative activity. Lately, 
the same terms, or modern versions of them—herding,
irrational exhuberance,
contagion,
and
self-generating
equilibrium—have been used by media, academics, and
policymakers to paint the crises of 1997, 1998, and 1999.
These words are always used to argue the irrationality
of ﬁnancial markets in particularly volatile periods.
Many of these terms have emerged from speciﬁc specu-
lative episodes, which have been sufﬁciently frequent
and important that they underpin a strong current 
belief that key capital markets generate irrational and
inefﬁcient pricing and allocational outcomes.
The proponents of such arguments can hardly ever
resist the invocation of three famous bubbles—the Dutch

124
Chapter 19
tulipmania, the Mississippi Bubble, and the South Sea
Bubble. That such obvious craziness happened in the past
is taken as the only necessary explanation for modern
events that are otherwise hard to explain with their
favorite economic theories.
Before we relegate a speculative event to the funda-
mentally inexplicable or bubble category driven by
crowd psychology, however, we should exhaust the rea-
sonable economic explanations. Such explanations are
often not easily generated due to the inherent complexity
of economic phenomena, but bubble explanations are
often clutched as a ﬁrst and not a last resort. Indeed,
“bubble” characterizations should be a last resort because
they are non-explanations of events, merely a name 
that we attach to a ﬁnancial phenomenon that we have
not invested sufﬁciently in understanding. Invoking
crowd psychology—which is always ill deﬁned and
unmeasured—turns our explanation to tautology in a
self-deluding attempt to say something more than a 
confession of confusion.
Fascinated by the brilliance of grand speculative
events, observers of ﬁnancial markets have huddled 
in the bubble interpretation and have neglected an 
examination of potential market fundamentals. The
ready availability of a banal explanation of the tulip-
mania, compared to its dominant position in the 
speculative pantheon of economics, is stark evidence of
how bubble and mania characterizations have served to

Conclusion
125
divert us from understanding those outlying events
highest in informational content. The bubble inter-
pretation has relegated the far more important 
Mississippi and South Sea episodes to a description 
of pathologies of group psychology. Yet these events 
were a vast macroeconomic and ﬁnancial experiment,
imposed on a scale and with a degree of control by 
their main theoretical architects that did not occur 
again until the war economies of this century. True, 
the experiment failed, either because its theoretical basis
was fundamentally ﬂawed or because its managers
lacked the complex ﬁnancial skills required to undertake
the day-to-day tactics necessary for its consummation.
Nevertheless, investors had to take positions on its 
potential success. It is curious that students of ﬁnance 
and economists alike have accepted the failure of the
experiments as proof that the investors were foolishly
and irrationally wrong.
An observation that the tulipmania and the Mississippi
and South Sea Bubbles predispose us to advance bubble
theories of asset pricing provided the point of departure
of this study. If small strata of particular episodes 
underpin the belief that bubbles may exist, it is desirable
to undertake a detailed study of these events, most of
which have not been examined from the perspective of
market fundamental theories of asset pricing, to assure
that other reasonable explanations have not been 
overlooked.

126
Chapter 19
In the end, one can take one’s pick: market fundamen-
tal explanations of events or bubble and crowd psychol-
ogy theories. It is my view that bubble theories are the
easy way out—they are simply names that we attach to
that part of asset price movements that we cannot easily
explain. As tautological explanations, they can never be
refuted. The goal here is to ﬁnd explanations with some
measure of economic and refutable content.

Appendix 1
The Tulipmania in
the Popular and
Economics Literature
Chroniclers of the tulip speculation, and modern writers
who cite it, take for granted that it was a mania, select-
ing and organizing the evidence to emphasize the 
irrationality of the market outcome.
In the twentieth century, a strong intellectual inﬂuence
on participants and observers of the ﬁnancial markets 
has been exerted by Mackay’s version of the tulipmania,
although he devoted only seven pages of text to it.
Bernard Baruch wrote an introduction to Mackay’s book,
whose reprinting he had encouraged, emphasizing the
importance of crowd psychology in all economic move-
ments. Dreman (1977), who also stresses psychological
forces in asset price determination, uses the tulipmania
as a prototype of market mania. Relating the same 
anecdotes as Mackay, Dreman employs the tulipmania as
a constant metaphor in discussions of succeeding major
speculative collapses. He states (52):
If, for example, my neighbor tried to sell me a tulip bulb for
$5,000, I’d simply laugh at him. . . . The tulip craze, like the

128
Appendix 1
manias we shall see shortly, created its own reality as it went
along. It is ludicrous to pay as much for a ﬂower as one pays
for a house. . . .24
Whenever large and rapid ﬂuctuations of asset prices
occur, the popular media recall the tulipmania. For
example, when gold prices jumped in 1979, a Wall Street
Journal (Sept. 26, 1979) article stated, “The ongoing frenzy
in the gold market may be only an illusion of crowds, a
modern repetition of the tulip-bulb craze or the South 
Sea Bubble.” The October 19, 1987, stock market crash
brought forth similar comparisons from the Wall Street
Journal (Dec. 11, 1987); and The Economist (Oct. 24, 1987)
explained the event as follows:
The crash suffered by the world’s stockmarkets has provided a
beginning and middle for a new chapter updating Charles
Mackay’s 1841 book “Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the
Madness of Crowds” which chronicled Dutch tulip bulbs, the
South Sea bubble. . . . It was the madness of crowds that sent
the bull market ever upward. . . . It is mob psychology that has
now sent investors so rapidly for the exits. (P. 75)
Malkiel (1985) cites Mackay extensively in his chapter
“The Madness of Crowds,” including the anecdote about
the sailor and the claim that the collapse led to a pro-
longed depression in Holland. In reference to other 
speculative episodes, he asks:
Why do such speculative crazes seem so isolated from the
lessons of history? I have no apt answer to offer, but I am con-
vinced that Bernard Baruch was correct in suggesting that a
study of these events can help equip investors for survival. The

The Tulipmania in the Popular & Economics Literature
129
consistent losers in the market, from my personal experience,
are those who are unable to resist being swept up in some kind
of tulip-bulb craze. (Pp. 44–45)
Galbraith (1993) simply repeats Mackay’s story about
the tulipmania without any effort at serious research to
include succeeding developments in knowledge on the
topic. Krugman (1995) could not resist invoking the tulip-
mania in discussing emerging market capital ﬂows.
On a more serious note, the pre–1950s academic 
literature written by major professional economists con-
tains little direct reference to the tulipmania. Palgrave’s 
Dictionary of Political Economy (1926, 182) includes a para-
graph on tulips in its section on bubbles, citing Mackay.
In earlier editions of his cubist study of manias, Kindle-
berger (1978) catalogued a long sequence of ﬁnancial
panics and manias and provided a descriptive pathology
of their dynamics; but he did not include the tulipmania
among those episodes examined in detail because
“manias such as . . . the tulip mania of 1634 are too iso-
lated and lack the characteristic monetary features that
come with the spread of banking” (6). In his article on
“bubbles” in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
(Eatwell, Milgate, and Newman 1987), however, Kindle-
berger includes the tulipmania as one of the two most
famous manias. In the most recent edition of his book on
manias, Kindleberger (1996) added a chapter critiquing
earlier papers that I had written on tulipmania.
The tulipmania made its ﬁrst appearance in serious
economics journals with the development of capital

130
Appendix 1
theory in the 1950s and the discovery of the potential
existence of multiple, dynamically unstable asset price
paths. Samuelson (1957, 1967) presents the tulipmania
metaphor and associates it with “the purely ﬁnancial
dream world of indeﬁnite group self-fulﬁllment” (1967,
230). Samuelson (1957) uses “tulipmania” interchange-
ably with “Ponzi scheme,” “chain letter,” and “bubble.”
Students of Samuelson, in a ﬂurry of research activity
concerning the “Hahn problem,” employ the tulipmania
as an empirical motivation. Shell and Stiglitz (1967) state,
“The instability of the Hahn model is suggestive of the
economic forces operating during ‘speculative booms’
like the Tulip Bulb mania.” Burmeister (1980, 264–286)
summarizes these models.
The advent of the “sunspot” literature generated a
revival of references to tulips as a motivation for the line
of research. For example, Azariadis (1981, 380) argues
that “the evidence on the inﬂuence of subjective factors
is ample and dates back several centuries; the Dutch
‘tulip mania,’ the South Sea bubble in England, and the
collapse of the Mississippi Company in France are three
well-documented cases of speculative price movements
that historians consider unwarranted by ‘objective’ con-
ditions.” More recently, Azariadis and Guesnerie (1986)
state, “And the reading of economic historians may
suggest that these factors (sunspots) have some perti-
nence for the explanation of phenomena like the Dutch
tulipmania in the seventeenth century and the Great
Depression in our own” (725).

The Tulipmania in the Popular & Economics Literature
131
Under the topic “tulipmania” in The New Palgrave Dic-
tionary of Economics (Eatwell, Milgate, and Newman
1987), Guillermo Calvo does not refer to the seventeenth-
century Dutch speculative episode at all. Rather, he
deﬁnes tulipmania as a situation in which asset prices 
do not behave in ways explainable by economic funda-
mentals. He develops examples of rational bubbles, both
of the explosive and “sunspot” varieties. In the ﬁnance
literature, the emergence of empirical anomalies has also
generated references to tulipmania as bubble and fad
explanations have regained respectability. In his presi-
dential address to the American Finance Association, van
Horne (1985), embraces the possibility of bubbles and
manias and, as an example, refers explicitly to the tulip-
mania, where a “single bulb sold for many years’ salary.”

This page intentionally left blank

Appendix 2
The Seventeenth-
Century Tulip Price
Data
Table A2.1 contains price data for various tulips. For each
type of bulb, the observations are ordered by date; they
include the price paid, the weight in aas of the bulb, the
price per aas, and the data source. I have gathered the
data from different sources of uneven reliability.
Some sources are marked with numbers to indicate the
numbering of notarized contracts reported by Posthumus
in Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek (1927, 1934). Because
these were carefully drawn contracts sworn before
notaries, they are the most reliable data, representing
serious transactions that did not occur in the colleges.
Furthermore, many are dated before the peak of the 
speculation in January–February 1637. Presumably, the
contracts drawn from June to September were for spot
delivery. The delivery dates for the winter contracts are
unclear. A few contract prices reported in Krelage (1946)
are labeled as “Krelage–46-p482.”
Next in order of reliability are the bulbs labeled “Chil-
dren,” which I have taken from Economisch-Historisch

134
Appendix 2
Jaarboek (1927). These bulbs are taken from a price list
labeled “List of some tulips sold to the highest bidder on
February 5, 1637, in the city of Alkmaar. These tulips were
sold to the beneﬁt of the children of Mr. Wouter
Bartelmiesz at a total amount of Fl. 68,553.” A facsimile
of this list is also reproduced in Krelage (1946, 488).
Again, the delivery date and terms of payment are not
clear from the available information. Also, the February
5 date seems at odds with the collapse date, which 
G&W claim occurred on February 3. However, as
recorded auction prices, the list represents some actual
transactions.
Lower in order of reliability are the numerous prices
reported in G&W. G&W is in the form of a long and
moralistic dialogue between Gaergoedt (Greedy Goods)
and Waermondt (True Mouth) about the nature of the
markets and the price dynamics during the speculation.
The third dialogue, “Prijsen der Bloemen,” presents a list
of about 250 bulb transactions, including prices and
weights, but it does not report the dates of the sales. For-
tunately, since a great deal of overlap appears between
the G&W prices and the “Children” prices, the author 
of G&W must have had access to the “Children” list in
constructing the G&W list. Thus, I used the February 
5 date of the “Children list to date the reported prices 
in the G&W list, including those G&W ﬂowers not
reported in the “Children” list. Moreover, ﬁnding many
of the G&W ﬂowers listed among veriﬁable transactions
generates some conﬁdence that the G&W author did 

The Seventeenth-Century Tulip Price Data
135
not simply make up the prices reported in the third 
dialogue.
In discussing the rapidity of price movement during
the speculation, G&W present the prices of twenty bulbs
observed at two different times in the speculation, claim-
ing the earlier prices were taken from four to six weeks
prior to the later prices for each bulb. However, they do
not indicate the dates on which the later transactions
occurred. Fortunately, most of the later transactions for
these bulbs are among the bulbs in the “Children” list or
in the extensive G&W list described above. Since these
bulbs are the only “time series” reported in G&W, it is
important to include them. Thus, I have presumed that
the later transaction for each bulb occurred on February
5, 1637, and that the earlier transaction occurred on
January 2, 1637, ﬁve weeks earlier. This explains why so
many January 2–February 5 pairs appear in the list in
table A2.1.
Finally, the list contains several transactions listed 
in Munting (1672, 1696) and in Krelage (1942) that I could
not ﬁnd among the above sources. Unfortunately, Krelage
reports the price per aas involved in particular trans-
actions and not the price and weight of the transacted
bulb.

136
Appendix 2
Table A2.1
Basic Tulip Price Data
Date
Tulip
Price
Weight
Price/Aas
Source
Place
01-Jun-36
Admirael Liefkens
6.6
1
6.6000
18
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Admirael Liefkens
11.8000
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Admirael Liefkens
4,400
400
11.0000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael Liefkens
1,015
59
17.2034
Children
Alkmaer
02-Jan-37
Admirael de Man
15
130
0.1154
G&W
02-Jan-37
Admirael de Man
90
1,000
0.0900
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael de Man
250
175
1.4286
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael de Man
800
1,000
0.8000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael de Man
175
130
1.3462
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael van Enchuysen
5,400
215
25.1163
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael van Enchuysen
28.0000
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Admirael van Enchuysen
900
8
112.5000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael van Hoorn
230
1,000
0.2300
G&W
05-Feb-37
Admirael van Hoorn
200
440
0.4545
G&W
01-Dec-34
Admirael van der Eyck
80
80
1.0000
7
Haarlem
01-Dec-34
Admirael van der Eyck
66
20
3.3000
7
Haarlem

The Seventeenth-Century Tulip Price Data
137
27-Jul-36
Admirael van der Eyck
2.5
1
2.5000
17
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Admirael van der Eyck
4.5000
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Admirael van der Eyck
1,620
446
3.6323
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Admirael van der Eyck
1,045
214
4.8832
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Admirael van der Eyck
710
92
7.7174
Children
Alkmaer
01-Dec-36
Bleyenburch (Laeten)
350
4 tulips
57
Amsterdam
28-Dec-36
Bleyenburch (Laeten)
120
104
1.1538
65
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Blijenburger (Vroege)
3.5000
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Blijenburger (Vroege)
1,300
443
2.9345
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Blijenburger (Vroege)
900
171
5.2632
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Bruyne Purper
2,025
320
6.3281
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Bruyne Purper
10.3000
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Bruyne Purper
1,100
50
22.0000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Bruyne Purper
1,300
60
21.6667
G&W
10-Jul-12
Caers op de Candelaer
24
3
Haarlem
02-Jan-37
Centen
40
1,000
0.0400
G&W
15-Jan-37
Centen
72
530
0.1358
van Damme, 106
22-Jan-37
Centen
380
3,000
0.1267
32
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Centen
400
1,000
0.4000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Centen
4,300
10,240
0.4199
G&W

138
Appendix 2
02-Jan-37
Coorenaerts
60
1,000
0.0600
G&W
22-Jan-37
Coorenaerts
220
1,000
0.2200
32
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Coorenaerts
550
1,000
0.5500
G&W
05-Feb-37
Coorenaerts
4,800
10,240
0.4688
G&W
10-Jun-36
English Admiral
3
1
3.0000
13
05-Feb-37
English Admiral
700
25
28.0000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Fama
605
130
4.6538
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Fama
700
158
4.4304
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Fama
440
104
4.2308
Children
Alkmaer
02-Jan-37
Generalissimo
95
10
9.5000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Generalissimo
900
10
90.0000
G&W
02-Jan-37
Gheele Croonen
24
10,240
0.0023
G&W
05-Feb-37
Gheele Croonen
1,200
10,240
0.1172
G&W
08-Dec-36
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
260
578
0.4498
Krelage, 73
02-Jan-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
46
515
0.0893
G&W
02-Jan-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
100
1,000
0.1000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
700
1,000
0.7000
G&W
Table A2.1 (continued)
Date
Tulip
Price
Weight
Price/Aas
Source
Place

The Seventeenth-Century Tulip Price Data
139
05-Feb-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
140
400
0.3500
G&W
05-Feb-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
550
515
1.0680
G&W
05-Feb-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
0.5800
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden
235
240
0.9792
G&W
12-Nov-36
Ghemarm. de Goyer
70
357
0.1961
Krelage, 73
04-Feb-37
Ghemarm. de Goyer
36
1 bulb
van Damme, 21
05-Feb-37
Ghemarm. de Goyer
250
1,000
0.2500
G&W
05-Feb-37
Gouda
7.5000
Krelage, 49
01-Dec-34
Gouda
45
30
1.5000
7&Krelage, 49
Haarlem
01-Dec-35
Gouda
2.1
1
2.1000
24
Haarlem
29-Aug-36
Gouda
3.75
1
3.7500
20
Haarlem
25-Nov-36
Gouda
446
66
6.7576
30
Haarlem
09-Dec-36
Gouda
600
400
1.5000
35
Haarlem
12-Dec-36
Gouda
520
48
10.8333
Laubach, 87
02-Jan-37
Gouda
20
4
5.0000
G&W
29-Jan-37
Gouda
100
7
14.2857
33
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Gouda
3,600
1,000
3.6000
Munting & G&W
05-Feb-37
Gouda
1,500
244
6.1475
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Gouda
1,330
187
7.1123
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Gouda
1,165
160
7.2813
Children
Alkmaer

140
Appendix 2
05-Feb-37
Gouda
1,165
156
7.4679
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Gouda
1,015
125
8.1200
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Gouda
765
82
9.3293
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Gouda
635
63
10.0794
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Gouda
225
4
56.2500
G&W&30
Haarlem
29-Sep-36
Groote Geplumiceerde
140
2,000
0.0700
28
Amsterdam
12-Jan-37
Groote Geplumiceerde
300
2,000
0.1500
G&W
05-Feb-37
Groote Geplumiceerde
300
400
0.7500
71
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Groote Geplumiceerde
280
1,000
0.2800
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Groote Gepulmiceerde
300
1,000
0.3000
G&W
15-Jan-37
Jan Gerritsz
230
288
0.7986
van Damme, 104
05-Feb-37
Jan Gerritsz
734
1,000
0.7340
G&W
05-Feb-37
Jan Gerritsz
210
263
0.7985
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Jan Gerritsz (Swijmende)
210
925
0.2270
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Jan Gerritsz (Swijmende)
51
80
0.6375
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Julius Caesar
1,300
187
6.9519
G&W
18-Dec-35
Latour
27
16
1.6875
9
Haarlem
Table A2.1 (continued)
Date
Tulip
Price
Weight
Price/Aas
Source
Place

The Seventeenth-Century Tulip Price Data
141
05-Feb-37
Latour
390
450
0.8667
G&W
16-Jan-37
Le Grand
90
122
0.7377
Krel-46-p482
Haarlem
22-Jan-37
Le Grand
21
185
0.1135
32
Amsterdam
24-Jan-37
Le Grand
480
1,000
0.4800
31
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Le Grand
500
350
1.4286
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Le Grand
780
1,000
0.7800
G&W
24-Jan-37
Macx
12
400
0.0300
31
Haarlem
03-Feb-37
Macx
400
2,000
0.2000
75
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Macx
300
1,000
0.3000
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Macx
300
1,000
0.3000
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Macx
390
700
0.5571
G&W
06-Jan-37
Nieuwburger
125
425
0.2941
65
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Nieuwburger
500
1,000
0.5000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Nieuwburger
390
495
0.7879
G&W
05-Feb-37
Nieuwburger
235
500
0.4700
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Nieuwburger
430
1,000
0.4300
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Nieuwburger
180
495
0.3636
G&W
01-Dec-36
Oudenaerden
600
10,240
0.0586
57
Amsterdam
02-Jan-37
Oudenaerden
70
1,000
0.0700
G&W

142
Appendix 2
22-Jan-37
Oudenaerden
1,430
5,120
0.2793
32
Amsterdam
30-Jan-37
Oudenaerden
2,200
4,864
0.4523
Krel-46-p482
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Oudenaerden
600
1,000
0.6000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Oudenaerden
370
450
0.8222
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Oudenaerden
530
1,000
0.5300
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Oudenaerden
510
1,000
0.5100
G&W
05-Feb-37
Oudenaerden
5,700
10,240
0.5566
G&W
17-May-33
Parragon Schilder
50
1 Bulb
34-2
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Parragon Schilder
1,615
106
15.2358
G&W
16-Dec-36
Petter
172
360
0.4778
van Damme, 103
05-Feb-37
Petter
900
800
1.1250
G&W
05-Feb-37
Petter
730
1,000
0.7300
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Petter
705
1,000
0.7050
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Petter
730
1,000
0.7300
G&W
05-Feb-37
Rotgans
805
1,000
0.8050
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Rotgans (Violette Gevlamde)
725
1,000
0.7250
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Rotgans (Violette Gevlamde)
375
500
0.7500
Children
Alkmaer
Table A2.1 (continued)
Date
Tulip
Price
Weight
Price/Aas
Source
Place

The Seventeenth-Century Tulip Price Data
143
18-Dec-35
Saeyblom van Coningh
30
7.5
4.0000
9
Haarlem
05-Feb-37
Saeyblom van Coningh
320
220
1.4545
G&W
05-Feb-37
Saeyblom, beste
1,000
1,000
1.0000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Schapesteyn
235
95
2.4737
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Schapesteyn
375
246
1.5244
Children
Alkmaer
02-Jan-37
Scipio
800
1,000
0.8000
G&W
12-Jan-37
Scipio
1,500
1,000
1.5000
28
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Scipio
100
10
10.0000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Scipio
400
82
4.8780
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Scipio
2,250
1,000
2.2500
G&W
01-Jul-23
Semper Augustus
1,000
1 bulb
Krelage, 32
01-Jul-24
Semper Augustus
1,200
1 bulb
Posthumus
01-Jul-25
Semper Augustus
2,000
1 bulb
Krelage, 33
05-Feb-37
Semper Augustus
5,500
200
27.5000
Munting
02-Jan-37
Switsers
60
10,240
0.0059
G&W
15-Jan-37
Switsers
120
9,728
0.0123
34
Haarlem
22-Jan-37
Switsers
280
10,240
0.0273
32
Amsterdam
23-Jan-37
Switsers
385
10,240
0.0376
Krelage, 51
01-Feb-37
Switsers
1,400
9,728
0.1439
75
Amsterdam

144
Appendix 2
Table A2.1 (continued)
Date
Tulip
Price
Weight
Price/Aas
Source
Place
03-Feb-37
Switsers
6,000
40,960
0.1465
38
Amsterdam
05-Feb-37
Switsers
1,800
10,240
0.1758
G&W
06-Feb-37
Switsers
1,100
10,240
0.1074
34-6
Amsterdam
06-Feb-37
Switsers
1,060
10,240
0.1035
34-5
Amsterdam
09-Feb-37
Switsers
1,100
10,240
0.1074
40
Haarlem
02-Jan-37
Viceroy
3,000
1,000
3.0000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Viceroy
4,203
685
6.1358
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Viceroy
3,000
410
7.3171
Children
Alkmaer
05-Feb-37
Viceroy
2,700
295
9.1525
G&W
05-Feb-37
Viceroy
6,700
1,000
6.7000
G&W
10-Jul-12
Vlaems
450
38,912
0.0116
4
Haarlem
02-Jan-37
Witte Croonen
128
10,240
0.0125
G&W
05-Feb-37
Witte Croonen
300
1,000
0.3000
G&W
05-Feb-37
Witte Croonen
3,600
10,240
0.3516
G&W
05-Feb-37
Witte Croonen
0.2700
Krelage, 49
05-Feb-37
Zomerschoon
1,010
368
2.7446
G&W

Notes
1. The discussion of political and economic history is based on Rich
and Wilson, The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vols. 4 and 5
(Rich and Wilson 1975, 1977); Braudel (1979), vol. 3; Attman (1983); and
Cooper, The New Cambridge Modern History of Europe, vol. IV (1970).
2. See Attman (1983, 35). The guilder was the unit of account. It was
denoted by the sign ﬂ. (ﬂorin) and was divided into 20 stuivers. The
stuiver was further subdivided into 16 pennings. The guilder was a
bimetallic unit, equivalent to 10.75 grams of ﬁne silver from 1610–1614,
10.28 grams from 1620–1659, and 9.74 grams thereafter. See Posthumus
(1964, cxv) and Rich and Wilson (1977, 458). Its gold content was 0.867
grams of ﬁne gold in 1612, 0.856 grams in 1622, 0.77 in 1638, and 0.73
in 1645. This was a devaluation of gold content of 16%. See Posthumus
(1964, cxix). Prices of foodstuffs, metals, and ﬁbers did not display 
signiﬁcant secular movements from 1600 through 1750; so given the
orders of magnitude of bulb price changes that we will observe, we
can take the price level as approximately constant in interpreting
nominal prices during this 150-year period.
3. See Penso de la Vega ([1688] 1957) for a description of the variety 
of securities and the sophistication of market manipulation on the
Amsterdam exchange.
4. Beckmann wrote originally in German at the end of the eighteenth
century; only the fourth English edition (1846) of his book was avail-
able to me.
5. For a list of these pamphlets, see the references in Krelage (1942,
1946).

146
Notes
6. These were published in the Weekblad voor Bloembollencultur and are
reprinted in Van Damme (1976).
7. The discussion in this section is based on Schama (1987, 323–371),
and on the translation of Penso de la Vega (1688, xii–xix).
8. See Prinzing (1916) on the epidemics of the Thirty Years’ War. See
also Cooper (1970, 76).
9. See Mather (1961, 44).
10. See Doorenbos (1954, 1–11).
11. See Mather (1961, 100–101).
12. See Posthumus (1929, 442).
13. Gheele Croonen and Witte Croonen apparently were not broken
tulips, though they were multicolored. However, it is not clear whether
all the other “pound good” tulips were broken.
14. In his discussion on economic distress in the tulipmania, Malkiel
asks, “And what of those who had sold out early in the game? In the
end, they too were engulfed by the tulip craze. For the ﬁnal chapter of
this bizarre story is that the shock generated by the boom and collapse
was followed by a prolonged depression in Holland. No one was
spared” (1996, 38). Unfortunately, there was no depression in Holland.
Malkiel prefers to propagate the myth handed down by Mackay to
seriously researching the topic.
15. I thank Guido Imbens and Klaas Baks for this translation.
16. Krelage cites “Clare ontdeckingh der ghener, die haer tegenwo-
ordigh laten noemen Floristen” (Hoorn: Zacharias Cornelisz, 1636) as
the source.
17. This section is intended as a brief outline of the vast Mississippi
scheme. For a recent fascinating view of the scheme and its imple-
mentation, see Antoin Murphy’s excellent John Law and also his biog-
raphy of Richard Cantillon. Larry Neal (1990) provides a general
description of the development of the ﬁnancial markets in England,
the Netherlands, and France in the eighteenth century, along with an
analysis of the South Sea and Mississippi bubbles.
18. This outline of Law’s experiment is based on descriptions in Harsin
(1928), Faure (1977), and Murphy (1986).

Notes
147
19. See Harsin’s (1928, 180) citation of Law’s Deuxieme Lettre sur le
nouveau system des ﬁnances.
20. Murphy (1997, 235) argues that Law was pushed into the share
price ﬁxing phase during a temporary loss of control.
21. I have taken the factual information in this section primarily from
Scott (1911), Carswell (1960), and Dickson (1967).
22. Neal (1988) discusses the nature of these annuities.
23. Neal (1988) argues that the peak price was £950 on July 1. Scott
(1911) indicates a peak price of £1050, but this apparently includes the
announced stock dividend of 10 percent. Following Neal, I have used
the peak price of £950.
24. Dreman clearly neglected to inquire about current bulb prices in
Haarlem before he wrote.

This page intentionally left blank

References
Anderson, A. 1787. An Historical and Chronological Deduction of the
Origin of Commerce, vol. 3. London: J. Walter.
Attman, A. 1983. Dutch Enterprise in the World Bullion Trade. Goteborg:
Almqvist and Wicksell.
Azariadis, C. 1981. “Self-Fulﬁlling Prophecies.” Journal of Economic
Theory 25:380–396.
Azariadis, C., and R. Guesnerie. 1986. “Sunspots and Cycles.” Review
of Economic Studies 53 (Oct.):725–737.
Beckmann, J. 1846. History of Inventions, Discoveries, and Origins, vol. 1,
4th ed. London: Harry G. Bohn.
Bradley, R. 1728. Dictionarium Botanicum: Or, a Botanical Dictionary for
the Use of the Curious in Husbandry and Gardening. London.
Braudel, F. 1979. The Perspective of the World. Vol. 3, Civilization & Cap-
italism, 15th–18th Century. New York: Harper and Row.
Burmeister, E. 1980. Capital Theory and Dynamics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Carswell, J. 1960. The South Sea Bubble. London: Cresset Press.
“Clare ontdeckingh der ghener, die haer tegenwoordigh laten noemen
Floristen.” 1636. Hoorn: Zacharias Cornelisz.

150
References
Cooper, P. 1970. New Cambridge Modern History. Vol. IV, The Decline of
Spain and the Thirty Years’ War. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
D’Ardene, J. 1760. Traité des Tulipes. Avignon: Chambeau.
de Vries, J. 1976. The Economy of Europe in an Age of Crisis, 1600–1750.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dickson, P. G. M. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in
the Development of Public Credit. London: Macmillan.
Doorenbos, J., “Notes on the History of Bulb Breeding in the Nether-
lands.” Euphytica 3, no. 1 (February 1954):1–11.
Dreman, D. 1977. Psychology and the Stock Market. New York: Anacom.
Eatwell, J., M. Milgate, and P. Newman, eds. 1987. The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics. Dictionary oillan.
Faure, E. 1977. La Banqueroute de Law. Paris.
Galbraith, J. K. 1993. A Short History of Financial Euphoria. New York:
Viking.
Garber, P. 1989. “Tulipmania.” Journal of Political Economy (April):
535–560.
——. 1990a. “Famous First Bubbles.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
(May): 35–54.
——. 1990b. “Who Put the Mania in Tulipmania?” In E. White, ed.,
Crashes and Panics: The Lessons from History. Homewood, IL: Dow-Jones
Irwin.
Hamilton, E. 1936–37. “Prices and Wages at Paris under John Law’s
System.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 51:42–70.
Harsin, P. 1928. Les Doctrines Monetarires et Financieres en France. Paris:
Librairie Felix Alcan.
Hartman, H., and D. Kester. 1983. Plant Propagation. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.

References
151
International Monetary Fund. 1998. World Economic Outlook and
International Capital Markets, Interim Assessment. Washington, DC: IMF.
Kindleberger, C. 1978. Manias, Panics, and Crashes. New York: Basic
Books.
Kindleberger, C. P. 1996. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Finan-
cial Crises, 3d ed. New York: Wiley.
Krelage, E. H. 1942. Bloemenspeculatie in Nederland. Amsterdam: P. N.
van Kampen & Zoon.
——. 1946. Drie Eeuwen Bloembollenexport, Vol 2. s’Gravenhage.
Krugman, P. 1995. “Dutch Tulips and Emerging Markets.” Foreign
Affairs 74:28–44.
La Chesnee Monstereul. 1654. Le Floriste François. Caen: Mangeant.
Law, J. [1705] 1760. Money and Trade Considered: With a Proposal for Sup-
plying the Nation with Money. Glasgow: Foulis.
“Liste van Eenige Tulpaen . . .” [1637] 1927. In Economisch-Historisch
Jaarboek, vol. XII, 96–99. Reprint, Haarlem: Adriaen Roman.
Mackay, C. [1841] 1852. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness
of Crowds, vol. 1, 2d ed. London: Ofﬁce of the National Illustrated
Library.
Malkiel, B. 1985. “The Madness of Crowds.” In A Random Walk Down
Wall Street, 4th ed. New York: Norton.
Malkiel, B. G. 1996. A Random Walk Down Wall Street. New York:
Norton.
Mather, J. 1961. Commercial Production of Tulips and Daffodils. London:
WH&L.
Munting, A. 1672. Waare Oeffening der Planten. Amsterdam.
——. 1696. Naauwkeurige Beschryving der Aardgewassen. Leyden.
Murphy, A. E. 1986. Richard Cantillon, Entrepreneur and Economist.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

152
References
——. 1997. John Law: Economic Theorist and Policy-Maker. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Neal, L. 1988. “How the South Sea Bubble Was Blown Up and Burst:
A New Look at Old Data.” University of Illinois Working Paper,
August.
——. 1990. The Rise of Financial Capitalism. Oxford: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Neal, L., and E. Schubert. 1985. “The First Rational Bubbles: A New
Look at the Mississippi and South Sea Schemes.” BEBR Working Paper
1188, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, September.
Palgrave, R. H. 1926. Dictionary
of
Political
Economy.
London:
MacMillan.
Penso de la Vega, J. [1688, Amsterdam] 1957. Confusion de Confusiones,
English trans. Boston: Baker Library.
Posthumus, N. W. 1926, 1927, 1934. “Die Speculatie in Tulpen in de
Jaren 1636–37.” Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek.
——. 1929. “The Tulip Mania in Holland in the Years 1636 and 1637.”
Journal of Economic and Business History 1 (May).
——. 1964. Inquiry into the History of Prices in Holland. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Prinzing, F. 1916. Epidemics Resulting from Wars. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
“Register den de Prijsen der Bloemen . . . Derde Samenspraeck.” [1637]
1926. In Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek, vol. XII. Reprint, Haarlem:
Adriaen Roman.
Rich, E. E., and C. H. Wilson, eds. 1975. The Cambridge Economic History
of Europe. Vol. IV, The Economy of Expanding Europe in the Sixteenth and
Seventeenth Centuries. London: Cambridge University Press.
——. 1977. The Cambridge Economic History of Europe. Vol. V, The Eco-
nomic Organization of Early Modern Europe. London: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
The Royal General Bulbgrowers Society. 1969. Classiﬁed List and Inter-
national Register of Tulip Names. Haarlem.

References
153
“Samenspraeck Tusschen Waermondt ende Gaergoedt: Flora.” [1637]
1926. In Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek, vol. XII. Reprint, Haarlem:
Adriaen Roman.
Samuelson, P. A. 1957. “Intertemporal Price Equilibrium: A Pro-
logue to the Theory of Speculation.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 79,
no. 2:181–219; reprinted in J. Stiglitz, ed., The Collected Scienti-
ﬁc Papers of Paul A. Samuelson, vol. 2. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1966.
——. 1967. “Indeterminacy of Development in a Heterogeneous-
Capital Model with Constant Saving Propensity.” In K. Shell, ed.,Essays
on the Theory of Optimal Economic Growth. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Schama, S. 1987. The Embarrassment of Riches. New York: Alfred Knopf.
Schumpeter, J. 1954. History of Economic Analysis. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Scott, W. 1911. The Constitution and Finance of English, Scottish, and Irish
Joint Stock Companies to 1720, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Shell, K., and J. Stiglitz. 1967. “The Allocation of Investment in a
Dynamic Economy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 81, no. 4 (Novem-
ber):592–609.
Smith, K. 1937. Textbook of Plant Virus Diseases. London: J&A Churchill.
Solms-Laubach, H. Graf. 1899. Weizen und Tulpe und deren Geschichte.
Leipzig: Felix.
“Tweede Samenspraeck Tusschen Waermondt ende Gaergoedt.” [1637]
1926. In Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek, vol. XII. Reprint, Haarlem:
Adriaen Roman.
van Damme, A. 1976. Aanteekeningen Betreffende de Geschiedenis der
Bloembollen, Haarlem 1899–1903. Leiden: Boerhaave Press.
van Horne, J. 1985. “Of Financial Innovations and Excesses.” Journal of
Finance 40, no. 3 (July):621–631.
van Slogteren, E. 1960. “Broken Tulips.” In The Daffodil and Tulip Year-
book, 25–31. London: Royal Horticultural Society.

This page intentionally left blank

Aas, 43–44
Admirael de Man, 65, 136
Admirael Liefkens, 41, 51, 58,
136
Admirael van der Eyck, 41, 50,
58, 63–64, 70, 136–137
Admirael van Enchuysen, 65,
136
Admirael van Eyck, 63–64, 70
Admirael van Hoorn, 136
Aigle Noir, 70
Amsterdam, 23
azen and, 44
bubonic plague and, 37
tulip collapse and, 61–62
Anderson, Adam, 87–88
Aphids, 41
Appeal to Frederick, 34–35
Asset price, 30–32, 123
bubble concept and, 4, 9
characterization of, 49–59
common bulbs and, 79–83
eighteenth-century hyacinths,
71–72
eighteenth-century tulips, 65–70
modern tulips and, 72–73
post tulip collapse and, 63–64
seventeenth-century tulips and,
133–144
Asymmetric information, 88
Attman, A., 145
Austria, 25
Azariadis, C., 130
Azen, 43–44
Bank of England, 109–110, 120
Bank of Japan, 107
Bankruptcy, 45, 49
Banque Generale, 92, 95
Banque Royale, 95–97, 98–102
Bartelmiesz, Wouter, 134
Baruch, Bernard, 127–128
Battle of Nordlingen, 22
Beckmann, Johann, 29–30, 46,
145
Bleyenburch, 137
Blijenburger, 137
Bloembollencentrum, 73
Board of Governors, 6
Bourse, 34–35
Brabanson, 65
Bradley, R., 67, 69
Index

156
Index
Braudel, F., 145
Brazil, 20
Breaking, 40–41
Breda, 22
Bruyne Purper, 137
Bubbles, 3. See also Dutch
tulipmania; Mississippi
Bubble; South Sea Bubble
Bubble Act and, 119
explanation of, 4–5, 7–9,
123–126
famous examples of, 12–14
Kindleberger on, 77–78, 83, 129
Law and, 14, 91–113, 121–122
literature on, 127–131
opinion and, 9–12
Ponzi scheme and, 89, 123, 130
price myth and, 83
ventures and, 87–120
Bubonic plague, 22, 81
price characterization and, 59
ravages of, 37–38
tulip market and, 44
Bulbs. See Dutch tulipmania;
Tulip bulbs
Burmeister, E., 130
Caers op de Candelaer, 137
Calvo, Guillermo, 131
Cambridge Economic History of
Europe, The (Rich and Wilson),
75
Capital ﬂow. See Herding
Caribbean, 20
Carswell, J.,
Centen, 57–59, 137
Chain letter, 90, 123, 130
China Company, 95
City Chamber of Marine 
Insurance, 33
Colleges (trading groups), 44–45,
47, 77
common bulbs and, 81
price characterization and, 49
Commodities, 23, 33, 44–45
Compagnie des Indes, 119
founding of, 95
French taxation and, 96
shares of, 97–98, 103, 105
takes over Banque Royale, 
100
Compagnie d’Occident, 92, 95
Contagion, 11, 123
Contracts, 61–62. See also
Futures; Markets
Cooper, P., 76, 146
Coorenaerts, 56, 58–59, 65, 138
Crashes, 3, 118–120, 123
D’Ardene, J., 42
de Koning, C., 37
Denmark, 20
de Vries, J., 38
Dickson, P. G. M., 111–112,
117–118
Dictionary of Political Economy
(Palgrave), 7
Doorenbas, J., 146
Dow, 7, 77
Dreman, D., 127–128, 147
Dutch, 61, 119
economy of, 22–23, 75–78
historical background and,
19–23
Dutch East India Company, 23,
33–34, 109
Kindleberger on, 77
Law and, 95

Index
157
tulip collapse and, 62
Dutch tulipmania, 3, 9. See also
Tulip bulbs
bubonic plague and, 38
collapse of, 61–70
economics training and, 17
explanation of, 123–126
Financial Times and, 10–11
fundamentals and, 13
futures and, 33–36, 44–45
historical background and,
19–23
legend’s source, 29–32
literature on, 127–131
mania interpretation and, 75–83
1998 template and, 10–11
price and, 30–32 (see also Price
data)
reason for, 12
traditional image of, 25–27
Wall Street Journal and, 128
Dutch West India Company,
20–21, 33–34
slave trade and, 23
East India Company. See Dutch
East India Company
Eatwell, J., 129, 131
Economics. See also Bubbles;
Markets
bubonic plague and, 37–38
chain letter and, 90, 123, 130
Dutch, 22–23, 75–78
European history and, 19–23
Keynesianism and, 6, 14, 106
Law and, 14, 91–113, 121–122
literature on, 127–131
mania interpretation and,
75–83, 123–131
Mississippi fundamentals and,
105–107 (see also Mississippi
Bubble)
panic and, 10–11, 123
South Sea Bubble and, 109–122
(see also South Sea Bubble)
tulipmania and, 17, 26–27,
29–32 (see also Dutch
tulipmania)
Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek,
133–134
Economist, The, 128
Eighty Years’ War, 19–20
English, 19–20, 22
South Sea Bubble and, 109–122
English Admiral, 63–64, 70, 138
Fama, 138
Faure, E., 147
Federal Reserve, 6
Financial crisis, 3, 118–120, 123
Financial institutions, 11
Bank of England, 109–110, 120
Bank of Japan, 107
Banque Generale, 92, 95
Banque Royale, 95–97, 99–102
Financial Times, 4, 10–11
France, 20–22
Law scheme and, 91–107
tax system and, 96
tulip market and, 43
Fundamentals
bubbles and, 4, 12–14
common bulbs and, 81
economics training and, 17
explanation of, 123–126
Law scheme and, 91–107
Mississippi Bubble and, 91–93,
105–107

158
Index
Fundamentals (cont.)
psychology and, 5
South Sea Bubble and, 121–122
ventures and, 88
Fund of credit, 92, 97, 100
Futures
common bulb prices and, 79–83
immorality of, 34–35
Ponzi scheme and, 89
price characterization and, 49
repudiation and, 34–35
South Sea Bubble and, 109–122
theory and, 8–9
tulip market and, 44–46 (see also
Dutch tulipmania)
G&W (Gaergoedt and 
Waermondt)
on breaking, 41–42
price data and, 31, 58, 71,
134–135 (see also Price data)
speculation and, 36
Galbraith, J. K., 129
Garber, P., 78
Generalissimo, 138
General Rotgans, 63–64, 70, 142
Germany, 22, 37
Gheele Croonen, 41, 138
Gheele ende Roote van Leyden,
65
price characterization and,
51–52, 58–59
seventeenth-century prices and,
138–139
Ghemarm. de Goyer, 139
Gouda, 43
eighteenth century and, 65
price characterization and,
51–52, 58–59
seventeenth century and,
139–140
Governments
connivance of, 87
herding and, 6
Law scheme and, 91–103
theories and, 8, 14
Great Depression, 130
Greedy Goods, 134
Greenspan, Alan, 6–8
Groote Geplumiceerde,54, 58,
140
Guesnerie, R., 130
Guilders, 44
Haarlem, 29
bubonic plague and, 37–38, 
59
eighteenth-century tulips and,
67
gardens of, 76
modern tulip prices and, 73
tulip collapse and, 62
Haarlemscher Courant, 66
Hahn problem, 130
Hamilton, E., 101
Hapsburgs, 19–20
Harsin, P., 96, 99, 147
Hartman, H., 39
Herding, 3, 123
meaning of, 5–6
theories and, 8
Holland, 61, 119. See also Dutch
tulipmania
economy of, 22–23, 75–78
historical background and,
19–23
Holy Roman Empire, 20
Hyacinths, 67, 71–72

Index
159
IMF (International Monetary
Fund), 10
Interim Report, 10–11
Internet, 8–9
Investment
bubbles and, 87–89
explanation of, 123–126
herding and, 5–6
Law scheme and, 91–107
Schama on, 33
South Sea Bubble and, 109–120
theories and, 8
Irrational exuberance, 3
bubbles and, 7, 9–10, 12
economics training and, 17
mania and, 75–83, 123–131
meaning of, 6–7
risk control and, 11
Jan Gerritz, 65, 140
Japan, 20
Julius Caesar, 140
Kester, D., 39
Keynesianism, 6, 14, 106
Kindleberger, C. P., 77–78, 83, 129
Krelage, E. H., 31, 145, 146
common bulbs and, 81–82
Dutch economy and, 76
hyacinth prices and, 71–72
price myth and, 83
tulip prices and, 66–67, 69,
133–135
Krugman, P., 129
La Chesnee Monstereul, 40, 42
Lack van Rijn, 41
Latour, 140–141
Law, John, 14
ﬁnance operations of, 95–103
ﬁnancial system of, 91–93
Mississippi fundamentals and,
105–107
power of, 97–98
South Sea Bubble and, 109–113,
121–122
Le Grand, 56, 58–59, 141
Leiden, 37
Le Maire, Isaac, 34
Literature
sunspot, 130–131
tulipmania and, 127–131
Livre tournois, 95
London, 13
London Assurance Company,
119
Mackay, Charles, 13, 127–129
common bulbs and, 81
sources of, 29–30
tulipmania and, 25–27, 61
Macx, 55, 58–59, 141
Malkiel, B. G., 128, 129, 146
Mania. See also Dutch tulipmania;
Irrational exuberance
explanation of, 75–83, 123–126
literature on, 127–131
Manias, Panics, and Crashes
(Kindleberger), 77
Markets. See also Bubbles;
Economics
bubonic plague and, 37–38
commodities and, 23, 33, 44–45
common bulbs and, 79–83
Dutch tulipmania and, 12,
33–36 (see also Dutch
tulipmania)
European history and, 19–23

160
Index
Markets (cont.)
explanation of, 124–126
fundamentals and, 5, 12–14 (see
also Fundamentals)
futures and, 44, 87–89 (see also
Futures)
G&W and, 30
irrationality and, 123
Law and, 14, 91–113, 121–122
South Sea Bubble and, 109–122
(see also South Sea Bubble)
Mather, J., 146
Mexico crisis, 10
Milgate, M., 129, 131
Mississippi Bubble, 3, 9–10,
12–14
explanation of, 123–126
fundamentals and, 91–93,
105–107
illustration of, 98
Law scheme and, 14, 91–113,
121–122
preliminary view of, 87–90
slave trade and, 95
Mosaic virus, 40–41
Munting, A., 30, 43, 135
Murphy, A., 147
Neal, L., 118, 120, 146
Netherlands, 19
bubonic plague and, 37–38
economic distress and, 75–78
historical background of, 19–
23
Newman, P., 129, 131
New Palgrave Dictionary of 
Economics, The (Eatwell,
Milgate, and Newman), 129,
131
New York, 20
Nieuwberger, 55, 58, 141
Oligarchy, 36
Opinion, 9–12
Oudenaerden, 54, 58, 59, 141–142
Palgrave, R. H., 7, 89, 129
Palgrave’s Dictionary of Political
Economy (Palgrave), 129
Panic, 10–11, 123
Paragon Liefkens, 41
Parliament, 120, 122
Bubble Act and, 119
purchases of, 111–113
refunding and, 110–111
Parragon Grebber, 65
Parragon Liefkens, 65
Parragon Schilder, 142
Peace of Prague, 22
Penso de la Vega, 145, 146
Petter, 142
Piece goods, 43, 49, 58–59
Ponzi scheme, 89, 123, 130
Posthumus, N. W., 31–32
Dutch economy and, 76
on piece goods, 49
tulips and, 46–47, 62, 133
Pound goods, 49, 58–59
Premier Noble, 70
Price data, 30–32, 123
bubble concept and, 4, 9
characterization of, 49–59
common bulbs and, 79–83
eighteenth-century hyacinths,
71–72
eighteenth-century tulips, 65–70
modern tulips and, 72–73
myth and, 83

Index
161
nature of tulips and, 43, 78
post tulip collapse and, 63–64
seventeenth-century tulips and,
133–144
Prijsen der Bloemen, 134
Prinzing, F., 146
Protestants, 20, 22
Psychology, 123–126
economics literature on,
127–131
fundamentals and, 5
Rentes, 92
Repudiation, 34–35
Rich, E. E., 20, 75
Richelieu, 21
Risk control, 10–11
Roi de Fleurs, 70
Rotgans, 63–64, 70, 142
Rotterdam, 67
Royal Assurance Company, 119
Royal General Bulbgrowers
Society, 41
Russia, 11
Saeyblom, 65
Saeyblom, beste, 143
Saeyblom van Coningh, 143
Samuelson, P. A., 130
Schama, S., 33, 35, 76, 83, 146
Schapesteyn, 143
Schubert, E., 120
Schumpeter, J., 91
Schuppe, John Balthasar, 29
Scipio, 53, 58, 143
Scott, W., 111, 117–118, 122, 147
Self-generating equilibrium, 123
Self perfection, 40
Semper Augustus, 26, 41
eighteenth century and, 65, 67
price characterization and, 50,
58, 78
seventeenth century and, 143
tulip collapse and, 62
Senecours, 65
Senegalese Company, 95
Shares. See Stock
Shell, K., 130
Short selling, 33–36
Slave trade, 23, 95, 110
Smith, K., 40
Solms-Laubach, H., 30, 62
South Sea Bubble, 3, 12–14
explanation of, 123–126
ﬁnance operations of, 115–120
Financial Times on, 10
fundamentals of, 91–93,
121–122
IMF on, 10
Law scheme and, 97, 109–113
Parliament and, 111–113,
119–120, 122
preliminary view of, 87–90
price collapse and, 118–120
refunding agreement and,
110–111
slave trade and, 110
Wall Street Journal and, 128
Spain, 19, 38
Armada and, 20–21, 77–78
historical background and,
19–22
South Sea Bubble and, 110
West India Company and, 34
Specie, 100–102
Speculation, 35, 130. See also
Markets
bubonic plague and, 37–38

162
Index
Speculation (cont.)
Dutch economy and, 33, 76–77
explanation of, 124–126
irrationality and, 123
tulipmania and, 36, 43–46,
61–64
Stadholder, 34
Stiglitz, J., 130
Stock prices
explanation of, 123–126
Law scheme and, 91–107
Mississippi fundamentals and,
105–107
Ponzi scheme and, 87–89
South Sea Bubble and, 109–120
Stuiver, 44
Sunspots, 130–131
Superintendent, 69, 70
Superintendent Roman, 67
Sweden, 20, 22
Switsers
eighteenth century and, 65
price characterization and, 52,
58–59, 80
seventeenth century and,
143–144
Theories, 124
about the future, 8
Greenspan and, 7
herding and, 6
Keynesianism and, 6, 14, 106
Law and, 14, 91–93
literature and, 129–130
Thirty Years’ War, 20, 22, 76
Trade. See Markets
Trading in the wind, 34
True Mouth, 134
Tulip bulbs
common, 79–83
eighteenth century and, 65–70
mania interpretation and, 75–
83
market of, 43–47
modern prices of, 72–73
nature of, 39–42, 78
seventeenth century and,
133–144
trading practices of, 44–46
Tulipmania. See Dutch
tulipmania
Tulpa Meerman, 63
Turkey, 25
Twelve Years’ Truce, 19–20
van Damme, A., 31, 37–38, 63
eighteenth-century tulips and,
65–66
van Damme, J., 63, 146
van der Groen, 65
van Horne, J., 131
van Slogteren, E., 41–42
Ventures
bubbles and, 87–89
chain letters and, 90
Law and, 14, 91–113, 121–122
Verspreijt, 63
Viceroy, 41, 57–58, 83, 144
Vroege Bleyenberger, 65
Vroege Branston, 63
Wall Street Journal, 128
Wassenaer, 62
West India Company. See Dutch
West India Company
Wilson, C. H., 20, 75, 145
Windhandel, 34
Wine money, 44, 77

Index
163
Wisselbank, 33
Witte Croonen
post collapse and, 63–64
price characterization and,
58–59, 79–80
seventeenth century and, 144
World Economic Outlook/Capital
Markets Interim Report, 10
Zomerschoon, 41, 144

