
Fascinate
Your 7 Triggers to Persuasion and Captivation

Sally Hogshead

TO QUINTON AND AZALEA,
MY FASCINATIONS

Contents
Preface: Witchcraft, Green Peas, and Sigmund Freud
Introduction: What Is “Fascination,” Exactly?
Part I: Fascinate or Fail Will You Fascinate? Or Will You Fail?
The Big O: Speaking of Fascination, Let’s Start with Sex, Shall We?
Cocktail lounges and the canoodling tango
The mental disorder known as infatuation
Orgasm
When fascination turns into obsession
The scale of intensity
Fetishes
Measuring elbows in a singles bar
Your MHCs
Tipping the stripper
Your Fascinating Face: Why You Were Born Knowing Exactly How to
Persuade
Amazon jungle to Amazon.com
A baby’s first party trick
The boy who couldn’t see his mother’s face
Mona Lisa is 83 percent happy
Why do humans smile?

Girls fall for the funny guy
The perfect comedic face
Fascination and the Media: Trends Driving the Need for a New Form of
Persuasion
The amnesiac and the maze
Papyrus print ads
Trends driving distraction
Rise of the ADD world
Goldfish and nine seconds
Paying attention vs. earning attention
Shutting out messages
The Fascination Economy
The Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message: How Do You Evaluate
Whether Something Is Fascinating?
Some ideas take off, but most fizzle
Esperanto death sentence
Gold Hallmarks of a fascinating message
Provoking reactions
Creating advocates
Cultural shorthand
Inciting conversation
Forcing competitors to realign
Social revolutions
Hype
Naming your baby with Google
A man named David Scott
How Fascinating Are You? Applying Fascination to Your Personality and
Brand

The Most Fascinating Person in the Room
The F Score
High-Scoring Personalities
More Fascinating Isn’t Always Better
Fascination versus Likability or Respect
Famous High-Scorers
Ultra-Scoring Personalities
Low-Scoring Personalities
Not Fascinating Yet? Don’t Panic, You’re on the Road
Part II: The Seven Fascination Triggers Meet Your New Arsenal: Lust,
Mystique, Alarm, Prestige, Power, Vice, and Trust
Lust: Why We’re Seduced by the Anticipation of Pleasure
Marilyn Monroe’s wet voice
Craving
“But I want it!”
Increasing desire for boring brands
Stop thinking, start feeling
Testosterone-drenched saliva
Body odor and vomit
Make the ordinary more emotional
Use all five senses
Godiva’s Chocolixir
Tease and flirt
The monkey and the grape
Mystique: Why We’re Intrigued by Unanswered Questions
Jägermeister: The most popular drink nobody likes

Sparking curiosity
The lure of celebrity deaths
Withholding critical information
Championship poker, where a single glance can cost millions
Mythology
Pop Rocks, bull testicles, and the number 33
Stories, not facts
Coca-Cola’s secret ingredient
What’s behind the velvet rope?
The kitchen inside the kitchen
Buzzkills
Alarm: Why We Take Action at the Threat of Negative Consequences
Luke Sullivan’s epiphany
Roller coasters, roulette wheels
Defining consequences
Creating deadlines
Ginzu knives and exclamation points
Why we procrastinate
How to increase danger
The suicide that failed
Not the crisis most likely, but the one most feared
Blood on the shoes
Distress steers positive action
Tap Project
Prestige: Why We Fixate on Symbols of Rank and Respect
Tulip hysteria
Emblems
Blue bake-off ribbons and pink Mary Kay Cadillacs

Setting new standards
Throwing down the vodka gauntlet
Harry Winston and the cursed Hope Diamond
Limiting availability
Zip codes
Earning it
A prestigious black piece of cloth
Power: Why We Focus on the People and Things That Control Us
The gold medal that cost too much
Spectrum of power
Domination
Sushi dictators
Provoking inferiority complexes
The alpha stance
Celebrity monkey paparazzi
Controlling the environment
The most fascinating organization in the world?
Reward and punishment
Potent, or impotent
Vice: Why We’re Tempted by “Forbidden Fruit”
Prohibition, Rockefeller, and Al Capone
Everyday guilty pleasures
Taboos
Bad girls
Controversy in Leaves of Grass and Where’s Waldo?
Michael Phelps and the bong
When to lead others astray
Defined absolutes

The black box experiment
DARE and “Just Say Maybe”
How to overcome vice
Give a wink
How and why traditional companies should apply vice
Trust: Why We’re Loyal to Reliable Options
It’s a Wonderful Life
Familiarity
The exposure effect
McNuggets, milk, and golden arches
Repeating and retelling
Hitler and the “Big Lie”
Authenticity
Villains, heroes, and your personal reputation
The Tiffany & Co. silver bracelet
Rebuilding or accelerating trust
How to “unfascinate” an unhealthy message
The Edible Schoolyard
Trust for beginners
Part III: The Fascination Plan of Attack How to Make Your Own Messages
More Fascinating
Ideas kept under lock and key
Three stages
Workshop program overview
Stage 1: Evaluation—How Fascinating Are Your Company and Message?
Are you reaching the Gold Hallmarks of a fascinating message?

Identifying your primary trigger
Your brand’s chemistry set
Who’s getting it right (or not)
Superman and Spider-Man
Stage 2: Development—Create and Heighten Fascination
Fascination badges
Bell curves
The fringe
Incorporating new triggers
What if?
Prestige and the T-shirt
Judging a book by its triggers
Stage 3: Execution—Bringing Your Fascination to Life
Building internal support for your plan
Measure, research, reevaluate
Tracking your progress
Removing barriers to fascination
Still fascination-resistant? Read on.
Appendix: The Kelton Fascination Study
How much is fascination worth?
Help your audience feel fascinated, and fascinating
Fascination in the workplace
In decision making
In personal relationships
What we seek in life: Relationships, trust, and fascination
Author’s Note

Fascination at a Glance
Sources
Acknowledgments
Searchable Terms
About the Author
Other Books by Sally Hogshead
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher

Preface
Witchcraft, Green Peas, and Sigmund Freud
More weight!” cried the old man, begging to be crushed more quickly.
“More weight!”
It was the summer of 1692, in Salem village. The old man’s ribs snapped one
by one, in sickening succession, each audible to the hundreds of townsfolk
encircling his execution. But his pleas were answered instead with the same slow
addition of stones upon his chest. For two days, six large men lifted stone and
rock onto Giles Corey’s torso. But Corey refused to confess to any charges,
asking only for more weight to speed his death. The sheriff stood over him,
impatiently waiting for a confession, using his cane to push the old man’s tongue
back inside his mouth. At last, Corey was silenced by the final stone dropping
upon his breast. His crime?* Giles had been accused of “fascination,” casting a
spell that left his victims powerless to resist. The grand jury decreed he had
enchanted the townspeople, mesmerizing them so fully that they became
immobilized with captivation. Under the spell of fascination, they became
hostage to his thoughts, losing the ability to think rationally or protest.* The
concept of fascination didn’t begin with Giles Corey’s execution in Salem
village. Throughout cultures, across the continents, since the birth of civilization
itself, people have studied the ways in which fascination influences behavior.
The word “fascination” comes from the ancient Latin, fascinare, “to bewitch.”
All around the world, ancient cultures were fascinated with fascination. The
Romans believed it was an evil curse, and for protection worshipped one of the
earliest Latin divinities: Fascinus, the god of fascination.† In Mesopotamia,
Persians believed fascination could cause deadly maladies. In Constantinople,
citizens painted passages from the Koran upon their houses to defend their
families from the spell of fascination’s evil eye. Fortunately, by 280 B.C.,

Greece’s first pastoral poet, Theocritus, seemed to have found a safeguard: an
old woman’s spit. During the Renaissance, the bookshelves of Europe were
filled with weighty tomes on the subject. De Fascino defined fascination as “an
open covenant with Satan…witchcraft of the eyes, or words…to so compel men
that they are no longer free, nor of sane understanding.” A hundred years later,
Tractatus de Fascinatione warned against lounging in bed too late in the
morning wearing nightcaps (yes, nightcaps), or breaking a religious fast on green
peas (yes, green peas).
How to prevent and cure? In many cases, the remedy seems almost worse
than the disease: the skin of a hyena’s forehead, dust in which a mule had rolled,
and a broth stewed from the ashes of a hangman’s rope. Not exactly goods you
could pick up on an afternoon Costco run. In the absence of hyena forehead skin,
it seems one could also lick the skin of a child’s forehead.
If all that sounds like quackery, let’s consult a doctor with whom you might
be more familiar: Sigmund Freud. In 1921, Freud labeled the relationship
between a therapist and a patient as “fascination,” a form of hypnosis. He went
on to describe romantic love as a state in which an individual becomes so
submissively engrossed in his object of “fascination” that he becomes
hypnotized, losing his critical faculties, in “bondage of love.”* Freud,
apparently, wasn’t the only one comparing fascination with hypnosis. The 1911
edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica describes fascination as a “hypnotic
condition, marked by muscular contraction, but with consciousness and power of
remembrance.”
Even our modern Webster’s Dictionary sounds a bit sinister in comparing
fascination to witchcraft: “bewitching, or enchanting…the exercise of a powerful
or irresistible influence on the affections or passions; unseen, inexplicable
influence.”
Yet as we’ll see, the ability to fascinate isn’t witchcraft or hypnotism. And it
doesn’t come from wearing nightcaps or eating green peas. It is a tool. Rather
than something to be feared, it is a discipline to be mastered. Fascination is born
of a natural instinct to influence the behavior of others. But the key to mastering
fascination is effectively activating the seven triggers:
LUST creates craving for sensory pleasure.
MYSTIQUE lures with unanswered questions.
ALARM threatens with negative consequences.
PRESTIGE earns respect through symbols of achievement.
POWER commands and controls.
VICE tempts with “forbidden fruit,” causing us to rebel against norms.

TRUST comforts us with certainty and reliability.
 
Whether you realize it or not—whether you intend to or not—you’re already
using the seven triggers. The question is, are you using the right triggers, in the
right way, to get your desired result? By mastering the triggers, your ideas
become more memorable, your conversations more persuasive, and your
relationships more lasting.
Across the ages, scholars have described the powers of fascination. Century
after century, they’ve told us how to recognize when someone is in a state of
fascination. Society after society, they’ve defined why fascination matters.
They’ve described repeatedly, and at length, the ways in which fascination
affects decision making. Yet throughout two thousand years of writings, one
question remains unanswered. And this is the most important question of all:
How can you become more fascinating?
Let’s find out.

Introduction
What Is “Fascination,” Exactly?
How I Became Fascinated with Fascination
Growing up in my family, earning attention wasn’t a recreational pursuit. It
was a matter of survival. Like any youngest child, I had to compete with older
siblings for attention. By toddlerhood I’d honed numerous strategies, from the
strategically executed tantrum to the art of asking, “Why? Why? Why?”
But then, when I turned seven, I was forced to raise my game. That year, my
sister was number one in the world in her swimming event (and went on to win
three gold medals in the Olympics), and my brother was accepted into Harvard.
The height of my achievement up to that point? Gold stars for finger painting.*
It was then that I learned my first lesson in fascination: A competitive
environment demands a more captivating message. Perhaps it won’t come as a
surprise that I went into marketing. Now I create messages for companies whose
competitive environments demand captivating messages.
In a distracted and overwhelmed world, everything—including you, your
communication, and your relationships—fights tooth and nail to get noticed.
Without fascination we can’t sell products off shelves, persuade shareholders to
invest, teach students to read, or convince spouses to vacation in Bora Bora next
February. Yet with fascination on your side, not only can you vacation in Bora
Bora; you can also unlock your own creative potential.
The Boy and the Chandeliers
Watching the boy, you might assume he was either daydreaming or bored.

But actually the opposite was true. He was coming alive. Pulse accelerating,
pupils dilating, sweat prickling, he stared at the iron chandeliers overhead.
Suspended by chains from the ceiling, these chandeliers swung in graceful arcs
after their wax candles were lit. The boy watched, hypnotized. He realized
something: The chandeliers took an equal number of heartbeats to complete each
arc, every single time, whether that arc was big or small. This boy wasn’t merely
“interested” in the swaying chandeliers. He wasn’t “paying attention” to them.
He was fascinated by them, and their movement. They swung back and forth.
Back and forth. Like a pendulum.
It was during this moment of fascination in the Pisa Cathedral that a
seventeen-year-old Galileo unlocked the most basic rhythm in the universe:
isochronism, the quantum leap in physics that soon led to his invention of the
pendulum clock, which led to modern timekeeping.
Even if you haven’t invented timekeeping, you’ve experienced this
spellbinding focus. It’s when you become lost in a moment, losing track of time
and the world around, completely focused on a person or message. When you
fascinate other people, not only do they focus on you and your message but
they’re also more likely to believe, care about, and retell your message.
Yet until now, the act of fascinating others has been an unpredictable
occurrence, a product of luck or timing or mysticism, rather than an ability to be
directed at will. But now, using both art and science, we’ll clear the mystery.
Along the way we’ll uncover what fascinates people, and why it fascinates them.
We’ll hear from leading experts in psychology, evolutionary biology, neurology,
and other-ologies, all shaken and served with a slice of pop culture.* To
understand why we become fascinated, and how we fascinate others, we’ll delve
into results from the first in-depth national marketing survey on fascination.
Developed and executed specifically for this book, the Kelton Study includes
more than a thousand people around the country in a broad range of ages,
industries, and professional levels. The Kelton Study found that people want to
be fascinated, and they want to be fascinating. Two branding implications:
People would be willing to pay almost a week’s salary to be the most
fascinating person in any situation. (A big opportunity if your brand
can help consumers feel more fascinating in their own lives.)
People want to feel fascinated by a product or experience, and will pay

more—often far more—for a brand that fascinates them. (A big
opportunity if your brand can help consumers feel more fascinated.)
Companies will add more value, and compete more effectively, by activating
one or more of the seven triggers. Those who don’t will be pushed aside or,
worse, forgotten. Messages that fail to fascinate will become irrelevant. It’s that
simple. This might not be fair. But as Salem villager Giles Corey can attest,
fascination doesn’t always play nice.
We all have certain behaviors that don’t exactly make sense, even to
ourselves. We make certain choices, and take certain actions, without
understanding exactly why. Here’s why: In a state of fascination, we don’t think
and act quite logically. We do things we don’t understand, we believe messages
we don’t agree with, and we buy things we don’t even want. At its most extreme,
fascination short-circuits the logical evaluation process.
Rather than coolly analyzing a decision, we’re gripped by deeply rooted
triggers. We might think we’re in control of our own choices, but much of the
time, we’re not. The seven triggers are. Triggers explain why people join
suicidal cults, or develop bizarre fetishes, or willingly obey tyrannical dictators.
More commonly (but just as irrationally), they buy sports cars they can’t afford,
procrastinate on major deadlines, or fall in love with the “wrong” person. Yet
once you understand the triggers behind them, these decisions begin to make
sense. A sneak preview of some examples we’ll explore: When does a billion-
dollar anti-drug program actually make kids more likely to do drugs?
 
The U.S. government spends $1.13 billion annually on an anti-drug program
named DARE. Not only does DARE not keep kids off drugs, it makes them
more likely to use drugs. This massive program increases drug use because it
unintentionally fascinates kids, using the vice trigger. It’s not just teenagers who
respond to vice: This trigger tempts us all to occasionally rebel and experiment.
Why did millions of people trust Hitler?
 
Hitler activated the trust trigger with horrible effectiveness. How? Trust
relies on consistency. Hitler knew this. He exploited a fundamental truth about
trust: If you tell a lie big enough, and keep repeating it, and deny any

contradicting input, eventually people will come to believe it. No matter how
illogical or poorly crafted the argument may be, followers are almost forced to
trust the message, because it’s all they know. To understand the lessons behind
Hitler’s tyranny, and to see which brands use the same principles, turn to the
trust trigger. And a few pages later, you’ll also find out why childhood obesity
can be overcome with principles similar to Hitler’s.
When is a flower worth more than the house it’s planted in front of?
 
In the late seventeenth century, the world experienced what many economists
believe was the first economic bubble. This bubble wasn’t in housing, or
currency, or credit; it was in tulips. Much like the real estate bubble of 2006, it
all started with rumors of outrageous profits. The price of tulips grew higher, and
tulips became a symbol of status—a botanical Louis Vuitton bag. The prestige
trigger began to obsess both the status-conscious and investors. Prices soared to
such extraordinary heights that an entire network of values flipped on its head,
and the price of a single bulb began to exceed the average person’s salary. Yes, it
seems cuckoo in retrospect. But we all make decisions based on the prestige
trigger, seeking respect and validation from our peers.
Why, exactly, do humans smile?
 
When other animals pull their lips back from their teeth, it usually means
they’re about to attack. Why, then, is smiling a sign of appeasement among
humans? Finally, after many years of debate, anthropologists solved the riddle.
As you’ll see in Part I, it has nothing to do with how it makes your face look, and
everything to do with how it makes your voice sound. It’s one of the many ways
in which you’re already using fascination cues (and always have).
 
And finally, there’s perhaps the most important question of all: Which of the
seven triggers should you be applying to your own work and life?
To answer this question, allow me to direct you to the chapter on mystique.
Here, we’ll explore the greatest puzzles of the world: from unsolved murders, to
secret formulas, to conspiracy theories. Under the spell of mystique, people

willingly do things they’ll regret, follow trends they dislike, and even buy
products they despise. You’ll find out why you’re more motivated by curiosity
than by answers, and how you can use suspense to your advantage when
communicating with others. You’ll discover that the most surefire way to kill
mystique is…to give away the answer.
 
To answer this last question above, I’m going to trigger a little mystique
myself, and won’t give away all the answers quite yet. Read on.
In the meantime, I will reveal this: Many of our choices are, in fact, not
choices at all. Our best friends and favorite foods, our pets and pet peeves, all are
contingent upon the seven triggers. The movies we see, the cereal we buy, we
often don’t choose to be fascinated by these things any more than we choose to
feel thirsty or fall asleep. It’s the same with the opinions we believe, the jokes
that make us laugh, and the person with whom we fall in (and out of) love.
We’re in control far less than we fancy ourselves to be, because our behavior is
being pulled by seven unseen strings.
The next time you find yourself engrossed in a game of golf, or craving a
specific food, or focusing like mad to meet a deadline at work, ask yourself:
What’s actually going on here? Underneath the surface, which of the seven
triggers is causing this fascination? Once you understand how fascination works,
you might realize that your behavior is being driven by something far different
from what you think.
You don’t control fascination. Fascination controls you.

PART I

Fascinate or Fail
Will You Fascinate? Or Will You Fail?

The Big O
Speaking of Fascination, Let’s Start with Sex, Shall
We?
The darkened cocktail lounge of the St. Paul airport Marriott is a social
petri dish, commingling business travelers from otherwise unrelated companies,
cities, and professions. The lounge’s ferns-and-brass ambiance offers these road
warriors a comforting mixture of familiarity and anonymity.
In between serving Sam Adams and Kendall-Jackson chardonnay, bartenders
witness the nightly routine of strangers engaged in flirtation, a timeworn ritual
that often progresses from suggestive glances to the elevator banks in two hours
or less. Had these bartenders studied Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt’s research in
evolutionary anthropology, they’d realize that they’re front and center at a
nightly performance of the flirtation tango—a series of dance steps
choreographed over the millennia by the Martha Graham of mating dances,
Mother Nature herself.
Whether a woman regularly quotes Carrie Bradshaw from Sex and the City
or belongs to a society with no written language, she’ll flirt using almost exactly
the same nonverbal signals as other women across continents, cultures, and
geographies. Eibl-Eibesfeldt discovered that women from around the globe—
from craggy, remote islands to metropolitan epicenters—use the same repertoire
of gestures when determining whether a potential mate is available and
interested. Flirting, like all fascinations, is innate.
The Canoodling Tango
In her aptly named book, Sex, Joann Ellison Rodgers describes Eibl-

Eibesfeldt’s discovery on just how all women flirt. A female begins fascinating a
male by smiling at him, raising her brows to make her eyes appear wider and
more childlike, quickly lowering her lids while tucking her chin slightly down,
in an effort to bring him closer. After averting her gaze to the side, she will,
within moments and almost without exception, put her hands on or near her
mouth and giggle, lick her lips, or thrust out her chest while gazing at the object
of her intended affection. And it’s consistent, regardless of language,
socioeconomic status, or religious upbringing. For men, says Rodgers, the
fascination ritual is less submissive but no less standardized. He’ll puff out his
chest, jut his chin, arch his back, gesture with his hands and arms, and swagger
in dominant motions to draw attention to his power (not unlike the way a male
pigeon puffs his chest, or a male gorilla struts). Like a woman’s flirtation, he’s
advertising critical cues about his reproductive fitness.
Fascination. Flirtation. Fornication.
 
Just as we’re born to be fascinated by specific signals from potential mates,
we’re also born knowing how to fascinate them as well. Flirtation is the most
elemental of all fascinations, one of a handful of instinctive cues upon which all
life depends. No flirtation, no mating. No mating, no offspring. No offspring, no
family, no passing of the genes, no species.
Fascination isn’t the same as sex, of course. However, sex does provide a
conveniently accurate metaphor. And unlike, say, South American bird watching,
sex is a universal phenomenon. So for purposes of making our point
academically, sex it shall be.
Fascination Is a Force of Attraction
This force of attraction heightens intellectual, emotional, and physical focus.
Couples in the St. Paul Marriott fall into this captivated grip, and you experience
it, too. When you impulsively decide to see a certain movie, when you crave
your favorite chocolate almond ice cream, or when you hit repeat on your iPod
to hear that song one more time, you’re experiencing a similar—if less intense—
attraction.
Attraction doesn’t have to make sense. In most cases, at traction is highly
irrational. We generally don’t decide to be fascinated any more than we decide to

be attracted to a certain person, because root causes for our fascinations are
hardwired into us long before we have any say in the matter.
Fascination takes many forms, but all tap into instinctive triggers, such as the
need to hunt, to control, to feel secure, to nurture and be nurtured. Some
fascinations last only a heartbeat, while others last beyond a seventy-fifth
wedding anniversary. No matter how long it lasts, or what behavior it motivates,
or which trigger inspires it, every fascination binds with a singularly intense
connection. We are, if only for a moment, utterly spellbound. Herein lies the
power of fascination: It strips away our usual rational barriers, exposing our
minds, leaving us vulnerable to influence, naked to persuasion.
Speaking of naked, let’s check back in with our couples flirting in the St.
Paul airport Marriott lounge.
At the bar, a paralegal is progressing nicely through her flirtation with the
service engineer from Sacramento. They’re performing their steps in the mating
dance with predictable precision. Yes, it’s all a bit crazy. But if the notion that
you’re not in control of your flirtation seems crazy, take heart: You’re not as
crazy as you will become, once infatuated.
The Mental Disorder Known as Infatuation
As things progress during flirtation, our neurochemistry rewards us with a
psychotic journey known as “infatuation.” Fascination and infatuation both
originate in the limbic area of the brain, the part that houses rage, ecstasy,
sadness, sexual arousal, and fight-or-flight.
In the book Love Sick: Love as a Mental Illness, Frank Tallis writes that if
we take the symptoms of falling in love and “check them against accepted
diagnostic criteria for mental illness, we find that most ‘lovers’ qualify for
diagnoses of obsessional illness, depression or manic depression.” Other
symptoms include insomnia, hyperactivity, and loss of appetite. Ah, ain’t love
grand? Northwestern University psychologist Eli Finkel describes how falling in
love can “make otherwise normal people do very wild things. They’ll stalk, hack
into e-mail, eavesdrop and do other things they’d never do in a rational frame of
mind.” Helen Fisher, an evolutionary anthropologist, explains that the elevated
dopamine levels experienced during the rush of falling in love can drive us to
take risks that might otherwise seem unthinkable.* So love really does conquer
all, and not always in a good way.
But wait. Hold on. Why would our brains throw us into a temporary
insanity? What’s the evolutionary purpose for this whacked-out loss of control?

To understand why fascination grasps us so irresistibly, keep in mind the illogic
of flirtation, and the lunacy of love.
Fascination, as we’ve seen, is a visceral and primal decision-making process,
one that’s largely involuntary. Fisher says that our brains are literally “built to
fall in love” because it’s in our evolutionary best interest not to think clearly
during the two-year time period it takes to meet, court, and produce a child, or
else we might come to our senses and avoid the inconvenience of child rearing
altogether. Tallis agrees, proposing that evolution has hardwired us for
psychopathological romantic obsessions that last “just long enough to ensure the
survival of genes from one generation to the next.”
First Comes Love, Then Comes Marriage, Then
Comes the Survival of the Species in a Baby Carriage
Most elements of fascination work at the subconscious level. Unlike the act
of paying attention, which is rational, our fascinations have more in common
with less logical behaviors of passion. We don’t even realize it’s happening, any
more than we realize that we’re flirting for reasons that have less to do with
hearts and flowers and more to do with our biological urge to procreate. Whether
you realize it or not, you experience fascination’s irrational grip.
Now that we’ve covered flirtation and falling in love, it’s time to go a step
further, and find out why your body is equipped to manufacture the
quintessential fascination.
Orgasm: The Ultimate Fascination
If flirtation and sex are metaphors for fascination, then the experience of
orgasm itself is fascination in the extreme. Ground-breaking human sex
researcher Alfred Kinsey described the fascination of sexual climax: “Some, and
perhaps most persons may become momentarily unconscious at the moment of
orgasm…only vaguely aware of reality.” Freud noted that orgasm brings an
almost complete disappearance of thought, a hypnoid state with a temporary loss
of self-awareness.* This focused state plays itself out in everyday life. Think of
when you’re “in the zone.” Psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi describes
what he calls a “flow state,” and its loss of self-consciousness. “Flow is the
mental state of operation in which the person is fully immersed in what he or she
is doing, characterized by a feeling of energized focus.”

Picture how your body zones out when you’re engrossed in a movie, or mid-
thought. You might stand perfectly still, jaw slackened, pulse rising, so
transfixed that you lose track of time and the world around you. You might be so
engrossed that you’re lost in thought during a lecture, or you may experience the
sense of being “in the zone” in a basketball game. Again, a loss of self-
awareness.
Fascinating messages, like fascinating people, have the potential to consume
us as almost nothing else can, sucking us into a vortex of intensity.
Csikszentmihalyi describes this in the addictive nature of flow, and “the state in
which people are so involved in an activity that nothing else seems to matter; the
experience itself is so enjoyable that people will do it even at great cost, for the
sheer sake of doing it.” Moments of fascination can become peak life
experiences, calling us forth to engage more fully than at any other time, giving
ourselves over to the vividness of complete and total engagement.
So compelling are such fascinations that in the extreme, only a thin line
separates fascination from its evil twin: obsession.
When Fascination Becomes Obsession
Most of us at some time lose connection with the world around us in a
healthy “flow state.” However, when the connection turns into obsession or
compulsion, it causes a severe disconnect with society, and even a disconnect
with reality. All fascination creates a momentary connection, but obsessions
create an ongoing unhealthy connection. In the grip of obsession we lose control,
held hostage to the compulsive behavior. Phobias are one example. Drug
addiction is another.
The Fascination Scale of Intensity
All fascinations sit on a spectrum. Some are mild; others, quite intense. Take,
for example, organizing a pantry. You might organize the cans and jars in your
kitchen pantry without really thinking about it. For someone with OCD,
however, those same shelves can become a fixation that defies normal behavior,
causing tremendous anxiety and stress. Same behavior (organizing the kitchen
pantry), yet with markedly different levels of intensity.
FASCINATION SCALE

Many people get into playing video games on a PS2 or Wii, usually as a way
to relax or socialize. For some, however, it becomes more extreme. These
players spend days in a room, staring at the screen without break, focusing on
nothing but the game. In Japan, this is known as “geømu otaku”: an obsessive
interest in video games. Same activity, just different levels of intensity and
behavior.
Here’s a way to visualize this spectrum of attraction, ranging from avoidance
to compulsion. (This scale is by no means absolute, but helps illustrate ten points
upon which any fascination can fall.) To illustrate this scale, let’s take an
example to which we can all relate. (No, not sex, get your mind out of the
gutter.) We watch TV commercials, whether we want to or not, with varying
degrees of attraction:
Avoidance: You’ll take steps to avoid TV commercials. You might TiVo
programs specifically to skip commercials.

Disinterest: You might leave the room during a commercial break (to
get a ham sandwich?).
Neutrality: You don’t really care if you watch the commercial or not.
You’re not going to take steps to avoid it, or to watch it.
Mild affinity: If a commercial happens to pique your curiosity, you’ll
watch. Otherwise, eh, whatever.
Interest: Commercials entertain, at least the good ones.
Engagement: You actively enjoy commercials. At the Super Bowl, you
might pay more attention to the commercials than to the game.
Immersion: You go out of your way to watch commercials, even going
online to search them out.
You get the idea.
Unfortunately for those of us in marketing, this is a purely fictitious
example, since few people will ever become so fascinated by TV commercials
that they experience the more extreme, darker states: preoccupation, obsession,
and compulsion. Yet the point here is that any activity has many degrees of
attraction.
Fetishes: Rubber Sheets, Anyone?

 
Back to our sex metaphor. To understand how things can become obsessive,
let’s peek into fetishes, a world in which one man’s fancy is another’s fixation.
A fetish is an excessive or irrational devotion to some activity or object (e.g.,
rubber, hair, stiletto boots, whatever; I’m not here to judge). Fetishes go beyond
normal interest. On the scale of intensity, if an impulsive flirtatious smile
suggests a mild form of fascination, fetishes demonstrate extreme connection.
FASCINATION SCALE
The word “fetish” comes from the fifteenth-century Portuguese word feiti o,
meaning “false power.” It involves a transfer of power from one source to a
symbolic substitute.* Instead, the item is now imbued with far more significant
meaning, almost a sexually religious meaning, so significant that the subject may
be unable to become aroused without it.
Some fetishes involve commonly sexualized things such as breasts, lipstick,

pigtails, silk sheets, and voyeurism. Others, the sound of car engines. Yes…read
on.
Sex therapist Louanne Cole Weston describes how even a sound can become
fetishistic. One of her patients described how, in his youth, he would regularly
watch an attractive young neighborhood woman try to start her car. The engine
took a few tries to start, making a churning sound. Soon he linked the sound of a
car engine with sexual arousal. Once he’d earned his driver’s license, he
simulated artificial “damsel in distress” scenarios. After seeing an attractive
woman leave her car in a grocery store parking lot, he’d open the hood and
unhook a wire. Once she returned to the car, he’d have the pleasure of hearing
the churning sounds of an engine that won’t turn over. Weston concludes that
“given the right circumstances, a person could develop an eroticism for probably
any sound.” Clearly, early fascinations can become (ahem) hardwired.
By this point, we’ve covered a smorgasbord of attraction cues: chest
thrusting, lip licking, even engine starting. Now, let’s talk elbow measuring.*
On a First Date? Measure His Elbows
The idea that symmetry equals beauty has been rattling around pop culture
for a few years, based on research from evolutionary biologists Steven
Gangestad and Randy Thornhill. Their study began by measuring seven body
points, such as elbows, and ended with the theory that symmetry translates not
only to better DNA, and better treatment from parents, but also better sex.
Men with symmetrical elbow bones are simply more fascinating: they have
more fun in the bedroom, more frequently, with more beautiful partners. Not
only have evolutionary biologists predicted sexual prowess on the basis of body
symmetry measurements, but also the level of physical dominance, emotional
stability, day-to-day health, even likelihood of fidelity.
Measuring elbows seems like running one of those free Internet background
checks: fast, free, with more information than you needed or wanted. But what if
there are no overt cues, such as elbows, to measure? Can you be fascinated by
someone’s beauty, even if you can’t actually see them?
Are Beautiful People Still More Attractive with the
Lights Off?
 

Buried deeper in Gangestad and Thornhill’s research, the data started
cranking out an even kookier finding: The beauty bias still applies in the dark.
Attractive people, the study found, literally smell different. Or more specifically,
better. Even when hidden from view, women will still choose symmetrical
males, merely on the basis of scent. A final blow to nonsymmetrical guys
everywhere: With highly symmetrical partners, women were more than twice as
likely to climax during intercourse (offering a biological advantage for funneling
sperm into the uterus to promote conception).
For the less symmetrical among us, take heart. While you’ll never be able to
control certain fascination influences, others are more malleable. Attracting
potential mates might be as simple as pulling your T-shirt out of the laundry
hamper.
Forget How You Look: The Real Question Is, How
Are Your MHCs?
 
All those hours spent primping and working out to look attractive may be far
less significant than we think. It turns out that scent might be more critical. And
“scent” doesn’t mean visiting a department store’s fragrance counter and
spritzing on some cologne.
Your MHC, or “major histocompatibility complex,” is a gene family that
strengthens your immune system. Scientists recently discovered that you
unconsciously detect MHC genes in others, just by the way they smell. In other
words, through scent, we can unconsciously detect gene makeup in other people.
So far, so good. Yes? Because now is when things get a little weird.
Scientists asked men to wear the same T-shirt for two days, without soap or
deodorant or cologne, so these shirts would be nice and whiffy.* Then, in a blind
study, they gave these well-ripened shirts to two groups of women: The first
group had MHC genes that were the same as the men’s, and the second group
had MHC genes that were different from theirs.
The results? Women were more attracted to the scent of guys who had MHC
genes different from their own. Translation: Potential offspring would have a
better chance of survival because the combination of different genes would
strengthen their immune systems. Numerous studies have proven that a
combination of genes is stronger than a more “pure” pool of genes. So critical is
a combination of genes that men and women with different genes experience

fewer fertility problems and miscarriages, and even fewer relationship problems.
That’s a big part of what fascinates us in romance and sexuality: finding people
with compatible histocompatibility.
But—what happened when the same test was done with women who were on
birth control? A different response entirely.
A University of Liverpool study showed that women taking the pill were
attracted to men with the same MHC genes as their own. Hormones in the birth
control pill disrupt the ability to judge genetic compatibility. These scientists
hypothesize that because birth control makes a woman’s body think it’s
pregnant, women respond to men who are more genetically similar to them (i.e.,
family members) because from an evolutionary standpoint, for a pregnant
woman, it makes more sense to be around people who will protect her and her
growing baby. Taking birth control pills is a choice that’s within a woman’s
control; however, many elements of her fascinations, such as attraction to a
man’s MHC genes, are not.
The Sexual Laboratory Known as a Strip Club
Multiple studies have confirmed that women are more “fascinating” to their
mates while ovulating. When women are especially fertile, their partners become
more attentive, are more vigilant, and engage in “mate-guarding” behavior to
keep other men away. To find out more, researchers from the University of New
Mexico “examined ovulatory cycle effects on tip earnings by professional lap
dancers working in gentlemen’s clubs.” In other words, they wanted to know
how this dynamic played out in the sexual laboratory known as a strip club.*
The researchers found that the strippers’ tips fluctuated, depending on their
menstrual cycle. While ovulating, fertile strippers earned almost 30 percent more
in tips than during other times of the month. However, dancers on birth control
pills saw no such boost in tips. Birth control essentially wiped out these dancers’
prime earning days. Over the course of a year, using the pill could potentially
mean thousands of dollars in lost income.† If your MHC genes can be
responsible for attraction, and the birth control pill can reverse that attraction,
what other fascinations are driving your behavior without your knowledge? Most
triggers lie outside your awareness, and many, outside your control.
On our journey through flirtation, fetishes, elbows, MHCs, and lap dances,
we’ve seen how our personal notion of attractiveness is rooted deep within us.
We might be irresistibly, magnetically drawn to a certain person without having
any idea that it’s not a conscious choice. It doesn’t end with physical attraction—

it only starts there. Whatever you’re drawn to—from watching reruns of Family
Guy to spending time with your family—you have the triggers to thank for it.
The next time you find yourself intrigued by a certain person, or engrossed
in a conversation, or mesmerized during an event, ask yourself: What’s
happening under the surface of your decision making to cause this heightened
interest? It might be a complex intertwining of triggers. Or it might be as simple
as a smile.

Your Fascinating Face
Why You Were Born Knowing Exactly How to
Persuade
A million generations after our reptilian brains retreated to the base of our
brain stems, fascination continues to be our most basic form of attention. Why?
Because fascination, at some level, is based upon survival. And to survive, you
must fascinate.
From the Amazon Jungle to Amazon.com
Marketers advertise to stand out amid a dizzying array of options. But
marketers didn’t invent advertising. Flowers did. As University of Florida
biology professor David Dilcher wrote, “flowering plants were the first
advertisers in the world. They put out beautiful petals, colorful patterns,
fragrances, and gave a reward, such as nectar or pollen, for any insect that would
come and visit them.”
Plants offer other lessons in marketing survival. For instance, the Amazon
jungle might look like it would be a desirable place to live, if you’re a plant. It’s
lush, exotic, flourishing, with plenty of water. But with thirty million species in
the rain forest, vegetation grows so thickly that each plant must fight to gain
food, protection, and even a slender ray of light. Plants act like marketing
managers: developing unique adaptations, designing spinoff extensions, and
seeking unconventional niches.
If the Amazon jungle is the most competitive place on Earth, the second
most competitive might be Amazon.com. Books compete to fascinate in many of
the same ways, because the more crowded an environment, the more competitive

it becomes, and the harder each individual must work. Flowers must fascinate
insects, and books must fascinate readers, in order to survive.
The same instincts that allowed our evolutionary fore-fathers to hunt woolly
mammoths for dinner are still very much in place today, even as we order a
Double Whopper through the speaker of the Burger King drive-through. These
instincts perfectly suited our cave-dwelling existence, but make less sense today.
When communicating with any of your fellow Homo sapiens, remember that
you’re not just dealing with the person you see before you today, you’re also
dealing with triggers that predate this book by millions of years. Left-over
survival instincts clash with our modern environment, and much of our behavior
lives in the far less rational areas of our brain. We’ve already seen how flirtatious
body language can influence decision making. Facial expression is even more
powerful.
The Fascination Machine
We’re constantly “reading” the facial cues of those around us, searching for
signals: smiles, wide eyes, scowls, tears. By looking at just two eyes, a nose, and
a smile, we can decipher and predict an extraordinary range of emotions,
personality traits, and intentions. Faces are so key to our survival, in fact, that
we’re born to be fascinated by them.
In the early 1960s, a developmental psychologist named Robert Fantz set out
to discover whether we’re born with an innate ability to perceive certain forms,
specifically faces. Without the aid of today’s sophisticated magnetic resonance
imaging brain scans, Fantz set up his own low-tech version with a simple
experiment. Over his infant subjects, he cleverly set a display board with two
pictures: a high-contrast bull’s-eye on the left and, next to it, a simple sketch of a
face. Behind the display board, Fantz then watched the babies through a
peephole. What he saw changed developmental psychology.
A Baby’s Very First Party Trick
While newborns’ eyes appear to wander aimlessly or stare with glazed
indifference, Fantz learned the opposite is true. Newborns focus on certain
shapes far more than others, with a decided preference for the human face. He
found that by two months of age, babies stare at a drawing of the human face
twice as often, and twice as long, as at a bull’s-eye. No coincidence, then, that

the range at which babies can most clearly see objects is twelve inches away,
roughly equal to the distance to view the mother’s face while nursing.
Fantz’s findings startled the developmental community, proving that a
fascination with faces is more “nature” than “nurture.” His experiments proved
that even at birth, we arrive prepackaged with survival mechanisms to help us
connect with others and form close relationships.
Facial fascination is such a critical skill that our brain has a region
specifically for recognizing, interpreting, and responding to human faces: the
fusiform face area, or FFA. Located deep within the temporal lobe, on the
underside of the brain, the FFA drives high-level visual processing needed to
distinguish and interpret faces and expressions. Building on Fantz’s findings,
neuroscientists can pinpoint the hardwiring in your brain, predicting whether you
prefer 
bean 
burritos 
or 
chicken 
chimichangas. 
Auto 
manufacturer
DaimlerChrysler used MRI technology to study how young men respond to three
different car body styles: sports cars, sedans, and small cars. Sports cars, by far,
created the highest levels of brain activity. (“What? Young men excited by
Ferraris? You don’t say!”) While this initial finding isn’t a shocker, the news
wasn’t that the activity occurred but, rather, exactly where the activity occurred.
It took place in the nucleus accumbens, a deep and primal area linked to intense
physical gratification. Previously, scientists thought this area responded only to
physical rewards, including chocolate and cocaine. But now for the first time,
the researchers watched as automobiles stimulated these mental explosions.
More startling was what happened next. Researchers then asked the young
men which specific brands were most attractive, still reading their brain
patterning. To their astonishment, while the young men appraised which models
were their favorites, activity fired off in their brains once again. But this time,
the fireworks centered in the FFA region—the region that identifies faces.
The link between transportation and faces isn’t limited to sports cars.
Anthropomorphization—ascribing human characteristics to nonhuman things—
is a common way to create bonds. The more something resembles a human face,
the more emotional attachment we feel for it.
Advertising frequently manipulates this response. Michelin tires plunks a
couple of animated eyes and a smile onto a charmless stack of tires, and presto,
those tires have a sparkling personality. Same with the Pillsbury Doughboy,
Scrubbing Bubbles, and many other brands developed in the seventies and
eighties.* Faces foster bonding, especially in stories for children. An early
documented case of this was The Little Engine That Could, which used a human
face on the train to help convey emotions and intentions within the story. Today,
artificial “faces” bond children and machines all throughout the aisles of Toys

“R” Us, from the train empire of Thomas the Tank Engine to the crew of Bob the
Builder.
Would children be as focused on toys such as Thomas the Tank Engine if
they didn’t have faces? Probably not. Faces allow children to experience all the
tank engine’s behaviors, and toys with faces allow children to distill a story,
internalize the message, and apply the lessons to their own lives.
But…What Happens If a Child Is Literally Unable
to Identify Faces?
If faces are so indivisibly essential to the survival of ourselves and our
species that our brains arrive into the world with an innate fascination for
looking at other people, then how can anyone cope without this primal skill?
Such was the case with a little boy whom we’ll call Harrison Platt.
At Harrison’s birth, the pediatrician declared the boy in perfect health, as he
did at Harrison’s six-month, twelve-month, and eighteen-month checkups. Yet
from the start, Harrison’s mother worried something was wrong. Harrison never
made eye contact. He only looked at her moving mouth. With strangers, this odd
behavior was even more pronounced: He hardly looked at them at all. It’s not
that Harrison couldn’t see. He could line up stacks of toys, and often did so
obsessively from lunch until dinnertime. What became clear over time was that
while Harrison had normal eyesight, he couldn’t see faces. No matter how much
his mother played and coaxed and patty-caked, her son registered absolutely no
reaction, emotion, or expression. At his two-year checkup, the pediatrician
diagnosed Harrison with autism.
Harrison’s autism caused his brain, unlike the brain of a normal toddler, to
react exactly the same when viewing a stranger as when viewing his own
mother. In fact, his brain would show more recognition for a familiar toy than for
his own mother. The FFA, that region governing facial recognition, failed to
interpret his mother’s face as anything more significant than a random jumble of
lines.
Robert Schultz conducted a three-year study on autistic children like
Harrison, working with fellow researchers at the Yale Developmental
Neuroimaging Program. Schultz discovered a missing piece of the autism
puzzle: These patients found it difficult to differentiate between humans and
things. They couldn’t “read” faces to see age, gender, or emotional state. With
little distinction between humans and things, it’s more difficult to feel empathy,
to predict behavior, to comprehend emotion, or to experience any of the other

ways in which our FFA helps us connect with others. As a result, they found it
extremely difficult to have interpersonal emotional relationships, or form bonds
within a group. Instead of examining faces with the usual FFA processors, they
lacked the hardwiring necessary to be fascinated with faces.
With this in mind, let’s return to our friend Thomas the Tank Engine. In a
New York Post article, the president of the Autism Society of America described
how she’d received countless letters from “parents who said their children were
mesmerized by Thomas.” Exaggerated expressions and explicitly articulated
feelings help children understand expressions and the meaning behind them. A
subsequent study by the UK’s National Autistic Society supported the
conclusion that autistic kids prefer Thomas the Tank Engine over any other
children’s character. In other words, the exaggerated expressions on the
characters’ faces fascinates these kids.
Mona Lisa, and the 83 Percent Happy Smile
So compelled are we to interpret facial expressions that one certain face has,
for centuries, fascinated us: the Mona Lisa. We’re unable to pinpoint the precise
emotions behind Leonardo da Vinci’s famously enigmatic subject, and therefore
continue to be fascinated by her mystique. The Mona Lisa was recently analyzed
with cutting-edge software developed to recognize facial emotion. Mona Lisa,
according to the program, is 83 percent happy, 9 percent disgusted, 6 percent
fearful, and 2 percent angry. Over the past few hundred years, that smile has
become a cottage industry; thousands of people make the trek to Paris each year
to get an up-close and personal look.
Of all the facial fascination cues that we give off, our smile might be the
most important. Yet from an evolutionary perspective, the human smile has
puzzled scientists for years. In the animal kingdom, retracting the mouth corners
and baring teeth is generally a sign of aggression, like a snarl, intended to
display dominant intentions or even imminent attack. Yet in humans, this same
retraction of the mouth corners and baring of teeth signals appeasement,
deference, and submission. Why are humans different?
Why, Exactly, Do Humans Smile?
The smile enigma stumped anthropologists for hundreds of years. Finally,
John J. Ohala, a professor from the Department of Linguistics at University of

California–Berkeley, revealed his answer. We smile, he discovered, not for the
visual cues. We smile because of the way it sounds. Or more specifically,
because of the way it makes our voices sound.
To understand the smile enigma, we must first understand why we respond
differently to low voices and high voices. Bigger animals have deeper voices, at
a lower pitch, and a louder sound. Think of a dog growl’s deep, imposing,
aggressive vibration. Among animals, a deep, low pitch is a threatening signal. A
higher voice and smaller size, conversely, is a sign of appeasement or timidity.
When a dog lowers itself downward on its front paws, in the classic “let’s play!”
pose, it’s making itself seem smaller and less threatening.
We see this “high pitch versus low pitch” phenomenon in the human world
as well. A higher voice is seen as more polite and deferential. When we coo to
babies in baby talk, we raise our voices and our eyebrows. (“Oooh, loooook at
the baaaaby!”) But can you imagine using this same voice with our boss or
employees? When we want to appear authoritative or dominant, we change both
our voices and our faces, lowering our voices and eyebrows.* A lower voice
equals dominance. When a boy goes through puberty, growing in size and
testosterone, his voice lowers. So ingrained is this perceptual link between
deeper voice and dominance that Margaret Thatcher had to undergo a similar
transformation before she could become the “Iron Lady.” Because of her higher
voice, the Conservative Party was concerned she would not be taken seriously.
They trained her with a vocal coach, making her seem larger and more
dominant.† In China, where a high, sweet falsetto is preferred, many women
entering the job market believe that a syrupy-sugary voice will help them land a
better job. The cosmetic surgery market now offers “voice beauty operations” to
burn away a portion of the vocal cord, thus scarring the cord and raising the
pitch. This questionable procedure creates a more “polite” voice by mimicking
the vocal pitch of someone with a smaller mouth cavity…a little girl.
Now, back to smiles. In 1980, at the one hundredth meeting of the
Acoustical Society of America, Ohala stunned the audience with his findings. In
his paper, “The Acoustic Origin of the Smile,” he revealed that the smile didn’t
begin as a visual cue, as had always been assumed, but something else entirely.
“High vocal tract resonances may also enhance the infantile character of the
vocalization by seeming to originate from a shorter vocal tract. Higher
resonances can be achieved by a trumpet-like flaring of the tract and/or by
retracting the corners of the mouth.” In other words, when we smile, we pull the
cheek flesh back against our teeth, and make our mouth cavity smaller. A
smiling mouth raises the pitch of our voice, which is instinctively perceived as
less dominant, more approachable.

The smile started as a way to sound less threatening, and evolved into a way
to look more approachable. Not a visual cue, but an aural cue.
From a social interaction perspective, then, smiles aren’t window dressing.
You’re fascinated with smiles because they communicate friendly intentions and
a desire to bond. From an evolutionary perspective, that’s important. Does that
stranger approaching your cave want to eat you? Or to make you smile, too?
Why Girls Fall for the Funny Guy
A sense of humor, like a smile, is fascinating for evolutionary reasons.
Recent studies show that women are more attracted to funny men, because
humor broadcasts a rich surplus of intellect and health to a potential mate. Just as
a peacock’s tail and a lion’s mane attract a mate by demonstrating a wealth of
survival resources, so does humor impress a female. (If you’re sick and starving,
you’re probably not cracking jokes.) Funny guys, biologically speaking, have a
higher likelihood of providing for their offspring.
Funny Faces and Funny Bones
What exactly makes someone funny? Is it comedic timing? Punch lines?
Rubber chickens and whoopee cushions? According to Dr. Anthony Little,
psychologist at the University of Stirling in Scotland and an expert in how we
perceive facial features, it’s a collection of specific facial characteristics linked
to our perception of others. In other words, just as chicks are wired to seek the
shape of seeds, so do we innately find a certain type of face comedic.
After scanning 179 facial features of twenty comedians, Dr. Little found the
winning combination most likely to produce a laugh: round face, small forehead,
large eyes, high cheekbones, wide nose, and big lips. Not exactly alpha-male
characteristics, right? In the Independent, he explains, “The features most likely
to mark out male comedians for success are predominately soft and feminine.”
Little goes on to explain why: “in the same way that infants are pre-programmed
to respond to the warmth and approachability of a mother’s face, soft, feminine
features put us at ease and encourage us to relax. This is conducive to laughter.”
Who has the “perfect comedy face?” Using his research, Little reports
optimal humor characteristics in comedian Ricky Gervais, star the of British
television comedy series The Office. His face, above all others, prepares us to
laugh. While brevity might be the soul of wit, apparently Gervais is the face.

A Smile Was the Original Social Medium
Several experts have shown that we rely on specific visual cues to make first
impressions. So what happens during a phone call? When you can’t actually see
someone, what role does your smile play? During a call, the person at the other
end can’t see you, but can hear your aural cues.
Remember John Ohala’s insight: From an anthropological perspective,
you’re not smiling in order to look friendly. In the phone call, you’re using your
smile for its original, intended purpose: to sound friendly.
Digital technology might introduce a new device every week, but from an
evolutionary perspective, we’re still the same humans. We’re still constantly
searching each other for clues about emotion. (Case in point: the popularity of
emoticons.) In a brief handshake, we exchange a hundred imperceptible hints
about our intentions and emotional state. We rarely realize it’s happening, but
we’re evaluating these hints to rapidly form an opinion and make a decision
about the other person (while simultaneously, they’re doing the same).
As humans, we fascinate one another each time we interact, with every
syllable of our voices, every waft of our scents, every flicker of our expressions.
Some people consciously recognize their own fascination cues, and manipulate
them to their own competitive advantage. Championship poker players win
tournaments by reading their opponents’ involuntary body language cues, and
Marilyn Monroe seduced audiences through aural cues that made them
unconsciously visualize her in bed. Part II will reveal why. Yet even if we’re not
a famous poker player or legendary movie star, we still have a toolbox of natural
fascination cues. If we use our natural cues, people will join us. If we don’t,
they’ll walk away. In the case of marketing, consumers walk away just by
turning the channel.

Fascination and the Media
Trends Driving the Need for a New Form of
Persuasion
The Amnesiac and the Maze
The maze at Hampton Court is one of the most famous hedge mazes in the
world, and has been for more than five hundred years. It lies on a grassy expanse
behind the palace once inhabited by Henry VIII, twisting a half mile of hedges
into labyrinthine complexity. The maze, which looks like something directly out
of Alice in Wonderland, also happens to be the perfect place for a study about
memory.
Researchers took a chronic amnesiac to the maze, and asked him if he’d ever
been there. No, he replied, he had not. They gave him a whistle, and had him
wind his way through the hedges. Upon reaching the center, he blew his whistle.
Researchers recorded the time. The next day, the researchers did the same thing.
They asked the amnesiac if he’d ever been to the maze, to which his reply was
no. Off they sent him again with the whistle, and they timed the speed with
which he reached the center.
Day after day, same thing. Again they asked if he’d ever been to the maze,
again the reply was no. Again they timed how long it took him to reach the
center.
Though the patient had no recollection of his time in the maze, something
strange happened. Each time the patient made his way through the maze, he did
it differently. Specifically, he did it faster. Without actively remembering the
maze, he was subconsciously learning. Over time, he built up a mental schema
of the labyrinth.

Memory, the scientists learned, works whether we realize it or not. All day,
we passively take in messages from the world around us, even if we’re not
overtly conscious of those messages. Enough messages, drilled in over decades,
will eventually shape our actions. It’s inefficient, but for several decades in the
twentieth century, it’s how advertising worked. Like the amnesiac in the maze,
we passively absorbed brand messages, cumulatively, over the course of years,
without realizing it.
Amnesiac Consumers
It’s appropriate that Phil Cowdell described this story to me, since Cowdell is
an expert at showing “amnesiacs” (consumers) how to remember their way
through the “maze” (the media landscape). As CEO at Mindshare North
America, Cowdell creates marketing messages for clients who don’t want their
consumers to wander aimlessly through twists and turns, listlessly absorbing
messages.
As Cowdell describes, “The traditional advertising model was built upon this
principle of passively absorbing information, slowly ingraining and embedding
it. The greater the number of messages, and the higher the exposure to those
messages, the more valuable the brand, and the more ubiquitous.” Now a
marketer’s job is more difficult, because the hedge maze changes every day.
Rather than ranting about the obsolescence of repeatedly drilling in
irrelevant messages, let’s pause to ask: Why did that model ever work in the first
place?
Papyrus Print Ads
Advertising started with the Egyptians, who used papyrus to make sales
messages and posters.* In the early twentieth century, advertisers developed
tools to get attention on behalf of brands. These tools, such as radio ads,
billboards, and the like, were rational, grounded in repetition and awareness.
They were based on how often someone heard a message, rather than on how
intriguing that message was.
This model was all well and good, and during the next few decades it
spurred many wonderful advertising industry classics such as radio commercials,
magazine ads, and the three-martini lunch. There were only three networks, and
little distraction to take you away from Palmolive ads on the soap operas. In

many situations, advertising was the most fascinating show in town. What
happened since then? Why is attention now in such short supply?
Trends Driving All the Distraction
Children get attention when they scream in the candy aisle. Don’t Walk signs
get our attention when they flash on and off. Marketers get our attention when
they offer a discount coupon, or buy TV ads during the Super Bowl, or advertise
a two-for-one sale. Yet while bells and whistles and gimmicks might work
(maybe), they rarely lead to lasting emotional connection, or long-term
behavioral change. Interest is not enough. Neither is awareness, intent to
purchase, or having share-of-mind, or any of the other jargon thrown into
PowerPoint slides. It’s not even enough to make a better product, or to grab more
attention. Like the plants in the Amazon and the books on Amazon.com, an
increasingly distracted consumer demands a more powerful form of connection.
Here’s why.
An Overload of Distracting Choices
Stimulation is plentiful. Too plentiful. We’re drowning in You-Tube videos,
LinkedIn requests, iPhone apps. In the detergent aisle, we choose from forty-one
varieties of Tide. On Netflix, we scroll through seventy thousand titles. On
search engines, we can face up to one hundred million results from a single
search. Every decision forces us to make choices, and with each of those choices
comes stress. Consumers feel bombarded with too many marketing messages,
with too many options and too little time.
To see how rapidly it’s all changing, let’s take a look back…all the way to
1997. It was this year that J. C. Herz brought us the book Joystick Nation: How
Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds. Herz
declared, “Videogames are perfect training for life in fin-de-siècle America,
where daily existence demands the ability to parse sixteen kinds of information
being fired at you simultaneously from telephones, televisions, fax machines,
pagers, personal digital assistants, voice messaging systems, postal delivery,
office e-mail, and the Internet…those to the joystick born have a built-in
advantage.” Stop and think for a moment. These words were published in 1997.
If those early days demanded “the ability to parse sixteen kinds of information
being fired at you simultaneously,” how many kinds of information are being
fired at you today? How many are you firing?

The Rise of the ADD World
In our chaotic world, our minds and our lives have become so cluttered that
we rarely focus on just one thing at any given time. We’ve thrown open the
doors to the short-attention-span theater, and now the show parades around us at
a rate of five thousand marketing messages per day, faster than FedEx, louder
than Kanye West, bigger than Disney World. Our attention spans are shrinking at
a rate inverse to the growing number of distractions. A hundred years ago, our
attention span averaged twenty minutes: one minute for each year of age, up
until age twenty. Things were slower on the farm, with fewer distractions.
But today, in adaptation to our environment, our attention spans are shorter.
(And shorter and shorter.) According to BBC News, “The addictive nature of
web browsing can leave you with an attention span of nine seconds—the same
as a goldfish.” Nine seconds! That’s all we get before people’s brains make a
decision whether to stay focused, or relocate to a new topic? No wonder we’re
experiencing the symptoms of adult attention deficit disorder: short attention
span, distractibility, and a tendency to be bored. In an ADD world, people
leapfrog to the next conversation, the next idea, the next website, culminating in
“oh, look, shiny object!” syndrome.
Earning Attention, Not Paying Attention
Picture attention as a currency. When we pay to see a movie or read a book,
we’re paying for stimulation. Until fairly recently, this model worked just fine,
because there was far more attention available than stimulation to fill that
attention. People “paid” attention. But now attention is scarce. It’s usually
difficult and expensive to convince a consumer to focus on a brand message.
Attention has become more important, more rare, and more valuable. To get
someone’s attention, now a marketer must earn it, often with massive effort and
crazy expense.
Even if a brand could reach everyone, it still can’t break through most of the
time. People simply shut out a message by fast-forwarding or clicking to the next
one.
The Ability to Shut Out Messages
Marketers have to deal with all kinds of “attention gatekeepers” designed to
shut out messages: TiVo, do-not-call lists, noise-canceling headphones, and pop-

up blockers. We all have to move past people’s natural resistance, because now,
with modern technology, people can more easily avoid messages. And even if
you can get your message through the mental spam filter, you’re still a long way
from influencing behavior. Assuming you do avoid being ignored, your next
challenge is to avoid being forgotten. (If you can avoid being ignored and
forgotten, you must still actually make someone act upon your message.) Shift
from the Information Age to the Fascination Age
In the last century, information was a scarce resource. Success relied upon
capturing and generating information, so information was power. Wars were won
with cracked codes and more sophisticated information systems. But information
is no longer hard to find. Search engines changed all that. Now, data are a
commodity. What’s scarce? Complete focus. Information isn’t power—the
ability to fascinate is power.
This trend isn’t just deflating the value of information—it’s also changing
the market value of products themselves.
The Fascination Economy
We once lived in a goods-based economy, then moved to a service-based
economy; then came the information economy, and knowledge economy. More
recently, Joseph Pine and James Gilmore brought us The Experience Economy.
Now, as companies struggle for new ways to differentiate themselves, it’s a
Fascination Economy. Fascination is the means by which companies will be able
to charge a premium for products, command more influence in the marketplace,
and build more loyal relationships over time. Rather than merely selling goods
or services, or even selling experiences, successful brands will begin to charge
for the value of their fascination. Companies that can help consumers feel more
fascinated in their own lives, or more fascinating in their relationships, not only
will win the sale but will earn consumers who actively seek out those products.
Fascinating People and Companies Win
They win bigger budgets, more time, better relationships, greater admiration,
deeper trust. The ones that fail to connect and stimulate will, increasingly, lose
the battle. It’s that simple. You can’t survive if you can’t persuade someone to
engage with you. What behaviors are you trying to elicit?
Most of us, at some point, are trying to get others to “do” something. But we

can’t get them to do much of anything until they’re focused on our message.
People won’t change a preference, start a thought process, form a bond, or make
a behavioral shift unless they’re provoked to change their opinions or actions.
Now that we’ve established why fascination begets action, the question
becomes, in what ways are you successfully fascinating the world around you?
Is your message provoking strong and immediate emotional reactions? Is it
creating advocates and inciting conversation? Are you forcing competitors to
realign? If so, you’re well on your way to the Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating
Message.*

The Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating
Message
How Do You Evaluate Whether Something Is
Fascinating?
It’s not enough to want to fascinate. It’s not enough to brainstorm genius
concepts out the wazoo if we can’t attract interest and support for our best ideas.
Otherwise, all those glorious little babies die an ignoble death, becoming just
more pieces of litter in the world’s flotsam and jetsam of woulda-coulda-
shoulda-beens.
But why? Why do certain ideas captivate, while others, seemingly equally
deserving, never get quite enough recognition or support?
Why Do Certain Ideas Take Off, and Others
Fizzle?
An idea can be brilliant, and unique, and fully deserving of worldwide fame,
yet never quite catch on. Esperanto is one such idea. This “universal second
language” is simple, smart, and incredibly useful, with all the makings of a huge
trend à la Facebook.
In the late nineteeth century, L. L. Zamenhof created Esperanto for the world
to share one united international language. It combines commonly used French,
Russian, German, and English roots in the simplest elements of each language,
with only sixteen easy rules to follow. Leo Tolstoy was one of its first
supporters. In the Esperanto language, the word “esperanto” translates to “one
who hopes” Zamenhof hoped to spread peace and literacy, remove geographic

boundaries, and open global understanding. Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg
wouldn’t be born for more than a hundred years, but Zamenhof was already
planning a language with all the transparency and utility of a social network.
By the 1930s, however, governments were actively squelching the language.
The educated class discouraged its use because they didn’t see the need for a
common language. Esperanto did catch on in some areas, but as the language
spread, so did paranoia. The Soviet Union increased restrictions on the use of the
language, forcing Esperanto speakers to register with the government, and by
1938 opposition to its use was so strong that the government deported
“Esperantists” to Siberia. At best, Esperanto’s use was discouraged. At worst,
countries such as Japan executed citizens just for speaking the language.* Death
is, without question, a serious obstacle to the mass adoption of any new idea or
product. (And you thought your idea faces obstacles to launching.) However, the
threat has passed, and today’s ADD world seems like the perfect setting for such
a simple, multicultural language.
Yet as you’ve probably noticed, this book isn’t written in Esperanto. The
language has never achieved full-blown fascination to the point of large-scale
adoption,† with only 0.03 percent of the global population speaking it. Despite
its compelling origin and the ripe opportunity to spread, Esperanto itself never
quite activated triggers.
The road to message greatness is littered thick with failed ideas: Sony
Betamax, Edsel, Zima, Apple Newton, Microsoft WebTV, FedEx Zap Mail…the
list could go on for hours. These ideas fizzled by never activating triggers.
If a great concept like Esperanto can’t take off, what other good ideas die
because they’re not activating the seven triggers? How could the seven triggers
spread more good ideas—your ideas—to the world?
First, to determine whether an idea is fascinating, start by checking it against
the six Gold Hallmarks. (Later in this book, in the Fascination Plan of Attack,
we’ll start to apply the Gold Hallmarks to your brand and message.) Gold
Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message
Fascinating people and companies don’t just talk at us. They get under our
skin and into our conversations. They challenge and move us. They’re unafraid
to ask questions, and along the way, change the way we think. They earn our
business, as well as our trust and our conversations. Instead of getting us to
merely notice them, the fascinating ones change us in some way. A fascinating
message, like a fascinating person, steps outside the norms in one or more of the
following ways.

Provokes Strong and Immediate Emotional Reactions
People respond to it immediately and instinctively, almost in voluntarily.
Often polarizing because it stimulates a “love it or hate it” response. Examples:
Bernie Madoff. Ducati. Botox cosmetic injections. Acid rap. Roman Polanski.
The Deadliest Catch. The Bush Dynasty.
Creates Advocates
A percentage of followers become passionately dedicated to the attraction, or
even consumed by it. Examples: NASCAR. The Jonas Brothers and Miley
Cyrus. The Da Vinci Code. Method cleaning products. MAC makeup. Warren
Buffett. Most religions.
Becomes “Cultural Shorthand” for a Specific Set of Actions or Values
The brand represents such a distinct point of view that it can stand alone as a
symbol for defined values. Its set of values becomes a reference point for how
people identify themselves and their world. Examples: Louis Vuitton. Virgin
Atlantic Airways. Seventh Generation products. X Games. PBS. Spam meats.
Kashi. Fender Stratocaster guitars. Zig Zag rolling papers. Ikea. Curves fitness
clubs. Pabst Blue Ribbon beer. Many tattoo designs.
Incites Conversation
The more people want to engage with, play with, learn from, talk about, and,
above all, connect with something or someone, the greater its social currency. It
almost can’t help but be noticed. It sparks spirited conversations and debate
among consumers, competition, and the media. Consistently “top of mind”
among a specific group, it earns more attention than it pays for. Examples:
Webkinz. Adidas originals. The Twilight series. The National Enquirer.
Illustrator R. Crumb. Grey’s Anatomy. Gene Simmons. TMZ.com.
Forces Competitors to Realign Around It
Doesn’t chase or mirror trends, but rather establishes new standards and
criteria for its category. Thinks, acts, and behaves unlike any other. Becomes
irreplaceable for the audience because it cannot be exactly replaced or

duplicated. Often (but not always) inspires imitators, look-alikes, and me-toos.
Examples: Trader Joe’s. Scion. Spanx. Wal-Mart. Donna Karan in the 1990s.
Swiffer. Microsoft, then Apple, then Microsoft again.
Triggers Social Revolutions
Disrupts the status quo of accepted beliefs. Breaks with established
conventions in its category, whether through minor tweaks or radical shifts.
Forces us to think differently about ourselves and our world. Examples: Bono.
MINI Cooper. The “Life is good” brand. Yoga. Grateful Dead. The Livestrong
yellow bracelet. Southwest Airlines. John Lennon. The Zone diet. United Colors
of Benetton. Prozac. YouTube. Dove’s “Campaign for Real Beauty.”
But Wait—Isn’t Something Missing from the List?
 
Yes, there’s a conspicuous absence. Nothing here mentions our own
messages, the ones we create and put out to the world about ourselves.
That’s because fascination has little to do with what you say, and everything
to do with what you inspire others to say about your message. Fascinating
people, like fascinating companies, don’t try to explain why they’re fascinating.
(Explaining to people why you’re fascinating is about as effective as explaining
to an employee why you deserve respect, or explaining to a date why you should
inspire fire in the loins. Not so much.) The Wizard of Oz said, “A heart is not
judged by how much you love, but by how much you are loved by others.” The
true measure of fascination lives not in your own communication to the world,
but in how the world communicates about you. If this sounds emotional, that’s
because it is. We don’t intellectually evaluate messages—any more than we
intellectually evaluate whether someone’s voice is high or low. A voice either
intimidates us, or it doesn’t. A message either does or doesn’t grip our interest
(and more often than not, it doesn’t).
For many brands, this is bad news. People don’t want to connect with
brands. They want to connect with each other. Fascinating companies create
more opportunities for people to connect with each other, through the brand. (If
you have any doubt, just go to a Harley-Davidson event.) For marketers, it’s not
about marketing a message—it’s about getting the market to create messages
about you. For a website—it’s not about the number of links in your site, but

about how many sites, and the quality of the sites, that link to you.
Sometimes, in such a hyper-connected world, messages become hype, losing
the substance of the original message itself. To understand the difference
between fascination and hype, I went straight to the expert on hyper-messaging:
Richard Laermer, author of Full Frontal PR and 2011: Trendspotting, CEO of
RLM PR.* “We’re the most networked society in the history of the world,” says
Laermer, “texting, talking, virtually slapping each other’s backs, Skyping,
tweeting, Ninging, every second telling each other things in some SMSociety.
But when it comes right down to it, we’re not actually substantially connected by
any one thing. We are networking, but not connecting, doing things so that we
can tell others we just did them. We’re living hyperlinks.”
After a while, that noise level turns into hype. For better or for worse, says
Laermer, hype is now ingrained in our psyche. As a result, it’s a little too easy to
proliferate hype. “We don’t stop to think critically about whether a media
spectacle is contrived (as in Tom Cruise jumping on Oprah’s couch just before a
movie in which he plays a crazed guy), or a family celebration is actually a
marketing push (Hallmark’s new holidays like National Chocolate Chip Cookie
Day), or a politician’s controversial ‘I’m running’ moment is consciously put out
on day one of his new book (that’s Newt Gingrich). And in most cases, rather
than playing roles in movies, celebrated actors simply play caricatures of
themselves (like Jennifer Aniston in a movie of the month).” We’re fascinated by
the hype, rather than the message itself.
So far, we’ve avoided any discussion of Google in this book. But now that
we’re on the subjects of fascination and the Internet, it’s time. In many ways, a
Google PageRank of a company’s website is tied quite closely to its level of
fascination, because both measure the amount of interest, energy, and
participation in any given topic. Your PageRank is, from an online perspective,
your reputation. It judges how often people talk about you, how much they say,
and who says it. So critical is Google PageRank that you might want to start
evaluating it before naming your unborn children.
Before Asking Friends Their Opinion of a
Prospective Baby Name, First Ask Google
Although I was born twenty-six years before Google, from a search engine
perspective, my parents did a bang-up job of naming me. As you might imagine,
my name faces little competition from others with my name. Does your name
fascinate Google? How about your kids’ names, do they fascinate Google?

Let’s say you’re an expectant parent, deciding on your unborn child’s name.
As we know, in a cluttered environment, the most fascinating option wins.
Nowhere is this truer than with names on the Internet. The title of a Wall Street
Journal article says it all: “You’re a Nobody Unless Your Name Googles Well.”
Journalist Kevin J. Delaney points out that if your own name is crowded out of
search results, it can carry a real professional price. No one can find you and
your work. You lose credibility. And if you’re job hunting, forget it. Eighty
percent of executive recruiters said they “routinely use search engines to learn
more about candidates.” It’s difficult to fascinate if no one can find you, so
“many people aspire for themselves—or their offspring—to command prominent
placement in the top few links on search engines or social networking sites’
member lookup functions.”
Having an easily searchable name is, increasingly, a valuable competitive
advantage socially, professionally, and monetarily. Just as a corporate logo
should be unique and easily identifiable, so should your own personal brand be,
and your name’s visibility is a significant aspect of that.
Google Optimization, Circa 1587
Google isn’t the first inhospitable spot for common names. In 1587, a boat
arrived on American shores with the first English-speaking settlers. It included
ninety-nine men, twenty-three of whom were named John. The entire settlement
died. A subsequent settlement, however, survived. It arrived on a little ship
named the Mayflower. It included passengers named Humility, Desire,
Remember, Resolved, and a boy born on the ship, Oceanus. (One particularly
creative father had two daughters, Patience and Fear, and two sons, Love and
Wrestling. One has to wonder how often little Love got his ass kicked on the
playground compared to his brother, Wrestling.) Fascinating naming might not
be the reason a settlement survives in settling a new world; however, it definitely
increases your odds of surviving on Google.
So what if you weren’t born with a Google-friendly name like Oceanus or
Fear? How do you stand out on Google, especially if you have an uncommonly
common name?
Pretend for a Moment That Your Name Is David
Scott

Hello, David Scott. Not only do you have an incredibly common first name,
but also an incredibly common second one to boot. A quick Google yields
1,160,000 results for “David Scott.” We can estimate a few hundred thousand of
these belong to each of the many David Scotts out there, including the David
Scott who walked on the moon as commander of Apollo 15, or the David Scott
member of Congress, or the David Scott the Iron-man triathlon competitor. Stiff
competition. So how to fascinate the Google PageRank algorithm?
This was the precise problem facing my friend David Scott.
In 1999, David started to write his first book. Although Google was barely a
glimmer in the Internet’s eye, David wanted a title with a combination of words
that didn’t pop up too much in the search engines. The process consumed quite a
bit of time, and David thought of a lot of titles, yet couldn’t find a new word
combination. To complicate matters, he also wanted to buy the domain for his
title. Everything, it seemed, was either a title of a rock song, or a band, or an
obscure blog. Still, he didn’t want to require the words “book title” anywhere in
the search terms. Finally, David hit upon the perfect title: Eyeball Wars. Two
words that weren’t yet associated with anything in search engines. David
snagged the domain and used that as the title of the book, so when people
searched for his book his content popped up first. It was during this process that
David realized, “Hey, wait, shouldn’t I do the same thing with my own name?”
Under the name David Scott, he was a small fish in a big pond. But then he
typed in his full name: David Meerman Scott. And voilà, he became a one-and-
only.
David Meerman Scott is an online marketing and PR expert, speaker, and
best-selling author of The New Rules of Marketing & PR and World Wide Rave.
He describes in an interview, “Looking back, adding my middle name was
probably one of the most important decisions I’ve ever made. Professionally,
everyone knows me by David Meerman Scott. My whole business is predicated
on that one decision.” If your name is John Smith or Joe Johnson, what to do?
Modify it. “Don’t underestimate the importance of your name being easily found
on the first page of search results. It’s essential.”
So now you know about persuading Google. But we want to persuade
others, too. We want to persuade co-workers to pitch in on a project, or convince
a new business prospect to meet, or raise money for a class trip to Washington,
D.C. That has less to do with PageRank, and more to do with a different type of
scoring system. Specifically, the F Score.

How Fascinating are you?
Applying Fascination to Your Personality and
Brand
Who Is the Most Fascinating Person in the Room?
I am facing a large room full of several hundred people, each looking
intently at me. As the keynote speaker at a conference, I’m standing onstage in
one of those vast hotel conference rooms, the kind with dozens of huge crystal
chandeliers as far as the eye can see. Each participant in the conference has just
taken the fascination personality test, and the results will give the “F Score,” an
overall score of fascination level. Now standing, the participants wait to hear
what their results mean.
They want to score highly, sometimes even jockeying for position vying to
be more fascinating than their colleagues. That’s only natural. People want to be
the “most fascinating” in the same way they might want to be “most handsome”
or “most intelligent.” In some ways, they’re correct: A strong F score is a very
good thing, indeed. Yet an ultra-high F score also carries certain risks. More, this
audience will soon witness, is not automatically better.
F Scores: The Fascination Personality Test
My team and I developed the F Score to objectively evaluate the level of
fascination generated by a product, brand, or idea. It can test individual
messages, such as a product’s packaging or a television commercial, or it can
test a holistic message, such as a product launch. More interesting, it also can

test personalities.
The F Score isn’t intended to be rigidly definitive—nothing about
fascination is—but it does offer a clear probability about whether someone has a
force of attraction behind his or her personality. The test also can point out
unrecognized patterns, strengths, and characteristics within a person’s behavior,
and ways in which that person evokes a positive or negative response from
others (sometimes intentionally, but usually not). I’ve given this test at many
types of organizations, for pharmaceutical reps as well as marketing executives
and real estate brokers, and the bell curve of scores is almost always the same:
the majority cluster in the middle, with a small percentage of exceptionally high-
or low-scoring personalities.*
High-Scoring Personalities
Fascinating brands have an extraordinary ability to influence behavior, and
the same is true of personalities. Those with a high F Score can sway opinion
and action far more effectively than those with a low F Score, because they use
triggers with unusual vividness and intensity. They get their message across.
These personalities might be the center of attention, or they could avoid the
spotlight. They might be charismatic, or they might be introverted. What all high
scorers share is an ability to persuade others by eliciting an intellectual,
emotional, and physical response.
We don’t have to try to watch high scorers. We almost can’t help it. They’re
the rock stars, the media figures, the villains, the challengers. Yet their gifts are
not without potential controversy.
Is More Fascinating Always Better?
In Part I, we saw that fascination operates on a spectrum, from delicate to
intense, and in the extreme, healthy behavior turns into something darker, more
eccentric, even dangerous. For the same reasons, a high F Score isn’t the same as
likability (an agreeable character and appealing personality), or respect (earned
esteem or admiration). Here’s why.
Fascination Versus Likability
A person doesn’t have to be likable to be fascinating. Those with the highest

F Scores can be well regarded, and even adored. However, some are intensely
unappealing, racking up a high F Score because they escalate their power or
alarm triggers in the extreme: Charles Manson, Ted Bundy, Osama bin Laden.
Fascination Versus Respect
A company that is respected isn’t necessarily fascinating. An eBay seller can
have a perfect 100 percent satisfaction score and sell the highest quality of
goods, and still go out of business. A high school graduate can have 1600 SAT
scores and not be accepted into Stanford if the application essay fails to sway the
dean of admissions. An attorney can be the keenest legal mind, esteemed by
every judge, and still fail to attract clients.
Famous High-Scorers
Celebrities successfully capitalize on their high F Score, exaggerating one or
more of their triggers. Would Angelina Jolie be as sexy with a tamer use of the
lust trigger, or as intriguing without mystique? Probably not. (And let’s not
forget her bad-girl side, the one that wore a vial of ex-husband Billy Bob
Thornton’s blood around her neck. Yep, that’s vice for you.) Shock jock Howard
Stern wouldn’t be as shocking without his use of the alarm trigger, knocking
listeners off-kilter and causing that “did he seriously just say that?” reaction.
Then there’s Rush Limbaugh, about whom the New York Times wrote, “The fact
that he purposely antagonizes people is part of the draw.” Finally consider Dr.
Laura Schlessinger, the conservative commentator, who attracts millions of
viewers as well as truckloads of hate mail. And with fame comes not only hate
mail but also tabloid covers. Think of Kim Kardashian, Kathy Griffin, Hugh
Hefner.
Commentators, journalists, and talk show hosts have to be fascinating, or
they won’t have an audience: Arianna Huffington, Bill O’Reilly, Glenn Beck,
Sean Hannity. No one tunes in for tame opinions.
Politicians can earn tremendous support from one group, and denunciation
from others: Sarah Palin. Rudy Giuliani. Ann Coulter. Reverend Al Sharpton. Al
Franken. In fashion, think of larger-than-life personalities such as Isaac Mizrahi,
Betsey Johnson, or Tom Ford. Business leaders such as Richard Branson and
Warren Buffett. Musicians such as Madonna, Eminem, Kurt Cobain, Keith
Richards, and Sean Combs. The sports world brings us Dennis Rodman, Kobe
Bryant, John McEnroe, Barry Bonds, and Andre Agassi.

Ultra-Scoring Personalities
Consider the personalities I just mentioned above, from the worlds of sports,
business, music, and media. They’re fascinating, very. They command
tremendous interest and, often, influence. But is every single person on that list
admired? Trusted? Inspirational? Loved?…Hmm. Not always. Not with the most
extreme personalities.
Meet the ultra-scorers: people with exceedingly high F scores. In either case,
they are very, very fascinating, and not always in a good way. They’re “love ’em
or hate ’em” types, earning both attention and resentment, admiration and
ridicule. At their best, they develop the rare charisma necessary to unite
corporations and nations. At their worst, they hit nerves and step on toes, lobbing
interpersonal firebombs and torching relationships.
People with the highest F Scores often earn our attention with their lack of
propriety, values, or common sense. Role models become more fascinating when
they collapse. The villain is more fascinating than the hero. Good news can’t
even get out the door without being trampled by scandal, exposé, and other
skeletons tumbling out of the closet. The press knows it, too. Journalists wield a
barbed hook, and we love to “read all about it.” New Yorker journalist Janet
Malcolm once remarked that journalism’s purpose is to serve the fascination of
“society’s fundamental and incorrigible nosiness.” We all love a good Page Six.
Men bite dogs when politicians announce they’re gay, televangelists admit to
affairs, and CEOs are caught stealing from the cookie jar.
Why are we enthralled by such unsavory exploits? Remember, fascination
lives in your less rational side, the one that’s more instinctive than intellectual.
It’s not always earned with etiquette, and it doesn’t play by the usual social rules.
We’re fascinated by the ways in which ultra-scorers manipulate the three most
conflict-ridden triggers: alarm, power, and vice.
But enough with the extremists. Most organizations have a sizable
percentage of low-scoring personalities, so let’s understand this group as well.
Low-Scoring Personalities
Personalities with a low F Score tend to avoid extremes, and avoid volatility.
These folks shine in a supporting role and often make wonderful friends because
they’re people pleasers. They’re more stable and consistent. We rely on them,
often for qualities such as integrity and comfort. They typically shy away from
the power, alarm, and vice triggers, feeling less comfortable with control or

controversy.
So what’s wrong with these qualities, necessarily? Where’s the liability? Not
everyone wants to be the high-scoring type, right?
A low F Score isn’t a problem…unless someone wants to influence
decisions and behavior. For anyone with a product to sell, or a message to
communicate, or a relationship to enrich, a low F Score can hinder connection.
Because they don’t particularly enjoy standing out, low scorers can easily get
lost in the crowd, and rarely command a great deal of influence.
But there’s a bigger problem.
We like to think that goodness triumphs for its own virtue, that we’ll be
recognized for our achievements, that our best efforts will be fairly rewarded.
We grew up being told, “Build a better mousetrap, and the world will beat a path
to your door.” In reality, things can be a bit different. It’s not enough to have a
better product, or better performance, if nobody notices or cares.
Before we can close any type of sale, we must first get through the door. In
today’s environment, it takes a strong F Score to open that door. Once we’re
through the door, then our product can do the talking. Beyond sales, this is true
for any situation in which we’re competing with other conflicting messages.
We learned this earlier: The more distracted an environment, the more
essential fascination becomes. Today, clients are distracted, bosses are distracted,
spouses are distracted, third-grade teachers are distracted.
Now, back to my speech, and the hundreds of people who have been
standing patiently during the time you were reading this discourse on higher-and
lower-scoring personalities. “All right,” I say to the group. “Let’s find out who is
the most fascinating person in this room.”
“If your score is in the lowest range, please sit down.” Only one person sits
down: a shy-looking young woman in an unassuming brown shirt. A sympathetic
murmur flutters around her, as though she just confessed a personal failure. Her
name tag reads margaret, and since many of these people in this audience work
in the same professional community, I ask the audience, “Who here knows
Margaret? How would you describe her?” The answers gush forth immediately:
“A real sweetheart.” “Generous.” “Good listener.” “Great friend.” Margaret, it
seems, is the friend we’d all call in the middle of the night when stranded with a
flat tire. And this isn’t uncommon with people who score low on the fascination
scale.
Continuing the exercise, I ask people to sit, based on their score. “If your
score is in the middle range, please sit.” Another crop of people sit, and like
Margaret, this group generally includes those with fairly mild-mannered body
language and unobtrusive style. The next group to sit demonstrates slightly

stronger body language and manner. And so on. People smile as they look
around, enjoying this personality test. The exercise continues until we have only
those who’ve scored highest: the most fascinating among the crowd. This is a
small group, but each person has a certain intensity in stance and expression.
And finally we have our winner, the person scoring the highest: a redhead
named Erik, with piercing blue eyes, a tightly wound stance, and a mischievous
smile. A thirtysomething Dennis the Menace. From the smiles and buzz of
conversation, I can tell people in the audience know Erik (and for better or
worse, find him fascinating as well).
Margaret and Erik sit at opposite ends of the fascination spectrum: Margaret
is unassuming and gentle, and probably goes out of her way not to upset others.
By her own admission, she’s rarely the center of attention. Erik, on the other
hand, is a jumper cable of energy, ferociously creative, a high-profile leader, and,
I imagine, more than a bit polarizing.
I invite Erik onstage, and he bounds up the steps. “How are you fascinating
at the office?” I ask. He replies, with a dry twinkle, “I make people cry.” (And as
the crowd laughed, it became clear from their reaction that there was truth in the
jest.) Fascinating, indeed. When I comment that he doesn’t exactly strike me as
the type to give out hugs, he retorts: “No, because my lawyer told me I wasn’t
allowed to do that anymore.” The entire conference applauds at the sheer
audacity of this comment, shocked and delighted and above all fascinated that he
would say such a thing. Their wide-eyed grins all seem to say, “Wow! Can you
even imagine?” I’m smiling, too. Because Erik has just perfectly proven my
point: Fascination is a double-edged sword.
Are you an Erik? Or are you a Margaret? How could you combine the best
of both personalities? To learn more about your own F score, take a sample test
at www.SallyHogshead.com/FScore.
In the last section, we looked at potential ways to evaluate whether or not
something is fascinating, with the Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message:
Provokes Strong and Immediate Emotional Reactions
Creates Advocates
Becomes “Cultural Shorthand” for a Specific Set of Actions or Values
Incites Conversation
Forces Competitors to Realign Around It
Triggers Social Revolutions
Personalities live within relationships, so the guideposts are similar, yet a bit

more people-oriented. The following questions will help you start to think about
your potential F Score results.
How Much Do People Naturally Talk About You, or Gravitate to You?
 
Do others make efforts to increase their sense of connection to you? Are they
willing to go to great lengths to talk with you, listen to you, engage with you? If
you’re a company, do they spend time on your website, and read your materials?
How Much Appetite Is There for Your Ideas and Opinions?
 
More than you can supply? Are people interested in what you’re thinking
and doing? Fascinating people generate a lot of curiosity about what they’re
doing now, and what they’ll do next. (Would anyone write a biography about
you?) What Kind of Response Do You Elicit with Your Words, Actions, or
Ideas?
Are you provocative enough to generate a spirited discussion, or even heated
controversy? Fascinating people elicit intense emotional reactions from others.
This response can be positive or negative. It can be intentional or not.
Do You Prompt Others to Think in New Ways?
 
The most fascinating people disrupt usual ways of thinking. There are many
ways to do so, from the whimsical to the terrifying. But all fascinating people
reveal a different way to think, and if they can absorb our focus, they have the
capacity to change our opinions.
How Often Do Others Imitate You in Their Behavior, Ideas, or
Technique?
 
Imitation isn’t just flattery. It’s a signal that you’re setting a standard of some

sort. Fascinating people and things become a sort of “shorthand” for bigger
values. Are you a symbol for anything? Would someone ever use you as a
reference point when describing something else?
Not Fascinating Yet? Don’t Panic, You’re on the
Road
Different people embody different types of fascination. That’s a good thing.
There’s no one “right” way to fascinate. And personalities that might seem
closed off at work can often blossom in other contexts or pursuits. Over the long
run, shy or low-key personalities can be as fascinating as the most charismatic
ones, especially if they trigger trust. Trust is the most powerful trigger in
relationships, and the low F Score group often earns more trust than their high F
Score counterparts. They’re not leading an agenda, or distracting people with
their triggers.
The point is never for one personality type to magically transform into
another, but rather to maximize existing strengths and remove barriers to
communication. For instance, Margaret could learn to articulate her ideas more
expressively in meetings, or initiate conversations more frequently with friends,
thereby increasing her power trigger. Erik could decelerate his extreme use of
the power trigger by adding trust, creating a more consistent style of interaction.
Even for the highest-scoring types, the goal should never be to be fascinating
for the sake of being fascinating. Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance
says, “Any effort that has self-glorification as its final endpoint is bound to end
in disaster.” In his best seller Good to Great, Jim Collins points out that inflated
self-importance can interfere with the success of your product or organization.
Personalities that are both strong and effective focus their efforts on making their
message, and their teams, more fascinating.
Do you lead? Only if you are able to fascinate others to follow you and your
vision. Because, as Peter Drucker said, “The only definition of a leader is
someone who has followers.” No fascination, no followers. It’s a fact in
leadership, on Twitter, and in your own life.
Of course, all the fascination in the world doesn’t matter if you don’t have
something worthwhile to say. What you’re saying is still more important than
how you’re saying it. No matter how important your message, it still must be
heard in order to be effective.
That’s where the seven triggers come in: lust, mystique, alarm, prestige,
power, vice, and trust. Each trigger is a world unto itself, each with invisible

behavioral tripwires and reflexes. Once we identify the forces behind each
trigger, you’ll see why you’re convinced by some leaders (but not others), why
you take some unwise risks (even though you know full well you shouldn’t), and
why you buy certain brands (without actually having the foggiest idea why).

PART II

The Seven Fascination Triggers
Meet Your New Arsenal: Lust, Mystique, Alarm,
Prestige, Power, Vice, and Trust

There’s a lot of really, really boring stuff in the world. Dust bunnies. Status
meetings. Tax forms. Flossing. Plain microwave oatmeal. Repeat sitcoms.
Waiting in line at the DMV. Exterior siding. Watching grass grow, pots boil, and
paint dry. In comparison to, say, chocolate or music, these things seem almost
impossible to make fascinating. Yet if that’s the case, then we’ve already
violated a central tenet of this book: Anything, and anyone, can become
fascinating.
But these objects and activities can become fascinating, and very
fascinating…if they trigger a response. Triggers give meaning to otherwise
meaningless things.
It’s Not the Thing, It’s the Trigger
Let me explain. Nothing is, in itself, fascinating. When something activates a
trigger, we’re compelled to focus—whether we want to or not. Many
fascinations revolve around things that are not in themselves “fascinating” or
“unfascinating.” Context and meaning determine whether a person or product is
fascinating.
We all have triggers that turn otherwise ordinary objects into fascinations.
We all become captivated by certain people, ideas, and things that might be
totally unfascinating to someone else. You do it. I do it. Fetishists do it.
Shoe Fetishes and the Interlocking Letter Cs
Remember when we looked at shoe fetishes in Part I? We saw how a stiletto
(or a piece of hair or the sound of a car engine starting) can be meaningless to
one person, but meaningful to another if fascination comes into play. In these
cases, it’s not the shoe itself that’s fascinating, but the meaning given to the shoe.
Once the shoe is imbued with lust, or vice, or power, it becomes fascinating.

As we said before: It’s not the thing, it’s the trigger that makes something
fascinating.
There’s also a matter of personal preference. Different triggers possess
different levels of appeal to different people. Some people respond very strongly
to vice, whereas others are most fascinated by prestige.
Fetishists aren’t the only ones whose triggers make them fascinated by
otherwise meaningless objects. Likewise, it’s not the chocolate cake that makes
your mouth water, it’s lust. It’s not the gossip that makes Page Six so popular,
it’s vice. It’s not your family photo that makes your heart swell, it’s trust.
Meaningless things fascinate consumers all the time, if a brand can give that
object meaning with a logo. A pair of interlocking letter Cs have little meaning.
That 
is, 
unless 
those 
interlocking 
Cs 
look 
like 
this: 
Suddenly those Cs have quite a bit of meaning, because they trigger prestige.
In our research, people were willing to pay almost 50 percent more for a pair of
intensely fascinating sunglasses, such as those made by Chanel. The Chanel logo
triggers prestige. (It’s not just the logo that makes the sunglasses more
expensive, of course; those glasses are higher quality than a generic pair.
However, quality is not usually what consumers purchase when they choose
Chanel over a no-name brand of equal quality.) Think about charging 50 percent
more for your product by invoking a trigger.
The 
Power 
of 
Branding 
Is 
to 
Make 
the
Unfascinating Fascinating
When consumers buy a certain brand, they’re often not paying for the utility
of the item. What they’re actually buying is the trigger.
The strongest brands create triggers around things that would otherwise be
meaningless. Even fungible or parity goods, ones that generally have fairly
universal value, become more valuable by adding a little meaning: Morton salt is

more meaningful than plain salt, and Clorox bleach is more meaningful than
plain bottled bleach. These brands apply different triggers, but they all apply the
same principles. Triggers can take something that’s relatively meaningless (such
as salt, bleach, or the letter C) and give it meaning.
Triggers also bring meaning to all types of otherwise meaningless scenarios.
Talking about the weather might be boring (“Boy, sure is hot out there!”). But
the meaning behind weather itself can be quite fascinating. Let’s say it rains on
September 19. Those dark, looming clouds on the horizon have a different
meaning to a farmer whose crops are withering than a bride on her wedding day.
Both people would be fascinated by the rain, but with different emotional
responses. They each attach different meaning to the rain, because that rain
carries a message.
We’re bombarded with stimuli every moment of the day, and we have to
choose which things to focus our limited mental energy on. We focus on those
things that fascinate us with meaning. Triggers apply meaning, and the more
meaning, the more fascination. Someone else’s dog might be invisible to you,
whereas your own dog is fascinating, because your dog triggers emotions and
meaning. Products work the same way: Triggers create meaning. The MP3
player wasn’t quite so fascinating until the iPod triggered lust.
Applying the Triggers
Many people don’t think of their company, or their own personality, as
inherently “fascinating.” Many believe they could never become fascinating. Yet
anything, and anyone, can become fascinating by applying the seven triggers.
A glass of orange juice might not seem very fascinating, but if you’re a
diabetic and your blood sugar drops low, that glass of orange juice becomes the
sole focus of your attention. A mailman in your driveway becomes riveting if
you’re waiting for college acceptance letters. Your odometer becomes more
gripping as soon as you see the flashing blue lights of a police car in your
rearview mirror. A bottle of water snaps your attention after you’ve just
competed in a habanero chile–eating contest. A plain black Gap T-shirt isn’t
terribly fascinating, but it sure is when Sharon Stone wears it to the Oscars. The
person making polite conversation at the cocktail mixer might not be fascinating,
at least not until you find out he’s the CMO of that company where you want to
work. The context creates triggers, and presto! You’re fascinated.
In these examples, the mailman, the bottle of water, and the Gap T-shirt
weren’t intrinsically fascinating. A combination of triggers around them made

them fascinating. Understanding how to switch on that response mechanism in
others gives us the power to change people’s opinions and behavior.
Exact fascinations can vary over time. But there are universal truths in
fascination. Wicked behavior shocks us, loud noises alert us, and unsolved
mysteries send us on fact-finding missions for resolution. It all comes down to
the same seven triggers. But how? How do these triggers cause us to fixate,
sometimes irrationally so?
The Instruction Manual for Decision Making
Once you understand how the triggers turn otherwise meaningless things into
intense captivations, you’ll realize how fascination directs decision making. In
upcoming pages, we’ll explore the behavioral, physiological, and psychological
explanations for how and why we’re gripped. To begin, above is a snapshot
preview. In this chart you’ll see the definition for each trigger, and the reason it
fascinates.
 
TRIGGERS: Lust DEFINITION: Anticipation of pleasure I AM
FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Craving is the anticipation of pleasure
TRIGGERS: Mystique DEFINITION: Unanswered questions I AM
FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Mystique makes me want to solve the
puzzle
TRIGGERS: Alarm DEFINITION: Threat of immediate consequence I
AM FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Alarm demands a response now
 
TRIGGERS: Prestige DEFINITION: Symbols of rank and respect I AM
FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Prestige earns status, respect, and
admiration
TRIGGERS: Power DEFINITION: Command over others I AM
FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Power controls
TRIGGERS: Vice DEFINITION: Rebellion against rules I AM
FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Vice tempts me with “forbidden fruit”
 

TRIGGERS: Trust DEFINITION: Certainty and reliability I AM
FASCINATED BY IT BECAUSE…: Trust comforts me because I can rely on
it
 
Each trigger adds a different type of energy to your message. Alarm adds a
sense of adventure, or immediacy, or even danger. Mystique adds curiosity.
Power adds respect or fear. Vice adds irreverence. And then there’s lust. Ah, lust.
So what does lust add? Quite a bit, as it turns out.

Lust
Why We’re Seduced by the Anticipation of
Pleasure
Her voice has been described as “cotton candy, smoke, wind, lollipops and
velvet.” “Champagne lava.” “The slow folding and unfolding of a pink cashmere
sweater.”
Psychologist David Huron uses a different word to describe Marilyn
Monroe’s famous voice: “wet.”
“When we see something we want to eat, when we receive praise, and even
when we hug our children, our mouths literally water,” says Huron, professor of
music and head of the Cognitive and Systematic Musicology Laboratory in the
School of Music at Ohio State University, in a series of interviews. In any type
of pleasure state, our mouths produce more saliva. Our tongue moves more
fluidly within the mucous membranes of our mouth, creating what Huron calls
“oral wetness cues.”
Oral wetness is a subtle and involuntary reflex; however, it broadcasts our
emotional state by causing distinct change in timbre of voice. “Oral wetness
offers an unspoken invitation to move closer,” says Huron. “It says, ‘Hey, over
here, something good is going on. Want to join me?’ We become fascinated by
the prospect of moving closer and sharing that experience.”
Marilyn Monroe’s wet voice communicated pleasure and openness. Her
voice was also “aspirated,” says Huron, meaning that she increased the amount
of air through her vocal cords when speaking, almost like whispering. We all
aspirate our voices when we’re murmuring to a person right next to us. Yet
Marilyn manipulated her wetness cues as part of her brand image. She
communicated with a “pillow talk” effect even while onstage, speaking as
though physically intimate with each person in the audience. (Cue your mental

replay of her aurally pornographic masterpiece, “Happy Birthday, Mr.
President.”) Whether we realize it or not, our own oral wetness announces our
positive or negative emotional state to the world. These are just a few of the
unconscious lust hints we give off every day…cues that either pull people closer
to us, or push them away.
What Is “Lust”?
 
Meet an eternally favorite deadly sin. Lust fascinates through experience: our
appetites and passions of sight, sound, taste, touch, and scent. We anticipate what
it might be like to fulfill this craving, and that anticipation pulls us closer.
To Lust for Something Is to Crave It
When thirsty, we might crave an orange Slurpee from 7-Eleven or a flute of
champagne. When hungry, we might crave homemade ribs with root beer, or
fresh oysters in St. Augustine. When we crave the softness of cashmere, or the
sunset on Venice Beach pier, that craving is lust. This trigger can focus on an
object, experience, or person; it might last moments, or a lifetime; yet in every
case, lust captivates our desire for sensory fulfillment.
As early as the sixth century A.D., lust emerged as public enemy number
one for Christian fathers. And not without reason. Lust seduces us from the
straight and narrow, a temptress holding a skeleton key to fit any chastity belt.
Overcoming desire is no easy task. Major philosophies have grappled with
this topic since the sixth century. Buddhism presented the “overcoming of
desire” as an ideal. In contrast, by appealing to our most undisciplined urges, the
lust trigger unleashes parts of ourselves that we’ve struggled for centuries to
tame.
Lust tends to be particularly difficult to ignore because it doesn’t stem from
wise and reasonable decision making. As a result, this trigger is especially useful
in heightening desire.
“But I Want It!”
At its heart and soul, lust stems from biological attraction. It triggers both a

physical and an emotional response, one that bypasses rational scrutiny and
heads straight to desire. We might successfully resist lust, but we cannot talk
ourselves out of it. It’s rarely “take it or leave it.” Willpower can change our
actions, but not our fascinations.
Facts create alarm, and opinions stem from power; however, lust is different.
It doesn’t involve reasoning. It’s not sensible. Whether we should crave cheesy
Taco Bell nachos rarely determines whether we actually do crave them.
If your message currently relies on an otherwise rational message, lust can
add new ways to increase your desirability. The need for a visceral element, such
as lust, is especially critical for messages relying upon power or prestige,
because these triggers can sometimes feel cold or impersonal. Additionally, trust,
which often relies upon rational information and reliability, benefits from cues of
attraction.
Lust for Traditional Messages
At first, many people and companies assume lust isn’t appropriate for them.
Don’t write it off so quickly. In a competitive marketplace (read: almost every
modern marketplace), all of us can benefit from becoming more sought-after for
our ability to make others feel closer to us. Many corporations, especially
traditional ones, benefit from the warmth and emotion of this trigger.
In my brand innovation sessions with companies, we often focus on helping
otherwise cold products feel more human, or unfamiliar processes seem natural.
Lust can make people so enamored with a message that they’re temporarily
willing to ignore everything else around, lower their defenses, and consider
something they otherwise might not.
Do you want to invite people closer? Do you want them to crave your
message? Do you want to add warmth to an otherwise cold package or process?
Do you want to pull consumers into stores, magnetically drawn to look at and
touch your product? Lust builds the allure of this interaction.
Same Utility, Increased Desire
Lust is not about utility or function. A product does not become more lustful
by adding more data to the instruction manual, or more product description on
the product label. (Compare Microsoft’s packaging to Apple’s, and you’ll see
why.) Great design frequently uses lust, especially when that design brings a

human sensibility to an object, or makes the functionality more pleasurable.
Rather than the usual PC blinking sleep light, which turns on/off/on, Apple’s
sleep light resembles the human characteristic of a beating heart. Product
development company IDEO designed an insulin injector that looks like a
Montblanc pen rather than a medical tool, evoking visual and tactile lust. Both
imbue an otherwise mechanical utility with a sense of warmth and pleasure. The
functionality is the same—the insulin is still insulin, and the hard drive is much
the same—but design makes the experience more fascinating.
Let’s start dipping into this bag of sensory tricks. Lust offers four pillars:
Stop thinking, start feeling. Make the ordinary more emotional. Use all five
senses. And tease and flirt. Instead of selling a brand simply on rational benefits,
this trigger focuses on creating an experiential attachment.
Stop Thinking, Start Feeling
Lust conquers the rational evaluation process, freeing us to stop thinking, and
start feeling. We might not even realize it’s happening, but in relationships, the
effects can be long-lasting. Maya Angelou remarked, “I’ve learned that people
will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will never
forget how you made them feel.”*
Attracting Clients…or Not
Remember Marilyn Monroe and the oral wetness cues? The rest of us exhibit
them, too, including you. Let’s say, hypothetically, you work in sales. You’re
making a call on a big prospective client. The presentation is going better than
expected: nods, smiles, note taking. You’re high-fiving yourself inside. Your
body language exhibits this confidence, as do your oral cues. Your prospect is
consciously listening to what you’re saying, but unconsciously listening to how
you’re saying it.
Now, not to be a buzzkill, but let’s imagine the presentation suddenly takes a
different turn. As you unveil your big conclusion, the client’s face goes tight:
“We tried that approach once. It was a major flop.” Uh-oh. Those pleasure-
induced oral wetness cues? Gone. Your mouth feels dry, your vocal membranes
dehydrating. Your voice becomes tinnier, as you swallow uncomfortably. Gulp.
You begin to experience the alarm trigger, which we’ll learn about shortly,
with a blast of fight-or-flight adrenaline. Your listeners sense the change, says
psychologist David Huron. Their own bodies begin to mirror your stress, and

psychologically, they distance themselves. Just like that, ladies and gentlemen,
lust has left the building.
Testosterone-Drenched Saliva
Not only do our mouths create more saliva in anticipation of pleasure, but in
some cases, a different type of saliva. Motor Trend magazine described a
Maserati as inspiring “visceral, carnal automotive lust.” One UK study suggests
this description is literally quite accurate.
Researchers assessed the levels of arousal in a group of women, measuring
the amount of testosterone present in their saliva. First, they tested the women’s
saliva. Then they tested it again, after the women had listened to the sound of
Italian sports cars such as Ferrari, Lamborghini, and Maserati. The result? One
hundred percent of the women demonstrated a significant jump in testosterone
levels after listening to the growl of Italian sports car engines. But it’s not just
any car engine that turns women on. When the women listened to a
comparatively weak engine, their testosterone levels plummeted below normal.
Smaller engines, it seems, trigger less lust.*
Combining Lust with Other Triggers
Half a block away from Artisanal Bistro in New York City, the scent of
exotic cheeses billows down the street like a pennant. Once inside, it’s an
olfactory immersion. If someone dines here frequently and then dies from
clogged arteries, surely this must be where they’d go to lactic heaven.
In the back of the restaurant glows the Cheese Cave, where some of the
world’s most coveted cheeses age in climate-controlled perfection. Bleu de
Basque from France, Monte Enebro from Spain, Montgomery’s Cheddar from
England. An epicurean’s first question might be: How do I decide which cheese
to order first? A marketer’s first question might be: How do all these cheeses
compete for shelf space in such a crowded environment?
Artisanal Bistro functions like many other competitive marketing
environments: an intensely crowded niche (the restaurant location), surplus of
exceptional offerings (250 of the world’s top cheeses), an overwhelming number
of options clamoring for attention (through scent, menu description, prior
experience with the cheese). And then there’s that issue of limited capacity (the
tummy).
A blue-veined Gorgonzola Cremificato has a characteristic texture, whereas

Pecorino Foglie di Noce is wrapped in walnut leaves. To survive, each cheese
must stand out in its own identifiable way.* Exotic cheeses offer unusual
complexity, often combining triggers. For instance, a cheese that uses a
proprietary aging process triggers mystique. A triple-cream Brillat-Savarin,
containing 75 percent butterfat, triggers vice. The Italian cheese Caciocavallo
Podolico comes from the milk of wild Podolico cows, who dine exclusively
upon ingredients such as wild strawberries, rosehips, juniper, and cornelian
cherries. A rare delicacy, this golden-toned cheese costs as much as pure silver,
inspiring the prestige trigger.
Artisanal Bistro offers a luscious version of lust, but this trigger isn’t just for
delicacies. Every type of sensory experience is a form of lust. Right now, as you
read this book, you’re experiencing the texture of the cover on your fingertips,
the color of the ink, the sound of the turning pages.† Cumulatively, it either
increases or decreases your fascination through lust.
Scent is an underrated lust cue. Whether that scent is Joy perfume or
something less appealing, it shapes our perceptions. Surprisingly, negative cues
can fascinate with positive results. Lust’s list of sensory input includes
unappealing smells…even decidedly unappealing smells.
Mmmm, Body Odor and Vomit
The archetypical English pub has a distinctive smoke-filled scent. Whether
patrons realize it or not, that scent is a big part of the classic pub experience. On
some level, we expect how an English pub should smell. The trust trigger also
comes into play here, because we expect this scent to consistently be part of the
classic pub experience.
When smoking was banned in public spaces, pubs grappled with the
question of how to retain their immediately identifiable smell. Would a pub by
any other scent smell so sweet?
“Many pub patrons don’t feel the same in a smoke-free environment,” says
Frank Knight, founder of air fragrance company Dale Air. Not to worry. The
company’s new air freshener offers an unusual scent: ashtray. “From what I have
heard, it’s because of the awful smells the tobacco used to veil, such as body
odor and vomit.”
Alrighty then! Let’s cleanse our palates, shall we?
Make the Ordinary More Emotional

Even the most ordinary products can inspire cravings.
The word “lust” connotes many things, but watercooler conversation is
generally not among them. Yet the most essential application of this trigger
might live in our everyday conversations.
Trust is the trigger most associated with relationships for its authenticity,
consistency, reliability. However, lust can play a role as well, infusing
communication with warmth and positive chemistry. Lust can bring
approachability and friendliness to a conversation, encouraging strangers to
lower their natural barriers of resistance, making them more likely to absorb our
message.
David Huron taught us that a blast of epinephrine stress can turn off
audiences, making our mouths go dry and stomachs knot. Intentionally or not,
subtle physical cues communicate our intentions. It’s true in our voices, and it’s
true in our unconscious body language: withdrawn posture, broken eye contact,
an insincere smile.
Nick Morgan, author of Trust Me and one of America’s top communication
coaches, tells me that “every communication is two conversations: the verbal
one (the content) and the nonverbal one(body language).” When someone’s
words tell us one thing, but his body language and tone of voice tell us
something else, which do we believe? “If the two are aligned, you can be a
persuasive, authentic communicator. But if the two are not aligned, people
believe the nonverbal communication every time.”
Morgan points to studies by Albert Mehrabian, who found that within
spoken communication, audiences draw 55 percent of communication cues from
the visual, 38 percent from the tone of voice, and only a measly 7 percent from
the words themselves. Each of these cues triggers trust over time; however, the
cues often begin with lust. When we smile affectionately, touch someone’s
sleeve during a difficult conversation, lean in to listen more closely, we’re
bonding by drawing upon lust. If trust is the trigger that drives what you say and
when you say it, lust is the trigger that drives how you say it. By combining both
of these, a message is more likely to be heard and remembered. Trust stabilizes
long-term relationships, and lust encourages people to return repeatedly.
Use All Five Senses
Long-term relationships require that those involved keep coming back. In
order to trigger lust over the long term, continually pique new types of appetites.
Not an easy task, but fortunately, we have five senses at our disposal.

For many, chocolate embodies lust. Yet to win in a crowded marketplace,
even the taste of chocolate can benefit from a little boost of sound, sight, scent,
and touch.
Sweetening a Brand with Lust
Not so long ago, the height of epicurean indulgence was a gold box filled
with Godiva chocolates. Instantly recognizable, the gold box became a
glimmering icon available only in high-end shops. Then, in an effort to expand,
in 1999 Godiva made a fateful decision to distribute in mass retailers such as
Barnes & Noble. The chocolates, which for the first time now included
preservatives, were no longer a treat to be craved and desired. Now you could
buy the gold box in strip malls. (Strip malls!) Simultaneously, ultra-premium
boutique brands such as Vosges and MarieBelle entered the category with exotic
ingredients including absinthe, black sea salt, violets, and paprika. How could
Godiva once again fascinate people with a lustful chocolate experience?
Advertising alone couldn’t fix Godiva’s problems. They needed to fascinate
younger, fashion-conscious women, pulling their attention away from
competitors and inside their own stores.
Secretly, away from prying eyes, Godiva developed an indulgent new
blended chocolate drink. Marketed to trendy female city dwellers, everything
about the drink was designed to embody total pleasure: a passionate and
seductive beverage that would be “decadent, luxurious, and speak to all of her
senses.” Customers could only get it by going inside a Godiva store. The
packaging looked less like a regular cup, and more like packaging from a high-
end designer. Even ordering the drink itself was a sensual experience, with the
theater of watching fresh raspberries, cream, and Belgian chocolate chunks
blended to order. This drink would go beyond chocolate—it would be sixteen
ounces of liquid hedonism, tempting women with a sinful seduction of all five
senses.
Charged with naming this product, I toyed with lustful chocolate decadence:
ChoCouture, Confection Perfection, and BonBon Vivant. But the winner
combined the essence of chocolate in a sexy potion: Chocolixir.
When the drink debuted in 2006, women described how their mouths
watered as they walked into the shops, smelling the scent of freshly ground
chocolate and soaking in the prospect of the velvety decadence awaiting their
senses. It wasn’t just the consumption, but also the anticipation. Instead of
merely throwing new posters in their store windows, Godiva earned retail sales

through the sensory experience of lust. By 2008, Chocolixir was blended in 152
Godiva shops around the world. Voilà! Godiva’s foot traffic is getting back on its
feet.
Watching the act of a chocolate drink being prepared—anticipating, desiring,
imagining it—heightens the experience. What aspect of your experience could
you share with customers, using all five senses, allowing them to indulge in
pleasure?
Tease and Flirt
Lust is a promise of pleasure.* It is not, necessarily, the fulfillment of that
pleasure. This trigger often hints and tantalizes and even promises, without
follow-through. At its best, lust makes others want more (and more and more),
even if those wants are never fulfilled.
Art of the Tease
Yes, “the chase” really can be more exciting than the prize. Neuroscientists
explored this premise in a simple experiment. They examined brain scans of
monkeys eyeing a luscious treat: a grape.
Each monkey’s brain was stimulated by the sight of the grape, and became
even more stimulated as the monkey held the grape, ready to eat it. However, the
monkey’s sense of reward didn’t increase when it ate the grape; that sense
actually decreased. Maximum pleasure occurred at the moment of getting the
desired object, rather than at the moment of consuming it. The conclusion: As a
motivator, desire is more powerful than fulfillment.
The pursuit of pleasure is often more fascinating than the pleasure itself.
Keeping that desire unfulfilled, or at least never entirely satisfied, is the key to
long-term fascination through lust. Otherwise, the champagne goes flat.
Lust engages our imagination. It allows us to participate in the process,
filling in the possibilities. As with the mystique trigger, lust makes us want more,
yet once we experience the complete truth, our desire might weaken. There’s a
reason that burlesque shows are rarely performed in the harsh morning light.
Other triggers focus on follow-through of a message, such as power and
trust. But lust, like mystique and alarm, is more about implications.
Not Even Room for a Wafer-Thin Mint

It’s dinnertime, and you’re hungry. Hold on, what’s that delicious aroma?
Wow, it’s a serving of rich, delicious _______! (Fill in the blank here with your
favorite dish.) You’re craving it, mouth watering, ready to dig in. Mmmm. Now,
fast-forward an hour or so. Plates are clean. Your meal of ______ was super
yummy, but now, ugh. Done.
Here’s what happened: As your stomach filled with that dinner, your lust for
it diminished. Lust ends, at least temporarily, once a craving is fulfilled.
Cirque du Soleil uses several triggers, including mystique (its tightly held
secrets), prestige (high-end execution), and power (extraordinary training and
skill). Yet most fascinating of all is the way in which Cirque du Soleil flirts with
the audience. Acrobats use a playful style of interaction that gaily sidesteps lead-
footed seriousness. From the elaborate costumes and makeup, to the avant-garde
aerial artistry, at the end of the show, audiences crave more.
Remember the monkey and the grape? Cirque never completely quenches
the interest of its fan base, because it continually introduces new feats, and new
global touring performances, to keep audiences ooohing and ahhhing.
You Heard It Here First: Sex Sells!
 
Marketers are no dummies. We didn’t need a big fancy research study to
prove that a product is more likely to sell if there’s a hot babe in a swimsuit
standing in the ad. Don’t want to take our word for it? Read the study.
The Journal of Consumer Research reports that the image of a woman in a
bikini will not only increase a man’s sexual stimulation, but will also increase his
likelihood of indulgent decision making. The authors continue, “It seems that
sexual appetite causes a greater urgency to consume anything rewarding.”
Merely holding a lacy bra made the men more likely to seek immediate rewards
such as an indulgent dessert, or spending a greater amount of money. The
appetites appear to become intertwined in the brain. As the brain opens to
possibilities, the wallet opens as well.
When Lust Is a Must-Have Ingredient
Lust leads to behavior that’s irrational, unreasonable, and, in many cases,
flat-out absurd. For many types of messages, this is good news. Critical, actually.
For products that are irrationally expensive or unhealthy, or for messages that

require people to step beyond their normal sense of restraint, lust can tip things
over the line. Lust turns “I really shouldn’t” into “I really shouldn’t, but I will
anyway.”
Combined with the vice and prestige triggers, lust compels people to buy
products with higher sensory fulfillment, even if they’re irrationally expensive. It
explains why there’s a market for sheets with not just three hundred thread
count, but fifteen hundred thread count. Combined with the vice trigger, lust
entices someone to order a Hardee’s Monster ThickBurger (1,420 calories and
107 grams of fat), or a Baskin-Robbins large Heath Bar Shake (2,310 calories
and 108 grams of fat). These choices can seem irrational, but lust is driving that
fascination train, my friend.
If your message must compel people to want something—really, really want
it, despite rational evidence to the contrary—employ the factors of sight, sound,
taste, touch, and scent.
 
IN OUR NEXT CHAPTER, we’ll search into the mysteries of unanswered
questions. Lust and mystique are good friends, and often work in tandem. They
both revolve around unfulfilled interest, piquing curiosity and the desire for
more.
To pique your curiosity, consider this: Mystique compels people to buy
products they don’t need, or even want. And in one case, as you’ll soon find out,
it compels them to pay a premium for a product they actively dislike.

Mystique
Why We’re Intrigued by Unanswered Questions
The bittersweetly harsh taste is unmistakable. Several seconds after being
swallowed, the taste still persists, feeling more viscous in the throat than is
actually the case. As the bar-tender pours the liqueur into a shot glass, one might
imagine a permanent stain forming on an asphalt highway.
Dozens of these shots have already been poured tonight, sometimes straight,
sometimes mixed with Red Bull. Partiers at the bar are usually eager to place
their order and receive their shot, and they often pay a premium price to do so.
Yet once the brown shot arrives, there’s a moment’s hesitation before it’s
actually consumed. An inhale, as if to brace oneself, because this drink has a
taste that even longtime advocates agree is atrocious.
The dark drink hasn’t become popular despite its noxious flavor, but rather
because of it. This is Jägermeister, the most popular product nobody likes.
An imported German digestive liqueur, Jägermeister has grown 40 percent
per year since 1985. Before then, the liqueur was a modest seller among German
immigrants. But then in 1985, importer and marketing genius Sidney Frank (who
went on to invent the Grey Goose brand) came across a story published in the
Baton Rouge Advocate describing his liqueur as a cult drink. The article claimed
it was “Liquid Valium,” jacked up with opium, Quaaludes, and aphrodisiacs. Did
Frank suppress the article? Nope. He copied it and posted it in college bars all
around the country. College students visiting New Orleans brought bottles of the
potion back to schools, and spread the mystique.
And boom, Jägermeister was anointed the drink of “dance naked on the bar”
wild partying. Why, exactly, is this revolting potion so popular? The answer
itself has mystique: Nobody knows why. As New York magazine described, “for
no clear reason at all, college kids in Baton Rouge and New Orleans decided

Jäger was cool. Just one of those things that happen sometimes. Kids being
funny. It’s likely they chose Jäger precisely because its taste was so horrific.”
Sidney Frank even leveraged the drink’s awful flavor: His bar poster shows a
brawny guy just after doing a shot of Jäger, grimacing in disgust, with a
headline, “So smooth.” People hate the product itself, but they love the brand.
And when they drink it, they love what it says about them.
Jägermeister is German for “master hunter,” though the real hunt is for a
definitive list of its ingredients. While Jäger is known to contain fifty-six
ingredients, rumors abound on just what exactly they are. Some claim it has elk’s
blood (most likely derived from the elk’s head drawing on the bottle). Others
swear it has opiates, or Valium.
Many companies, including Coca-Cola, pour a jigger of mystique into their
brands. The more information these brands withhold, the more consumers want
those products. As for Jägermeister, whatever floats inside those green-tinted
bottles, one thing’s for sure: After a few shots, your memory of the evening’s
events could well be an unsolved mystery.
What Is Mystique?
 
Eye-catching enough to get noticed, yet complex enough to stay interesting.
Revealing enough to pique curiosity, yet shadowy enough to prompt questions.
Mystique flirts with us, provoking our imagination, hinting at the possibilities,
inviting us to move closer while eluding our grasp. It doles out information,
without ever actually giving anything away. Like the lust trigger, this trigger is
rooted in unfulfillment. The magic trick ends if you find out how the white
rabbit appears from the black hat.
Of the seven triggers, this is the most nuanced, and perhaps the most
difficult to achieve. Mystique invites others closer, without giving them what
they seek. A delicate balance to be sure, but successfully achieved, it’s
fascination’s exemplar. Mystique can add anticipation and curiosity to any
relationship, from new business pitches to social invitations, by motivating
others to return for more.* There are four main ways to trigger mystique’s
delicate balance: Spark curiosity. Withhold information. Build mythology. And
limit access. Begin by sparking an intense behavioral motivator: curiosity.
Spark Curiosity

Topics that spark our curiosity become discussed, debated, and dissected,
often without ever being understood. We wait breathlessly during cliffhangers
and suspense thrillers. We wonder about conspiracy theories and unsolved
mysteries: The Shroud of Turin. The Bavarian Illuminati. Area 51. From the
Bermuda Triangle to crop circles, we’re obsessed with certain phenomena
specifically because we can’t explain them.
Murderers seem to hold an especially grisly appeal: Jeffrey Dahmer. Charles
Manson. Jack the Ripper. Mystique melds with the alarm trigger in thriller
movies: On some level we’re alarmed by what we’re watching, but still, we want
the conclusion.
You might remember The Blair Witch Project, the entirely fictitious horror
flick that kept millions of fans guessing about whether it was real. The movie
used mystique deluxe through-out filming, even depriving the actors of
knowledge of what would happen next. Creating a near-hysteria for answers, the
film grossed $248 million from a $35,000 cost.
The Queen Bee of Mystique Topics: Celebrity Deaths
Prime-time TV shows still play hourlong specials about these deaths. Elvis
Presley’s death (or not?). Michael Jackson’s suicide (but there was that global
tour in the works?). Paul McCartney’s so-called demise (“I buried Paul”). Even
Lincoln’s assassination in the theater has a certain grim appeal (especially that
bloodstained playbill). And on the night of July 18, 1969, what exactly happened
in that Oldsmobile Delmont 88 that allowed Ted Kennedy to escape, while Mary
Jo Kopechne did not? Surely the answers can’t be as interesting as the questions
themselves. They rarely are.*
Curiouser and Curiouser
Intriguing people make us curious to learn more. We think about them, we
talk with our friends about them, we might research them, we want to be close to
them emotionally, intellectually, or physically. Products affect us the same way.
When a product has successfully fascinated us through mystique, we might
ask friends about it to hear their experiences, research it online, read the manual,
spend time learning about its history and process, and spend time in the store. If
we’re deeply fascinated by a brand, we might join hashgroups on Twitter, or
travel to a conference where it’s featured.

If you fascinate others with mystique, they’ll want more information. Reveal
that information very carefully, if at all. Show a glimpse without giving away the
money shot.
Withhold Information
We’re fascinated by mystique because of our natural desire to fill in missing
information. If there’s a question, we want an answer. “What happens next? How
will the story end? Who gets the girl?” Withholding information can be a
valuable tactic for any professional, but for some, it’s a full-time pursuit.
When a Single Glance Can Cost a Million Dollars
Under conditions of stress, the human body responds in predictable ways:
increased heart rate, pupil dilation, perspiration, fine motor tremors, tics. In high-
pressure situations, such as negotiating an employment package or being cross-
examined under oath, no matter how we might try to play it cool, our bodies give
us away. We broadcast our emotional state, just as Marilyn Monroe broadcast
her lust for President Kennedy.
We each exhibit a unique and consistent pattern of stress signals. For those
who know how to read such cues, we’re essentially handing over a dictionary to
our body language. Those closest to us probably already recognize a few of our
cues, but an expert can take it one step further, and closely predict our actions.
Jeff “Happy” Shulman is one such expert. Happy is a world-class poker
player. To achieve his impressive winnings, he’s spent much of his life mastering
mystique. At the highest level of play, winning depends not merely on skill,
experience, statistics, or even luck with the cards, but also on an intimate
understanding of human nature. In poker, the truth isn’t written just all over your
face. The truth is written all over your body.
Drops of Sweat, a Nervous Blink, and Other “Tells”
Tournament poker is no longer a game of cards, but a game of interpretation,
deception, and self-control. In an interview, Happy says that memorizing and
recognizing your opponent’s nuances can be more decisive than luck or skill.
Imperceptible gestures can reveal a million dollars’ worth of information.
Players call these gestures “tells.” With a tell, a player unintentionally exposes
his thoughts and intentions to the rest of the table. The ability to hide one’s tells

—and conversely, to read the other players’ tells—offers a distinct advantage.
At the amateur level, tells are simpler. Feet and legs are the biggest moving
parts of your body, so skittish tapping is a dead giveaway. So is looking at a hand
of cards and smiling, or rearranging cards with quivering fingertips. But at the
professional level, tells would be almost impossible for you or me to read.
Happy spent his career learning how to read these tells. “If you know what
the other player is going to do, it’s easier to defend against it.” Like others
competing at his level, Happy might prepare for a major tournament by spending
hours reviewing tapes of his competitors’ previous games in order to instantly
translate their tells during live competition.
Information Is the Opposite of Mystique
If you were playing poker against Happy (not something I recommend, by
the way), what gestures might tell Happy something about your cards? You
might take a sliver of a moment too long to decide on your bet, or toss your
chips in the middle too quickly. Glance around the table, or talk more quickly
than usual, or breathe a tad more quickly, and he’ll know something’s up. If your
cheeks flush or the veins on your neck and arms become more prominent,
you’ve blown your poker face.
At the same time players read one another’s tells, they’re also working hard
to hide their own. Happy practices control over every possible variable, every
nuance of technique. He even practices how he throws chips into the pile. Still,
cool-handed experts are human, and give away tells. To compensate, some
players wear hoodies to take away arm and neck tells, sunglasses and hats to
hide their eye and face tells, and headphones to mask voice tells. In the absence
of any clues, Happy says, it’s like “playing against a computer.”
Once, Happy played against a master tell reader. As this player watched him,
Happy glanced twice at his cards. To avoid this becoming a tell, Happy began to
glance twice at his cards with each hand. This sort of manipulation is called a
“reverse tell”—purposely distracting from “real” tells. With championships on
the line, players sometimes go even a step further, because tells get smaller as
rank gets higher. “In poker, if you give away even the slightest bit of
information, you’re dead,” says Happy.
A younger, aggressive professional player prepared for a tournament by
faking tells in a most unusual way. Players tend to bet more recklessly against a
senior player, so he dressed up as a seventy-year-old man, complete with full
makeup. Opponents couldn’t anticipate his playing style. He won the game.

Reading “Tells” Outside the Poker Tournament
Poker players are fascinated by one another, obsessed even, in the quest for
clues. Since they can’t look at one another’s cards, they have to hunt for any
available information. At the same time, they’re obsessed with hiding
information about themselves.
Away from the poker table, we operate the same way. We selectively reveal
our strengths and weaknesses to those around us, and choose which secrets to
share. At the same time, we search for tells—pieces of information to answer our
questions and predict others’ behavior.
In the grips of mystique, we behave much like poker players. A jealous wife
might count and recount the number of her husband’s Viagra pills in the
medicine cabinet, in order to find out if he’s having an affair. A tech company
might regularly scour public records on patent files submitted for information
about a well-funded startup, in an attempt to predict its innovations.
Withholding information, as we know, is vital to mystique. So in these
examples, the husband and the startup company would be wise to keep tight
controls on the “tells” they share. Learning from Happy, they would never reveal
their methods, even after the game is over. They’d act unpredictably, to keep
others off kilter. If their system started becoming apparent, they’d change it.
Raise the Reward
Poker teaches us another lesson on mystique. The more valued the prize, the
more others will vie for the information required to win it. With only ten bucks
on the line, players might not focus intently. But even minuscule blinks become
fascinating when the prize climbs to one hundred grand. Once your message
captures a high level of interest, you can withhold more information, thereby
provoking further mystique. The higher the stakes, the more all-consuming the
participation.
In addition to withholding certain information, we can also build mystique
around a message by gradually introducing new information and meaning,
adding layers of mythology.
Build Mythology
“Mythology” is the collection of stories, traditions, and beliefs belonging to a
particular group or event. It can be strategically fostered, or it might just

naturally build over time.
Remember Leonard Nimoy’s show In Search of…? Episodes explored
mysteries such as the Loch Ness monster, black holes, ESP, and telekinesis. If
these mysteries were brands, they’d have very successful case studies. These
messages have successfully surrounded themselves with a broad collection of
meaning: sightings, reports, contradictory information, and, of course, lots of
questions.
Pop Rocks, Bull Testicles, and the Mysterious 33
Brands intentionally build mythology the same way. Rolling Rock has the
“33” on the bottle (supposedly for the year Prohibition was repealed). Dr
Pepper’s original bottle featured a 10–2–4 (supposedly for the three main pick-
me-up times of day). Other brands build mythology into their marketed history,
such as Bartles & Jaymes, who built a campaign around the idea that wine
coolers were dreamed up by two old guys on a porch.
Other brands, intentionally or not, cultivate mystique:* Vox vodka
reportedly won’t give a hangover, and Zima can’t be detected in a Breathalyzer
test. Pop Rocks are lethal if mixed with Coke. Green M&M’s are an aphrodisiac.
And Red Bull (the other half of the Jägerbomb) lists “taurine” as an ingredient,
which is reportedly made with either bull urine or bull testicles, depending on
which urban myth you believe.
Mystique offers a competitive advantage, even for parity products or stale
companies, because mystique doesn’t require a complete reinvention.
Colonel Sanders, as you might recall from the advertising, uses “eleven
secret herbs and spices” in KFC chicken. These spices are mixed separately, in
two different factories, to minimize the number of people who know the whole
recipe. Then the company combines all eleven ingredients at a third location.
Maybe KFC’s recipe is more special than what you can buy at your local
grocery store, maybe not. But mystique seems to help people think so. From a
brand perspective, it’s hard to know which is more valuable: the recipe, or the
secret.
Stories, Not Facts
Stories are more powerful messages than facts. They allow others to
participate, and draw their own conclusions. Over time, a group’s “tribal
knowledge” turns into mythology, creating an unspoken shorthand for bigger

events and stories.
Religions use stories rather than facts to build mystique, as do shows such as
J. J. Abrams’s Lost, and even Barack Obama’s candidacy. Facts alone can help
with other triggers, such as power and trust, but not this one. If you want to build
mythology within your company, rather than circulating a PowerPoint of data,
cultivate legend and lore. As we now know, information kills mystique.
A Very Secret Secret
Coca-Cola’s secret ingredient, the cryptically dubbed “Merchandise 7X,” has
remained a secret since the soda’s invention in 1886. The company has kept its
prized list of ingredients in a vault inside the Trust Company’s bank since 1925.
This much is known. From there, it’s difficult to tell fact from fiction,
because Coca-Cola itself builds specialness around its drink by feeding
mythology to reporters and consumers.
One urban myth states that only two Coca-Cola executives know Coke’s
formula; however, they each know only half. The truth, apparently, is a bit
different but no less mythologically lavish. Coca-Cola shrewdly builds
mythology in conversation and the media, boosting our perception of the drink’s
value and cachet.* Executives who know the recipe cannot travel in the same
airplane, because in case of a crash, the recipe would be lost forever.
Coca-Cola, Now Betty Ford Approved
More mythological bang for your buck: Here are two bits of Coca-Cola
mythology not actively circulated by the company.
The Coke recipe, which originally included cocaine, became cocaine-free in
the 1920s. However, the drink is still made with coca leaf, and one of the main
Coca-Cola processing plants must still remove the cocaine (in a process aptly
named “decocainization”). Doing so requires an official Drug Enforcement
Agency permit, and only the Stepan Company in New Jersey has this DEA
permit.
The cocaine-free leaves are sent to the Coca-Cola Company. In a package
ostensibly labeled “coke from Coke,” the leaves’ active ingredient is sold for
medicinal purposes to Mallinckrodt, a pharmaceutical company. Ironically,
Mallinckrodt is one of the world’s largest supplier of anti-addiction medications.
Another juicy bit. When Cola-Cola employees were busted for trying to sell
the secret formula to Pepsi for $1.5 million, Coke’s CEO said that the breach

“underscores the responsibility we each have to be vigilant in protecting our
trade secrets. Information is the lifeblood of the company.” But guess who
turned the Coke employees in to the feds? Pepsi.
Secret formulas can turn an otherwise mundane recipe of any sort into a
source of fascination. If mystique is the lifeblood of sugar water, consider what it
might accomplish for your company.
Limit Access
Successfully mysterious people and groups limit access. They maintain
control by making people feel special to be “on the inside.”
When people feel that they’re part of the select few, they’re more committed.
And they make all those people on the outside want to get inside to see what all
the fuss is about, building mystique envy. Even after they’ve been allowed past
the velvet rope, it should still be a long and interesting walk to the inner
sanctum, so their anticipation builds for another opportunity to connect.
The Kitchen Inside the Kitchen
In LA, a city where very little remains hidden, one restaurant thrives on
mystique. The name of the restaurant is Crustacean, and it’s famous for its garlic
crab dish. I would tell you how the garlic crab dish is made, but like every other
devotee of the signature dish, I have no idea. The dish is made inside the “Secret
Kitchen,” a kitchen that’s built inside the restaurant’s main kitchen, where only
the founding family’s relatives are permitted. In between star spotting and deal
making, you know what diners are talking about? The one thing they can’t have.
Access.
Maybe Crustacean can teach us a thing or two in our own lives. Continually
make your audience, whether your consumers, or employer, or significant other,
eager to learn more. With your romantic partner, who knows…perhaps install a
bedroom inside the bedroom?
Rarity of Confidentiality
These days, mystique has, alas, become rare. Confidentiality is all but
extinct, because we have too much access. We’re living in a time of kiss-and-tell
and tell-alls. A time when starlets race the tabloids to announce their own
exposé. When companies confess to problems before the bloggers expose them.

When Larry Flynt offers a $1 million bounty for any proof of a sexual encounter
with a high-ranking government official. And then there’s YouTube, the ultimate
mystique killer. Yet this dearth of privacy makes genuine mystique—when we
can find it—all the more fascinating.
Mystique Buzzkill
Someone ruining the big surprise ending to The Crying Game or The Sixth
Sense before you’ve actually seen the movie: That’s a mystique buzzkill. If
mystique is your main trigger, remember, your mystique ends when the chase
ends. Once lost, mystique cannot be regained. It must be impeccably maintained,
without ever fulfilling the desire for more information, or else the spell will be
shattered forever. If Sophia Loren declined on-camera nude scenes, so should we
all.
Know when to end your message. And on that note, we’ll end here.
 
ON TO ALARM, THE threat of negative consequences. We’ll learn about
positive effects of alarm: why deadlines make us more productive, and why
demands push us to achieve more. We’ll also learn the less pleasant side to
alarm, such as when your computer freezes (and you haven’t backed up the hard
drive recently).

Alarm
Why We Take Action at the Threat of Negative
Consequences
In the photo, it looks as though someone turned the car inside-out.
Disemboweled passenger seats spill onto the ground, a smashed windshield flails
from the dashboard, the headlights grimace. The car’s frame, frozen in time,
seems to writhe on the ground around the lamppost.
There’s a reason for the expression, “I couldn’t look away…it was like a car
accident.” Macabre photos are as fascinating as they are unpleasant.
Organizations such as MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving) frequently use
explicit photos in their advertising, shocking us into the reality of hitting a
lamppost at eighty miles per hour. Many drivers feel so repelled by these graphic
consequences that they either call a cab or stick to Diet Coke. Many drivers, that
is, but not all. Teenage drivers aren’t as alarmed by the graphic threat of drunk
driving, thanks to an adolescent sense of immortality.
This presents a peculiar problem for drunk driving prevention. How can
teens be convinced not to drive drunk if death doesn’t top their list of concerns?
What could possibly be more alarming than being inside a car turned wrong-
side-out?
Luke Sullivan, a legendary advertising writer, solved the problem. Luke
knew that teens don’t fear death in the same way as adults. He also figured out
what does create alarm among these drivers: losing their license. Armed with
that fact, he threatened teens with the ultimate dire consequence.
In Luke’s ad, we see a picture of a teenage guy on the way to prom, with his
corsage-wearing date at his side. The headline reads: “If the thought of losing
your life doesn’t keep you from drinking and driving, imagine losing your
license.” In the photo, the boy is being chauffeured to prom…by Mommy.

What Is Alarm?
 
The sight of blood. An unexpected phone call in the middle of the night.
Shooting chest pains. Losing sight of your child in a crowd. A guy in a striped
sweater named Freddy Krueger running at you with a hand made of five knives.
Infrequent though they may be, these situations rev up our internal crisis center.
We’re hit with a blast of adrenaline, motivated to fight-or-flight. Now. Now!
Physiologically, people are programmed to focus and act. Under the
influence of alarm, people respond in one of two ways: attempt to get rid of the
danger, or panic and flee the perceived danger. Fight or flight. In either case,
they often ignore rational thought, acting instead under far more instinctive
motives.
Our bodies involuntarily respond to alarm in specific ways, such as
increased heart rate, decreased motor skills, and the perceptual narrowing of
tunnel vision. It all translates to simple physical responses: that thin trickle of
sweat sliding down your temple as you sit for your performance review, or the
kaboom-kaboom in your chest when the HR department calls and asks if you’ve
“got a minute.” Something’s about to happen, and the situation demands focus.
These instinctive reactions started before the modern workplace, before we
were even human. At the beginning of our evolutionary journey, in the swamps
of Pangaea, alarm was our most important trigger for survival.*
Eat Dinner, or Be Dinner
Join me for a walk down memory lane (and as we walk, let’s envision our
knuckles scraping along the ground, since this is a few million years ago).
Suddenly, you and I spot a saber-toothed tiger staring at us, its fangs dripping
with anticipation. “Hmm, this could go badly,” you grunt to me. And right you
are. We have approximately 0.03 second to decide whether to stand our ground,
or hightail it outta there. Fight, or flight. Eat dinner, or be dinner.
We experience this same involuntary response today. Even when there’s no
immediate mortal danger, the alarm trigger sets bells ringing and survival juices
pumping.
Another scenario. Let’s say we’re having dinner together, you and I, at a
sushi restaurant. You bite into a nice, big piece of avocado…only to realize with
wide-eyed horror that the green lump you just downed is actually not avocado,

but wasabi, the scorching green Japanese horseradish. You have approximately
0.03 second to decide whether to go through with swallowing the huge lump of
wasabi, or deposit it into the nearest napkin. Fight, or flight. Not exactly pleasant
choices. So why would anyone actively pursue risky activities?
Roller Coasters and Roulette Wheels
We work hard to eliminate mortal dangers in our environment. We sterilize,
we vaccinate, we declaw, we bubble-wrap. Given this, how, exactly, can we
explain the popularity of risk-chasing pastimes such as skydiving, or running
with the bulls? It all comes down to the adrenaline rush. A few generations ago,
humans experienced danger at every turn. Now we miss the rush, according to
scientists, and some of us even crave it. Without the daily prospect of death, we
artificially generate adrenaline by tempting fate. For instance, that little rush of
running a yellow light? It’s two triggers at work, vice and alarm. A double-dose
thrill of vehicular disobedience. Naughty you.
Not only do many people seek alarm, but most people respond to it
positively when it is applied with constructive goals. How? There are five pillars
for instilling alarm: Define consequences, create deadlines, or increase perceived
danger. Along the way, we’ll also want to focus—not on the risks most likely—
but on the ones most feared. And finally, we’ll need to use distress to steer
positive action.
By more clearly defining consequences associated with your message, you
can more specifically shape behavior around them.
Define Consequences
The alarm trigger has a unique ability to compel people to do things they
otherwise don’t care to do, in order to avoid consequences. Tax forms are not
considered widely fascinating. However, if you haven’t completed them, they
become positively riveting on April 14. How does the IRS convince you to
willingly hand over a percentage of your income? It clearly defines the
consequences.
Consequences usually follow a similar formula: “If you don’t do this, then
that will happen.” For instance, “If you don’t pay your taxes, you go to prison.”
Another example: Kids aren’t always so fond of cauliflower or Brussels sprouts.
Many parents (including me) persuade kids to eat veggies with this classic

alarm-based warning: “If you don’t finish your vegetables, you can’t have
dessert.”
You experience this every day. If you don’t stop hitting the snooze alarm,
you’ll be late for work. If you don’t train for that marathon, you’ll fizzle halfway
through. If you paint your house chartreuse, your neighborhood association will
get cranky. And so on. Deadlines and demands prompt us to act.
The more clearly a message points to consequences, and the greater those
consequences, the more urgently people focus on the message. During a fire
drill, we might be mildly attentive or bored. Sure, we have to act, but it’s not
mortal danger. At the opposite end of the spectrum, if someone shouts, “Fire!” in
a crowded theater, we’ll use whatever means possible to flee the threat.
To increase the likelihood of action around your consequences, strengthen
your argument with a deadline. Whether gentle or rigorous, deadlines heighten
immediacy.
Create Deadlines
Alarm is such a universal and involuntary trigger that people manipulate it
for a variety of different uses: leadership, politics, fund-raising, and parenting.
(And marketing, of course.) As we saw with the IRS tax forms, deadlines can
effectively persuade people to accomplish unpleasant tasks. The same principle
applies in motivating many types of behavior toward goals. Through deadlines,
leaders can positively motivate large groups of people, especially when used in
combination with triggers such as trust, power, and prestige.
When people are getting in shape, personal trainers help them stay focused
on a specific weight or fitness goal. Year-end sales quotas can help sales reps
stay on track. Clearly defined agreements can sustain progress, even when things
get tough. Deadlines also help sell ShamWows, Slap Chops, and Egg Genies to
insomniacs.
Ginsu Knives and Exclamation Points
Maybe you’ve had this happen. It’s late at night, you can’t sleep, and you
find yourself watching an infomercial or maybe QVC. The spokesperson holds a
snazzy new Snuggie design, or a nifty Hang-o-Matic closet organizer. She
announces that she has just one hundred Hang-o-Matics remaining at this price,
so whatever you do, call now.
Now, let me remind you, it’s late, and you’re awake rather than asleep,

perhaps eating a bowl of sugary cereal in bed. Whatever. The point is, you don’t
need a Hang-o-Matic closet organizer, and only a few minutes ago found out
what one is, but because they’re apparently about to all be gone, forever, never
to be available ever again, you, like millions of people, might find yourself
pausing to say, “Well, quick, let’s think…” Alarm provides just enough incentive
to push a decision across the line.
We generally don’t like to lose potential options. When deadlines are
applied, we’re forced to make a decision. Indecision is a decision. eBay
mastered this technique, whipping bidders into a frenzy during the final
countdown phase of a hot auction. If you don’t bid, you might lose out on that
must-have Hello Kitty backpack.
Perhaps you’ve never succumbed to a late-night infomercial urge, but
you’ve probably noticed the urgency in those ads for one-day department store
sales (“Sale ends at midnight!”), for Ginsu knives (“Call now and we’ll throw in
the free wind chimes!”), or for monster truck rallies (“Sunday! Sunday!
Sunday!”). These ads use a frenzy of exclamation points to whip us into a panic.
These messages are intended not only to communicate a product, but also to
communicate scarcity, limited time availability, and consequences.
Alarm-based marketing logic often goes something like this: There is a
limited quantity (scarcity). Unless you act now (urgency), you’ll lose your
opportunity (consequence). When crafting a message for an audience who is
stuck in apathy or indecision, deadlines and consequences overcome inertia to
create action.
What if the person who’s stuck in apathy is you? If you need to direct a
specific action, deadlines create focus. If you’re a procrastinator, alarm can be
your best friend.
At What Point Does a Procrastinator Stop Procrastinating?
Ever have trouble focusing on a task, delaying it again and again until finally
the deadline is perilously close, and you suddenly seem to magically snap into
focus? As a procrastinator, you have alarm to thank for your sudden ability to
accomplish the task. Alarm, we now know, sparks a series of involuntary
physical responses, one of which is adrenal focus. When a deadline is
comfortably far away, procrastinators don’t feel enough alarm to merit attention.
As the deadline looms, the consequences of missing the deadline become more
imminent. Studies show that’s the point at which alarm reaches a critical mass,
and the task becomes fascinating in order to avoid the consequences.

Do customers procrastinate about buying your product? The greater the
resistance to a task (e.g., paying taxes), the greater the consequences must be in
order to compel us to do it (e.g., prison shower stalls). For a customer waffling
about a decision, a message with alarm can tip him over to your side. Define
consequences, and ratchet them up for failure to act—but stop before they
become paralyzed.
Deer in Headlights
Increasing perceived danger increases fascination. However, there’s a law of
diminishing returns at play. If alarm gets dialed up to the point of panic, the
benefits diminish. Just as the body sweats and trembles in the presence of alarm,
at a certain point, the brain shuts down and we lose the ability to problem solve.
Neuroscience shows that after the fear system of the brain kicks into overdrive,
decision making stops. We stop thinking creatively, and start reacting purely out
of fear. If you’re a manager, apply threats constructively.
Whether real or perceived, alarm flings people into high alert, filling them
with a sense of readiness, danger, or even terror. In the face of too much
pressure, with consequences that are too great, people can’t perform. They
simply shut down, thrust into a frozen deer-in-headlights confusion. A manager’s
message is no longer fascinating if her group is unable to respond.
Increase Perceived Danger
Not many candies use alarm to fascinate. Most breath mints, for instance,
position themselves as politely “refreshing.” Altoids is different. It’s “curiously
strong,” and sold in a tin box. (What? Mints in a tin box? Whoa, stand back.)
The advertising revolves around mints so strong they’re borderline dangerous,
with headlines such as “Awakens like a horsewhip on the backflesh.” Good
morning, indeed.
Earlier, we saw that the higher the consequence, and the more immediate the
danger, the greater the action. Infomercials and IRS tax forms might be boring
and contrived; however, they succeed in driving desired behavior such as
ordering Ronco products or filling out forms.
It’s a simple equation: Alarm threatens. We act. Of all the seven triggers, this
one is the most visceral, and never is it more visceral than when applied to the
human body itself.

The Suicide That Wasn’t
The Amtrak Acela high-speed commuter train is dark steely gray with blue
vinyl seats. It arrives with astonishing noise and speed, decelerating from its
seventy-eight-mile-per-hour blur only upon reaching the platform. It was in front
of this train, on the night of October 27, 2006, that Jay Gnospelius chose to
jump. He selected this particular train for its snub-nosed design, which seemed
to offer the highest likelihood of instant death. Because most of all, in his suicide
attempt, Jay Gnospelius wanted to avoid being mutilated.
Ten days later, Jay awoke in Yale New Haven Hospital’s Intensive Care
Unit. His family lawyers had already begun scouring the length of tracks and
surrounding area for a negligence lawsuit against Amtrak and the station. This
stopped once Jay revealed to his wife that he chose to jump, the result of a
psychotic break. The answers lay not at the tracks of the Amtrak station, but
within Jay’s psyche. With this, Jay began the long process of reconciling the fact
that he had not, in fact, avoided mutilation.
Eighteen months later, Jay introduced himself to me via e-mail to discuss
marketing around his foundation. The first thing I notice is his sense of humor.
Jay is funny. Laugh-out-loud funny. I ask Jay if he was always as funny as he is
now, and he responds dryly, “A train can’t knock funny into you, and it can’t
knock funny out of you.” He is devastatingly blunt, and there is nothing about
Jay’s life—no question, no stigma, no skewering reality—that’s off limits in his
conversation. Sometimes this brand of shock value goes beyond shocking. His
website proclaims, “When life takes your limbs, make limbonade.” He wasn’t
committing suicide, he was “knocking boots with a train.” And he describes the
whole event as “A Night to Dismember.” (He’s using the vice trigger in his
wicked humor, and more than a little of the power trigger for control.) Jay’s
presence brings up certain questions rooted in the alarm trigger, questions that
part of you might prefer to leave unasked. “How did it happen?” “Why did he do
it?” And perhaps most alarming of all, “What if that were me?”
After researching and interviewing Jay for several months, I invited him to
join me at a conference where I was speaking, in New York City. There, in the
hotel lobby, as the escalator glided to meet him, I first caught sight of his face.
Then I watched as his body came into full view gradually, dramatically.
Suddenly my brain goes haywire. My God, his arm—where is his arm? And his
leg?
I know that Jay has no right arm and left leg. Of course. And Jay is well
aware of the alarm his presence sets off in other people. He describes my
reaction as a natural one: Our minds expect four limbs, and when that

expectation is violated, on some level, it’s threatening. The experience is a visual
representation of consequences, like those MADD car wreck photos. Except it’s
not a photo. And Jay knows this. He expects it. And on some level, he relishes it.
Over the past two years, Jay has become remarkably skilled at wielding
alarm. Pushing buttons left and right, Jay uses alarm to snap attention in his
direction, creating compulsively must-watch scenarios. You can’t ignore him if
you tried, because if you do, he’ll just increase the intensity until you pay
attention. Jay once compared the experience of people meeting him to the
Romans in the Colosseum, “like watching a prisoner thrown to the lions.”
(However, considering how cunningly Jay uses the alarm trigger, I’m not sure
whether Jay is the prisoner or the lion.) Despite his daredevil attitude,
underneath, Jay’s body is a metaphor for himself: strong and challenging with a
tough exterior, yet also vulnerable and flawed. For all his titanium bionics, Jay is
very human.
Superficially, Jay’s story and physical differences make him a fascinating
guy. But what keeps him fascinating are the ways in which he strategically
applies alarm to his goals. As a motivational speaker and advocate for the
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, he delivers a message that is hard
to ignore, or forget. He channels our alarm into action. Alarm holds our own
insecurities up to our faces, forcing us to confront squeamish realities about our
own mortality. So does Jay.
Every message has the potential to activate alarm. Sometimes this alarm is
buried deep inside, but in Jay’s case, it’s immediately apparent. If we learn from
Jay’s approach, rather than shielding people from their own natural fear, we
should heighten it. Rather than overcoming our so-called flaws, we should push
them into service for our higher purpose.
Focus Not on the Crisis Most Likely, but on the One
Most Feared
By identifying an audience’s hot buttons, a message can target which alarm
creates enough fascination to change behavior. Often, the most frightful risks are
highly implausible, and might not be immediately obvious. To convince teens
not to drive drunk, for example, writer Luke Sullivan didn’t use graphic
implications of car accidents; he used social implications of losing one’s driver’s
license. Generating a sense of urgency often has less to do with rational threats,
and more with understanding human behavior.
Many people have trouble staying fascinated by their diet and workout

routine. Long-term health benefits, such as greater longevity and lower heart
disease, often fail to motivate people to the gym as quickly as the prospect of an
unpleasant unveiling at bathing suit season. In fact, when it comes to staying fit,
the fear of looking unattractive is more motivating than the hope of a slim
physique.
Similarly, the hamburger you eat for dinner will be far more likely to kill you
with heart disease than mad cow disease. Avian flu has killed zero Americans,
but fear of avian flu infected the media throughout 2005. Chain saws injure
36,000 Americans each year, while clothing injures 112,000 (oops, careful with
that zipper). It wouldn’t make sense to focus on cold facts in this situation, when
people are motivated more by perceptions.
Know the “Got Milk” campaign? Of course you do. It’s famous for hitting
on a genius truth of alarm: We’re more fearful of running out of milk while
eating chocolate chip cookies than we are fearful of weak bones. The threat of
crippling osteoporosis might compel us to drink more milk, but the threat of
running out of milk while eating chocolate chip cookies sends us dashing to the
convenience store.
Like many aspects of fascination, it’s illogical. Alarm responses don’t
always make sense. Think back to the comparison of a fire drill versus a fire in a
theater. In the actual fire, people will go to any lengths to escape the source of
alarm. This does make sense, if escaping the theater is a matter of life or death.
But what about the opposite? Would an audience also begin a stampede on
their way inside a theater? On one bitterly cold December evening, that very
thing happened.
Blood on the Shoes
Outside the Riverfront Coliseum, thousands of fans waited anxiously. Many
had traveled to Cincinnati for the sold-out concert. By 1 P.M., the crowd bulged
for the 8 P.M. show. Patience, and breathing room, were in short supply. Soon
the doors would open, and the audience could stream inside to claim their first-
come-first-served seating.
Then, unexpectedly, the musicians began a sound check. Fans mistook this
music for the start of the actual concert. The crowd of eight thousand
steamrollered forward, irrationally alarmed to miss securing a good seat to watch
the show. Closed glass doors couldn’t hold them back. A door was shattered, and
the crowd crushed one another past shards.
General admission tickets were known as “animal-style” seating. As this

herd shoved forward to find seats, no one seemed to notice the blood on the
bottoms of their shoes. But by the time the concert began, eleven people had
been trampled to death, owing to the threat of negative consequences: missing a
good seat to watch the Who in concert on December 3, 1979.
Like the other six triggers, alarm doesn’t always make sense. But it does
compel people to act, and act quickly. For positive action, point this action
toward desired behavior.
Use Distress to Steer Positive Action
Often, people mistakenly think of alarm as inherently negative. Not so. Like
all triggers, this one isn’t inherently “good” or “bad.” It often has very positive
results, as we’ll see. Managed correctly, creating a sense of crisis can develop
immediate motivation, unite groups, and cost-effectively get large numbers of
people involved. The green movement, for instance, took off when a critical
mass of people became alarmed about the future of the environment. Until
people became fascinated through alarm, they were perfectly happy to toss paper
and glass in the same bin.
It’s easy to understand why people become fascinated by alarming events
such as a flood warning, or a lover saying, “We have to talk.” But let’s test this
theory. Could commodities such as salt or sand become alarming? What about
water?
Tap water, straight from the faucet, is even less fascinating than bottled
water. Could tap water possibly become so fascinating that people would
actually pay a dollar for a plain glass of water straight from the faucet?
The Tap Project
If you’re reading this book, odds are you enjoy the privilege of plentiful
drinking water. In restaurants, we can usually have as much free water as we
like. Around the world, however, 990 million people live in a state of crisis,
without access to clean and safe drinking water. To fetch water, in many
developing countries girls and women must walk up to three hours daily. Most
alarming, more than 4,200 children die every day from not having clean drinking
water. UNICEF works to provide lifesaving water to impoverished children.
However, the organization doesn’t receive enough funds to keep these thousands
of children from dying each day without clean water.
Simply asking for donations doesn’t work. At least, it doesn’t work well

enough. How could UNICEF increase alarm, in order to increase contributions?
How could they make clean drinking water fascinating? In 2007, the ad agency
Droga5 invented a solution, named the Tap Project.
What if Every glass of Water You drank quenched Someone Else’s
Thirst?
 
The Tap Project poses this question, asking restaurant patrons to pay for
something they normally take for granted. Diners donate a single dollar for tap
water before a meal. People are able to donate by simply doing something
they’re already doing: going out to eat and drinking water. Better, with each
dollar, UNICEF gives a child clean drinking water for forty days.
What began growing one drop at a time in 2007 has since flooded to include
thousands of restaurants, sponsors, celebrities, and even more volunteers. The
New York Times called it “The biggest idea of the year,” and the New Yorker said
it “reinvents charity for the 21st Century.”
The Tap Project demonstrates how a subtle shift in an old message can
exponentially increase new results. By making the donations more accessible
(only a dollar, at a location you’ll already be visiting), UNICEF makes lifesaving
water more accessible.
There are many important messages out in the world. Most, almost all, will
go ignored. It doesn’t matter how valid and critical your message is if no one
listens and responds.
We may not always like or enjoy messages that generate alarm. Often we
don’t. However, we do pay attention. Similarly, we may not always like or enjoy
those we respect, but they earn our fascination. In our next trigger, prestige,
we’ll find out why.

Prestige
Why We Fixate on Symbols of Rank and Respect
At one point in history, a single tulip bulb was sold in exchange for four fat
oxen, twelve fat sheep, four tons of butter, a thousand pounds of cheese, a
complete bed, a suit of clothes, a silver cup, and large measures of rye, wheat,
beer, and wine. The year was 1636, at the height of the Dutch hysteria for tulips.
This hysteria became so extravagant, so delusional, so widespread, that modern
economists pinpoint this as the world’s first economic bubble.
Investors traded tulip bulbs in the stock exchanges, with prices depending
not on beauty or perfume, but on scarcity and fashion. At the market’s height, an
investor offered twelve acres of prime land for one prestigious Viceroy bulb.
Other varietals flaunted such cachet that they were given designer names
corresponding to titles of exalted respect, such as “admiral” or “general.”
The rarest tulips had spectacularly vivid petal colors. The most popular were
Violetten, featuring purple or lilac infused on a white background, and Rosen,
with red or pink against white. With designs such as flamboyant lines or flames
against signature colors, these blossoms were more difficult to cultivate, but
scarcity increased their price.
Today, as then, seeds grown from a flowering tulip bulb take between seven
and twelve years to propagate. Cultivating the most desirable varieties of tulips
requires years of investment, and the most valuable varieties grow the most
slowly. Even after so many years of labor, these precious tulips bloom only in
April and May for about a week. Therefore, the Dutch purchased actual tulip
flowers for only two or three months out of the year. However, the real craze
began in the after-season. Owing to the frenzied demand, investors created a
futures market in which traders signed purchase notaries to create a year-round
market.

The tulip craze began to spread in a manner not unlike the tech bubble of
2000, or the real estate bubble of 2006. The French got wind of the outrageous
profits, and joined in the speculation. Prices soared to such extraordinary heights
that an entire network of values flipped on its head. So ferociously had the
prestige trigger gripped the community of tulip buyers that they became
obsessed with acquisition and value, competing with everyone else to acquire a
flower worth more than the next investor’s. Some investors reportedly paid
upward of six times an annual salary, and in some cases more than the cost of a
house, for a single flower bulb. A single flower could be worth more than the
house in front of which it was planted.
The flowers themselves had no utility, of course. They couldn’t be eaten,
they had no medicinal use. Investors couldn’t ride one to market, or pass it down
as an heirloom. They couldn’t even be carried in a wallet. Tulips were sold on
the promise of prestige.
Then, as now, the most prestigious aspect of an asset could be the “idea” of
it, and in this case, the “idea” of tulips was sold with the creation of the futures
market. Feverish investors began selling off possessions and liquidating
retirement accounts in order to buy…yep…tulips.
Yet what goes up must come down. In the case of tulip hysteria, the bust was
fast and hard. As soon as the Dutch changed trading laws, allowing buyers to
back out of tulip contracts for a small fee, the resulting market anxiety led to
panic selling. Tulips may have been traded on an idea, but the collapse left many
in real financial ruin.
Today, some historians debate to what degree tulip hysteria impacted the
Dutch economy. Yet the importance of the story doesn’t lie in being the first
bubble of its kind, but in the fact that the principles surrounding value
fluctuations and market dynamics often stem from fascination with prestige.
Your car loses value when you drive it off the lot, your DVD player is
obsolete with the introduction of the next technology, and this season’s must-
haves become next season’s has-beens. But that never stops the prestige trigger
from gripping consumers and investors. It’s in our nature to prove worth and
value. People today are still drawn to objects and endeavors that represent social
standing, and probably always will be. We’ll be fascinated by prestige as long as
we remain hardwired to compare ourselves to those around us.
What Is Prestige?
 

Fancy logos, designer brands, and famous European hotels might come to
mind. But that’s merely the obvious side of prestige. This trigger reveals a
group’s values and beliefs by identifying the pecking order among its members.
Prestige rates people and objects relative to one another.
This trigger applies to any form of social position that demonstrates one
member’s position relative to others. By examining the basis upon which a group
evaluates prestige, we can get a sense of that group’s values and beliefs. Is the
pecking order based upon education? Beauty? Social achievements? Specialty in
a professional area? Number of appearances on Letterman? The ability to score
tickets to a sold-out Miley Cyrus concert? Examining how a culture or company
stacks up its members reveals its priorities.
Prestigious people can evoke admiration, but more often, competition and
envy. Among corporate circles, fascination might be triggered by a framed
Princeton diploma or an invitation to speak at the TED conference. In a second-
grade classroom, the same status might mean winning a round of Spore video
game. Both represent achievement, and carry implied “value” to the group.
As we saw with tulip hysteria, when the prestige trigger gains momentum, it
creates irrational behavior. People go to great lengths to attain the object of their
fascination. How can you make people fascinated to attain you? No matter what
your personality or product, prestige can increase your perceived value. There
are four ways: Develop emblems, set new standards, limit availability, and earn
it. To begin, let’s find out how emblems work.
Develop Emblems
Long before Dior and Gucci, societies were fascinated by prestige. In ancient
times, coveted badges included coats of arms, specific colors, mode of wearing
hair, wreaths, shoes, lineage, burial practices, certain seats, and insignia of
office. In certain African tribes, where bravery and valor are more prestigious
than commercial assets, scars are status symbols. In Western societies, a fat, pale
body indicated wealth and success because only outdoor manual laborers were
tanned and thin; today, a tanned, thin body is a status symbol more associated
with a spinning class than spinning a combine harvester.
Just as they paid absurd prices for tulips 375 years ago, today people pay
absurd prices for logos. Prestige emblems can cost a few billion dollars (a
private island on The Palms), or a few cents (a nifty new stamp), but usually
have little or no intrinsic value. Regardless of price tag or economy, these
principles remain the same. Emblems themselves will change over time, but the

fascination with emblems will not.
Emblems fulfill a deep, instinctive need because they say something about
us. Abraham Maslow calls this “esteem”: the need to feel important, respected,
and recognized as an achiever. We satisfy this need by communicating our value
to the world around us. A Mercedes Maybach, perhaps? Sure, yeah, it’s
expensive, but the price tag also comes with intangible extras like getting to
consult with designers, craftsmen, and engineers. As a brand, the car is less of a
“car,” and more a statement of membership in an elite.
What to do if everyone in your social circle already has a Maybach? How,
then, can a mogul make a statement? During the Japanese real estate boom an
industrialist named Ryoei Saito showed just how creative the monied can get.
Twice he paid world record prices for artwork, for a Van Gogh and a Renoir, and
then he announced he planned to be buried with his paintings.*
Blue Bake-Off Ribbons and Pink Mary Kay
Cadillacs
Emblems can be simple or elaborate, expensive or humble, but all share
some degree of unattainability. Emblems incentivize people to stay a step ahead
of everyone else. Bake-off champions show off blue ribbons. Mary Kay’s top
employees drive pink Cadillacs. Children collect autographs from Mickey and
Minnie at Disney. Girl Scouts wear merit badges on uniforms. Proud fathers of
newborns have hospital bands. Alcoholics Anonymous members mark sobriety
with coins. Scholars frame Phi Beta Kappa keys.
By developing symbols of value, groups can strengthen participation and
commitment. People eagerly work to acquire and show off emblems. So it only
makes sense that companies should develop emblems of value.
Prestigious groups monitor access to remain sought-after, rare, and valuable.
Insider brands usually control how many people get access to the brand;
otherwise, oversaturation cheapens status and destroys value. Otherwise,
subculture brands head directly to the strip mall. In 2004, the Ed Hardy tattoo-
inspired brand launched onto the edgy glam-rock scene with its iconic skulls,
tigers, and red rose designs, often combined with a “Love kills slowly” banner of
hand-etched type. For this trend, once coveted by insiders, love doesn’t kill
slowly; it needs only five years. By 2009, line extension included (get ready): Ed
Hardy–branded drinking water, candy, vodka and wine, coffee beans, disposable
dinnerware, Koozies, Band-Aids, air fresheners, hand sanitizers, Smart Cars,
hookahs, as well as a skull-adorned collection of diapers, sippy cups, and

pacifiers.* As exposure goes up, so do profits, but mystique among the original
insider fans drops.
To establish fresh prestige, consider the existing standards—and how to set a
new one.
Set a New Standard
Setting a new standard doesn’t just change perceptions of a company; it
shifts its entire category. Once set apart, a prestigious brand will have no
alternatives, merely inferior substitutes.
When Grey Goose vodka was introduced, it threw down the ultraluxury
vodka gauntlet. The price tag, literally double the cost of other vodkas on the
shelf, was unthinkably high. Yet more incredibly, the price was established
before the bottle was designed, before the distillery was named, and even before
the vodka recipe itself was invented.
That might seem like putting the “cart before the goose,” but not only did
Grey Goose define a new “ultrapremium” vodka category, but within eight years,
it closed the largest ever single brand sale when Bacardi bought the spirit for $2
billion. Instead of dogfighting with others to gain prestige, it simply forced an
entire category to realign.
What about a brand? What if it falls behind its peer group? Once lost,
prestige is difficult to reclaim. But as we’ll see, not impossible.
What Happens When the World’s Most Dazzling Diamonds Lose Their
Sparkle?
 
No royalty, dynasty, or government empire can surpass the House of Winston
in its legacy of celebrated jewels. The brand’s glorious past includes many of the
most famous diamonds, and diamond wearers, in history. As one fine example,
the grande dame of gemstones, the Hope Diamond, began its dramatic history
with Louis XIV. After peering down from its golden perch atop the crown jewels
of France, it then spent time in the jewel boxes of Marie Antoinette and
Countess du Barry before becoming the possession of Harry Winston. Winston
donated the forty-five carats of dark blue perfection to the Smithsonian, where it
now sits cushioned on display as specimen 2177868.* Diamonds from the
Winston vault have commemorated some of the most renowned romances ever,

from European royalty to Hollywood royalty. It was at Harry Winston that
Richard Burton bought Elizabeth Taylor’s engagement ring, and that Aristotle
Onassis bought Jackie O’s marquise. Marilyn Monroe gushed, “Talk to me,
Harry Winston, talk to me!” in her classic 1953 rendition of “Diamonds Are a
Girl’s Best Friend.” And not without reason. The House of Winston was known
for selecting only the rarest gems, with only 0.01 percent of the world’s reserves
deemed worthy to sell under its name. Yet what makes the Winston brand even
more precious are the stories behind the stones themselves.
Mr. Winston once purchased a 726-carat stone in London, setting off a
heated debate about the safest way to get it back to the States. A league of
bodyguards? Chartered ship? Colossal insurance policy? Harry Winston
wouldn’t say which method he’d picked. Two weeks later, the priceless jewel
arrived at his Fifth Avenue store, sent via standard registered mail, for 64 cents
postage.
Shipping methods weren’t Harry Winston’s only nerve-racking decision. He
cut many of his diamonds himself, often with tens of millions of dollars resting
on a single mallet tap. Winston was dissatisfied with anything but flawlessness.
Upon purchasing the famed 143-carat Star of Sierra Leone, he announced he
would cleave away the ever-so-slightly flawed imperfections, thus greatly
reducing the size of the stone. It was an extraordinarily risky maneuver, one that
unleashed an outcry from diamond connoisseurs before he made the decision.
But Winston picked up his tool, and struck the magnificent gem.
The resulting stone was only a fifth the size—but because it was flawless, it
far surpassed the value of the original.
Later in his career, after negotiating the largest ever individual parcel sale of
diamonds in history, Mr. Winston made one final request at the sale: “How about
a little something to sweeten the deal?” His counterpart wordlessly took a 181-
carat rough from his pocket, and rolled it across the table. The resulting D-
flawless emerald-cut diamond has since been known as “The Deal Sweetener.”
Considering Harry Winston’s focus on detail, it’s not difficult to understand
that a little black box with the initials “HW” on the top was prestigiously
fascinating. Yet after the passing of Mr. Winston himself, the House of Winston
couldn’t rely on the same old cues.
“Old New York” Starts to Seem…Well, Old
The House of Winston’s Fifth Avenue flagship location dripped “old New
York” cachet. Most of the hallowed diamonds were hidden away in a vault until

requested, and patrons had to pass through a security gate to enter. The gray silk
decor was described as “the inside of a coffin.”
Overall, the setting boasted exclusivity and discretion to older shoppers, but
for others, it was fussy and outdated. Putting the nail in the gray-satin-lined
coffin, oversized “diamonds” rapidly became commonplace with the abundance
of cubic zirconias. Five-carat earrings became rather humdrum.
Could the House of Winston reclaim prestige? As part of the Point One
Percent* team charged with reestablishing the brand, we focused on the
experience of prestige itself. Prestige is about rank. Just as Grey Goose
established a new standard, so did the House of Winston need to claim an
uppermost position. How?
While diamonds might be billions of years old, as with every product, their
cultural context changes over time. To survive new competitors and a changing
economy, every brand must adjust its fascination cues to survive. To trigger a
higher level of prestige, we wooed the world’s most legendary portrait
photographer, Richard Avedon, to shoot movie stars such as Anjelica Huston and
Mena Suvari wearing the mighty jewelry.
Next in the process, because I was the writer for the advertising, it was my
turn to capture all this prestige in words. It wasn’t easy. How to express just how
good these diamonds actually are? And in just a few words, no less? A woman
might own a Harry Winston necklace for years and still be lucky to encounter
only ten people who could fully appreciate it.
To understand this experience for myself, I visited the flagship store. There
in the vault, I tried on some of the world’s most iconic pieces of jewelry. A forty-
carat ring once owned by Jackie O. A $10 million necklace worn by an actress as
she accepted her Academy Award. Pieces that are loaned only to A-level stars
and brides in Dubai. Adorned with those weighty gems, I found out that there’s a
thrill in wearing the Earth’s most precious offerings. At that point, the headlines
almost wrote themselves:
 
People will stare.
Make it worth their while.
RSVP your regrets to the ordinary.
Watch the women watching the men watching you.
 
In 1867, Karl Marx had commented in Das Kapital, “If we could succeed, at
a small expenditure of labour, in converting carbon into diamonds, their value

might fall below that of bricks.” Quite fortunately, the House of Winston proved
him wrong, and their diamonds retained prestige. Any product can prove Marx
wrong, and avoid commoditization, as long as it triggers fascination.
What might a nonluxury company learn from a purveyor of fine gemstones?
People inherently compete within their peer group. Every product has the
potential to become a prestige emblem. If that emblem sets a new standard,
people work harder to achieve it. The value of that emblem isn’t about the utility,
so the cost of the item itself often doesn’t matter, but rather, the signal of
achievement it sends to others. As emblems go, a Winston necklace might come
at a dear price; however, many emblems cost little in terms of actual market
value.
Within your company, in the office, the same principle applies. If a manager
can create an environment in which people compare themselves to one another,
they often naturally seek to achieve just slightly more than those around them.
Grey Goose and Harry Winston set new standards. Now we’ll look at
prestige of a different sort: scarcity.
Limit Availability
Someone paid $14.3 million for a license plate.
No, the plate isn’t made of solid gold, and it doesn’t contain plutonium
rocket fuel. It features the number 1. In the oil-rich and car-obsessed culture of
Dubai, license plates are a matter of personal pride. Most plates have five digits.
But the lower the number, the higher the price tag.
Increasing Price to Decrease Accessibility
Luxury brands offer the most blatant example of the desire for exclusivity.
These brands trade on a very simple premise: A higher price tag isn’t a barrier to
purchase, but rather an incentive. Reports the New York Times, “In some cases,
manufacturers adjust prices upward to make sure that their goods hang in good
company, displayed alongside prestigious luxury brands.”
Limiting availability isn’t just confined to the Persian Gulf emirates and
Fred Segal boutiques. In many cities, prestige can be described in five digits: the
zip code.
You probably know 90210. But you might not know 31561, or 11771. These
zip codes have become brand names to those in the know, communicating
volumes of prestige in just five digits. The New York Times and CNN have both

described a growing fascination with zip codes. Realtors report that increasingly,
new residents “shop” for these numeric brands more fervently than the house
itself. In Long Island the post office has received a flood of requests for
neighborhoods to be annexed into more demographically desirable zip codes.
Some residents even petition to change the zip code of their current area to
increase their social standing. “Rather than admit to being status seekers, people
generally claim that they are changing their zip code so that the Fire Department
can locate them more readily in an emergency or to insure that their mail will get
through or to allow their children to share their classmates’ zip code. More often
than not, however, the unspoken reason is upward mobility.”
New York’s billionaire mayor, Mike Bloomberg, referred to his city as a
“high-end product,” a description made more colorful by the Wall Street Journal:
“Gucci on a metropolitan scale.” Apparently, keeping up with the Joneses today
might require moving next door to them.
Living Up to the Hype
Forcing others to wait (whether for an appointment, or a new product
release) can raise prestige. However, limiting availability only works when
people get something worthwhile in exchange. Every detail must justify the
heightened cost.
Exercising Restraint
Limiting availability requires exercising some degree of restraint. In a
culture obsessed with larger portions, mass production, and a store’s cubic
footage, prestigious people and companies know when to decline the super-sized
in favor of a single mouthful of perfection. Quality, not quantity. Repeat after
me: No thank you, Sam Walton.
While a snazzy zip code might certainly impress many people on the return
address of a letter, in many instances, prestige is more about actions than
purchases. Like respect, some of the most desirable status symbols must be
earned.
Earn It
Economies change, and with them, tastes. In a recession, for instance, a
FICO score over 800 can be more highly regarded than a 4,000-square-foot

house. Debt-free liquidity earns more admiration than a bejeweled chihuahua
peeking from a Hermès bag. A full-time job with benefits becomes more
admired than a blinged-out car. The classic black Armani power suit can be
pushed aside in the closet for the understated shirt and slacks.* For many,
frugality is the new fashion.
During a financially stressful environment, people and companies use
prestige to fascinate in new ways. When budgets tighten during a cutback or
recession, the alarm trigger enters the picture and prestige cues can shift
dramatically. Diversifying prestige cues beyond mere name recognition helps
prestige-oriented brands avoid taking a hit when people no longer want overt
displays. Prestige demands meaning in order to justify the fascination.
The Path to Prestige is Slick with Sweat Equity
Few of us will enjoy the advantages of Kennedy lineage or Swiss bank
accounts. But don’t give up yet. Increasingly, prestige lives in our
accomplishments, network, and personal reputation (elements more within our
control than being a royal firstborn). Modern prestige comes from running a
marathon, winning a Rhodes scholarship, or in some cases, even procuring a
limited-edition Prius.
For one form of prestige, people invest a minimum of 39.5 years, with a high
probability of at least as many broken or dislocated fingers and toes. In
exchange, they get a piece of fabric. A black one. Tang See Do, an American-
style version of the Korean martial arts, rarely awards its eighth-level black belt.
As with other levels of black belts, this status has nothing to do with age,
economic status, or social status. In the classroom, a green-belted CEO might
bow to his black-belted assistant.
Like our next trigger, power, the most authentic and lasting fascinations
require you to earn them.

Power
Why We Focus on the People and Things That
Control Us
Olympic athlete Dominique Moceanu was not just any gymnast. She was a
fourteen-year-old member of the U.S. Olympic Gymnastics team, a darling of
the 1996 Atlanta games, achieving the stratospheric heights of gymnastic
success. And hers was not just any Olympic team: It was the beloved
“Magnificent Seven” that won gold for the USA. Moceanu and her team only
added to an already unprecedented track record earned by her coaches, Bela and
Martha Karolyi. The Karolyis also coached Mary Lou Retton, Nadia Comaneci,
and thirteen other world champions.
Yet Moceanu believes her Olympic gold medal cost too much. In July 2008,
Moceanu criticized Bela and Martha Karolyi, and called for Martha’s removal
from Olympic training (Bela had since retired). Moceanu cites “mental and
physical abuse,” including strict demands, lack of compassion, and dietary
restrictions.*
Under the influence of the power trigger, people submit to being controlled.
Most forms of training work this way: A student relinquishes some degree of
power to a teacher, in exchange for greater achievement. But sometimes, great
rewards come at great cost. Where does training stop, and abuse of power begin?
Or as the New York Times headline asks of Moceanu’s charges, “How much is
too much?”
Dominique trained with different coaches to attempt a comeback in 2006.
However, USA Gymnastics rejected her from competing at nationals because
“Moceanu wasn’t physically prepared to compete.”

What Is “Power”?
 
No matter where you rank on the pecking order, no matter your age or
gender, no matter your continent or political view, power fascinates you. It’s a
response as involuntary as it is primal.
As the alphas of the pack, powerful people control our behavior in a myriad
of ways. Wordlessly, they set the rules. Who’s powerful? CEOs and prime
ministers. Black belts and Boy Scout leaders. Terrorists. Oil sheiks, film critics,
and teacher’s pets. Firstborns, matriarchs, and Big Brother. Though their
leadership differs, powerful people share an ability to both make decisions and
influence decisions.
Anything can trigger power, if it controls its environment. Drug cartels use
power. Objects and events can trigger power by controlling their environment:
raging hurricanes, killer whales, and Greek gods of mythology. Even the lowly
red stop sign uses power, by invoking the law.
In his book Superclass, David J. Rothkopf describes why:
Power is, of course, hard to quantify. Wealth is often a source of power.
Position regularly translates into power. Perhaps the most ancient source of
power is grounded in subtler things, like access or ideas. There is no single
or universally accepted metric for power, so a certain amount of subjective
judgment is inevitable. Determining who has it and who does not is made
more difficult because some of the most influential among us commonly
mask their power or use it infrequently.
In positive circumstances, power can motivate others to rise to their best.
Used differently, it can unjustly intimidate or persecute. Gandhi persuaded
differently from Genghis Khan, yet both commanded the multitudes with
political mastery.
The Spectrum of Power
All seven triggers live on a spectrum. In the case of power, it ranges from
delicate suggestion to crushing force. A meter maid uses a slight form of power,
whereas a hijacker on a plane uses the same trigger to its maximum extent.
Under the influence of extreme power, individuals have little choice. Their

behavior is controlled by someone (or something) else. People obey because
they must, as a matter of survival. Classic example: the iron-fisted hand of a
communist regime. You’ll work hard, and you’ll like it!
Yet lest you think power is all hammer and sickle, take a look at this
trigger’s flip side. Power isn’t necessarily over-powering. It can guide gently,
even lovingly. It’s a necessary ingredient in many forms of structure, training,
and motivation to achieve higher results. A parent uses power with an infant by
shaping sleep patterns, feeding times, and language development. A parent might
also use this trigger with a high school student through a weekly allowance or
use of the family car. Either way, the goal is not to defeat the child, but to make
her stronger.
Whether parental or dictatorial, authority figures use power to control us.
This trigger weaves itself throughout our life every day, guiding our behavior.
When our manager sends a seemingly casual text message on Friday afternoon
mentioning a report that’s now needed for Monday morning, our personal
weekend plans just got wrecked. But we’re “persuaded” to skip the cookout and
head into the office on Saturday because we’re fascinated by the prospect of a
promotion. (In addition to power, the threat of unemployment triggers alarm.)
Used intelligently and selectively, this trigger strengthens your reputation and
earns respect. In a competitive market-place, it can give a decided upper hand.
Power offers three paths: dominate, control the environment, and, finally, reward
and punish. Let’s begin with domination.*
Dominate
In the presence of power, we instinctively become submissive. When we’re
in the presence of someone who is more powerful, our innate response
mechanisms are altered—translating into essentially a “deer in headlights”
response, because “your body is preparing to have heightened attentiveness to
what others are doing and how you’re being evaluated,” says Deborah Gruenfeld
of the Stanford Graduate School of Business. We know, for example, that there
are actually distinct differences in serotonin levels based on position in the
hierarchy—and that serotonin levels change as animal subjects move into alpha
or beta position.
When we are talking to a more powerful person, experts report, our personal
boundaries can lower, making us resistant or skeptical. Our body language and
speech patterns usually become deferential. We’re more open to suggestion,
more easily persuaded, and more likely to be dominated.

We all willingly allow ourselves to take a backseat in certain situations. But
some people go to a greater extreme. They eagerly pay to be dominated. Even
humiliated. (No, not by a dominatrix with a leather whip…by a chef with a very
sharp knife.) The Sushi Dictators
You may remember the Soup Nazi from Seinfeld. But are you familiar with
the Sushi Dictators? These guys aren’t paid actors, and the clientele is real. Each
dictator has his own irritable quirks, but in many cases, patrons aren’t allowed to
order because the chef selects your meal. If you look up Sushi Nozawa in LA,
it’s one of the highest-rated restaurants in terms of the food. The Zagat
description, however, clearly calls out its infamous reputation: “Makes the Soup
Nazi look polite.” Wall Street Journal reporter Katy McLaughlin describes this
omakase tradition, which means “trust the chef,” and explains that some
consumers go because they think they’re getting an authentic meal. But as
psychologist David Stewart explains in the article, “people value praise more
when it comes from people who don’t give it out easily.” People go to these
restaurants in search of both “modest risk” and “approbation,” Stewart says,
“perhaps in the form of an uni handroll.”
When I lived in LA, one of my favorite restaurants was Sushi Sasabune.
More a fluorescent-lit, dingy greasy spoon than a sushi mecca, it had yellowed
handwritten signs on the walls that said threateningly, “No California roll. No
bowl of rice.” (These are often favorites of the budget-conscious, or of sushi
newbies, who tend to prefer tamer Americanized sushi.) Instead of name tags,
every waiter’s shirt simply said, “Trust me.” This was an order, not a request.
Chefs occasionally yell at customers for making a poor choice, and kick out a
certain number of patrons each month to keep it interesting. This power play
wouldn’t work if the food couldn’t live up to the hype, but this sushi is so fresh it
almost bites back.
Can you persuade others to obey you? Yes, you can. And if you use
domination as keenly as the Sushi Dictators, you’ll even be tipped extra for it.
Provoking Inferiority Complexes
Who said fascinating people always play nice? Not in this trigger they don’t.
The Sushi Dictators emphasize insecurities. Aggressive negotiators prey upon
weakness. Be polite, if you please. But if you’re ready to dial up your power,
you might need to take off the gloves, even if they’re white kid gloves.
Marketers kindle insecurities all the time, and with great effectiveness. You
might say that insecurities pay an ad agency’s salaries. After all, if consumers

aren’t concerned about a problem, they won’t buy a product to solve it. Bad
breath and body odor weren’t always offenses punishable by social ostracism—
not until advertisers needed to sell more mouthwash and deodorant. Dry Idea
commanded us, “Never let them see you sweat.” Sure antiperspirant told us,
“Raise your hand if you’re sure,” and showed us how icky it was to be un-sure.
Yellowish tooth aren’t exactly beauty assets, but they weren’t stigmas until teeth
whiteners showed how embarrassed we should be without flashcube-white teeth.
The alarm trigger shows that negative consequences prompt action. This
principle applies here as well. Consumers buy products to solve problems; the
more negative and immediate the consequences, the greater a consumer’s
fascination with purchase. By provoking insecurities around our parenting skills,
sexual prowess, intellect, and financial savvy, products trigger fascination.
Taking the alpha Stance
Ranking systems fascinate us because they establish the group’s
“celebrities,” or alpha members. Many groups invoke power by establishing a
clear ranking system. It’s even apparent in high school cliques: Without much
effort, cliques form unspoken rules about who’s in charge. Social networking
sites do this all the time, listing each user’s number of followers, offering easy
public tools to rank a user’s influence within the network.
What if there’s conflict within a group about which member is the alpha
leader? Who has the most power: the greatest ability to control and influence the
environment? That’s where things get tricky. Start a staring contest with a
growling pit bull, for instance, and the dog won’t be the one to flinch first.*
Someone who is able to stare down a pit bull: Cesar Millan, expert dog trainer,
aka the “Dog Whisperer.” Yet expertise is only one half of his power. Equally if
not more important is the execution of his experience: A combination of
knowledge and tough love amplifies his domination.
Celebrity Monkey Paparazzi
The next time you’re in the grocery store checkout line and find yourself
staring at a charismatic athlete, billionaire mogul, or world-famous movie star’s
face on a magazine cover, blame your DNA. Just as we’re instinctively
fascinated by faces, we stare at the power. No matter where we rank on the
social food chain, leaders fascinate us. Our obsession with powerful people is far
older than People magazine. We inherited it from our hairier ancestors.

Deep within our tribal psyche, we share a need to focus on the most
powerful members of our group. It’s a raw, primal catalyst. Programmed into our
social code is a need to “follow the leader,” to find role models and fixate upon
them. Duke University neurobiologist Dr. Michael Platt affirmed this by
developing a scientific experiment that I’ll call “Entertainment Weekly Goes to
the Lab.”
Platt offered thirsty rhesus monkeys a choice: a drink of their favorite
beverage, or an opportunity to look at photos of “celebrity” monkeys (the Jay-Z
and Beyoncé of the monkey kingdom). Celebrity monkeys were those that
commanded attention in their pack, through power, food, and sexual magnetism.
Not only did the monkeys want to look at their celebrities, but so strong was the
fascination with power that the monkeys chose photo viewing over drinking.
And even the celebrity monkeys were fascinated by images of fellow celeb
monkeys.
Control the Environment
Every day, we allow others to control our personal environment. We agree to
iTunes’ terms of use, or take off our shoes for TSA security at the airport. On
Facebook, users operate within a highly regimented interface that’s quite
different from MySpace’s zany options (and which one is winning the social
media wars?). iTunes, TSA, and Facebook all use power to control their
environments, and control us in those environments.
What happens if an entire organization increases power to improve results?
As we saw with gold medalist Dominique Moceanu, power can push
performance—but not without price. In the words of the New York Times: How
much is too much?
Meet Landmark Education, a “personal training and development company.”
The Most Fascinating Organization in the World?
In Part I, we learned the six Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message:
Provokes strong and immediate emotional reactions
Creates advocates
Becomes “cultural shorthand” for a specific set of actions or values
Incites conversation
Forces competitors to realign around it

Triggers social revolutions
With these criteria, Landmark Education Corporation is surely among the
world’s most fascinating companies. Most people have never heard of this
insular organization, but once introduced, they’re unlikely to forget it. Landmark
persuades a high percentage of its attendees to make significant changes in their
lives, yet simultaneously provokes and polarizes them. It accumulates fanatics,
even evangelists, as well as heated debate from detractors. Within the self-help
or personal development industry, it’s a reference point around which others
define themselves. Yet while not everyone agrees with Landmark’s methods, if
you can learn their secrets, your message can become more fascinating, too.*
Landmark describes itself as a “global educational enterprise committed to the
fundamental principle that people have the possibility of success, fulfillment,
and greatness.” Said more plainly, Landmark teaches self-help courses. More
than a million people have completed Landmark’s introductory program, the
Forum, in twenty-one countries. Surprisingly little is known about the techniques
used in Landmark’s coursework. The privately held organization releases little
data, and attendees sign a six-page non-disclosure agreement.† It’s difficult to
unveil much about Landmark, especially its methodology (which, as we know,
increases mystique). Most information comes from anecdotal stories and input
from previous participants.
Here are two things that are known. And while these facts seem to contradict
each other, they both stem from the unique way in which Landmark controls its
environment.
First, Landmark achieves extraordinary results.
The majority of participants describe the Landmark Forum as a life-
changing program. In a Yankelovich study, 90 percent of participants
reported that their Land mark Forum experience “exceeded their
expectations.” An IMC, Inc., study reported that 94 percent of
graduates said it made “a profound, lasting difference in the way they
live their lives,” and 93 percent said that it was “one of the most
effective programs” they’d taken.
Second, Landmark is controversial.

The organization is often compared to Scientology, and accused of
using cultlike methods. (As we saw in Part I, cults achieve the very
highest levels of fascination among followers.) An expert likened
Landmark’s methods to “the process used by the Soviets in preparing
confessions for their show trials or the first stage of the brainwashing
process.” The program is illegal in France.
Just how does Landmark achieve such remarkably high approval ratings?
And why all the fuss?
Landmark wields the power trigger in unique ways. While “controlling the
environment” might sound like an elaborate show to stage, this company does so
by directing basic elements of surroundings and process, proving that even
subtle changes can make a message dramatically more fascinating.
What’s the point of all this protocol? Why does Landmark go to such great
lengths to enforce its own power? Psychologists suggest that when people are no
longer in charge of basic elements of a situation (such as where they sit, or when
they go to the restroom), they must give over some degree of control that they
normally use to define their independence, and thus themselves. Many
researchers have proven that once people have agreed to let go of small details,
they become more willing to submit to the more significant changes. By
gradually releasing self-control, they open themselves up to more significant
changes, and to the leader. The leader’s message sinks in far more deeply,
“destabilizing” an individual, and shedding his natural resistance.
This destabilization, according to experts, makes people more open to new
interpretations. It’s how brainwashing works, how boot camp works, and to a
greater or lesser degree, it’s how most immersive learning works. Often,
immersive learning begins small, with seemingly insignificant details of
environment.* One sociologist describes how a “structured” and “organized”
seminar format increases “total power” for the leader. The more specific a
leader’s direction, the greater his potential influence. Within every type of
interaction—an interview, a negotiation, a confrontation—hundreds of variables
shape the result, and the more variables we can govern around a message, the
more we control the environment. By convincing the audience to follow specific
rules, leaders can make their message become more fascinating.†
Applying Landmark’s Methods to Your Next Meeting
Praise or condemn Landmark’s techniques, but like Bela and Martha Karolyi,

this organization very effectively uses power to achieve remarkable results. How
might this apply in our own lives? For instance, we might want “total power”
during a presentation, to make sure our message persuaded and captivated the
audience. What general themes from Landmark could we adapt and apply?
We’d begin exerting power in a meeting before the meeting ever began,
crafting the interaction so it unfolds on our terms rather than on someone else’s,
by accident. We’d consider every aspect of how an audience experiences a
presentation: the layout of the room, the schedule, even the refreshments. We’d
eliminate distractions, such as exterior noise or interruptions, so our message has
less competition. We’d increase mystique by selectively choosing which pieces
of information to reveal. We’d monitor the physical experience of the meeting,
including even the comfort level of the chairs (or in the case of Landmark, their
discomfort). To ratchet up control even further, we wouldn’t ask participants just
to turn off phones, but to surrender them for the duration of the program.
Rarely do we seek to be manipulative or dictatorial. But we do want to
persuade. A fascinating meeting clearly positions a leader, and allows an
audience to immerse itself in the message. Begin that process from the very first
impression.
Head & Shoulders Had It Right
Remember the tagline “You never get a second chance to make a first
impression”? Maître d’s know this, telling us when and where we’ll be going.
Nightclub bouncers don’t get chatty about their decision-making process for who
gains access to the Cristal-drenched VIP room.*
You already know that a strong first impression begins with confident body
language and eye contact, and a firm handshake. Yet this approach doesn’t apply
just to in-person meetings. The same is also true when introducing any type of
message, from a disciplinary warning to a routine internal memo. Carefully
manage your message and reinforce it. Minimizing errors becomes even more
essential when power is your trigger. Mistakes, such as website glitches or
incomplete data, deflate your position. Nobody wants to watch how sausage is
made.
Whether subtle or overt, this style of interaction increases domination. This
domination exerts some degree of pressure on others, making them less likely to
reject a message.
Reward and Punish

Dominique Moceanu’s success with the Karolyis, and her subsequent
approbation of them, demonstrates the great influence of reward and
punishment. When people covet a reward, even a small one, they become
fascinated by the prospect of attaining it. If they begin to believe that the reward
is worth a potential downside, they’ll go to great lengths to achieve it. In many
cases, unreasonable lengths.*
When offering a reward, don’t be afraid to put it well out of reach, enticing
others to push outside their comfort zone to achieve it. But a warning: If
negative reinforcement becomes too strict, or punishment too frequent, it sparks
a backlash.
Rules and Consequences
Callers to Suze Orman’s show already know that they risk her signature
wrath by fessing up to their huge credit card debt. Suze has developed governing
principles in her own metaphoric playbook, and the audience knows the
consequences for breaking them. Whether you’re establishing rules for a
companywide policy on time sheets, or establishing a prom curfew for your
teenager, don’t get namby-pamby in enforcement.
Many leaders heighten the power trigger by withholding praise. They hand
out compliments sparingly, even when rules are followed correctly, because
praise gains affection but not necessarily respect. Yet not everyone withholds
praise and support. Some gain power by boosting a sense of power in others.
Viagra did this in the late nineties.*
The Big Power of the Little Blue Pill
Impotence is probably as old as sex itself. In Medieval Masculinities, Vern
Bullough tells us that in the Middle Ages, the condition was “a threat not only to
a man’s maleness but to society. Potency came to be not only the way in which a
male defined himself, but how he was defined by society.” So great was the
implied meaning that impotence could prevent or nullify marriage, and serve as
grounds for divorce.* A man who couldn’t trigger power was no man at all.
A generally dismal view of the condition continued into the twentieth
century. But then, in 1998, Pfizer renamed “impotence” as “erectile
dysfunction.” Presto—unlike impotence, erectile dysfunction was a urological
issue (merely a little plumbing glitch!), rather than a humiliating psychological

neurosis. By changing the name of the condition, Pfizer and pitchman Bob Dole
changed far more. No longer were anyone’s personal inadequacies to blame. In
its second year on the market, worldwide Viagra sales topped $1 billion in
fascination-enhanced sales.
Next up, we’ll meet vice: the bad girl of the fascination triggers. The one
who stays out too late and drinks too much whisky, and convinces you to come
along. Do join in, won’t you?

Vice
Why We’re Tempted by “Forbidden Fruit”
Smart organizations recognize a business opportunity when they see it. So
when Prohibition began on January 17, 1920, the Mafia expanded beyond
gambling and thievery, and into the far more profitable pursuit of bootlegging.
Overnight, the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages became
illegal in the United States. As the black market for hard liquor flourished, the
mob became wealthier than ever, growing so pervasive and powerful from
alcohol profits that Chicago mob boss Al Capone earned more than $100 million
a year. * The Mafia held a national convention in 1928 to formalize its reign,
even discussing a nationwide crime syndicate.
The “Noble Experiment,” as Prohibition was called, didn’t dampen drinking.
When drinking moved underground into speakeasy clubs, beating Prohibition
became a hobby enjoyed by millions of Americans. Former proponent John D.
Rockefeller admitted its failure, writing that “drinking has generally increased;
the speakeasy has replaced the saloon; a vast army of lawbreakers has appeared;
many of our best citizens have openly ignored Prohibition; respect for the law
has been greatly lessened; and crime has increased to a level never seen before.”
Thanks to Prohibition, the vice trigger made Americans thirstier than ever.
To Capone’s disappointment, Prohibition was repealed in 1933, greatly
reducing the underworld’s illegal profits. Americans found new forms of vice,
and the mob found new business activities.*
What Is “Vice”?
 

The devil sitting on your shoulder, whispering in your ear? He’s whispering
vice. When we’re told we can’t have something, this trigger of fascination can
take hold and make us want more.
Cultures have always recognized this phenomenon. Pandora had her box,
Lot’s wife’s curiosity turned her into a pillar of salt, Romeo and Juliet loved
more passionately (and died more passionately) because their parents tried to
keep them apart. One bite of an apple got Adam and Eve booted out of paradise.
And let’s not forget the cat, whose curiosity proved her undoing.
Rules are not often fascinating, but bending them, very much so. When
we’re tempted to push a boundary, or deviate from standard norms, we’re in a
vice grip. Vice includes everything you want to do, and know you shouldn’t do,
but still just might do.
Vice takes many forms in our daily lives, usually masquerading as guilty
pleasures: vanity, insincerity, excessive spending, sexuality, and other qualities
easily found inside every Victoria’s Secret mall location.
The Push-Up Bra: A Wearable White Lie
We each indulge in a few transgressions. That third slice of pepperoni pizza,
high blood pressure be damned. Sleeping in on Sunday when the grass needs
mowing. Sneaking the occasional cigarette at a bar. Texting while driving, or
reading trashy gossip magazines while getting a pedicure. It’s watching
Nip/Tuck, reading DailyCandy, or logging onto PerezHilton.com.
Not every type of vice fascinates every person, but we all have a few gleeful
gratifications hidden in our behavior.* We all challenge virtue now and again. (If
you’ve ever pressed the close button from inside the elevator doors while
someone is rushing in, well, there you go.) Please Use Responsibly
A little vice goes a long way, so customize your message by using it in
combination with other triggers.
Few of us intend to deliberately lead someone into temptation. Yet unless we
understand how we’re influencing action, we could be doing just that, making
this trigger unexpectedly important. We’ll soon find out how a message that
unintentionally triggers vice can accomplish an entirely different result than
intended. People do the exact opposite of what they’re told. Just ask the
Prohibitionists.
The word “vice” comes from the Latin vitium, meaning “failing or defect,”
because vices reveal our weaknesses. These weaknesses don’t necessarily force
us into a morally bad place, and they’re not always “wrong” or “evil.” Rather,

vice tempts us to break out of strict norms, or bend the rules a bit.
Ready to have a dance with the bad girl? A whit of vice can spice up any
humdrum conversation or unremarkable brand. We have four pillars of vice at
our disposal: Create taboos. Lead others astray. Define absolutes. And give a
wink.
Forbidden fruit would not taste so juicy if it weren’t forbidden. Let’s start by
exploring the juicy world of taboos.
Create Taboos
It’s easy to spot how female celebrities flaunt taboos to trigger our
fascination (though not necessarily our respect). Porn tapes from eye-candy stars
such as Paris Hilton and Kim Kardashian increased their exposure. Reality stars
fight for the “villain” role, including Omarosa from The Apprentice and Simon
Cowell from American Idol, because villains earn notoriety. The patron saint of
vice, Madonna, stokes the vice machine by humping the stage in a wedding
dress, or dancing in lingerie next to burning crosses, or starring in hardcover
erotica stashed behind the bookstore counter. Monica Lewinsky launched a
handbag line with little more than a tête-à-tête with a cigar on her résumé.
The profits of Controversy
Banned material isn’t always wrapped in plain brown paper wrappers. It also
comes in covers with titles that read The Catcher in the Rye, or American
Heritage Dictionary, or Where’s Waldo?* In 1882, the great American poem
Leaves of Grass was banned for obscene content. Sales increased so dramatically
from the publicity that poet Walt Whitman bought a house from the royalties.
Herein lies a key benefit of vice: Nobody yawns when vice seeps into the
conversation. It never fails to get people talking (and talking and talking, and
often, buying).
We’re especially fascinated when our heroes fall from heights, into the fiery
infernos of vice.
The Golden Swimmer Takes a Dive
Months after the Beijing Olympics, fourteen-time gold medalist swimmer
Michael Phelps was photographed in 2009 smoking from a bong. (You have no
idea whatsoever what a “bong” is, right?…Good, just checking. Me neither.)

Experts predicted that the photo would cost him millions of dollars in
endorsements. But no. Quite interestingly, the same trigger that fascinated Phelps
in that infamous photo has also grabbed hold of lucrative sponsors as well.
The notorious photo, circulated around the globe, happens to display an
Omega watch on Phelps’s left wrist. A spokesman for Omega Watches crowed,
“You can’t buy this kind of product placement—believe me, we’ve tried!…He’s
modeling one of our blinged-out products as he expertly removes the carb from
the bong, which we will also be selling replicas of: The Poseidon, as we are
proudly calling it, holds actual water, just like what Michael Phelps swims in!”
Phelps not only “expertly removes the carb from the bong,” as the Omega
spokesman announced, but he also knows how to tap the next pillar of vice:
leading others astray.
Lead Others Astray
Las Vegas, the uncontested vice capital of the world, doesn’t just lead others
astray: It leads them directly into the den of iniquity.
When Las Vegas conspiratorially promises in your ear, “What happens here,
stays here,” your mind goes berserk with all the wicked possibilities. That
tagline taps into an incredibly complex mind map of desires, fears, protocols,
expectations, and even religious and moral codes. When you hear those words,
you almost pause to consider exactly what it is that would stay in Vegas.
To compete in any crowded marketplace, you must lead someone astray
from his usual behavior. If you’re a restaurateur, you must tempt patrons to order
more expensive bottles of wine and a dessert course. Every process of vice starts
by getting someone to consider what he could have, and desires to have, but
doesn’t have. Yet.
Making Guilty Pleasures Guiltier
Sometimes, changing behavior starts with changing the channel. Have you
seen the TV teen drama Gossip Girl? It’s a popular guilty pleasure, but it wasn’t
always so popular. With initially modest ratings for this startup show, the
network decided to do something bold to raise its profile.
Major news outlets skewered Gossip Girl for its depiction of bad behavior.
The show didn’t apologize for the storylines—it celebrated them. Advertising
posters wallpapered all over major cities used the negativity to tempt viewers:
“Very Bad for You,” one poster screamed. “A Parent’s Worst Nightmare,” and

“A Nasty Piece of Work,” declared others. And perhaps most delightfully,
“Mind-Blowingly Inappropriate.”
Was it effective? Oh yes. Ratings increased substantially. Viewers celebrate
the show that celebrates bad behavior.
Define Absolutes
Let’s start with an experiment, shall we?
We’re in a laboratory together, you and I. It’s starkly white, without
decoration or distraction of any kind. On the table in front of you, I place an
unadorned black box. It has a lid, which is shut but unlocked. “You can look at
this box,” I say, “you can touch it. But you cannot open it.” Then I leave the
room, stopping only to add one final reminder, “Whatever you do, do not open
this box.”
Some people would never consider opening the box. But chances are, as
time passed alone in that white room, you might stare at the unlocked box and
start to wonder, “What’s inside, and why can’t I open it? Must be pretty good to
create all the fuss.” If more time passed, you might begin questioning my
warnings. After all, I haven’t given you any meaningful reason to obey me. You
don’t even know me, or more importantly, trust me.
Now, imagine you can see through the windows of this white laboratory, into
other rooms, each filled with people like you. They each have a black box in
front of them, but there’s a difference: They’ve each opened their boxes. And
what glorious things must be inside! They seem ecstatic. These people start to
notice you and your unopened box. They encourage you to open yours, despite
my order. You’re torn. You want to follow the orders, but a mix of rebellion and
temptation now stirs you.
“What if,” you might say to yourself, “…what if I just take a small peek?”
Just a small peek. That, my friend, is a gateway drug.
Why “Just Say No” Leads to “Just Say Maybe”
You’ve probably seen those red-and-black bumper stickers encouraging us to
“DARE to keep your kids off drugs.” The DARE program (Drug Abuse
Resistance Education) has a strong premise and participation. Police officers
teach kids about the dangers of drugs and violence by focusing curriculum on
“refusal skills,” or eight ways to “just say no.” Theoretically, it works on many
levels: Kids interact with police officers, police officers become more involved

on a grassroots level with the school, and everyone learns how to refuse drugs.
Spending billions of dollars, the DARE program has been deployed in 80
percent of school districts in the U.S. and in fifty-four other countries with a
zero-tolerance policy.
There’s just one problem. It doesn’t work. New research shows that at best it
prompts no change in behavior, and at worst, it increases affinity for drugs. Not
only does DARE not keep kids off drugs, it makes them more likely to use
drugs.
The respected program indoctrinates thirty-six million of our youth each
year and costs the United States approximately $1.13 billion annually. Yet the
U.S. Surgeon General, Department of Education, and the General Accounting
Office have all labeled the program ineffective.
Rocky Anderson, former mayor of Salt Lake City, eliminated his city’s
DARE program. Anderson announced his contempt in Rolling Stone: “I think
your organization has been an absolute fraud on the people of this country. For
you to continue taking precious drug-prevention dollars when we have such a
serious and, in some instances, growing addiction problem is unconscionable.”
When my researcher spoke with Anderson, he was more adamant, calling the
program “whoredom.”
Why doesn’t DARE work? And more important, what does? To answer
these questions, my team and I did several weeks of primary and secondary
research. After reading the findings and interviewing other anti-drug program
leaders, we discovered specific ways in which the program unintentionally
triggers vice in teens: DARE’s zero-tolerance policy encourages kids not only to
engage in an abstinence lifestyle, but also to turn in their friends, and even report
parents’ drug use; it dispenses fear-based information about drugs for shock
effect and doesn’t draw distinctions between substances (e.g., beer versus meth);
and the authority figures (police officers) are not trusted and familiar people. The
program heightens both mistrust and mystique.
In a nutshell: The research suggests not that prevention doesn’t work, but
that this particular model of prevention—while well intended—doesn’t work.
Like the unopened black box, it turns drugs into forbidden fruit.
The Teenage Brain, a Vice Magnet
All seven triggers affect decision making, whether or not we intend them to.
Using vice, however, can cause the exact opposite effect rather than the one
intended. Especially with teenagers. Vice, when combined with mistrust and

mystique, increases the likelihood of engaging in behavior.
In the chapter on alarm, we saw Luke Sullivan’s epiphany about drunk
driving and teenagers: a graphic photo of a car wreck won’t effectively dissuade
teenage drivers. For teens, fear isn’t necessarily a reason to avoid something. It
can even heighten the attraction, in a natural, normal part of the brain’s
development through adolescence.* According to a recent study, seventeen-year-
olds commit more crimes than any other age group. And in another study,
college students age eighteen to twenty-four were more likely than their older
counterparts to take risks across a broad spectrum of activities, from not wearing
a bicycle helmet, to riding with a drunk driver, to experimenting with illegal
drugs.†
Unintentionally Triggering Vice
Rules and policies are an important part of a functioning workplace, but can
backfire when employees feel micromanaged, or don’t understand the reasoning
behind them. Ever see Office Space? The proverbial TPS report makes
employees want to disobey, if only for the thrill of rebellion.
The same applies to any authority figure. Parents can trigger defiance by
enforcing unreasonably difficult restrictions. Or, when a speed limit is raised by
five or ten miles per hour, studies show that people will still drive just slightly
over it, pushing the boundary.
What lessons could we draw from DARE? When we sincerely intend to
create constructive structure, could we be triggering negative behaviors instead?
How to Encourage Someone to Want to Break Your Rules
Let’s play a game. Say we want to activate vice. How might we go about
that? If you pull the heavyweight vice levers below, you could stand back and
watch the backlash.
First, enforce rigidly black-and-white behavioral codes. Speak in
absolute terms such as “never,” “always,” and “no.” Develop a strict,
authoritative relationship, with punishment that seems unjustifiable.
Exaggerate negative consequences. (“If you kiss a boy, you’ll get
pregnant.”)
Give a firm “no” without a reasonable reason why. For most people,
being told that they can’t do something is like a matador’s red cape to

a bull. Make people want to rebel, so they can prove their
independence against you.
Fail to establish trust. Present your lessons without any familiar
context or figures.
Finally, use the “unopened black box” method we saw at the beginning
of this section: Trigger mystique by tempting someone, by giving them
just a peek without any further explanation. Tell them what not to do,
without telling them why they shouldn’t do it.
How to Encourage Someone to Ignore Vice, and Follow Your Message
Now let’s go in the opposite direction. How could you discourage vice, and
encourage smarter choices? To overcome vice, adjust three other triggers:
decrease mystique, and increase power and trust.
Start by decreasing the mystique trigger. Answer questions with open
communication. Offer an honest appraisal of consequences. Don’t allow secrets
to build intrigue or confusion. The more transparent you are, the less mystique
can lure someone away from your message.
Next, make your group feel more powerful, by giving them control of some
aspect of their environment. Encourage mutual respect, rather than a
master/servant dynamic.
Most important, invest a great deal of time and energy in the trust trigger,
making your group feel they can rely upon you. The more people trust what
they’re being told, and the more they trust the person giving them this
information, the more likely they are to follow it.
One last note. The father of analytical psychology, Carl Jung, wrote, “The
word ‘happiness’ would lose its meaning if it were not balanced by sadness.”
Similarly, the word “virtue” would lose its meaning if not balanced by vice.
Keep it all in perspective, balancing virtue and vice. Once you get extremist on
either end, the pendulum goes a-swingin’.
In this chapter so far, we’ve delved into hard-core vices: smuggling,
pornography, and illegal drug use, not to mention bad reality TV. These
examples, while a pleasant way to pass the time, might not appeal to a happily
middle-of-the-road perspective. What is vice’s role in decision making for the
more conservative among us?

Give a Wink
Each trigger changes behavior in a unique way. A message with lust draws
people in, because they crave a sensory experience. A message with prestige
elevates itself above the rest. A message with alarm prods people to act quickly.
These have clear application for companies. How, and when, does vice apply?
Unconventional companies and “challenger brands” often benefit from
stirring up new energy around a topic. Mid-sized, niche, or emerging brands lack
certain advantages that the eight-hundred-pound gorilla enjoys. Their survival
depends upon their ability to disrupt perceptions and force reevaluation. With
smaller budgets, they often require free PR and buzz, which benefits from
controversy.
Category leaders such as Fortune 100 corporations or incumbent politicians
generally envision different fascination goals for themselves. These leaders tend
to have long-standing relationships, with highly ingrained customer habits and
decades-long messages, and want to maintain the status quo. They use vice less
often, focusing instead on triggers that maintain established norms: prestige,
power, or trust. However, ignoring vice isn’t always the wisest choice.
Used wisely, vice can offer a fresh sense of unexpectedness to an otherwise
straightforward message. This is true even for the biggest corporations, such as
Wal-Mart and General Electric. Like the mystique trigger, vice piques our
curiosity to know more. And like the alarm trigger, it surprises us with a
potential change in direction, grabbing our instant attention.
How Could a More Traditional Brand Employ Vice?
Certain people and brands (Tabasco, Wonderbra, singer Lady GaGa) tempt
consumers with a taste of forbidden fruit. But what about a more traditional
brand message? How might you take a product that’s a fungible commodity, is
defined by utility, or is stuck in a parity category, and somehow make it
fascinating?
If you’re a mattress company: What if you named your pillow-top
mattress the “Sunday Morning Sleep-In”?
If you’re a credit card company: What if your rewards program had a
“sin package” that only members over twenty-one could join? Instead
of regular points, would you offer credits for online gambling?
If you’re an electronics company: What if your headphones included a

secret “road to deafness” volume setting?
If you’re a car dealership: What if your car company invested in a
private U.S. autobahn that let you drive as fast as you wanted after
purchase?
Tweaking Expectations
To see how we might apply vice to your environment, start by tweaking
established expectations. That’s what Maya Lin did.
War memorials are always alabaster white. At least they were until 1982,
when a young, unknown student named Maya Lin beat fourteen hundred others
competing to design the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Her black reflective
granite wall created protests of outrage. Not only was the monument not white, it
was also not a towering obelisk.
“The Wall” has become not only a powerful and beloved tribute, but
profoundly connective, affecting its visitors through the interaction between their
reflection in the black granite with the names of the fifty-eight thousand dead
engraved into the stone. Lin won the design contest by creating a monument that
not only commemorated, but broke with conventional norms in a category.
Allow Your Audience’s Imagination to Do the Work for You
While a sliver of habanero chile pepper can pique interest, the intensity of a
thick slice can turn off or repel. Rather than focusing solely on vice, use it as one
ingredient in an overall strategy.
Subtlety works best. Over-explanation, justification, and backtracking all kill
vice as surely as flipping on fluorescent lights in a candlelit restaurant and
watching cockroaches scurry from view.
Combining Vice with Other Triggers
Two triggers, used together, can be stronger than either one alone. Just as
sliced green apples complement a crisp sauvignon blanc, certain triggers
perfectly pair together with vice. A few time-tested favorites: Vice + Alarm
Box office sales prove the winning partnership of vice and alarm. Depravity,

evil, and gore lure in crowds. While other Hollywood movie genres slip, the
horror genre takes in hundreds of millions without traditional star vehicles.
Friday the 13th has eleven movies in the franchise and a TV series. (If Jason
isn’t your thing, you can choose from six Saw films, five Child’s Play, eight
Hellraiser, and six Texas Chainsaw Massacre films.) Vice + Power
When a mogul lights up a fat Cuban cigar in a nonsmoking restaurant, he
seems to imply that for him, ordinary rules simply do not apply. Same for
corporate con men at Enron, or recall Leona Helmsley’s infamous “Only the
little people pay taxes.” With power, studies show, comes an entitlement to break
the rules. If power makes people more likely to indulge in unrestrained behavior,
it’s certainly a highly compatible partner to vice, which tempts us to bend the
rules.
Social psychologist Deborah Gruenfeld studies the effect that power has
upon powerful people. A Stanford Business article by Marguerite Rigoglioso
shares her research. As people experience power, says Gruenfeld, they become
disinhibited: less likely to control themselves and their behavior, less concerned
with what others think of them, and more likely to flaunt cultural constraints and
consequences. “When people experience power, they stop trying to control
themselves; they forget that there are social consequences.”
Vice + Lust
When vice meets lust, naughty things happen. Just ask Hugh Grant. As you
might recall, Grant, the charming rogue movie star, was infamously interrupted
in an oral dalliance with a Hollywood prostitute named Divine Brown. For
many, this was especially perplexing in light of the fact that not only was Hugh
Grant wealthy enough to rendezvous with someone who lived in the 310 area
code, but at the time his long-time partner was über-supermodel Elizabeth
Hurley. It’s unclear why Grant was attracted to Ms. Brown,* but it’s clear why
he was attracted to the combination of vice + lust. Even if your audience isn’t
deviant, you probably want them to deviate—from their current behavior, at
least.
 
THE PURPOSE OF A message with vice isn’t to lure your audience into sin,
but rather to lure them away from their standard choices. A message with vice
encourages people to change their patterns and try something different: a most
useful tactic for anyone who wants to change ingrained beliefs or behavior.

If you’re interested in building a long-term relationship, vice isn’t your
trigger. Trust is. After peeking at mystique, alerting to alarm, and flirting with
vice, let’s now find out how to build meaningful and authentic relationships over
time.

Trust
Why We’re Loyal to Reliable Options
Hum a few bars of “O Come All Ye Faithful,” sip your eggnog, and gather
round the fireplace to roast chestnuts, kids. It’s time to tell the story of how the
trust trigger brought us our traditional holiday classic It’s a Wonderful Life.
Upon its release in 1946, It’s a Wonderful Life wasn’t quite the success it is
today. Actually, it flopped. Soundly. Earnings didn’t come close to the cost of
production, the studio was disappointed, and the director, Frank Capra, was
criticized and humiliated. The holiday movie seemed destined to fade into
obscurity. But then, serendipitously, trust came into play.
In 1974, the film’s copyright protection slipped. It became public domain.
Now, television stations could air It’s a Wonderful Life for free. And air it they
did. Every year, the movie played throughout the Christmas season. Families
gathered to watch. Children grew up with Jimmy Stewart and the angels.
Americans saw the same images year after year. Jimmy Stewart and the angels
became emblazoned on our collective concept of holidays, hope, and American
optimism. From a marketing perspective, the movie has become an ingrained
part of the Christmas “brand architecture” along with gift-wrapped toys,
caroling, and the colors red and green. It’s a tradition.
Yet like many traditions, one might argue, this one succeeds not because it’s
the highest-quality option, but because it’s the most familiar. Familiarity and
repetition have turned the movie into a fascinating holiday message. We love It’s
a Wonderful Life because, unlike the audiences in 1946, we know it.
What Is Trust?
 

The other six triggers can fascinate us in a short time frame. The sound of an
ambulance siren instantly triggers alarm. A magazine article’s provocative title
sucks us in with mystique. One glance at the latest iPhone summons lust. Trust,
however, is fascination of a different sort. This trigger is more complex than the
other six. It’s more nuanced, more fragile, harder to earn, and much easier to
lose. You can dabble in prestige, or experiment with power, but you can’t dip in
and out of trust. It must be established consistently.
Other triggers often guide our decision making by provoking us in some
way. Alarm thrills us with immediacy or change. Mystique stimulates us with
curiosity. Trust, however, guides everyday decision making in a different way:
familiarity and comfort. For example, we choose to put on our favorite old
college sweatshirt because we trust it to feel exactly the same as it has felt for
years. We trust the opinions of our friends or acquaintances over that of a
random stranger. We repeat family traditions, like watching It’s a Wonderful Life,
because they provide reassuring shared continuity for the group.
As we’ve seen, we’re living in an ADD world. Even if we ourselves don’t
have ADD, we have to deal with fragmented schedules, competing demands, and
priorities pulling our attention in different directions. Even our relationships
change more frequently, making everyday life feel more scattered. In the face of
overwhelming stimuli, the most trusted options relax and reassure us. Continuity
makes us feel safe.
How to establish and enhance trust? Five pillars for trust: Become familiar.
Repeat and retell. Be authentic. Accelerate trust in a shorter time frame. And
“unfascinate” an unhealthy message. Messages will use different pillars
depending upon their stage and purpose, but as our strongest pillar in
relationships, drawing upon one or more of these pillars can win the battle for
attention.
Become Familiar
The word “familiar” comes from familia, meaning family. Family is more
than just an emotional bond, and so is familiarity. Neurochemically, there’s a lot
going on with familiarity. Our minds look for patterns. When we recognize them,
we not only rely on them, but also develop preferences based on pattern
repetition. Our brains use these patterns to map everything we see, hear, and
experience in order to establish an expectation for the future.
The Exposure Effect

In 1876, Gustav Fechner described this phenomenon, calling it the “exposure
effect.” The more we’re exposed to something or someone, the more we trust it.
And the more we like it. Scientists have since used the exposure effect to
describe why we might like a song more after hearing it a few times, why we
feel more comfortable around friends than strangers, and why we’re inclined to
feel as though we personally know celebrities we see frequently. Consistent and
repeated exposure to a celebrity such as Will Smith or Oprah Winfrey makes us
more likely to trust them, and like them, because their images have created a
neurochemical pattern on our brains.
These patterns can slowly accumulate over the course of years, as with It’s a
Wonderful Life. But does that mean only adults experience trust? Do we
experience the exposure effect early in life?
McNuggets, Milk, and the Golden Arches
McDonald’s earns fascination through many triggers. The sight, smell, and
taste of a Big Mac build lust. Their fries rouse vice with sodiumladen goodness.
And through repetition of messaging and consistency of experience, they earn
trust.
It doesn’t take long for McDonald’s to build trust in young diners. In a study
designed to show the effects of marketing on young children, researchers at the
Stanford University School of Medicine and Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital
presented children ages three to five with two different sets of chicken nuggets.
They wrapped one set of nuggets in McDonald’s packaging, and the other in
plain, unmarked packaging. Which group of nuggets tasted better? they asked.
The twist: The packaging was different, but the nuggets themselves were exactly
the same.
Overwhelmingly, the young patrons rated the McDonald’s branded food as
tasting better than the unbranded food—even though the food was exactly the
same. Thomas Robinson, director of the Center for Healthy Weight at Packard
Children’s Hospital, reports, “Kids don’t just ask for food from McDonald’s,
they actually believe that the chicken nugget they think is from McDonald’s
tastes better than an identical, unbranded nugget.” Not only did kids prefer the
flavor of branded nuggets, but also the taste of menu items not normally
associated with McDonald’s: carrots, milk, and apple juice when these foods
were presented in McDonald’s-branded packaging. By age three, their taste buds
were already “tricked” into imagining superior taste.
To fascinate diners with trust, Mickey D’s doesn’t just invest in becoming

the most familiar option. It also allows people to know what to expect from each
encounter by maintaining predictability.
Maintaining Predictability
Earning trust demands an investment of time and effort, because
predictability requires a guaranteed certainty. Trusted brands carefully pay
attention to detail, reinforcing consistency between expectations they set and
results they deliver. In return, the reward for earning trust is a big one: loyalty.
Loyalty acts as a rudder of decision making, because in certain
circumstances, we want to know exactly what to expect. Surprises aren’t fun
when it comes to an auto manufacturer’s warranty, auto-deposit of a paycheck,
or the skill of our cardiac surgeon. In these types of relationships, we seek
reliable options. Safety is paramount and excitement is bad, so we’re drawn to
stability. Year after year, we might return to the same accountant not for her keen
fashion sense or witty banter, but because we don’t have to worry if our 1040
form will pass muster.
“I’ll Have the usual”
We order the same dish in a restaurant over and over not because it’s
surprising, but the opposite: We know and love it. Once we know what to expect
from a brand, they’ve already done much of the decision-making heavy lifting
for us. McDonald’s applies this premise to its message, as do many of the most
established companies.
Trusted brands reliably deliver specific qualities: In the morning, we can
wake up and put on a navy blue Brooks Brothers jacket knowing it won’t look
passé, get into our assuredly safe Volvo, and drive to any Starbucks in the
country to enjoy the same cup of coffee. At work we can sit at an ergonomic
Aeron chair and stylish Herman Miller desk, writing with the Sharpie pen that
won’t wash off. On the way home from work, while listening to a Miles Davis
song that we know will be cool, we can pick up a dinner we know will be
healthy at Whole Foods. After work, we can see a Francis Ford Coppola movie
that we know will be epic, and perhaps crack open an Anheuser-Busch beer,
which, we’re about to find out, has been approved by a panel of predictability
experts.
Anheuser-Busch takes predictability seriously. This company’s quality
control might be renamed “predictability control.” Members of an elite panel

ensure the consistency of the beer’s flavor from brewery to brewery, day to day.
To guarantee uniformity, samples from each of the fifteen breweries are flown
into the St. Louis headquarters, served to the tasters in identically selected
glasses that have been cleaned precisely with filtered water. The panel samples
every ingredient, including air, which they bubble through water and sip.
Because of this, consumers can trust that every beer, from every brewery, tastes
the same.
Over the years, traditional marketing has built these companies into familiar
friends. Even if we’ve never driven a Volvo or worn a Brooks Brothers, we
develop expectations based on their reputations.
The more predictable a message, the more we rely on it. These brands
demand very little learning curve, reassuring us by recognizing our expectations,
and reliably satisfying them. Trusted messages are also consistent, with very
little conflicting input, because inconsistency breaks trust. To build consistency,
repeat your message, and retell your story.
Repeat and Retell
Many organizations use consistency to influence behavior, but one did so
with devastating effectiveness. Instead of selling a product, this organization sold
an ideology. Instead of ingraining beliefs about a store, it ingrained beliefs about
life and death. And millions of people followed the message, as horrible as the
message was. How did this organization use trust?
How Did the Nazis Instill Their Message?*
As we saw earlier, if an organization wants to persuade followers through
trust, it must deliver a very consistent, reliable message. If people hear that
message repeatedly and consistently, and if that message has few deviations and
little conflicting information around it, they “trust” it. In the absence of
conflicting input, even a false message will be trusted.
If there are opposing viewpoints, however—if an audience hears a variety of
messages—then as a whole, they’re more likely to start asking questions. They
form opinions and make their own decisions, becoming less likely to blindly
trust any one specific message. The audience fragments, trusting different
messages.
If you’re a propagandist, this presents a real problem. Propagandists don’t
want opposing viewpoints. That is especially true of a propagandist whose

message violates his audience’s deeper beliefs. For these communicators, it is
not enough to merely repeat the message—dissenters must also be squelched.
Propagandists use information control to enforce exact consistency. They
monitor every possible piece of information their audience might absorb,
rigorously reinforcing their agendas while going to great lengths to prevent
outside contradicting influences. No matter how illogical or heinous their
argument may be, followers are almost forced to trust it. It’s all they know.
Nazi propaganda chief Joseph Goebbels was a master of manipulating trust
through consistent repetition. He wrote, “If you tell a lie big enough and keep
repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it…. It thus becomes vitally
important for the State to use all of its powers to repress dissent.” Adolf Hitler,
in his autobiography Mein Kampf (“My Struggle”), instructs that the purpose of
propaganda is to attract the attention of the crowd, “so skillfully that everyone
will be convinced that the fact is real,” by not overestimating the intelligence of
the masses. He summarizes, “The greater the lie, the greater the chance that it
will be believed.” Make the lie big, make it simple, keep saying it, and
eventually they will believe it.
All Propaganda is Marketing
Hitler even applied this to marketing, reinforcing a need for absolute
declaration: “What, for example, would we say about a poster that was supposed
to advertise a new soap and that described other soaps as ‘good’? We would only
shake our heads. Exactly the same applies to political advertising.”
In a quote that could just as easily come from a Marketing 101 class, Hitler
teaches, “The art of propaganda lies in understanding the emotional ideas of the
great masses and finding, through a psychologically correct form, the way to the
attention and thence to the heart of the broad masses.” Marketing isn’t
necessarily propaganda. All propaganda, however, is marketing.
Trust doesn’t demand a moral absolute—only absolute consistency.
Repeating a message and retelling a story will drill in blind trust. However, to
build a genuine relationship with an audience, a message must reflect sincerity
and authenticity.
Be Authentic
From Gymborees to mothers’ teas, parents gush about Baby Einstein videos.
And what’s not to like? Plop your child (whether infant, toddler, or

kindergartener) in front of the TV while you step away to do dishes or (gasp!)
enjoy some free time. In your absence, your little darling only grows smarter and
more verbally proficient. What a guilt-free parenting indulgence! Even President
Bush praised the company. But…oh, wait, what’s this? A study published in the
Journal of Pediatrics reveals, “For every hour per day spent watching Baby
Einstein DVDs and videos, infants age eight to 16 months understood an average
of six to eight fewer words than those who did not watch them.”*
Villains, Heroes, and Other Personal Brands
We measure how much we “trust” something by comparing our expectations
against deviations. The more similar something is to our expectations, the more
we count on it. Reputations confirm this.
We trust good guys to be good. (Notice how few fairy tales illustrate Prince
Charming embezzling from the royal coffers.) We also “trust” Darth Vader,
Cruella de Vil, and Caligula to be bad. We revel in the evil of Heath Ledger’s
Joker, and the innocence of Forrest Gump. If an established character deviates
sharply from his persona, we’re confused, even disappointed.
In the case of superagent Ari Gold on HBO’s Entourage, unpredictability
might make for interesting TV. But in the workplace, consistency is the
cornerstone of a reputation built around trust. In the office, just as in the movies,
predictable behavior builds a reputation, but erratic action unravels the pattern.*
Reputations influence decision making. People make trust judgments based on
comparisons to past experiences. If your success relies on instant gratification or
surprise, then use trust at your leisure. However, if your success relies on trust,
then you must, without question, deliver what people expect. The more specific
your promise, the more urgent the need to deliver. We’re indignant if a FedEx
shows up late (when it absolutely, positively needed to be there overnight), or if
a Timex watch takes a licking but doesn’t keep ticking. Brands that fail to live up
to their raison d’être earn negative fascination: bad word of mouth. The brands
that we consistently trust are those that fulfill expectations.
Flavor of the Month
Tempestuous by nature, fads can feel sexy and exciting. They whip up
exaggerated, even zealous fascination. Some triggers can benefit from fads,
especially lust, prestige, or alarm. However, trends are a fickle mistress. They’re
difficult to maneuver or maintain.

For iconic people and companies, fads can erode credibility. Or worse,
damage trust. Trusted messages are not mercurial. Neon-yellow leggings or a
slick fauxhawk might do many things, but earning trust likely isn’t among them.
For a retailer, sustaining the same message might sound easy enough, but the
reality is that tastes change, economies change, and companies change.
Sometimes, it’s easy to give in to the temptation of cashing in on a fad.
Fashion Victim or Fashion Victor?
 
A quintessential classic, the Tiffany & Co. logo is engraved into 170 years of
exclusivity. Yet in the late 1990s, Tiffany’s lower-priced line of silver jewelry
took off as a must-have sensation among teenage girls. In particular, one $110
charm bracelet became a must-have fashion item. Other brands would rejoice in
the brisk sales, yet Tiffany executives knew these trinkets could make the brand
too accessible for older, wealthier patrons. As the company’s stock prices rose,
so did the concerns.
In a controversial move, Tiffany raised prices on the silver pieces to put the
brakes on this trend. This decision probably lost short-term profits from shoppers
wanting an affordable look, but preserved prestige from the company’s long-
term wealthy base.
It’s a risk to remain unchanged. Ruts are sticky. But for companies that rely
on long-standing trust as a primary trigger, every message must communicate
stability.*
Contradictory Input Kills Trust
We’re wired to attach our own security and safety to the idea of trust, so
when those bonds are broken, we feel threatened. Broken trust can have
disastrous effects, requiring serious effort, time, and a savvy plan to rebuild.
A situation that no homeowner has ever, ever faced:† a contractor who
finishes a remodeling job later than expected. If a contractor promises to have a
remodel finished in one month, but you’re living in your bedroom for three
months, they’ve created a contradiction between their message (completion
promised in a month) and their results (completion in three months), thereby
introducing a dissonance between what they say and do. Instead of trust, the
contractor is more likely triggering alarm around deadlines. In the workplace,
loss of fascination can translate to loss of a job, especially when deadlines and

budgets are tight.
Breaking and Rebuilding Trust
Everyone makes mistakes. Even with the best intentions, messages can turn
out differently than planned, especially after making a mistake. They point out
the break in expectations, in order to rebuild patterns of trust.
For Odwalla, the natural juice company, trust is a main trigger of the brand.
Along with lust (for their juicy flavors), the company built itself on absolute
freshness, without pasteurization. But since there was no pasteurization to kill
bacteria on the apples, the apples needed to be picked only directly from the
trees. A worker in the grove apparently took a fruit from the ground, and the
resulting E. coli outbreak killed a little girl named Anna. Rather than explaining
or hiding, Odwalla worked directly with everyone in the supply chain. They
removed all fruit juices from the shelves, and within just five weeks of the recall,
developed a “flash pasteurization” method of preserving fresh flavor, for both
quality and consumer safety.
Odwalla broke trust, then repaired it. And they did so on an accelerated time
frame. If you don’t have years to build trust, it is possible to speed the process by
weaving existing associations in with your message. Even without a 170-year-
old reputation on your side, like Tiffany & Co.
Accelerate Trust
A message can become established fairly quickly, as Hitler’s did, through
repetition without contradictory input. In most cases, however, an enduringly
trusted message takes time to build. The message doesn’t need to be biggest, or
best, or first of its kind: The eventual success of It’s a Wonderful Life showed
how retelling a story makes it more trusted over time.
Repetition alone is rarely enough to make a message fascinating. To earn
trust, ideally the message itself will extend over time. To accelerate trust,
however, a message can tap into values that extend over time.*
Reinventing Cues from the Past
Yesterday’s tired facts can be reinvented anew. And just about anything from
your past is fair game. Colt 45, the malt liquor favored by the urban poor, turned
a flinch-worthy truth into a street-smart marketing tool. Instead of hiding from

the fact that the oversized bottles are usually carried in small brown paper bags,
they created cool hand-drawn ads printed directly on small brown paper bags.
The campaign used its heritage to do the seemingly impossible: reposition Colt
45 to hipster drinkers.
Companies occasionally rebuild trust by going back into their own history
and bringing back old marketing devices. Maxwell House returned to “Good to
the last drop,” Star-Kist tuna reintroduced Charlie the Tuna, and Burger King
invited us to once again have it our way.
Companies lacking in perennial trust cues often simply borrow someone
else’s. Senekot laxatives borrowed James Brown’s “I Feel Good,” and Viagra
regaled us with “Viva Viagra.” Sea-Bond Denture Adhesive brought back “Bye
Bye Love.” If a song isn’t quite exactly right off-the-rack, many TV
commercials take poetic license (as long as they pay to license the song): Luvs
diapers paraphrases the Beatles’ “All You Need Is Luvs.” And Kraft Cheese
Crumbles brought us their version of “Unbelievable,” the hum-worthy
“Crumbelievable.”* Are dead celebrities off-limits for conjuring trust cues?
Hmm. Maybe not always the best idea. Using old footage, amid a 1997 outcry, a
Dirt Devil commercial featured Fred Astaire dancing with a vacuum cleaner.
Orville Redenbacher died in 1995, but through the wonders of computer
graphics, a 2007 commercial featured him holding an iPod while touting his
microwave popcorn.
Using Familiar Cues for Introductions
Remember the “exposure effect”? We’re drawn to people and situations that
feel familiar. They fit a pattern we already know. This logic explains why
“Crumbelievable” probably tested so well in focus groups. And it explains why
we’re more likely to extend trust to something that’s similar to what we know.
By linking a new message to one that’s already firmly trusted, we can
shorten the time frame needed to develop trust. Real estate professionals often
use the scent of baking bread or cookies when showing a home to buyers,
because these nostalgic scents cue unconscious memories for many buyers. The
scents bring familiar cues to an unfamiliar environment, making it seem more
immediately homelike.
“Unfascinate” an Unhealthy Message
Can a message become too fascinating—so fascinating that for a certain

group of people, it’s no longer possible to logically evaluate it? Cults are too
fascinating, and so are ultra-extremist political groups. They influence to the
point of brainwashing, with messages that can overwhelm all other choices.
Embedded with trust, these messages can be extremely difficult to neutralize.
The Darker Side of Trust
It is possible to break an unhealthy decision-making cycle by replacing one
message with another. The unhealthy message must first become “unfastened,”
and replaced by a new, healthier message.
In the section on vice, we saw how the DARE anti-drug program has the
unexpected result of increasing the likelihood of drug use among teens. And we
learned that trust overcomes vice: When trusted peers, rather than strangers,
teach prevention, the anti-drug message becomes far more effective. Trust can
deter, or even reverse, negative behavior caused by other triggers.
Unhealthy Trust
Just as trust encourages us to gravitate to a familiar image rather than an
unfamiliar one, so do we gravitate to familiar messages. And we gravitate to
familiar messages whether they’re healthy or not. Fast food is an ingrained
message, and as a consequence, obesity is a negative consequence of trust. For
those who’ve grown up with fast food as a regular, established part of their
dining repertoire, fast food is a comfortable, reliable staple.
A few pages ago, we looked at young kids’ learned preference for
McDonald’s branded chicken nuggets. As the trust attachment to fast food
grows, so do the health risks. We’ve all seen the news reports and articles on
childhood obesity. The numbers keep getting worse: According to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, the number of overweight or obese children
ages two to nineteen years old has tripled since 1980.
But let’s be fair. Assuming we could hide McDonald’s signs from our
children, and never allow them to watch TV commercials or play with the Happy
Meal toys, would they choose rhubarb over a candy bar? Taking it a step further,
assuming both unhealthy and healthy options were equally available, would kids
pick kale over fries? Can healthy food ever hope to compete with fast-food
culture? Is it possible for our society to win the battle against childhood obesity
—a battle against billion-dollar marketing budgets, against the body’s natural
appetite for salt and fat and sugar, and against even the force of a deeply

ingrained trigger of trust?
In one little schoolyard parking lot, fast food is starting to lose the battle.
The Edible Schoolyard
When it comes to food shopping and consumption, there’s been a
fundamental shift in the United States since World War II. Instead of purchasing
food directly from farmers, we’ve shifted to a processed model, purchasing food
from manufacturers such as fast-food restaurants. As a result, most children have
very little experience with food in its original, unprocessed state.
One school is changing the rules, giving kids a “happy meal” of a different
sort. This lunch doesn’t come in a box printed with puzzles, but rather from a
garden planted by the kids themselves. Alice Waters, a major proponent of the
organic food movement who is credited with developing California Cuisine,
piloted the Edible Schoolyard. Waters started the program in 1994 in Berkeley,
an outgrowth of the Chez Panisse Foundation, at the Martin Luther King Jr.
Middle School.* Students turned the school’s parking lot into a garden, or an
“edible schoolyard.” Teachers and students cleared the land and developed a
garden to teach kids about the entire process of how food comes from the earth
to their plates. Kids don’t just eat the food; they experience it. And they start to
choose it over unhealthy food.
In a phone interview, Carolyn Federman, director of development at the
Chez Panisse Foundation, described how the program “has shown that if you
offer children a new dish, there’s no better than a fifty-fifty chance they will
choose it. But if they’ve been introduced to the dish ahead of time, and if they
have helped prepare it, they will all want to try it.” The kids say, for example,
“I’ve learned that vegetables are better than I thought.”
Banning unhealthy practices, or rejecting negative beliefs, will only spark
vice, creating “forbidden fruit.” But applying principles from the Edible
Schoolyard, we might turn around negative habits or beliefs by replacing those
beliefs with a new set of trusted experiences.
Lessons to Learn and Apply from the Edible Schoolyard
At some point, many of us face the difficult task of reversing a deeply
ingrained opinion or belief. By identifying a new positive message, and
introducing a variety of new ways to experience that message, we can start to
loosen the grip of the old one. People learn by doing, because it ingrains new

trust beliefs and habits in a variety of ways.
For the Edible Schoolyard program, for instance, food is an academic
subject. Kids translate vegetable names from one language to another in Spanish
class; in math class they convert grams to ounces; and in history class they learn
about indigenous cultures and the origins of recipes. Go beyond rational data,
and instead provoke creativity and emotion around your intended message.
Cumulatively, these experiences fascinate by building a new trust.
Trust for Beginners
This most valuable of all triggers rarely comes quickly or easily. Tiffany
demonstrated how difficult it is to maintain authenticity over time, requiring
great effort and expense. If you’re new to the trust trigger, and believe it’s worth
the investment, take a lesson from trusted people and companies.
When introducing yourself, find ways that your message can feel instantly
familiar. Pinpoint shared values with your audience, since people bond more
quickly with others who have similar values and traits to their own.
Identify the patterns you want to fascinate others with. If you build upon
them and stick to them, trust will build gradually and naturally over time. In the
meantime, while trust builds, activate another trigger to generate fascination:
prestige and power are trust’s closest substitutes.
Until this point, we’ve been playing with triggers in abstract theory. Time to
talk more tangibly about your own message, as it lives in the real world, with
Part III, “The Fascination Plan of Attack.” We’ll poke and prod at your brand to
find hidden gems and potential challenges. Applying the grand total of
everything we’ve learned up to this point, we’ll create your “badges” and “bell
curves” in a creative process, and we’ll apply the Gold Hallmarks to your own
message.
Along the way, we’ll pause to consider an $8,200 cocktail, a postmortem
tattoo, and, oh, those delightfully bright orange polyester Hooters shorts.
Ready? Let’s get fascinating.

PART III

The Fascination Plan of Attack
How to Make Your Own Messages More Fascinating

In Part I, we saw why people become fascinated. In Part II, we learned
which triggers fascinate. Now, we’ll start to develop your plan to make your own
message more fascinating.
Ideas Kept under Lock and Key
Fascinating ideas are precious. They can change the course of a company’s
revenue, or change the course of history. We sometimes treat ideas indelicately,
as through they’re worth little more than the paper upon which they’re written.
Early in my career, one experience taught the value of fascinating ideas.
In 1991, the world headquarters of TBWA Advertising was located at 292
Madison Avenue. This was back when a Madison Avenue address was still
considered de rigueur for an agency’s letterhead. TBWA exuded the untouchable
cool of an international catwalk model: aloof, poreless, slightly bored, altogether
intimidating. It was the summer of 1991, when the agency had recently debuted
the iconic Absolut Vodka campaign and was now polishing its fame to blinding
perfection. Entering the all-white lobby made one feel suddenly self-conscious,
acutely aware of some otherwise irrelevant detail, such as the fact that the dry
cleaner’s seamstress had recently resewn a button in a slightly off-color thread.
Yet on the first day of my unpaid summer internship, walking into that
lobby, I felt no intimidation whatsoever. Not because I possessed that same
unattainable cool, but quite the opposite. I was too clueless even to have a clue
of how clueless I was. Just two weeks earlier I’d graduated from college wearing
my new $29.95 Thom McAn white pumps, my unruly hair gelled back into a
Laura Ashley bow, and that internship was mine, all mine.
My first week, I heard a rumor that the creative department staff locked their
file drawers at night. Why? So no one could steal their ideas. I was naïve, but not
blind, and this intrigued me greatly. What kind of intellectual bullion could
possibly fill those files? These same employees casually left personal valuables
such as watches and cameras on their desks at night, yet neurotically locked their

file drawers? Whatever lay inside those OfficeMax treasure chests, I wanted
some of it.
Over the course of the summer, I learned (while fetching coffee) why writers
and art directors kept their ideas under lock and key. Those scribbles and words,
when applied against a client’s specific marketing challenges, could seed an
entire brand campaign. If the campaign launched, in addition to skyrocketing the
careers of those behind it, it could generate hundreds of millions of dollars for
the client, realign entire product categories, and become a pop culture hero.
TBWA had recently done just this: their global Absolut phenomenon all began
with one single, hand-drawn piece of paper.
Today, if you and I somehow discovered one of those locked filing chests
and jimmied it open to sell at the neighborhood pawnshop, we’d be mightily
disappointed. The ideas would probably be worthless. An idea is only as
valuable as its ability to solve a problem.* Those TBWA ideas, while priceless in
1991, are meaningless outside the context for which they were created. Alas,
there is no underground black market for story-boards and media plans.
Ideas are precious, yes—but not in and of themselves. They don’t live in a
vacuum. They become precious only once they successfully answer a specific
need; otherwise they’re just scribbles.
Just as you can’t solve your own problems with TBWA’s ideas, the ideas in
this book won’t become truly valuable until you apply them to your own context,
obstacles, and goals. There is no one-size-fits-all fascination plan. However,
through applying best-in-class principles used by the most influential brands, a
framework emerges: the Fascination Plan of Attack.
Three Stages for Your Plan of Attack
Accelerated Lessons and Exercises for You and Your Team
Stage 1: Evaluation Stage 2: Development Stage 3: Execution
In my consulting and workshops, I chart an immersive Plan of Attack with
clients. However, today, since I’m here and you’re there, and we’re not in the
same room together, this book will give you the tools you need to begin. What
follows is your fascination crash course, condensed into a manageable DIY
process for you and your team. I recommend completing Stage 1, Evaluation,
over the course of a full day, so that you can collect a snapshot without diving so
deep that you lose perspective. Stage 2, Development, can take hours or years,
depending on your needs. Again, I suggest a full day minimum on a specific
message. Stage 3, Execution, is an ongoing process. It’s worth spending a day

discussing the opportunities and obstacles laid out here, but this should become a
continual part of integrating fascination into your team’s thinking.
Before you start getting ready to cram your own filing cabinets full of
precious ideas, here are a few quick housekeeping items. First, it’s unrealistic to
think you’ll motor through this whole curriculum at once, so consider doing this
program as an intensive meeting over the course of two or three days. Next,
document everything you generate, because ideas that seem unrealistic at first
can be viable later. Finally, there must be snacks involved. (Go easy on the Red
Bull, though.) All right then, let’s begin.
The discussion, exercises, and questions that follow will help your team
embark on three critical steps for innovation: Assess your current levels of
fascination, create new forms of fascination, and then successfully apply
potential ideas. First, we’ll evaluate how effectively you’re fascinating your
audience.

Stage 1: Evaluation
How Fascinating Are Your Company and Message?
We’ve seen how fascination persuades people to do things they don’t
understand (cheating on diets or spouses), believe messages that don’t make
sense (chicken nuggets taste better if wrapped in McDonald’s packaging), and
buy things they don’t even enjoy (Jägermeister, baby!). Unsurprisingly, then, this
evaluation process might feel unfamiliar at first.
Here’s the first difference between a traditional evaluation and our Plan of
Attack: We won’t be evaluating your own messages. As tempting as it might be
to spend time examining what you do and say, that’s fairly irrelevant here.
Fascination lives not in your own communication to the world, but rather in how
the world communicates about you. Sure, marketers used to control the message,
but today, the market controls the message.
Messages take off and become fascinating through the six Gold Hallmarks
introduced in Part I. By tweaking the Hallmarks, we can more easily use them to
evaluate your own company and message. Take a deep breath, and a good, hard
look. How is your company performing against these criteria?
Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message
Do we provoke strong and immediate emotional reactions?
Do we create advocates?
Are we “cultural shorthand” for a specific set of actions or values?
Do we incite conversation?
Do we force competitors to realign around us?

Do we trigger social revolutions?
Let’s take a moment to apply each.
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re Provoking
Strong and Immediate Emotional Reactions
The unfortunate reality is that most marketers set out to create messages
that offend the fewest people. They’re playing not to lose. Yet as we saw
with world championship poker, Landmark Education, and Jay Gnospelius,
strong and immediate reactions are a key characteristic of fascinating
brands. Some reactions are positive, some not, but they do fascinate.
If you’re not generating a negative reaction from someone, you’re
probably not fascinating anyone. List the reactions, both positive and
negative, that you provoke.
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re Creating
Advocates
Your fans may be a small slice of your overall base, but they’re the most
passionate and vocal, and they’ll participate in your marketing work.
Fiskars (yes, that old scissors company) created a “crafting ambassadors”
program called “Fisk-A-Teers.” These scrapbooking aficionados and craft
connoisseurs get to learn from one another, and the company gets an
ongoing focus group of free research on potential new products, lifestyle
insight, and new product ideas. Fiskars doesn’t talk to its audience; instead,
it gives the audience ways to connect through the brand.
Maker’s Mark Bourbon Whisky harnesses the power of its greatest fans,
allowing them to play an integral role in the growth of the brand. Each
“ambassador” gets his own Maker’s Mark barrel of whisky, marked with
his name; the company sends regular updates about this personal barrel,
with the opportunity to taste and purchase from this batch. Maker’s Mark
even provides ambassadors with business cards! These consumers aren’t
just consumers, they’re activists. Can you create ambassadors? How would
you reward them, inspire them, and support their communication with you,

and with one another?
If you don’t currently have a fan base for your message, challenge
yourself with the following questions: What would it take to compel
someone to pay for a T-shirt bearing your logo? What would it take to make
people stand in line for hours to purchase your product? What would it take
for people to pay double to obtain your product—even if the utility of the
product didn’t change? What would it take for your product to become so
beloved that it never, ever went on sale?
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re Embodying
Specific Core Values
In an attempt to be all things to all people, most brands end up saying
nothing to anyone. Fascinating companies earn attention by focusing on a
specific message: Home Depot (do-it-yourself), Patagonia (sustainability),
Target (accessible style), Nordstrom (overachieving service), or De Beers
(romantic expression). Tiffany & Co. made a tough decision to reduce their
line of trendy silver pieces, but in doing so, preserved trust and prestige.
Even tiny details represent bigger core values. Pret A Manger, a
gourmet take-out chain, stirs its granola by hand with a four-foot-long
wooden oar. Sure, they could far more easily stir it with a mechanical
mixer, but according to Pret’s “slow food” beliefs, this would damage their
oatmeal’s flavor and texture. That wooden oar stirs not only the oatmeal,
but also our imagination. That oar tidbit, while not advertised or promoted
anywhere, tells us that all of Pret’s food will be as homemade as a New
York deli’s can be.
Ask Yourself:
Do you represent such a distinct point of view that you can stand as a
symbol for certain values?
What’s the one essential quality without which your brand would not
survive?
A more challenging question: What core values is your brand so
committed to that it would be willing to go out of business before

sacrificing them? (If you have trouble with this question, the alarm
trigger should be activating right about now.)
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re “Cultural
Shorthand” for a Set of Actions or Values
Early Volkswagen Bug and Porsche owners would wave to one another,
bonding over their shared choice in cars. Airstream motor homes have ID
numbers, so Airstream owners can tell who just passed them. People
identify with fascinating brands: They identify themselves, their opinions,
and their community. (As the commercial says, “Are you a Mac, or PC?”)
Ask Yourself:
How do customers use your product or message to tell the world about
themselves and their point of view?
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re Inciting
Conversations
People don’t want to connect with brands. They want to connect with
one another. The U.S. military created a way for members of its target
audience to connect with one another over a product. When the number of
military recruits dropped, the military started conversations among potential
recruits by creating a video game. Future Force Company Commander, or
F2C2, portrays the nation’s futuristic military as an invulnerable high-tech
organization, giving its consumers (teenage boys) a carefully controlled
glimpse of battle. It doesn’t matter if you agree with the game, you can’t
ignore why it got so many potential recruits talking, and connecting.
The more people become fascinated by you and your message, the more
they want to interact with you: playing with you, talking about you,
learning from you, and above all, connecting with you and then with one
another.

Ask Yourself:
What opportunities do you create for people to connect with one
another?
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re Forcing
Competitors to Realign
Zappos.com forced its competitors, and its category, to realign. For
many consumers, shopping online had two big barriers: the potential
inconvenience of returns, and potential shipping costs. To lower the alarm
trigger, Zappos offers free shipping both ways, thereby killing two risks
with one stone. Zappos.com also triggers power (by giving consumers more
control), with a highly visual site and multiple product shots (for the
gratification of lust). Prestige enters the mix with “Zappos Couture,”
featuring Vivienne Westwood, Moschino, and other decidedly un-Zappos-
like designers. And since we’re talking about women and shoes, it’s also a
vice combination! This online model, while deceptively simple, defines its
category through innovation with multiple triggers. In 2009, Amazon
bought the company for $928 million, leaving many competitors flat-
footed.
Ask Yourself:
How could you communicate so distinctively that your innovations
turn into your consumers’ expectations? How can you set your
competitors on the defensive?
Exercise: Evaluate Whether You’re Tapping
Into, or Triggering, Social Revolutions

When people become fascinated, they merge with larger groups of
people fascinated by the same message. These groups can do much of your
work for you, inciting others to join a bigger cultural movement. Harley-
Davidson revolutionized a category, and sparked a revolution. Jim Nelson,
executive creative director at ad agency Carmichael Lynch, explains that in
the sixties, the public had an extremely negative opinion of motorcycle
riding. To refute this, Cycle World magazine published an article claiming
that 99 percent of bikers were law-abiding, responsible citizens—the other
1 percent of outlaw bikers were giving the rest a bad name. Harley riders
took that 1 percent as a badge of honor, calling themselves the “One
Percenters.” In response, Honda came out with a campaign that said, “You
meet the nicest people on a Honda.” Harley didn’t back down on its
message. These riders didn’t want to be nice, they wanted to ride.*
Social revolutions aren’t once-in-a-decade events. They’re happening
constantly, every single day: from political beliefs, use of technology,
fashion, and consumption of media, to local communities and family
structure. Even if you don’t trigger a social revolution, as Harley did, you
can certain tap into cultural changes.
Ask Yourself:
How can your message capitalize on emerging changes? For instance,
could your advertising pinpoint a new trend, and use it to your
advantage?
Could you tie your message into what people are already doing and
saying around a specific cause?
What groups, communities, and tribes could your message excite and
activate, so that they champion your message as part of their own?
Identifying Your Primary Trigger
You’re already using triggers (whether you intend to or not, and whether you
want to or not). By now you probably have an idea of your primary fascination
trigger—the one that most closely embodies the way in which you fascinate
others. You might also have an idea of your secondary triggers. While clarifying

your triggers, and the ways in which you use them, it helps to print out a list of
the seven triggers to have in front of you:
LUST is the desire or craving for sensory gratification.
MYSTIQUE lures with a puzzle, or unanswered question.
ALARM threatens with immediate consequences.
PRESTIGE earns respect through symbols of achievement.
POWER is command over others.
VICE tempts with “forbidden fruit,” causing us to step outside our usual
habits or behaviors.
TRUST comforts us with certainty and reliability.
In Parts I and II of this book, we saw how fascination already shapes our
actions and opinions in surprising ways. An effective fascination plan harnesses
this power. Once you understand the triggers that drive your customers’
behavior, and design your plan with your triggers and badges in mind, you can
direct this force of attraction. Are you using the right triggers, in the right way, to
get your desired result?
Your Brand’s Chemistry Set
Let’s take a few well-known brands, and check out how their current
branding successfully activates specific triggers. (There’s some degree of
subjectivity involved with this exercise, so expect and enjoy healthy debate. The
point is to identify and establish patterns.) The Appeal of Lust + Trust for
Mass Brands
We don’t necessarily think of Coke, Olive Garden, and Rachael Ray as
similar brands. However, they all rely on the same two triggers as many
mainstream food-oriented brands: lust and trust. (Many Kraft products have
almost exactly the same formula as Olive Garden.) Each brand uses different
secondary triggers, in addition to lust and trust. For instance, we saw how Coke
amps up mystique, through mythology. Olive Garden adds a bit of the alarm
trigger with notorious wait times for a table, and time-limited specials. And
Rachael Ray gives a splash of vice when she encourages viewers to tweak
recipes as they go, or when she sneaks in extra “delish” bites.
Trend-Oriented Brands

In contrast to the lust + trust combination, brands that tap into trends tend to
trade on other triggers, without emphasis on the consistency and safety of trust.
 
COKE
OLIVE GARDEN
RACHAEL RAY
 
The chain of W Hotels (part of Starwood Hotels & Resorts) tempts urban
travelers with all manner of saucy treats. One offer is a “Seduce Me” package:
When you “sneak away for a racy rendezvous” they’ll provide not only a bottle
of bubbly and late checkout, but in addition, their “pleasurable playthings are
sure to spice up your escape.”
Have you ever been inside a Sephora? This sophisticated cosmetics and
beauty store not only allows consumers to sample products, but spurs them on to
experience and experiment with all the trendiest fragrances, imported creams,
and shimmering makeups. Sephora lives in a different category from W Hotels,
but their triggers mirror each other, and they share a similar a message: Indulge,
experiment, and upgrade your life…while never giving all your secrets away.

 
W HOTELS
SEPHORA
FEDEX
Who’s Getting It Right (Or Not)?
Federal Express thrives on triggering alarm. When the threat of negative
consequences runs high, we’re willing to pay extra for overnight service in order
to trust that it will arrive.
The Walt Disney World experience is based upon stories, and stories form a
foundation of mystique. In addition, visitors know they’ll step inside a highly
sensory environment. And for many of us, Disney World fulfills a trusted
expectation: Our children will enjoy something similar to our own first Disney
experiences years ago.
 
WALT DISNEY WORLD THEME PARK

 
Who’s not triggering much of anything? Kmart offers very little in the way
of fascination. The brand has some of the trust trigger from name recognition.
They sometimes use the alarm trigger for sales: remember “Attention Kmart
Shoppers!” and “Blue Light Specials”? There is also the stockholder’s alarm,
during the filing of Chapter 11 in 2002. Other than that, Kmart is not living up to
Target’s fearsome fascination combo of lust (with its brilliantly iconic marketing
and design), prestige (bringing high style to the masses), vice (for instance,
consumers can find reasonably priced versions of designer clothes), and trust
(with the brand’s consistently good taste), as well as a bucketful of lust (and it’s
a bucket designed by Philippe Starck or Michael Graves).
 
KMART
 
Archetypes and Superheroes
The seven triggers apply to every type of message and personality, and even
to archetypical comic book superheroes.
We may never get to see Superman and Spider-Man battle it out in real life,
but we can see how these two superheroes’ triggers stack up. Superman, the
quintessential all-American superhero, fascinates us with dashing good looks,
meteor-exploding ability, rock-solid trust from the authority figures, and
occasional kryptonite poisoning from Lex Luthor.
Spider-Man, on the other hand, is a darker alter ego. He evokes a different

set of triggers with a fully masked costume, web-slingers, “spider-sense,” and
nemesis Doctor Octopus. He doesn’t always follow authority and has been
arrested (far different from mild-mannered Clark Kent!). This intriguing combo
has generated enough mystique and vice to spellbind us since 1962.
 
SUPERMAN
SPIDERMAN
Exercise: Your Brand’s “Chemistry Set”
Imagine seven beakers on the table in front of you. Each beaker has a
label: lust, mystique, alarm, prestige, power, vice, and trust. Some beakers
are close to empty, some are half full, and if you’re lucky, one is filled near
the top. These seven elements combine in a sort of chemical formula, a.k.a
your brand.
These seven potential fascination triggers offer an infinite number of
brand combinations. You can blend or separate them, dial them up or pull
them back. You can reinvigorate your whole identity by adding or
subtracting small amounts of a single trigger, or revise your ratios
depending on your goals. The point will be to develop the most irresistible
recipe, and make it your own. Your “chemical formula” may also use
secondary triggers, ones used less frequently or to a lesser degree.
On a piece of paper or whiteboard, draw the seven beakers, one for each
trigger. Now estimate your current levels of fascination: How full is each
beaker? Which beakers should be more full, or less full, in order to fulfill
your goals? Keep these levels in mind as we move forward into Stage 2, so

you can calibrate according to your badges, and your bell curve.
OKAY, NOW YOU’VE EVALUATED your message. How might you use
the seven triggers to develop it?

Stage 2: Development
Create and Heighten Fascination
By now we have an idea of how you generate fascination—and how much
of it you generate. The next stage is my favorite part of the whole process:
Develop new ways to fascinate others. Time to put creativity to work for us.
Fascination Badges
No matter what type of brand you are, no matter what type of message you
spread, you already have raw ingredients to be fascinating. I call these
ingredients “fascination badges” because they’re emblematic of what you
represent. So how, exactly, are you fascinating? Seven potential areas:
1. Purpose: Your reason for being; your function as a brand.
 
2. Core beliefs: The code of values and principles that guide you; what you
stand for.
 
3. Heritage: Your reputation and history; the “backstory” of how you came
to be.
 
4. Products: The goods, services, or information you produce.
 
5. Benefits: The promises of reward for purchasing the product, both tangible

and abstract, overt and implied.
 
6. Actions: How you conduct yourself.
 
7. Culture: All the characteristics of your identity, including personality,
executional style, and mind-set.
 
Badges allow employees, customers, and fans to identify themselves with
you, and through you, beyond product usage. They invite people inside your
brand, allowing them to participate and take ownership. Find them,* and then
methodically refine and expand them.
Exercise: Create New Badges
One by one, go through the seven types of badges, and brainstorm every
possible association for each. Starting with your “purpose,” for example,
list all the words, ideas, and associations, gleaned from every possible
source, from your mission statement to your implied intentions. The more
specific, the better. Next, move on to core beliefs. And so on. What patterns
emerge? A few real-life badges to get you started: • Heritage: At Nike,
business cards feature a drawing of a waffle iron, commemorating the “aha”
moment when founder Bill Bowerman poured rubber into his wife’s waffle
iron, thereby creating Nike’s original racer sole design.
• Core beliefs: The Martin Agency, famous for its inclusive culture,
designed its new building with a circular foyer two stories high. The foyer
is aesthetically beautiful, but also serves as a literal representation of the
company’s core values: At company meetings, every employee can be part
of the discussion.
• Culture: Fascination badges started long before formal marketing in
the twentieth century. In the seventeenth century, carrots were either purple
or red. But then the Dutch royal family, named the House of Orange,
needed a “brand campaign” to exemplify their powerful influence. They
could have sewn a bigger flag, or painted a fancier crest, or trained a fiercer
army. Instead, horticulturists created a way to turn the country’s favorite
vegetable, the carrot, into a symbol of the national color. As you’ve seen for
yourself, carrots have been carroty orange ever since.

Badges and Bell Curves
You just brainstormed all your badges in seven categories, and even created
new ones. Now we’re going to find which ones are fascinating—or could
become fascinating.
Imagine a bell curve for the “purpose” badge list you brainstormed above.
On this bell curve, you’d plot unremarkable product associations at the left,
moderately interesting ones in the middle, and extraordinary ones at the far right.
Many of your purpose badges will collect in the middle (because they’re not
meeting the Gold Hallmarks for a fascinating message). However, you might
have a purpose that goes way out at the edge…an outlier.
Malcolm Gladwell, author of the book Outliers, says that “outlier” is “a
scientific term to describe things or phenomena that lie outside normal
experience.” Your goal is to find or create your own “outliers,” badges that are
an extreme deviation from the mean. These meet criteria from our list of Gold
Hallmarks, and as a result, fascinate people in the extreme. If you can find an
outlier that’s three standard deviations away from the center, you’re on to
something.
Exercise: Finding the Edge of Your Bell Curve
This exercise draws upon everything we’ve done so far in this section:
badges, hallmarks, and bell curve, as well as your seven fascination trigger
options. The steps:
1. List your badges (both existing and potential).
2. Evaluate against the hallmarks of a fascinating brand.
3. Plot on a bell curve.
4. Push badges outward on the curve by infusing them with more of your
primary trigger.
5. Push badges outward on the curve by infusing them with a new trigger.
6. Build your message around these badges.

Draw a bell curve, and take all the aspects of a single badge that you
brainstormed above, and plot them on the curve.
For the sake of discussion, let’s pick the “heritage” badge. Your heritage
might be inherently fascinating, or it might not. If not, either go on to your
next badge, or better yet, stop and find ways to make your heritage more
fascinating. A furniture company with an eighteenth-century legacy or
noteworthy story behind the founder could have an outlier, because those
badges would score highly on the hallmarks. A software company that
launched only yesterday might not have strong heritage badges. But how
might this startup turn its lack of heritage into a fascination badge? To
increase the fascination level of a badge, apply more of your triggers.
Now go on to your next badge category. Repeat.
Ask Yourself:
What could happen if you took an uninteresting badge and pushed it a
little further, and a little further, to see how far you can go? Sears
introduced a “products” badge: the first replacement guarantee of its
kind, for any tool bearing the Craftsman name. This new guarantee
wasn’t one year or ten years as other competitors offered; it was a
lifetime replacement guarantee, reaching out to the edge of the bell
curve and becoming a powerful trust badge. Sears was willing to go all
the way to the edge, where no one in the category had gone.
The Fringe
The degree to which you are willing to step outside your category norms is
the degree to which you’ll fascinate others.
The Ritz-Carlton hotel chain is an outlier in customer service. While it’s not
a formally acknowledged policy, any Ritz-Carlton employee is reportedly
permitted to spend up to $2,000 to ensure that a guest’s problem is immediately
handled. (That’s prestige partnered tightly with trust, to ensure credibility.) The
more unchallenged a norm appears to be, the more fascination you can earn by
tweaking it.
Celebrity nightclubs live at the fringe. Otherwise, a hotspot becomes a

“coldspot.” In Las Vegas, Rum Jungle advertises a cocktail for $8,200, with
Rémy Martin Louis XIII cognac and Roederer Cristal Champagne, served “on
the rocks.” The rocks? A pair of 1.5-carat diamond earrings. (That’s the prestige
trigger, mixed liberally with vice and lust.) If Cristal isn’t your thing, try
Hooters. The chain restaurant, whose tagline is “Delightfully tacky, yet
unrefined,” offers a meal package with twenty chicken wings and a bottle of
Dom Pérignon. (That’s the prestige trigger combined with, um…orange Dolphin
shorts in size XS and tan pantyhose.) Fringes Have No Boundaries
In the safe confines of the creative process, explore as far as you can into the
fringe wilderness. When you’re ready to launch your message in the market, you
might not push your message to the maximum intensity—in many cases, that’d
be overwhelming, even a turnoff. But at this point of development, don’t be
afraid to raise the stakes. Better to be exceptional in one or two areas than pretty
good in all.
Exercise: identify Outliers of Your fringe
Remember the chemistry set? Now that you know your main trigger,
how far can you push it? If your trigger is prestige, how can you embody
that in the extreme? In this exercise, the goal is to see just how far you
might extend to the outermost tip of the bell curve. Here, you’ll find prime
fascination territory. The more extraordinary your badges, the more
fascinating they can become. As you’re expanding possibilities, push past
the obvious. Past what you’ve done before. Past what your competition is
doing. Keep going. No, a little further. (C’mon, there’s good stuff in there,
but you have to go out and find it!) At the fringe, you’ll develop your most
highly concentrated badges.
Say you’re a leading diaper brand. You make perfectly good diapers,
ones that absorb without leaks, and have comfy Velcro on the sides. Your
product benefits are necessary; however, as badges, they’re not fascinating.
These badges plop in the middle of your bell curve, rather than out at the
fringe. How might you create fascinating badges? If you created a line of
diaper covers with Gwen Stefani’s LAMB fashion label, that would activate
prestige (the trigger) and get people talking (the hallmark). There’s your
badge. If you made fully flushable diaper for eco-tourists, you’d activate
trust (the trigger), and become part of a social revolution (the hallmark). If
the diaper’s exterior were printed with a simple visual story, the ending of
which was hidden in invisible ink until your child wet the diaper, that would

pique the curiosity of mystique (the trigger), as well as prompt positive and
not-so positive strong and immediate reactions (the hallmark).
Ask Yourself:
What happens if you step your toe over the line, and revise an accepted
norm? Identify how you could start to offer one truly inimitable
difference.
How could you redefine a specific expectation, as Ritz-Carlton has
done? You’ve hit the jackpot if you can get people to start
conversations about your brand with the phrase, “Wow, cool, I can’t
believe what Company X just did for me…”
Incorporating a New Trigger
A trigger that might seem unsuitable by itself can perfectly accent another
trigger. Together, the two triggers build a more compelling overall message.
If your primary fascination element is prestige, should you consider alarm?
If your primary fascination element is lust, how might you ramp up your power?
Under what circumstances should you leverage another trigger entirely?
At certain growth stages, a trigger that was once fascinating can become a
weakness. This might be because your audience changed, or your category
evolved, or technology leaped ahead; in any case, triggers are a means to an end
and must change accordingly. As we saw, Harry Winston relied upon prestige for
decades, but when new competitors emerged and the category shifted, the brand
incorporated power.
Club Med faced a similar need for change. The brand’s former tagline neatly
summed up a generational wild streak: “The antidote to civilization.” For years,
Club Med was the place to rid yourself of civilization’s many irritating
conventions (moderation, marital vows, et al.). The tagline itself reeked of vice.
But as the political climate was swinging to the right, Club Med fell out of sync
and stopped its swinging. It refocused where the money was: parents and
families, adopting prestige (attracting a laid-back international coterie) and lust
(cuisine, scenery, spa treatments). Club Med’s transition is successfully
complete.* Other examples when you might want to dial up, or dial down, new

triggers: If your trigger is trust, you’re building a reputation upon consistency.
Yet trust can eventually begin to feel ho-hum and predictable. What if you laced
a little alarm into the mix? You’d increase urgency and action around your
message, and add just enough adrenaline to keep things interesting.
If you increase a bit of lust, you’ll encourage people to step in more closely
and participate.
If you currently trigger prestige, you’re elevating your status and rank. Yet
be careful not to become so aloof and unattainable that your target feels
uncomfortable with your message.
Mystique will make people want to ask questions, learn more, and share
what they know. That curiosity keeps it from feeling cliché or status-conscious.
Additionally, prestige 
brands must 
take 
care 
in 
releasing 
new
communication, since tossing out random information can cloud your message
or fail to meet expectations. Again, mystique can strengthen prestige here as
well, allowing you to withhold information and release only the minimum
necessary.
Is power your thing? The power trigger is a favorite with corporations,
because it establishes leadership. Yet messages with power run the risk of feeling
corporate and self-inflated, or worse, steely and detached. To avoid intimidating
your audience, add just a drop or two of lust for warmth and approachability in
your message.
If your message is feeling stale or ponderous, consider a whit of vice, which
encourages your audience to consider new alternative ways of thinking and
behaving. This zesty little trigger helps people experience your message anew,
rather than taking it for granted as the “same old, same old.”
Exercise: Combine Your Primary Trigger with a
New One
One of my clients, Cole Haan, had a legacy of the prestige trigger.
Everyone knows the products are well crafted, but they lacked the level of
lust normally reserved for trendier prestige brands such as Gucci and
Jimmy Choo. To fight back, Cole Haan tapped new technology from parent
company Nike, engineering a new design of cushioned four-inch high-
heeled shoes. With this invention, high heels weren’t just for Town Car–
cruising socialites and masochists. Women who do crazy things like walk
could now wear shoes with both prestige and lust. One appearance on
Oprah later, and early designs were sold out across the country.

Ask Yourself:
Go through the list of seven triggers. For each one, consider a
possibility for how you might incorporate it with your primary trigger.
You might be surprised.
Cautionary Tale: Use Care When Switching
Triggers
If you choose to alter your trigger, that’s fine, but stick to your core values
unless you’re ready for a massive overhaul. Even if you piggyback on trends,
don’t violate your core values. Celebrity chef Wolfgang Puck’s company scores
high on lust (craveable foods), and prestige (trendy restaurants such as Spago).
By releasing supermarket soups and airport pizzas, he retains the core values of
his brand for a broader market.
When customers buy a product, what they’re often actually buying is
something more than the utility of the item—they’re buying a trigger. If they pay
for your product, but you don’t deliver the expected trigger, you could face a
backlash. Here’s an example. If a consumer expects to buy the trust trigger, but
instead gets the vice trigger, it violates expectations. Kelly Clarkson made one
such faux pas. When Clarkson became the first American Idol winner, her fans’
expectations were clearly defined: She was the newly christened American pop
princess, bubble gum and sparkles. But then Clarkson threw the world a
curveball with her third album, My December. The new darker, grittier Clarkson
broke her core values (trust trigger). Songs such as “Haunted” and “Sober” were
deemed “too negative” by her own label. Failing to fascinate fans, Clarkson
canceled her tour due to underwhelming ticket sales, and sought new
management. Madonna, on the other hand, reinvents by the day; reinvention is a
core value of hers.
It’s good and necessary to evolve your message over time. However,
changing your trigger entirely and without warning might just end up creating
the alarm trigger for your accountants.

What If…?
Okay! This is where the brainstorming really kicks in. “What if” questions
sit at the heart of any fascination development process, allowing us to apply
everything we’ve established in the exercises so far. What if you ramped up your
primary trigger? What if you incorporated a new trigger? What if you went 180
degrees in the other direction of your category’s expected triggers? This type of
exploration should continue indefinitely, but in the interest of helping you
imagine the possibilities, I’ll demonstrate how I unfurl the process with clients.
EXAMPLE 1: A SINGLE TRIGGER, A SINGLE
PRODUCT, APPLIED IN MULTIPLE WAYS
What If You Applied the Prestige Trigger to an Unprestigious Item?
PRESTIGE AND THE T-SHIRT
Prestige, as you’ll recall, is why we fixate on symbols of rank and respect.
Items of prestige have cultural meaning because they communicate a group’s
priorities and values. How could a mass-market product, such as a T-shirt,
trigger prestige? Obviously you could sew a designer logo or emboss it with
rhinestones, sure. But what if…
• WHAT IF YOU MADE THE T-SHIRT SCARCE?
 
Create T-shirt designs by famous artists that are available only in limited
editions of ten thousand. Or editions of one hundred. Or editions of one. When
an edition is sold out, it’s gone forever (or at least until it pops up—ding!—on
eBay).
• WHAT IF YOU TURNED THE T-SHIRT’S PURCHASE INTO A
PRESTIGIOUS EXPERIENCE?
 
Design a high-end “mobile T-shirt boutique” that visits customers at

bachelorette parties or baby showers. Bring consumers a carefully curated
selection of T-shirts, thereby increasing their perceived value.
• WHAT IF YOU MADE IT FROM CULTURALLY SIGNIFICANT
MATERIALS?
 
Make the shirt from a fabric that holds special appeal. Sew it from distressed
concert T-shirts, or UK football jerseys.
• WHAT IF YOU MADE IT FEEL CUSTOMIZED?
 
Allow customers to customize their T-shirt design (lettering, color,
embroidery, etc.) and then watch online, in real time, via streaming video, as
their T-shirt is made in the workshop. By the time the shirt arrives, customers
already have an attachment to their shirt.
• WHAT IF PEOPLE HAD TO EARN THE T-SHIRT?
Make consumers “pay” for your T-shirt, above and beyond the price tag. (My
nephew has a T-shirt from Cancun that announces his tequila prowess: “I ate the
worm!” Now, admittedly, that might not be my personal idea of fascinating
prestige, but it is for his target audience.) • WHAT IF YOU MADE THE T-
SHIRT TOO EXPENSIVE NOT JUST FOR MOST CONSUMERS, BUT
FOR ALMOST ALL CONSUMERS?
How can you make the ubiquitous white T-shirt less ubiquitous? Chanel
makes a $500 T-shirt; Prada, a $1,500 one. Both have sold fairly briskly. Who
says you can’t make a $15,000 T-shirt? You might never, ever sell a single one.
And that’s not the point. You’d provoke conversations.
• WHAT IF YOU TAPPED INTO DEEPER VALUES?
 
People pay more for brands whose beliefs connect with their own. What if
your T-shirts were woven from recycled hemp? What if you started a “T-shirt

relief” program that employed families in global disaster zones, building free
housing in exchange for their skills, and donors get T-shirts? Or what if you
created the world’s first “LEED certified” T-shirts?
Now apply this logic to yourself and your brand. What would compel your
customer to associate prestige with you?
EXAMPLE 2: A SINGLE COMPANY, MULTIPLE
TRIGGERS
The truth is, marketers can get into ruts. Our television commercials can get
into ruts: We rely on winding roads to sell cars, cute animals to sell toilet paper,
and ethnically nondescript families sitting around a dinner table to sell spaghetti
sauce. We also get into ruts with triggers: We use prestige to sell expensive
items, vice to sell energy drinks, and lust to sell perfume. It’s all a bit trite, really.
Sometimes it’s important to play against type, and apply unexpected triggers. In
this “what if” example, we’ll apply unexpected triggers to a single small
company, staying away from the clichés.
JUDGING A BOOK BY ITS TRIGGERS
What if You Activated New Triggers Within a Traditional Category?
Let’s say you’re marketing a small neighborhood bookshop. Obviously,
you’ll be competing against a massive market leader: Amazon.com. How could
you convince people to go out of their way to visit your store, pay higher prices,
and forgo services such as automatic billing? By applying the triggers, of course.
• WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED TRUST?
 
Could you trigger it relatively quickly, through a frequent-buyer program? Or
trigger it more intensively, by interacting with every customer on a first-name
basis.
• WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED LUST?
 

Your small bookshop could offer an intimate fireplace, or ergonomic reading
chairs.
• WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED ALARM?
 
Alarm uses consequences or a deadline to prompt fast action. You might
carry a hard-to-find book, and stock just ten of them, giving customers a reason
to shop immediately.
• WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED MYSTIQUE?
 
Change your stock once a week, each week with a different theme, and
always a surprise. One week, you might line the shelves with books about the
ocean (from marine biology to Old Man and the Sea), and the next you might
delight consumers with a monkey-related theme (Planet of the Apes, Tarzan, and
Curious George).
• WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED POWER?
 
Power controls the environment. A bookstore could develop its own unique
system of evaluating books: for example, a “favorites” selection in the spirit of
Jack Covert and Todd Sattersten’s The 100 Best Business Books of All Time.
• WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED VICE?
 
Vice entices people away from their routine behavior. Encourage customers
to take one day a year to turn off the computer, stay home from work, and read
their favorite new books…purchased from your shop, of course.
WHAT IF YOU TRIGGERED PRESTIGE?
 

Exclusively carry first editions and autographed copies. Or make your entire
store accessible to a membership-only cadre.
 
IN STAGES 1 AND 2, we’ve been living in the world of possibility:
thinking of what you might do or could do. Now let’s talk about what you
actually will do. Time to bring all this conceptual goodness into execution.

Stage 3: Execution
Bringing Your Fascination to Life
By this point, you’ve established your current scenario, and you’ve
developed new ideas. Now we’ll bring to life all the strategies and ideas we’ve
developed so far. When I work with clients, this stage becomes extremely
customized because each industry has its own nuances, as does each company
and product, fluctuating with the industry, all driven by the brand personality.
Stage 3 won’t outline exercises, because by this point, your Plan of Attack will
be different from anyone else’s, and will depend entirely upon your context
(because as we now know, ideas are only precious in a specific context). Yet
short of working together in person, let’s continue with your Plan of Attack.
There isn’t one defined approach, but there are defined principles.
Before you unleash your new plan with your main audience, you must first
consider how you will help it become fascinating within your own group.
Building Internal Support for Your Fascination
Plan
You now have a clearer understanding of where you’re connecting with your
audience, and where black holes lurk. You have a range of potential badges, and
a bell curve for making your existing ideas more fascinating. But that’s not
enough. You also need your team’s full support.
Every message needs advocates in order to survive. When presenting ideas,
as is always the case, fascination isn’t measured in what you say, but in what
others say about you.

Sharing Your Fascination Plan with Others
It’s one thing to come up with new ideas, but quite another to create
advocates from your partners, clients, investors, board of directors, or anyone
else holding the mighty approval stamp. At first, fascinating ideas can feel risky,
so managing this process wisely takes extra thought.
In the face of increased risk, you must increase evidence and payoff.
The more unorthodox the idea, the more evidence you’ll need to sell it,
and the greater the payoff must be to justify it.
Build the most rational possible argument. Don’t try to sell a new idea
with abstractions like “word of mouth.” Early in the process,
substantiate your idea with potential timelines, anticipated costs, and
partners. Remove as many variables and unknowns as possible, to
demonstrate control. Hypothetical is okay at this stage, but be as
specific as possible.
Show how you’ve succeeded in a parallel situation. Back up your ideas
with reference points or comparable case studies. If you haven’t
accumulated this success track record yet, show how concepts such as
the one you’ve proposed have masterfully succeeded in the past.
Help your client or boss “sell up.” If someone else will be defending
your idea to higher levels, make sure that person has the understanding
and tools to do so. Once you’ve made sure that the presenter can
clearly articulate the idea, then make sure that the presentation itself
can stand on its own, without you there.
In the preface, we learned that for thousands of years, everyone from
academics to ordinary folk viewed fascination as witchcraft. Hopefully by now

we agree that fascination isn’t witchcraft, and can be measured, researched, and
reevaluated.
Measure, Research, Reevaluate
If you’re a marketer, odds are you’ve already done the research on your
customers: You know who they are, where they are, and what they’re buying.
You might have gigabytes of information, an R&D department full of facts, or
even a hardbound deck of McKinsey & Company analysis. What you probably
lack, despite all these data, is an understanding of how to change the nature of
your relationship with consumers by becoming more fascinating.
Without the benefit of knowing your scenario and goals, we’ll keep this big-
picture. The following points will help chart the course of refining your Plan of
Attack.
Moving Beyond Traditional Research
In your market research, are you asking the right questions, and looking in
the right places, to measure fascination? It’s not always a simple matter. While
it’s relatively easy to measure awareness and recall, fascination is trickier. It’s
intangible and subjective, often defying logic and analysis. Unlike measurements
such as “share of voice,” we can’t easily calculate fascination metrics such as
“share of attraction” or “share of mystique.” However, we do have guidelines:
our Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message, and your F Score. As you
consider these, also keep two points in mind.
Two Points to Remember
Don’t just track the message you create. Instead, track the ways in
which your message inspires others to create messages about you.
The effectiveness of your message is measured not by how many
people hear that message or even remember it, but by how many listen
to it, talk about it with other people, and, ultimately, take action on it.
Traditional analysis works well for traditional messages. But with

fascination, you’ll need to slightly alter the ways in which you follow through.
Start by reconsidering a few basic points.
Reconsider your goals. Traditional marketing had generalized goals,
such as increased sales and greater loyalty. But in today’s fragmented
ADD world, those are way too general. Your plan will benefit from
more specific goals, and fascination can help. Do you want to increase
foot traffic in your retail locations by pulling people into your stores to
interact with your products (as Apple and Sephora do with lust)? The
more specific your goals, the more accurately you can reach them.
Reconsider your metrics. What metric will be most useful for your
overall goals? Measuring “awareness” of your message is good, and
standard practice, yet by itself, awareness is too passive and limited.
Go beyond traditional means of evaluating a consumer’s degree of
connection to reveal factors such as number of mentions in mainstream
media, satisfaction index, and percentage of increase in social media
mentions.
Track Your Progress
Traditionally, tracking a company’s marketing success would revolve around
the number of products sold or services hired. But by following a number of
indicators, you can more tangibly and specifically measure your increase in
fascination.*
Removing Barriers to Fascination
Companies that fascinate audiences over the long term share certain
qualities. Evaluation, development, and execution of fascinating ideas should be
a collective goal, one with resources and support from the C suite all the way
through the ranks.
Slaughter the sacred cow. What policies and practices do we have in
place only because “that’s the way it’s always been done”? What

corporate or marketing dogma is so “sacred” within your company that
it seems off-limits to questioning? And how can you start questioning
it?
Awaken sleepy traditions. What might have been fascinating at one
time can soon become unremarkable. Crayola’s first contest to name a
color, in 1993, drew two million entries. But without changing the
format, participation has dwindled to a measly twenty-five thousand
entries. How can you update the same-old, same-old?
Raise the stakes. What would you do if your company’s life depended
upon earning fascination in the next year? In the next month? In the
next twenty-four hours? Now?
Avoid committee mentality. The most fascinating ideas are often fragile
because they can be easily “dumbed down.” (Who’s your Chief
Fascination Officer?)
Earn trust. Trust, as we know, is confidence based on prior experience.
In an ADD world, preferences and ideas and relationships change
constantly, but trust remains. Prestige and mystique are great triggers
to have, but your most fascinating asset will be your ability to
continually earn trust from peers, the press, and the community.
Still Fascination-Resistant? Questions for Your Team to Consider

What policies and protocol block fascination by forcing a “red tape”
mentality, or an overthought, overcontrolled approval process?
Is there a percentage of revenue that you can stake on fascination-
oriented projects?
What offerings within the company are a commodity or parity? How
can you tweak those, even slightly, to become unique enough to
generate interest?
Is the group so concerned with neutrality that your communication is
diluted down to gray mush? Are you so focused on keeping a low
profile, playing it safe, that you’re killing fascination opportunities
before they’ve had a chance to hatch? (Fascination requires putting
yourself out there for remarkable ideas, accomplishments, and
innovations.)
Are you trying to keep too tight a grip on fascination? You can’t keep
fascination private from your own audience. The moment you try to
own it, you risk killing it.
BY APPLYING THE SEVEN triggers to a product or message, and by
measuring results against the Gold Hallmarks, a company can consistently
engage consumers, carving out a niche that cannot be filled by anyone or
anything else. But before any of this branding goodness can happen, the
company must first develop a culture of fascination within its own organization.
For some groups, this requires a significant shift. If the purpose of fascination is
to help people connect, then we must first support an environment of connecting
with each other in the workplace, so our most fascinating ideas survive and

flourish.
You’ll find out how fascination affects behavior in the workplace in our
appendix, “The Kelton Fascination Study.” You’ll also discover whether people
will spend more for fascinating products (hint: yes), as well as the amount
people will pay to become more fascinating to others (hint: it’s more than you
think).

Appendix: The Kelton Fascination study
Women will spend more to be fascinating than they spend on food. In fact,
women will spend more to be fascinating then they spend on food and clothes
combined.
They will pay an average of $338 per month to become the most fascinating
person in the room, roughly 15 percent of their net income. This finding was on
page 46 of the Kelton Fascination Study, conducted by national public opinion
company Kelton Research. Developed for this book, the study surveyed 1,059
Americans around the country, ages eighteen and over.*
To our knowledge, there’s never been an in-depth national survey on this
topic. The survey included a lengthy list of questions on the relationship between
fascination and decision making: brand choices, careers, relationships, and
personal self-image. Our goal was to define the role of fascination in people’s
lives, measure it in tangible terms, and learn more about general themes.
How much is fascination actually worth, in dollar amounts?
Are people willing to pay more for fascinating products?
In what ways do people differ in their levels of fascination (men versus
women, CEOs versus college students, New Yorkers versus people in
the Midwest)?
What exactly determines if a message, or product, is fascinating?
What behaviors do people exhibit when fascinated?
The resulting research offers a breadth and depth of insight.* (Some answers
surprised us, some didn’t.) But the numbers reveal more. The numbers tell us the
role of fascination in people’s vanities and insecurities, love lives and work lives,
secret obsessions and public personae. It doesn’t take much analysis to see the
respondents’ frustrations at work, and their inviolable connection to their
children. As a whole, it’s not just a study about fascination, but a look at how
people feel about themselves and their lives in general.

Topline Findings
People will pay a great deal of money if you can help them become
fascinating. On average they will pay $288/month to be the most
fascinating person in a room. (Five percent will pay more than
$1,000/month.) In addition to paying more, they’ll invest more energy
in you and your product.
People will pay a great deal of money if you can help them feel
fascinated. A fascinating brand can charge more than an unfascinating
one. People also will pay a premium for brands that activate desired
triggers. In the presence of a fascinating product, people report a
physical, intellectual, and emotional response, and sometimes even an
“adrenaline rush.”
People will go to surprising lengths to have a more fascinating life.
They want to feel more engaged and immersed. And not only will they
pay to be fascinated, but when asked how far they would go for a
fascinating life, six out of ten people said they would bend their
morals, standards, or loyalties. Among unmarried people, that number
rises to seven out of ten.
The Role of Fascination in Personal and Marketing
Messages
How Can Fascination Shape Decision Making?

If you want to measure whether you’re fascinating someone… When
fascinated by a product, 80 percent report behaving differently: doing
research, talking to friends, protecting it, touching it, or even reporting
a physical response when in contact with the item of their fascination.
(If you’re a marketer, track tangible behaviors to know whether your
product is effectively fascinating consumers.)
If you’re interested in communicating to a younger audience…
Younger consumers are more interested in being fascinating than
fascinated. (By giving them opportunities to captivate others, you open
the door to higher sales and/or price point for your brand.)
If you’re thinking about abandoning the personal touch… While the
digital space offers endlessly unique experiences, 81 percent of us
have most fascinating conversations in person rather than online. In-
person contact is still the most compelling and can drive deeper
relationships.
If you’re thinking about hiring a celebrity spokesperson… We think of
celebrities as fascinating; however, 78 percent of Americans are more
fascinated with the lives of their families. (Yet as we’ll see below,
they’re still bored by their own lives.)
If you’re wondering about customizing your message for different
parts of the country… People respond differently, based on their
geography. Lust is more fascinating on the West Coast. Trust is most
fascinating in the Midwest. And in the Northeast, it’s about power.
(Those lucky Northeasterners also report having more fascinating lives
than anyone else in the country.)

If you want to align yourself with something that’s already
fascinating… By a landslide, the most fascinating entity in people’s
lives is their own children. An overwhelming 96 percent of parents
find their own children fascinating.
If you want to tap into groups that are already fascinated… Groups
most likely to report feeling fascinated by their own lives: parents,
married people, women, people ages eighteen to thirty-nine, those who
earn more than $50,000 per year, and those with a hobby.
If you’re still wondering if fascination matters for marketers… People
will pay up to three times as much for a product or experience that
they find “intensely captivating.”
The Kelton Study at Work
Fascinating Your Bosses, Employees, Co-Workers, and Clients
Fascinated employees are more engaged with their work, and more loyal to
their bosses and companies. Still, there’s no such thing as one-size-fits-all
fascination.
Who is most fascinated by work? Those at the beginning of their
careers, and those at the peak of success. Those in their twenties are
highly fascinated by their careers, as are CEOs and senior managers.

Married employees are also likely to be “extremely fascinated at
work.” Maybe married employees have a greater appreciation for
stability. Or maybe the singles scene makes work seem less interesting
by comparison?
A fascinating personal life is three times more important than a
fascinating work life. Another reason companies should support a
healthy work/life balance. (Perhaps giving employees a day off with
family is more important than that office holiday party.)
We’re at our peak of fascination with work while in our forties. This
group says they become the most engrossed in their work, compared to
the rest of the population. Of these, 55 percent are fascinated at least
once a day and sometimes more. (Replacing your more “expensive”
employees with cheap young talent could end up costing more than
enhancing the workplace experience for experienced players.)
The higher you climb the corporate ladder, the more the power trigger
becomes important. There’s a clear and steady increase in the desire to
be perceived as powerful (starting at entry level to C level). People
who make over $50,000 a year are twice as likely to be fascinated by
power than those who make under $50,000; if you’re trying to
fascinate a senior manager, reread the section about the power trigger.
Lower-level employees are more fascinated by attractiveness than by
power. (Among this group, appearance is more important than
influence.)

Only 9 percent say their bosses are “extremely fascinating.” The
majority of people don’t find their bosses even mildly fascinating.
Management training to help leaders engage and inspire might help
workplace morale.
A few generational differences: Generations are fascinated differently
by work, and by personal life. It’s important not only to evaluate which
trigger to use with your groups, but, to persuade and influence
behavior, you must also customize for their age and professional level.
Our priorities change throughout our careers. For instance, eighteen-to
twenty-nine-year-olds think having a fascinating career is more
important than a fascinating personal life. Looking at the older set,
there’s a different story. C-level employees say they’re more fascinated
with their spouses than any other group.
Good news if you’re hiring: People would rather be fascinating on a
job interview than a first date.
Good news if you’re firing: Unemployed people think their lives are
more fascinating than those who are employed.
The Role of Fascination in Personal Decision
Making
If you’re considering having a baby… Parents think their lives are far
more fascinating than nonparents. Four in five parents become
“completely engrossed” in an activity or conversation with their

children at least a few times a week, and 63 percent of moms
experience this on a daily basis.
If you’re trying to decide between sending an e-mail or speaking in
person… People find in-person conversations four times more
fascinating than ones online.
If you’re thinking about texting someone… It depends on the person’s
age. Baby boomers aren’t very fascinated by their mobile devices, but
for younger people their cell phones are “completely engrossing.”*
If you’re thinking about dishing the dirt on divorce… 82 percent say
they’re more fascinated by what keeps couples together than what
breaks them apart. Could be the state of the country with such a high
divorce rate, but there may be an opportunity for a brand or TV show
to celebrate healthy relationships.
If you’re considering cosmetic surgery… People rated “reading books
and newspapers” as making someone more fascinating than cosmetic
surgery. In addition, people would rather have a conversation with
someone who’s trustworthy than someone who is attractive.
If you’re considering stretching the truth… 64 percent of people are
more interested in fact than fiction. (Embellishment also breaks our
most important trigger, trust. Find interesting ways to present the
truth.)

If you want to tempt people to break their rules… 60 percent say
they’d be willing to bend morals and standards to live a more
fascinating life. For unmarried people, it goes up to 68 percent. For the
majority, it might seem, doing what’s “wrong” isn’t so wrong if it nets
a positive outcome.† Midlevel managers, for instance, are less worried
about telling the truth than other professional segments. People value
fascination, and if they have to bend a few morals to do it…well, so be
it. (For more on the subject, refer to the vice trigger.)
If you’re thinking about breaking someone’s trust… People rate trust in
their personal relationships as more important than all the other
triggers combined.
If you’re nervous about taking a risk in your life… Spectacular success
is more important than spectacular failure. Risks may be less risky
than you think. A big success is a much bigger deal than a failure.
When trying to impress the CEO, the news is even better: In this
group, 93 percent find spectacular success to be fascinating.
Conclusions
A few final notes of the study:
We’re bored. We’re overwhelmed by messages, but unsatisfied by the
ones we do have. We’re doing too much, but are not fascinated by the
things we are doing. All those messages and experiences aren’t getting
the job done. Only 40 percent of us found our lives fascinating in the
past year.

Most people don’t feel fascinating. We feel shy about admitting that we
want to be fascinating, but we do. On a personal level, we want to
attract the respect and attention of others. We go to great effort and
expense for products and experiences that can help us become more
fascinating in the eyes of others.
Fascination makes us feel more alive. In the presence of someone or
something that fascinates us, we talk more, react more, and connect
more.
The three main things we seek: relationships, trust, and fascination.
Relationships, especially with family, fascinate us. Having close bonds
raises the quality of our lives and makes us feel more engaged in
general. We feel “intensely fascinated” while spending time with the
people we love more often than while doing anything else. Trust is the
most important trigger, and the one by which we judge ourselves and
others in a relationship.
Despite the billions of dollars spent by record companies, fashion designers,
and movie directors, what we find most fascinating is spending time with our
children and significant others.
 
On the very first page of the survey, at the top of the page, participants read
the following opening statement:
For the purpose of this survey, we are describing fascination as an
intense captivation. When something is fascinating, it captures your
attention in an unusually intense way. It’s more than “interesting.” It
distracts you from other things around you, and makes you want to pay
complete attention. You might be fascinated by a favorite book, a project at
work, or even a new love. Note that when something is fascinating, it is not

inherently good or bad, only that it captures your full attention.
By the end of the research, it became apparent that in terms of the role
fascination plays in our lives, it’s more than described above. The respondents
told us that fascination is a fundamental part of our relationships and our quality
of life. It affects how hard we work, who we marry, even how we feel about
ourselves.

Author’s Note
Like all things fascinating, the triggers and exercises in this book are not
ironclad black and white. Fascination is a constant work in progress, ever
changing alongside technology, the environment, consumer attitudes—and your
feedback. We’re interested to hear about your own triggers, and the results of
your exercises from Part III. We’re also constantly on the lookout for fresh
examples of the ways in which people and companies use triggers. Is your brand
fascinating in a particularly remarkable way? Do tell. We’re quite keen to hear
more.
Fascinate@SallyHogshead.com
We frequently share new findings and observations of how fascination lives
in culture, marketing, and everyday life, and you’ll find these at
SallyHogshead.com. To join our conversation, please feel free to friend and
follow: Facebook.com/Hogshead
Twitter.com/SallyHogshead
Linkedin.com/in/hogshead
In the meantime, thank you for joining this conversation. May all your days
be fascinating.

Fascination at a Glance
Overall Principles:
You are already fascinating, using your natural strengths.
Anyone, and anything, can become more fascinating.
There are seven fascination triggers, each with a different purpose.
Fascination is instinctive, innate, and often involuntary.
Fascination affects every part of our lives.
Fascination is the shortcut to persuasion.
Now more than ever, fascination is a new competitive advantage.
Trends Driving the Need for Fascination:
An overload of distracting choices
The rise of the ADD world
Earning attention, not paying attention
The ability to shut out messages
Shift from the information age to the fascination age
The Fascination Economy
Gold Hallmarks of a Fascinating Message:

Provokes strong and immediate emotional reactions
Creates advocates
Becomes “cultural shorthand” for a specific set of actions or values
Incites conversation
Forces competitors to realign around it
Triggers social revolutions
The Seven Triggers
These seven universal triggers spark a variety of responses, any one of which
heightens our physical, emotional, and intellectual focus. Effectively activated,
each trigger creates a different type of response.
Lust
If you trigger lust, you will draw others closer. They will crave your
message, wanting more and more until satiated.
Pillars of Lust:
Stop thinking, start feeling
Make the ordinary more emotional
Use all five senses
Tease and flirt
Mystique
Trigger mystique, and you’ll encourage others to learn more about your
message. They’ll be intrigued, and seek information.
Pillars of Mystique:

Spark curiosity
Withhold information
Build mythology
Limit access
Alarm
With alarm, you compel others to behave more urgently. They’ll take action
in order to avoid negative consequences.
Pillars of Alarm:
Define consequences
Create deadlines
Increase perceived danger
Focus not on the crisis most likely, but on the one most feared
Use distress to steer positive action
Prestige
A message with prestige will elevate you above others, inspiring
covetousness or envy.
Pillars of Prestige:
Develop emblems
Set a new standard
Limit availability
Earn it

Power
If you effectively trigger power, you will control others. They will defer to
you and your message.
Pillars of Power:
Dominate
Control the environment
Reward and punish
Vice
By triggering vice, your message will tempt others to deviate from their
usual code of conduct. They’ll act outside of standard habits or norms.
Pillars of Vice:
Create taboos
Lead others astray
Define absolutes
Give a wink
Trust
With trust, your message will comfort others, relax them, and bind them
more closely to you.
Pillars of Trust:

Become familiar
Repeat and retell
Be authentic
Accelerate trust
Your Potential Fascination Badges
Seven potential areas for what you represent:
Purpose: Your reason for being; your function as a brand.
 
Core beliefs: The code of values and principles that guides you; what you
stand for.
 
Heritage: Your reputation and history; the “backstory” of how you came to
be.
 
Products: The goods, services, or information you produce.
 
Benefits: The promises of reward for purchasing the product, both tangible
and abstract, overt and implied.
 
Actions: How you conduct yourself.
 
Culture: All characteristics of your identity, including personality,
executional style, and mind-set.
Steps to Find the Edge of Your Bell Curve:

List your badges (both existing and potential).
Evaluate against the hallmarks of a fascinating brand.
Plot on a bell curve.
Push badges outward on the curve by infusing them with more of your
primary trigger.
Push badges outward on the curve by infusing them with a new trigger.
Build your message around these badges.
Who Invented the Seven Triggers?
 
These seven triggers aren’t anything new. I didn’t invent them. In fact,
you’re already using them. You’ve been using them your whole life.
That very first time you gave your mother a big, toothless smile? You were
fascinating then, and you’re fascinating now. Every time you make eye contact,
you’re fascinating. When you teach your kindergartener how to use scissors, or
train the dog to stay off the couch, you’re fascinating. When you keep a secret,
or stand your ground, or fulfill a promise, or hold someone close, you’re
fascinating because you’re using your natural strengths to connect with others.
How will you apply the seven triggers to your own message so that the
people around you don’t just hear what you’re saying, but act upon it? How
could you apply this not only to your product and work relationships but to the
people and pursuits closest to you? That’s the bigger purpose.

Sources
Lust
MARILYN MONROE’S “WET” VOICE: David Huron is professor of
music at Ohio State University, and author of Sweet Anticipation: Music and the
Psychology of Expectation (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2008). Over the
course of two entirely engrossing interviews, Huron described the effects of a
“wet” or “dry” voice, and directed me to John Ohala’s work on why humans
smile. Huron also described other lust cues not included in this book: Why a
certain song can have the power to make us weep (we attach great personal
meaning to it), why horror movie sound tracks give us goose bumps (frisson
sounds create a state of fear in the spine and lower brain), and why we
experience pleasure in those horror movies (endorphine release mimics cocaine
and heroin in brain chemicals). Why Cinderella’s stepsisters have big feet (foot
size is a secondary sex characteristic, so bigger feet make them more masculine).
And why Betty Boop is perversely sexual (she’s a cutesy voice in a Jessica
Rabbit body).
The initial descriptions of Marilyn Monroe’s voice come from a 2006 NPR
program, when commentator Brian McConnachie played her voice, and asked
his listeners to describe it.
Mystique
JÄGERMEISTER: Seth Stevenson’s May 21, 2005, New York magazine
article, “The Cocktail Creationist,” is chock-full of juicy marketing stories about
liquor baron Sidney Frank. (For more information, see also Grey Goose in the
prestige trigger.) With stories on Jägermeister, Coraz—n, and Grey Goose, this
article also might offer prospects for your next night out.
Championship poker: Jeff “Happy” Shulman shared many terrific insider
secrets about the world of high-stakes poker. Shulman, editor of Card Player
magazine, also gave us the phrase, “Information is the opposite of mystique.”

Alarm
DRUNK DRIVING AND THE PROM DATE: To confirm details on this
example, I interviewed Luke Sullivan in 2009. However, it dates back a bit
further. Sullivan was my mentor at my first job at Fallon McElligott advertising
agency in Minneapolis, in 1993, and this particular ad was formative in my
career.
 
JAY GNOSPELIUS: To write the case study on Jay Gnospelius, I spent
several weeks interviewing and researching Jay’s history, and the topics of
suicide and amputation as they relate to the alarm trigger. I grasped the topic
more fully while Jay and I were eating dinner together one night in New York.
Jay ordered the steak, very rare, then said to the waiter, “Could you please ask
the chef to cut the meat into small bites?” I didn’t understand why…at first.
Prestige
TULIP HYSTERIA: The history of the tulip economic bubble has been
well documented by economists, botanists, and historians. The first known
example is the 1637 hand-illustrated manuscript The Tulip Book of P. Cos.
Charles Mackay described the bubble in his 1848 book, Memoirs of
Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (Boston: L. C.
Page and Company, 1932). More recently, Peter M. Garber wrote about it in
“Famous First Bubbles,” for the Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 2 (Spring
1990): 35–54.
Power
DOMINIQUE MOCEANU: In 2008, Dominique Moceanu spoke out
against the Karolyis, and the physical and mental toll female gymnasts face. The
debate appears in many publications, including a New York Times article on July
22, 2008, by Juliet Macur, titled, “Amid Harsh Words for the Karolyis from Ex-
Gymnasts, a Question: How Much Is Too Much?” (This is not the first time
Moceanu earned the public’s fascination for controversy. In 1999, Frank Litsky
of the New York Times reported on the “bitter dispute” between Dominique
Moceanu and her father, Dumitru, which included a clash over $1 million in
earnings, a restraining order that kept him at least 500 feet away from his
daughter, and perhaps most notably, accusations that Dumitru was trying to kill

two of Moceanu’s friends.)
LANDMARK EDUCATION: For the extensive research involved in this
case study, we’ve tried to present an even-handed snapshot that allows us to
draw upon Landmark’s techniques, while still exploring the organization’s
uncommonly intense use of the power trigger. Maintaining objectivity isn’t as
easy as it might sound. Research about Landmark is plentiful and varied, but
also controversial and biased (both for and against the organization). Landmark
has many vocal detractors, such as cult expert Rick Ross. A Washington Post
1992 story by Robert F. Howe was titled “Self-Help Course Allegedly Shattered
a Life.” Al Lock, corporate training consultant, attended the Forum course, and
describes the “brainwashing process” in a November 6, 2008, Bangkok Post
article, “Train the Trainer: The Landmark Debate.”
Landmark Education itself offers a great deal of constructive, objective
research on its own site at LandmarkEducation.com, including the quoted studies
by Yankelovich and IMC, Inc. This case study also draws upon my own personal
(positive) experience in Landmark courses in the early 1990s.
Vice
DARE: There’s a great deal of documentation in the media about DARE’s
lack of success. For example, the United States Government Accounting (now
Accountability) Office (GAO) report issued in 2006 provided no evidence that
the program was effective in reducing alcohol or drug abuse, which was earlier
identified as the “central question to be addressed by the study.” Our research for
this case study included working closely with Dr. Linn Goldberg, professor of
medicine at the Oregon Health and Science University, head of the Division of
Health Promotion and Sports Medicine, and co-developer of the drug-prevention
and health-promotion programs ATLAS and ATHENA, sponsored by the
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). Additional phone interviews included
Rocky Anderson, former mayor of Salt Lake City (and outspoken critic of
DARE), and Dr. Kelli Komro, who developed Project Northland (called “DARE
Plus”), a successful alcohol-prevention program, while at the University of
Minnesota.
There are a number of programs that do actually work and are endorsed by
the National Institute of Drug Abuse. Examples include Atlas/Athena, Life Skills
Training, Project Alert, and Project Northland. Each has unique attributes and is
right for different age groups and targets, but all produce effective, positive
results for preventing drug use.

Trust
EDIBLE SCHOOLYARD: We worked with Carolyn Federman, director of
development at Chez Panisse Foundation, to learn about the program’s premise
and day-to-day application. Alice Waters’s lovely book Edible Schoolyard: A
Universal Idea (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2008) offers descriptions of the
program, photographs of the gardens, and first-person accounts from students.
Waters writes, “Right there, in the middle of every school day, lie time and
energy already devoted to feeding the children. We have the power to turn that
school lunch from an afterthought into a joyous education, a way of caring for
our health, our environment, and our community.”
 
Huge thanks to my principal investigator, Gabe Goldberg, for his research
skills, insight, and creative collaboration through out the project. Mr. Goldberg is
a marketing executive living in New York City who has worked with some of the
biggest brands and most respected companies in the world, including JWT
(formerly J. Walter Thompson), Unilever, Condé Nast, Time, Inc., and Starbucks
Coffee Company.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to my spectacular agents, Larry Kirshbaum and Jud Laghi; my
brilliant editor, Ben Loehnen; the assistant editor, Matthew Inman; the team at
HarperCollins; Linda Jeo Zerba and Deputy Consulting; Sabrina Ross Lee; and
my speaking coaches, Nick Morgan and Nikki Smith-Morgan. And thank you to
my beloved assistant and friend, Cynthia Gaskin.
So many people on Facebook and Twitter contributed ideas that in a sense
this book is a collaboration with all of them. Thank you for making this book
more 
fascinating! 
For 
a 
complete 
list, 
please 
see
www.SallyHogshead.com/thanks.
Finally and most of all, to my incredible family, I thank you with all my
heart.

Searchable Terms
Note: Entries in this index, carried over verbatim from the print edition of
this title, are unlikely to correspond to the pagination of any given e-book reader.
However, entries in this index, and other terms, may be easily located by using
the search feature of your e-book reader.
 
Absolut Vodka, 189, 190
absolutes, 155–60, 174
access, limiting of, 97–99
activities, risky, 104, 158
ADD. See attention deficit disorder
adrenaline, 102, 104
advertising, 19, 23, 32–33
advocates, 42, 194–95, 224
affinity, 11
aggression, 26, 27, 138
Airstream, 196
alarm, xvi, 27, 51, 52, 54, 74, 88, 101–16, 130, 163, 178, 202, 245
Altoids, 109
Amazon (place), 19–20
Amazon.com, 20, 198
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, 111
Anderson, Rocky, 156–57
Angelou, Maya, 73
Anheuser-Busch, 172
anthropomorphization, 22–23
anticipation, 70, 80
appearances, 236, 237
appetites, 78–79, 82–83

Apple, 73
approval process, 229
archetypes, 203–4
arousal, 74–75
Artisanal Bistro, 75–76
Astaire, Fred, 180
attachments, experiential, 73
See also connections, emotional
attention deficit disorder, 35
attention gatekeepers, 36
attention span, 33–37, 168–69
attraction, 5, 16–18, 50, 71
attractiveness, 236, 237
authenticity, 175, 185
autism, 23–25
automobiles, 22, 74, 121
accidents, 101–2
Avedon, Richard, 126
avian flu, 112
avoidance, 10
awareness, 33
 
babies, 20–21
Baby Einstein, 175
baby talk, 26
badges, 207–11, 250–51
Barnes & Noble, 79
Bartles & Jaymes, 94
Baton Rouge Advocate, 86
beauty, 13
beer, 172
behaviors, 159–60, 176, 233–34
bad, 152, 154–55
control of, 133–34, 135–36, 143–44, 159–60, 164, 197

irrational, 113–14, 120, 146
leading astray, 154–55, 157
birth control pill, 16, 17
Blair Witch Project, The (movie), 88
Bloomberg, Mike, 129
body language, 78, 90–93, 137, 146
bonding, 22–23, 24, 28, 78, 196
books, 20, 152–53
bookstores, 219–21
boot camps, 144
boredom, 239
bosses. See leaders and leadership
boundaries, personal, 137
Bowerman, Bill, 209
brain, 6, 7, 21–22
brainwashing, 144, 181
brands and branding, xix–xx, 32, 37, 64–66, 79–80, 86–87, 94–95, 123–24,
126–29, 161–62, 170–71, 194, 195, 200–204, 207–8, 223, 227–29, 233
badges of, 207–11, 248–49
bell curve and, 210–11, 213, 249
core beliefs, 207, 209, 216, 249
culture, 208, 209, 249
heritage, 208, 209, 211, 249
insider, 122
loyalty, 171
luxury, 128, 153, 177
purpose of, 207, 210
Brooks Brothers, 172
Brown, Divine, 164

Brown, James, 180
bubbles, economic, xxi, 117
Bullough, Vern, 147
Burger King, 180
buzzkill, 98–99
 
Capone, Al, 149
Capra, Frank, 167
Carmichael Lynch, 198
carrots, 209
Cartier, Pierre, 124
Cash, Johnny, 180
celebrities, 52, 88, 139, 152, 153–54, 169–70, 180–81, 234
cell phones, 237–38
chandeliers, xviii
Chanel logo, 65
charity, 115
cheese, 75–76
Chez Panisse Foundation, 183
chicken nuggets, 170, 182, 193
child rearing, 7
children, 20–21, 234–35, 237–38, 240
chocolates, 79–80
Chocolixir, 80
choices, xx–xxi, 34
Christmas, 167–68
Cirque du Soleil, 82
Clarkson, Kelly, 216–17
cliques, 139
Club Med, 214
clutter, 35
coca leaf, 96–97
Coca-Cola, 86, 94, 95–97, 200, 201
cocaine, 96–97
Cole Haan, 215–16
Collins, Jim, 59
Colonel Sanders, 94
Colt 45, 180, 208

commentators, 52
communication, 20, 28, 40, 43–44, 78, 160, 193, 224, 226, 234, 237
competition, 127
confidentiality, 98–99
connections, emotional, 34, 42–43, 44–45, 57, 77, 78, 162, 169, 194–95, 196–
97, 229–30, 238, 240
consequences, 104–5, 107, 109, 138, 147, 159, 160, 164
consistency, xix, 173
Constantinople, xiv
contexts, 64–66, 223
conversations, 42, 153, 213, 234, 237
Corey, Giles, xi–xii
couples, 238
Cowdell, Phil, 32
cravings, 70–71, 82
Crayola, 228
Crispin Porter + Bogusky, 208
Crucible, The, xii
Crustacean, 97–98
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 8
cues, xx, 4, 30, 89–93
aural, 29–30
facial, 20–21, 25, 29
olfactory, 76–78
oral wetness, 69, 74
past and, 180–81
cults, 143, 181
curiosity, 58, 87–89, 215
Cycle World, 198
Dale Air, 77
dangers, 104, 158
 
DARE (Drug Abuse Resistance Education), xviii–xix, 156–57, 182
De Beers, 195

De Fascino, xii
deadlines, 105–8, 178
death, 101–2
decision making, 157–58, 168, 171, 176, 181–82, 231–32, 233–34
personal, 237–39
decocainization, 96–97
Delaney, Kevin J., 46
design, 73
desire, 70–72, 81
destabilization, 144
diamonds, 123–28
Dilcher, David, 19
Dirt Devil, 180
disinhibition, 164
disinterest, 10
dissention, 174
divorce, 238
Dole, Bob, 148
domination, 26, 27, 40, 136–40
dopamine, 6
Dr Pepper, 94
drinks, chocolate, 79–80
Droga5, 115
Drucker, Peter, 59
drugs, xviii–xix, 156–57, 182
drunk driving, 101–2
Duckworth, Alexander, 126
 
eBay, 107
economy, 37, 130
Ed Hardy brand, 122
Edible Schoolyard, 183
Egyptians and advertising, 33
Eibl-Eiesfeldt, Irenäus, 3, 4
elbow symmetry, 13–14
emblems, 120–23
emotions, 25, 30, 72–78

employment, 237
Encyclopaedia Britannica, xiii
engagement, 11
engines, car, 13, 75
Enron, 163
environment, control of, 140–46, 160
erectile dysfunction, 147–48
Esperanto, 39–41
esteem, 121
evil eye, xii
evolution, 7
exclusivity, 128
expectations, 162, 172–73, 175–76, 198, 202
Experience Economy, The, 37
exposure effect, 169–70, 181
expressions, 78
exaggerated, 25
facial, 20–30
eye contact, 146
Eyeball Wars, 48
eyebrows, 4, 26
 
F score, 49–60, 226
Facebook, 140
faces, 20–30
feminine, 29
recognition of, 23–25
fads, 177
familiarity, 167–68, 169–73, 185
Fantz, Robert, 21
fascination, xii–xiv, xv–xvi, xvii–xxi, 4–6, 19, 30, 36, 43–44, 53–54, 231–41,
245–46
level of, 49–60
plan for, 189–230

scale of, 9–11
scoring of, 49–60
summary of, 245–50
Fascination Plan of Attack, 189–230
development stage, 191, 192, 207–21
evaluation stage, 191, 192, 193–204
execution stage, 191, 192, 223–30
Fascinus (god), xii
fear, 158
Fechner, Gustav, 169
Federman, Carolyn, 184
FedEx, 176, 202
feelings, 73–77
fetishes, 11–12, 64–65
FFA, 22, 24
fight-or-flight, 102–4
Finkel, Eli, 6
Fisher, Helen, 6, 7
Fiskars, 194–95
flirtation, 3–4, 5, 80–82, 87
flow state, 8–9
flowers, 19
focus, xvi–xvii, 5, 8, 35, 36, 37, 63–64, 103, 105, 107–8, 195–96
followers, 42, 59, 139, 194–95
food, 170–72, 182–84, 195–96
For God, Country and Cola-Cola, 96
foreheads, xiii Frank, Sidney, 86
Freud, Sigmund, xiii, 8
fringes, 211–13
frugality, 130
fulfillment, 80–82, 87
sensory, 71, 76, 79–82, 83
fusiform face area. See FFA

Future Force Company Commander (F2C2), 197
 
Galileo, xvi Gangestad, Steven, 13
geømu otaku, 10
genetics, 15–16
Gervais, Ricky, 29
gestures, 4, 90–93
Gilmore, James, 37
Gladwell, Malcolm, 210
Gnospelius, Jay, 109–12
goals, 226
goldfish, attention span of, 35
Godiva, 79–80
Goebbels, Joseph, 174
Good to Great, 59
Google, 45–48
Gossip Girl (TV show), 154–55
“Got Milk?,” 113, 191
Grant, Hugh, 164
Greece, xii
green peas, xv
Grey Goose, 123
Gruenfeld, Deborah, 136, 164
 
Hampton Court, 31
handshakes, 146
Harley-Davidson, 198
Helmsley, Leona, 163
Herz, J. C., 34
hierarchies, 120, 136, 139
Hitler, Adolf, xix, 40, 174
Home Depot, 195
Honda, 198
Hooters, 212
Hope Diamond, 124
House of Orange, 209
House of Winston, 123–28

humor, sense of, 28–29, 110
Hurley, Elizabeth, 164
Huron, David, 27, 69–70, 74, 78
hype, 44–45
hypnosis, xiii
 
ideas, 39–41, 57–58, 189–91, 223, 227–28
selling of, 224–25
specificity and, 224–25
identification, 42, 196
IDEO, 73
ideology, 173–74
iLiKETRAiNS, xii
imitation, 58
immersion, 11
impotence, 147–48
impressions, first, 145–46
In Search Of… (TV show), 93
incentives, 122
infatuation, 6–7
information, 36
control of, 174
withholding, 89–93, 215
ingredients, 86–87, 94, 95–97
insecurities, 138
interest, 11
intimidation, 27
IRS, 105, 106, 109
isochronism, xvi
It’s a Wonderful Life (movie), 167–68
iTunes, 140
 
Jägermeister, 85–87
job hunting, 46

job interviews, 237
Jolie, Angelina, 52
journalism, 52, 53
Joystick Nation: How Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our Hearts, and
Rewired Our Brains, 34
Jung, Carl, 160
 
Karolyi, Bela, 146
Karolyi, Martha, 146
Kelton Fascination Study, xvii, 151, 231–41
Kelton Research, 231
KFC, 94–95
Kinsey, Alfred, 8
Kmart, 203
Knight, Frank, 77
Kraft, 180, 200
 
Laermer, Richard, 44
Landmark Education Corporation, 141–45
language, 39–41
Las Vegas, 154
leaders and leadership, 59, 106, 139–40, 145, 215, 236
learning, 184
immersive, 144
subconscious, 32
Leaves of Grass, 153
Leonardo da Vinci, 25
license plates, 128
licenses, driving, 102
lies, 174, 236
likability, 51
Limbaugh, Rush, 52
Lin, Maya, 162
liquor, 149–50
Little Engine That Could, The, 23
Little, Anthony, 29

lives, personal, 232–40
logos, 64–65, 121, 177
love, romantic, xv
Love Sick: Love as a Mental Illness,6
loyalty, 171
lust, xiv, 52, 69–84, 164, 197, 200, 201, 202, 203, 212, 214, 215, 246
Luvs, 180
 
M&Ms, 94
MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving), 101
Madonna, 217
Mafia, 149
major histocompatibility complex. See MHC
Maker’s Mark, 195
Malcolm, Janet, 53
Mallinckrodt, 97
marketing, xvii, 19, 32, 79, 107, 138, 174–75, 193, 224–27
martial arts, 131
Martin Agency, 209
Marx, Karl, 127
Maslow, Abraham, 121
Maxwell House, 180
mazes, 31–32
McDonald’s, 170, 183
McLaughlin, Katy, 137
McLean, Evalyn Walsh, 124
meaning, 64–66
media, 31–38, 227
Medieval Masculinities, 147
Mehrabian, Albert, 78
Mein Kampf, 40, 174
memory, 31–32
mental illness, 6
Mesopotamia, xii
messages, 32, 36, 39–48, 59–60, 68, 71–73, 115, 146, 151, 163, 165, 212, 224
awareness, of, 226, 227
consequences and, 104–5, 138, 159, 160

customization of, 234
evaluation of, 193–204, 227
plan for, 189–230
hallmarks of fascinating, 41–43, 57, 141, 193–94, 210, 226, 246
replacement of, 181–84
specificity of, 195–96, 224
tracking of, 226
metrics, 227
MHC, 15–16
Michelin, 23
military recruitment, 196–97
milk, 113
Millan, Cesar, 139
Miller, Arthur, xii
Moceneau, Dominique, 133–34
Mona Lisa, 25
Monroe, Marilyn, 30, 69, 70
More Weight (song), xii
Morgan, Nick, 78
motivators, 81, 87, 114
motorcycle riding, 198
movies, horror, 163
mutilation, body, 110–11
My December (album), 217
MySpace, 140
mystery, 97–99
mystique, xiv, xx, 25, 52, 85–99, 123, 124, 157, 159, 160, 201, 202, 215, 246–
47
mythology, 93–97
 
names, 46–48
Nazis, 173–74

Nelson, Jim, 198
Ness, Eliot, 149
neutrality, 11
New York magazine, 86
nightcaps, xiii
nightclubs, 212
Nike, 209, 216
Nordstrom, 195
nosiness, 53
Nowak, Lisa Marie, 7
nucleus accumbens, 22
 
obesity, xix, 182–83
obsessions, 6–8, 9
odors. See scents
Odwalla, 178–79
Ohala, John J., 26, 27
Olive Garden, 198, 201
omakase, 137
Omega Watches, 153–54
orgasms, 8–9, 14
Orman, Suze, 147
outliers, 210–13
ovulation, 16–17
 
PageRank, Google, 45–48
panic, 108
parents, 234–35, 237–38
pasteurization, 179
Patagonia, 195
Pemberton, John S., 96
Pendergast, Mark, 96
pendulums, xv
penis, xiii
Pepsi, 97
performance, 108
personalities

F score of, 50–60
high-scoring, 50–54
low-scoring, 54–55, 59
persuasion, 137
Pfizer, 148
phallic symbols, xii, xiii
Phelps, Michael, 153
physical fitness, 112
the pill, see birth control pill
Pillsbury Doughboy, 23
Pine, Joseph, 37
pitch, 26–28
plants, 19–20
Platt, Michael, 140
pleasures, 81
guilty, 154–55
Point One Percent, 126
poker, 30, 90
police, 156–57
political groups, 181
politicians, 52
Pop Rocks, 94
Porsche, 196
power, xiv, 12, 27, 36, 51, 54, 133–48, 160, 163, 185, 197, 215, 236, 247–48
spectrum of, 135–36
praise, 147
predictability, 171–73
pregnancy, 16
presentations, 145
prestige, xiv, xix, 117–31, 185, 197, 203, 212, 214, 215, 217–19, 247
Pret A Manger, 195–96
prices,65,117–19,121,128–29,232–33
procrastination, 107–8
procreation, 7–8, 14, 15, 103

products
realignment of, 197–99
standards of, 43, 123, 162, 197, 211–13
Prohibition, 149–50
propaganda, 174–75
provocation, 58
psychotherapy, xv
public domain, 167
pubs, 77
Puck, Wolfgang, 216
purchasing, 82–83
 
ranking systems, 120, 136, 139
Ray, Rachael, 200, 201
reactions, emotional, 41–42, 58, 89–90, 194
rebellion, 159
Red Bull, 94
Redenbacher, Orville, 180–81
reinforcement, negative, 133, 147
relationships, 24, 28
See also connections, emotional
repetition, 33, 167–68, 173–74
reputations, 172, 176
resistance, 137
respect, 51–52, 160
revolutions, social, 43, 198–99
reward and punishment, 146–48
rewards, 134, 146–47
Rigoglioso, Marguerite, 164
risk taking, 6, 239
Ritz-Carlton, 211–12
Robinson, Thomas, 170–71
Rockefeller, John D., 150
Rodgers, Joann Ellison, 4
Rolling Rock, 94

Rome, xii
Rothkopf, David J., 134–35
rules, 158–59
breaking of, 149–51, 158–59, 163–64, 238–39
enforcement of, 147, 159
Rum Jungle, 212
 
Saito, Ryoei, 121
Salem, Massachusetts, xii–xiii
saliva, 69, 74–75
Santayana, George, 173
scarcity, 107, 118, 122, 128–30
scents, 14–16, 75–77, 181
Schlessinger, Laura, 52
Schultz, Robert, 24
Scott, David Meerman, 47–48
Scrubbing Bubbles, 23
Sea–Bond Denture Adhesive, 180
search results, 46, 48
Sears, 211
self, 232–33
self-awareness, loss of, 8
self-glorification, 59
self-help courses, 142
selling up, 225
Senekot, 180
senses, 73–80
Sephora, 202
serotonin, 136
sex, 5, 13, 80, 82–83, 147–48, 164
Sex, 4
shoes, 197–98, 215–16
shopping, online, 197
Shulman, Jeff “Happy,” 90–92
smell. See scents
smiles, xx, 25–28

social networks, 40, 139
social position, 120
songs, 180
sounds, 13
speech patterns, 137
Spider-Man, 204
Star of Sierra Leone, 125
Star-Kist, 180
status, social, 120–21
Stephan Company, 96
Stern, Howard, 52
Stewart, David, 137
Stewart, Jimmy, 167
stories, 23, 95, 173, 202
stress, 74, 78, 89–90
strip clubs, 16–17
strippers, income of, 16–17
submission, 136–37
Sullivan, Luke, 102, 103, 158
Superclass, 134
superheroes, 203–4
Superman, 203–4
survival, 19
sushi, 137
Sushi Nozawa, 137
Sushi Sasabune, 137
symmetry, 13–14
 
T-shirts, 15, 217–19
taboos, 152–54
talk shows, 52
Tallis, Frank, 6, 7
Tang See Do, 131
Tap Project, 115
Target, 195, 203
taxes, 104–5, 149, 163
TBWA Advertising, 189
teams, 224, 227–29

teases, 80–81
teenagers, 101, 156–58
tells, 90–93
temptation, 79–83, 151, 154, 155–56, 159
testosterone, 74–75
texting, 237–38
Thatcher, Margaret, 27
Theocritus, xii
Thomas the Tank Engine, 23, 24
three-martini lunch, 33
Thornhill, Randy, 13
Tiffany & Co., 177, 178, 185, 195
Timex, 176
Tolstoy, Leo, 40
Tractatus de Fascinatione, xii
trains, 23
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), 140
triggers, xiv, xviii–xxi, 17, 41, 50, 52, 60, 63–68, 200–204, 214–17, 246–47,
249–50
application of, 66–68
combining, 77–78, 163–64, 200–204, 214–16
definitions of, 68, 199
instinctive, 5, 103, 134
summary of, 246–48
switching, 216–17
unexpected, 219–21
See also alarm; lust; mystique; power; prestige; trust; vice
trust, xiv, xix, 40, 59, 77, 78, 157, 159, 160, 167–85, 200, 202, 203, 212, 214–
15, 216, 228, 238, 240, 248
accelerated, 179
breaking, 178–79, 239

rebuilding, 178–79, 181
truth, 174, 238
tulips, xix, 117–118
TV commercials, 10–11
 
unattainability, 122, 147
UNICEF, 115–16
urgency, 107
 
values, 42, 58, 119, 179, 185, 195–96
vestal virgins, xii
Viagra, 147–48, 180
vice, xiv, xix, 52, 54, 149–65, 197, 201, 203, 212, 214, 215, 216, 239, 248
video games, 10, 34, 197
Vietnam Veterans Memorial, 162
viewpoints, 173–74
vodka, 123, 189
voices, xx, 26–27, 29–30, 69–70
aspiration of, 70
Volkswagen, 196
Volvo, 172
Vox, 94
 
W Hotels, 201
Walt Disney World, 202–3
water, 114–15
Waters, Alice, 183
websites, linking to, 44
Webster’s Dictionary, xiii
Weston, Louanne Cole, 13
Where’s Waldo?, 153
Whitman, Walt, 153
Who, 114
Winston, Harry, 124, 125, 212
witchcraft, xi–xii, xiv

Woods, Tiger, 149
workplaces, 227–30, 235–37
 
YouTube, 98
 
Zamenhof, L. L., 39
Zappos.com, 197
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, 59
zero-tolerance, 157
Zima, 94
zip codes, 128–29
Zuckerberg, Mark, 40

About the Author
SALLY HOGSHEAD helps world-class businesses develop messages that
influence and persuade consumers, partners, and employees. Starting out as one
of the most award-winning advertising writers in the country, she is today a
world-renowned brand consultant and speaker, leading keynotes for companies
such as Starbucks and Microsoft as well as innovation workshops. As a creative
director, she develops fascinating ideas for both Fortune 500 companies and
start-ups. Hogshead and her work have been featured in the New York Times and
on the Today show, CBS, ABC, and MSNBC.
www.sallyhogshead.com
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.

ALSO BY SALLY HOGSHEAD
Radical Careering: 100 Truths to Jumpstart Your Job,
Your Career, and Your Life

Credits
Jacket design by Faith McCormick
Jacket photograph © Caspar Benson/Getty Images

Copyright
FASCINATE. Copyright © 2010 by Sally Hogshead. All rights reserved
under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of
the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable
right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text
may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered,
or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in
any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-
books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Hogshead, Sally.
Fascinate : your 7 triggers to persuasion and captivation / Sally Hogshead.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-06-171470-2
1. 
Marketing—Psychological 
aspects. 
2. 
Advertising—Psychological
aspects. I. Title.
HF5415.34.H65    2010
658.8001’9—dc22       2009038607
EPub Edition © January 2010 ISBN: 978-0-06-196616-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca New
Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

* Good news: Massachusetts no longer issues death sentences on charges of
fascination.

* Giles Corey is a character in Arthur Miller’s 1953 play about the Salem
witch trials, The Crucible. Of slightly less cultural significance is that Giles
Corey also inspired a song titled “More Weight,” by a band named
iLiKETRAiNS.

† Fascinus was worshipped by “vestal virgins” (young girls selected to
remain virgins for thirty years or else be buried alive), and Roman children wore
phallic-shaped amulet necklaces to symbolize him.

* Speaking of Freud and phallic symbols: Fascinare is Latin for “fascinate.”
Fascinum is Latin for “erect penis.” Draw your own conclusions.

* Yes, I’ve since worked out my issues on the shrink’s couch, thanks for
asking. (As if having the last name “Hogshead” weren’t bad enough.)

* We’ll point to marketing, but this book isn’t just for marketers. Marketing
is just a metaphor for the modern world, because every day, in every
relationship, we’re “marketing” our ideas to be heard.

* A handy example of “unthinkable” behavior: former astronaut Lisa Marie
Nowak’s 2007 jealousy-fueled drive to kidnap a romantic rival (while reportedly
wearing adult diapers on the cross-country drive to avoid stopping en route).

* In French literature, this experience was described as la petite mort, or “the
little death,” referencing the loss of awareness with the surrounding world.

* For example, a high-heeled shoe stops being just a shoe, a piercing stops
being just a piercing, and a black latex zip-up catsuit with coordinating riding
crop stops being your regular Saturday night standby.

* Authorial recommendation: If you’re highly symmetrical, congratulations,
read on. If you’re a bit lopsided, ah, perhaps you’d best skip ahead a few
paragraphs or risk a rather unpleasant revelation about why your college
roommate’s bedpost boasted more notches than yours.

* I might feel compelled to offer more details on the T-shirts’ exact scent;
however, the data on this aspect of the research are thankfully brief.

* Imagine the conversation between a researcher and a stripper: “Hello there,
Kandi, you look very nice this afternoon. Those six-inch Lucite heels make you
really, ah, tall. Anyway, in order to get reimbursed by the university for this
study, can I please get a receipt for any dollar bills I tip you?”

† A stripper’s income rises and falls with the ability to fascinate, and guess
what: they’re not the only ones. We all use involuntary signals to persuade
clients.

* Considering the research on faces, perhaps we should bring this technique
back. The Cisco Cowboy? The 3M Three Musketeers?

* There’s a wired connection between pitch of voice and facial expression,
and David Huron offers a simple experiment you can do right now to prove this.
Sing a note at a comfortable pitch, with your mouth in an “O.” As you’re doing
this, note your facial expression. Now, sing the highest note that you’re capable
of: Notice how you raise your chin and eyebrows. Finally, sing the lowest note
you can: Your chin and eyebrows lower, in a more aggressive expression.

† If you want to be taken more seriously by triggering power, lower your
voice to raise the intimidation factor, such as when giving directions. It won’t
make you more liked and trusted (as a smile will), but it might increase the
effectiveness of your message by increasing the power and alarm triggers. Just
be advised: Intimidation doesn’t make your message more right, only more
dominant.

* I’m curious. Instead of putting posters of the sides on buses, as we do now,
did they put them on the sides of chariots?

* If not, stick close: you’ll learn how in Part III: The Fascination Plan of
Attack.

* In the trust trigger, we’ll see how Adolf Hitler vehemently opposed any
communication that contradicted his message. His manifesto, Mein Kampf,
described Esperanto as part of the Jewish conspiracy to achieve world
domination.

† The U.S. Army has circulated military phrase books in Esperanto.

* Interacting with Laermer is like drinking from a very smart, and very
charismatic, social media fire hose, and our discussion was as lively as one
might expect from the man who was a CrackBerry addict before many of us
even had an e-mail account.

* High and low scorers are polar opposite personality types. Before the test
even begins, it’s clear that they interact differently with the world around, from
body language and style of dress to how they socialize, to where they sit in the
room.

* Interestingly, I found this quotation as a post from Angelou herself on her
Facebook fan page, which proves that you can use even a digital interface to
fascinate an audience with feeling.

* Draw your own conclusions about the “guy with the sports car is
overcompensating for something” hypothesis.

* I imagine this as a chorus line of cheese—one by one, cheeses that fail to
fascinate get kicked out of the show.

† Unless you’re reading on a Kindle or other digital-type device, which is
fine, unless you downloaded it without paying for it, in which case you’re
triggering vice.

* The macdaddy form of lust is, of course, sex. Duh. But we’re not even
going to go there in this section. Well, not much.

* Yet take note: This style of interaction requires a deft touch, or else it feels
like game playing. Without authenticity or sincerity, mystique devolves in to a
cheap mind game.

* Picture Chang and Eng, the legendary conjoined brothers billed as “the
original Siamese twins.” They’d certainly lose mystique if we found out they’d
actually superglued themselves together.

* Caveat emptor. Believe at your own risk.

* Spoiler Alert: In the book For God, Country and Coca-Cola, Mark
Pendergrast outs what many believe to be the classic Coke recipe. Coca-Cola’s
inventor, John S. Pemberton, kept it in a collection of formulas:
 
INGREDIENTS:
1 oz caffeine citrate
3 oz citric acid
1 fl oz vanilla extract
1 qt lime juice
2.5 oz flavoring (no further clarification here…could this be the mysterious 7X?)
30 lb sugar
4 fl oz powder extract of cocaine (decocainized flavor essence of the coca leaf)
2.5 gallon water
caramel sufficient
 
FLAVORING:
80 oil orange
40 oil cinnamon
120 oil lemon
20 oil coriander
40 oil nutmeg
40 oil neroli
Mix caffeine acid and lime juice in 1 quart boiling water add vanilla and
flavoring when cool. Let stand for 24 hours.

* Lust is another of the oldest triggers, because it guaranteed a little
procreation booty.

* For that investment, one can only hope he’s the most fascinating guy at the
afterlife party.

* At the time of this writing, the Ed Hardy by Christian Audigier line of
bedding (including duvet cover and neck roll) was discounted 40 percent by at
Macy’s. Counterculture, meet outlet mall.

* According to legend, the stone carried a grisly curse to all who owned it.
As the story goes, the Hope Diamond originated as one of two glittering eyes on
a statue of the goddess Sita, deep within a Hindu temple. After it was stolen,
enraged temple priests swore that every owner would face a terrible fate. And
indeed, subsequent owners met with rather unhappy endings: they were
dethroned and beheaded, stabbed and starved, drowned in a shipwreck. Even
jewelers trading the Hope were not immune; some succumbed to insanity, others
to suicide. By 1908, the Washington Post published an article titled, “Hope
Diamond Has Brought Trouble to All Who Have Owned It.” All this mystique
only increased the stone’s fascination (not to mention its market value). In 1911,
Pierre Cartier (of Cartier jewelers) enticed socialite Evalyn Walsh McLean to
purchase the stone by embellishing the lurid tales of tragedy. McLean never fell
prey to the curse, but instead, strapped the Hope Diamond to her dog’s collar for
walks, and frequently misplaced it at parties.

* What does the name Point One Percent mean? This agency only targets the
0.1 percent wealthiest consumers in the world. The agency was founded by
Alexander Duckworth. (Imagine how much fun we had introducing ourselves in
meetings together: Duckworth and Hogshead.)

* A note on prestige: The word “classy” isn’t when it’s spelled with a k. Trust
me on this one.

* Dominique’s name comes from dom, the Latin root meaning “master” or
“lord,” the same root as “dominate.”

* Because I’m the author and I say so. That’s why.

* There’s a reason why that “dog bites man” isn’t a fascinating hook.

* A Harvard Business School case study titled “Landmark Education
Corporation: Selling a Paradigm Shift,” describes coursework that is “intended
to provide individuals and organizations with an insight into how to become
more effective and/or access to a way of being which they had not thought
possible.”

† The NDA includes multiple variations on the following language: “a very
small number of people who have no personal or family history of mental illness
or drug abuse have reported experiencing brief, temporary episodes of emotional
upset ranging from heightened activity, irregular or diminished sleep, to mild
psychotic-like behavior…to psychosis occasionally requiring medical care and
hospitalization.” The release also mentions suicide. The Washington Post reports
on one former participant’s lawsuit: “Three days after attending the Forum,
according to testimony, Ney suffered a breakdown and was committed to a
psychiatric institute in Montgomery County. She was held there for two weeks,
at times heavily drugged and strapped to a bed to prevent her from harming
herself.”

* In the early nineties, I took a few Landmark courses, and saw firsthand
how effectively they utilize subtle power. The program allowed us to eat or use
the restroom only on a strict schedule, the room’s layout adhered to a rigid
seating arrangement, the decor was austere, body language was monitored,
exercises were mandatory, fifteen-hour days were nonnegotiable, and bathroom
breaks were infrequent. Other participants noticed what seemed to be intentional
light and temperature fluctuations.

† Please note: Exercising power doesn’t make you a great leader, it merely
demonstrates your ability to regulate. You will be defined, and ultimately judged,
on the quality and effectiveness of your message.

* Plus they wear black double-breasted suits, which may or may not be your
idea of a fashion statement, but it ups the intimidation factor.

* I admit it, I jump through hoops for frequent flier rewards—my speaking
schedule demands last-minute flight availability, and, okay, maybe I also do it
because of the perks. Yet one year I was sixteen thousand miles shy of
maintaining my premier membership with Delta. I calculated that I could
accumulate just that many miles by flying from Jacksonville to Seattle…twice.
So off to Seattle I flew, back and forth, twice, without ever leaving the airport.
But, it turns out, I was still a few miles short (Delta, if you’re listening, I’m still
peeved). I discovered this on December 29, which meant I had only two days left
to earn the miles. But at this point, I was so close I could almost feel the leather
seats underneath me, so I flew to New York on New Year’s Eve. The flight was
delayed, which meant I could possibly lose the necessary miles for the calendar
year. I told the flight attendant my tale of woe, and not only did I snag an extra
bag of peanuts, but the pilots radioed the ground crew, who lined up and greeted
me with an orange-flashlight escort to my waiting return flight. So anyway. Back
to the ridiculous, idiotic behavior of people on a quest for reward.

* Curious to know pre-Viagra options, I turned to Impotence, by Angus
McLaren, who reports that early aphrodisiacs included “windy, warm, and wet
foods” as well as “the brains of male sparrows mixed with filberts and billy goat
grease.”

* How to prove if a man was impotent? At one point the Church assigned
“seven honest women” to the task of determining whether or not a man was
impotent. At other times, members of the court were pressed into action,
standing around the bed during copulation to confirm a man’s performance (or
performance anxiety).

* Allow me to put this into economic perspective. In an article on the top-
earning professional athletes, Sports Illustrated reports that Tiger Woods earns
“the inconceivable total of $100 million.” Capone’s income, translated into 2008
dollars, is well over a billion dollars annually. Surprisingly, Capone was not
paying personal income tax on these dollars. Eliot Ness indicted him in 1931.

* Don’t feel too bad for Capone. The Mafia was able to console itself by
increasing profits from prostitution, drugs, labor racketeering, and loan sharking.

* In the Kelton Survey, 60 percent of Americans said they would be willing
to bend their morals, standards, or loyalties in order to have a more interesting
life.

* It’s difficult to identify exactly how the Where’s Waldo series of children’s
books earned the distinction of being among the American Library Association’s
one hundred most challenged books between 1990 and 2000. Rumor has it that
as a young readers search to find Waldo amid the intricately drawn cartoon
images, they can also find topless sunbathers and other naughty bits. Get out
your magnifying glasses, kids.

* Don’t tell your teenager about the study conducted at UC Berkeley, which
found that a teenager’s brain is “not capable of the kind of reasoning that allows
most grown-ups to make rational decisions.” That’s a pretty good excuse. “Sorry,
Dad, I got a D because my brain chose a game of Halo over homework.”

† For many marketers, the eighteen-to thirty-five-year-old male audience is
an extremely important part of the mix. If you want to promote yourself to guys,
strongly consider vice in your repertoire.

* For this disrupted paradise by the dashboard light, Ms. Brown (née
Thompson) charged Hugh Grant only $60 cash. However, from the ensuing
publicity surrounding the arrest, she reportedly earned $1.6 million. In a
newspaper article titled “Hugh’s Divine Intervention,” Brown describes that her
rendezvous with Grant bought her a four-bedroom home and private school
education for her children. Not bad for a night’s work.

* A difficult question. But to quote George Santayana’s words that are
inscribed on the walls of the Auschwitz concentration camp, “The one who does
not remember history is bound to live through it again.”

* My own kids are doomed.

* Note: “Consistent” doesn’t necessarily mean “good.” Trust builds a strong
expectation of future behavior based on past behavior. Now, that behavior could
be bad. That college buddy who always runs half an hour late, but you still meet
him out for drinks anyway? You’ve figured out his patterns, and can accurately
judge his behavior. His tardiness might annoy you, but won’t surprise you.

* In twenty years, when those teenage girls acquire the spending power for
lavish gold and diamonds, they won’t associate the Tiffany & Co. logo with the
one attached to that cute little sterling silver trinket they wore back in high
school.

† Dripping sarcasm.

* Consider your own family’s traditions: They usually are not focused on the
“best” foods or the “biggest” gestures, but rather on a sense of continuity that
draws upon your home, your shared history, your favorite activities, and time
spent around your kitchen table.

* Reportedly, a hemorrhoid cream was about to use Johnny Cash’s “Ring of
Fire” for a TV commercial, until Cash’s family exerted their good taste.

* The Edible Schoolyard is, ironically, just thirty-eight miles north of the
location of the McNuggets study at Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital. On the
drive from the children’s hospital to the Edible Schoolyard, there are three
McDonald’s drive-throughs, in case you get hungry.

* Many ad agencies have created cultural alchemy with a single precious
idea. Imagine a cocktail napkin scribbled with “Just Do It,” or the back of a sales
receipt with the handwritten words, “Got Milk?” Ideas can begin anywhere,
including the whiteboard in your conference room this afternoon.

* A man owned both a bar and a Harley. During his life, he collected several
large Harley tattoos on his back and shoulders. When he died, his son had the
tattoos removed, tanned, and framed in the bar. I’m uncertain if this is a positive
for patrons at the bar; however, it is good proof that Harley fascinates.

* Examples of where to uncover your badges:
Culture: Make a list of unorthodox customs, unusual traits, or quirky habits
within your company itself. Even the smallest traditions can reveal deeper
values, show-casing your brand’s uniquely fascinating point of view. How do
you prepare for a launch, or celebrate your success? Are there policies or
processes that represent your perspective? Ad agency Crispin Porter +
Bogusky’s employee manual (really more of a culture manual) is available to all
for download.
    Heritage: Examine your own heritage. What patterns continually emerge?
What watershed decisions shaped your ethos? What people or products
exemplify your DNA? Browse the attic of your past. Find things from your
history that were fascinating at one time, but failed to hold interest. (Remember
Colt 45 and their newly hip brown bags?)
    Intangible assets: Do you have unexploited intellectual property hiding in the
corners? Below-the-radar accomplishments? Talents that rarely see the light of
day? Relationships that could become fascinating partnerships? Inactive
licenses? How about unused R&D, such as sidelined innovations or research
without analysis?

* I imagine Club Med must have been quite an interesting vacation as it
transitioned its occupancy list from seminaked hedonists to suburban families.
“Sir, I’m sorry, you’ll have to put your bathing suit on while at the breakfast
table.”

* Examples of ways to measure fascination:
    Community participation in your online media: Includes number of members
/ subscribers joined, download counts, RSS subscriptions, page views, length of
visit, number of comments, trackbacks, and posts on other blogs. Number of
customer complaints, suggestions, and questions. YouTube traffic, MySpace
members, Facebook pages, category chat forums and wikis.
    Content creation and distribution about your brand by outside (unpaid)
parties: Includes mentions in prominent blogs, social networks, and mainstream
media, as well as user-generated content (YouTube uploads, Podcasts, Vodcasts,
Twitter). Track what your audience is saying about your brand with Google
Alerts, Technorati, Digg, Techmeme, Stumbleupon, and del.i.cious. Measure
what your audience is doing around your brand through Google Analytics,
Feedburner, and Technorati.
    Offline participation: Tracking fascination in the offline world requires a
more finely tuned ear to the ground. List every location and touchpoint where a
potential customer could encounter the product, benefits, and media you
produce. Note other forms of increased energy around your brand: business
inquiries and sales leads, interview requests and spontaneous referrals, fan clubs
about your brand, and third-party branded merchandise (drinking cups with your
logo, T-shirts, bumper stickers, etc.).

* Kelton Research is a global public opinion company. It works with more
than thirty of the Fortune 100 corporations, including McDonald’s, Target, and
Pepsi. Twice it has been named “fastest-growing market research consultancy”
by Inc. magazine, and in 2008, Entrepreneur named it to its Hot 100 Companies
list.

* The results of the study fill a four-inch-thick binder, which I don’t
recommend reviewing without reading glasses due to its exceedingly small type.

* This group ranks their cell phones as more fascinating than their own lives!

† Despite the importance of trust, the majority of us are willing to bend our
morals in pursuit of a more fascinating life.

