MIT OpenCourseWare 
http://ocw.mit.edu
 
 
6.931 Development of Inventions and Creative Ideas
 
Spring 2008 
 
 
 
For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.  
 

CREATE OR PERISH 
The Case for Inventions and Patents 
ROBERT H. RINES 
Rines and Rines 
Boston, Massachusetts 
Lecturer, Department of Electrical Engineering 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
PRELIMINARY EDITION 
Transcribed for MIT OpenCourseWare 
http://ocw.mit.edu 


CREATE OR PERISH 
The Case for Inventions and Patents 


Contents 
Introduction 
1 
1 
The Origin and Development of The American Patent System 
5 
1.1 
Conclusion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13 
2 
The Role of the Patent Oﬃce and the Courts 
15 
2.1 
The Nature of the Patent Oﬃce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15 
2.2 
Patent Oﬃce Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18 
2.3 
Review of Patent Oﬃce Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
19 
2.4 
The Present Mood of the Courts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20 
2.5 
The Reports of Patent Oﬃce and Court Decisions 
. . . . . . . . 
22 
2.6 
A Further Role of the Courts – Infringement Suits 
. . . . . . . . 
23 
3 
The Patent Law 
27 
3.1 
Classes of Patentable Invention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
27 
3.2 
Conditions of Patentability 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
31 
3.3 
Interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35 
3.4 
The Statutory Test of Invention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36 
3.5 
Obviousness of “Subject Matter as a Whole” 
. . . . . . . . . . . 
39 
3.6 
Statutory Presumption of Validity of a Patent . . . . . . . . . . . 
42 
3.7 
Commentary–Legal Recognition of Inventions . . . . . . . . . . . 
43 
4 
Patents in Action (History of the Basic Telephone Patent) 
47 
4.1 
The Circumstances Underlying Bell’s Invention . . . . . . . . . . 
47 
4.2 
Bell’s Basic Patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
49 
4.3 
The Founding of Bell’s Company – and the Pirates . . . . . . . . 
51 
4.4 
Enters the Supreme Court . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
54 
4.5 
How Would Our Supreme Court React to Bell’s Patent? . . . . . 
63 
5 
The Rights, Obligations, and Problems of Inventors 
65 
5.1 
University and Government Relations 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
69 
5.2 
Current Governmental Agency Regulations Concerning Patents . 
71 
5.3 
Industrial Employment Agreements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
73 
5.4 
The Problems and Dangers in Negotiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
75 
5.5 
Professor Cady Was Not Alone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
82 
v 

5.6 
Conclusion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
85 
6 
The Future of American Patents 
89 
6.1 
Previous Suggested Improvements in the Patent System . . . . . 
89 
6.2 
The Search 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90 
6.3 
Opposition Proceedings 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
91 
6.4 
Technically Trained Tribunals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
94 
6.5 
Are Today’s Patents Worth Saving? 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
97 
6.6 
What is Wrong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103 
6.7 
The Task 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 
7 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
113 
7.1 
Present Proposals for a Common European Patent and Judiciary 114 
7.2 
Some Diﬀerent Ideas for Revision of the American Patent System 118 
8 
Court Modernization for Aiding the Patent System and the Law125 
8.1 
The Nature of the Criticism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125 
8.2 
A Few Measures Already Proposed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129 
8.3 
A Diﬀerent Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130 
8.4 
Conclusion 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 
9 
A Formula for Economic Decline 
133 
9.1 
The Pity of Serendipity 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133 
9.2 
“Mind-Forged Manacles” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 
9.3 
“Conformity Is a Psychotic State” 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135 
9.4 
Mental Containers 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135 
9.5 
The Degree Slide Rule Won’t Work This Time 
. . . . . . . . . . 136 
9.6 
A New Use for Senior Scientiﬁc Statesmen . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 
9.7 
Create or Perish 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 

List of Figures 
1.1 
The ﬁrst United States Patent Grant, July 31, 1790. . . . . . . . 
12 
4.1 
Part of Bell’s original telephone patent. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50 
4.2 
A part of Elisha Gray’s caveat. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
54 
4.3 
Bourseul’s make-and-break concept. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
59 
4.4 
Philip Reis’s construction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
60 
5.1 
Cady’s patent drawing. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
77 
5.2 
A part of Nicolson’s original patent. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80 
5.3 
A part of Pierce’s patent. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
87 
6.1 
Interest of the United States Supreme Court in patents. . . . . . 111 
vii 


CREATE OR PERISH 
The Case for Inventions and Patents 


Introduction 
The American patent system needs no apologists. Though it may not be entirely 
suited in all respects to our current problems and needs, and though sometimes 
it may have been misused, its record of achievement in the progress of our 
country is indelibly written on the pages of history. Its current service, despite 
the fact that it is not being fully utilized in the second half of the century, seems 
to me equally indisputable; though some critics without ﬁrsthand experience in 
this ﬁeld may not agree. Those critics are free to write their own books. 
I have undertaken to write mine as a champion of the philosophy that today, 
as much as ever, incentives that make a person ﬁght to be an individual promote 
the welfare the whole state. In my lectures, many of which have been included 
in this book, I frankly paint a picture, particularly for engineers and applied 
scientists, that is based on this philosophy and thus supports patents1 
But invention, patents, and innovation cannot be treated apart from their 
social, political, and economic environment, despite mechanistic courses given 
in law schools. Thus, to review the principles of patent law without delving into 
the interplay of many aspects of our society would be to discuss a theoretical, 
nonexistent system. This book, therefore, is not addressed solely to engineers 
and applied scientists; some parts are addressed to lawyers, economists, busi­
nessmen, and politicians. 
I have found the problem of presenting all facets so that they may be under­
stood by readers of quite varied disciplines to be not without diﬃculty. For this 
reason illustrations have been conﬁned to technology that can readily be com­
prehended by nontechnicians, and legal and economic discussions have been kept 
suﬃciently elementary to be grasped at least in part by the technical reader, 
but without sacriﬁcing the point intended for the legalist or economist. 
Those who expect an engineering “cookbook” approach to this subject will 
not ﬁnd it here. Similarly, those who look for a presentation in the form of a 
Procrustean “case study” will be equally disappointed. 
To write an interdisciplinary book requires a mixture of interdisciplinary 
techniques, and so I have tried to interweave history, primary principles, proce­
dures, problems, and points of conﬂict into what I believe to be the true fabric 
pattern of the patent system, struggling to stay alive in a world of rapid change. 
Because of this somewhat unorthodox approach, I have summarized the scope 
1Gordon McKay Lectures on Patent Law, given at Harvard University, 1956-58. 
1 

2 
Create or Perish 
of each chapter at its head, and, in some cases, the reason for the approach used 
in order that the reader may better understand my mode or presentation. 
In Chapter 1, a survey of the origin and historical background of the Amer­
ican patent system is presented; and, at its conclusion, serious questions are 
raised as to whether that system is currently either eﬀectively performing its 
original historical purposes or meeting the requirements of the present. I hope 
that by the end of the book, the reader may have gained an insight into some 
of the answers to these questions. 
Chapter 2 reviews the role of the Patent Oﬃce and the courts in adminis­
tration of the patent laws, especially for the beneﬁt of those unfamiliar with the 
administrative details of patent application prosecution and judicial review. 
The statutory provisions of American patent law are discussed in Chapter 
3, with reference to actual cases interpreted and decided by the courts. While 
the classes of patentable inventions and the conditions of patentability can be 
readily agreed upon, there is widespread conﬂict as to the standard set by the 
1952 Patent Act to determine what is “invention” and what is “obvious.” I 
have, accordingly, devoted a section of this chapter to discussing this conﬂict, 
giving my own views – predicated upon what I feel is in the national interest, 
namely an interpretation that encourages the independent American inventor 
and his backers as well as corporate inventors. In this connection the chapter 
concludes with statistics oﬀered by leading independent inventors pointing up 
their vital current contributions to technology and the necessity for liberal and 
sympathetic legal recognition of their work if the independent inventor is not to 
disappear from the American scene. 
In Chapter 4, I have carried forward an illustrative approach found most 
eﬀective in lecturing: tying together the complete picture of innovation – from 
the conception and invention stage, through ﬁnancial backing and development, 
entrepreneuring, business formation, and legal contests with pirates. Here I have 
used the medium of the Bell Telephone Cases, because this outdated invention 
involves technology and a degree of importance familiar to all readers, and 
because almost everything that could happen did happen to Bell, except the 
anonymity experienced by many current inventors from which he was saved by 
a single vote in the Supreme Court. 
Strongly woven through the fabric of the invention-innovation cycle are the 
relations between inventor and employer and between inventor and potential 
user or licensee. These include typical industrial, university, and governmental 
contract provisions. Since inventions are frequently stolen, the pitfalls facing 
the inventor are reviewed in Chapter 5. There are, however, very few proven 
cases of such piracy, and so I have selected a previously little-known example 
(in the ﬁeld of piezoelectricity) that took over two decades to document and 
establish by legal decision. The publication of this exposure, it is hoped, may 
forewarn the inventor, and perhaps give second thoughts to business and govern­
mental agencies in the matter of trying to circumvent the proprietary position 
of inventors. 
Chapter 6 discusses critically recent proposals for improving the patent sys­
tem, including current conﬂicting views in Congress and the courts as to gov­

3 
Introduction 
ernment rights in patents and other matters. 
I have left to Chapter 7 a consideration of the exciting modernization pro­
gram being planned by the European Economic Community with the view of 
providing a single common European patent and law of patents. The possible 
eﬀect of this upon the American system is noted, and some of my own views 
with regard to possible immediate improvements in the administration of our 
system are presented. 
Though one of expected primary groups of readers of this book is the en­
gineering profession, the solution to current problems in the protection of in­
ventions and patents calls for more than mere engineering consideration. There 
is a decided, and even primary, legal side concerning which something must be 
said. In Chapter 8, therefore, I have supplemented Chapter 7’s technical sug­
gestions for Patent Oﬃce and administrative improvement with proposals for 
modernizing judicial review. I have tried to formulate these in language that 
engineers can follow, but without losing their force for the legal and quasi-legal 
professionals. 
Chapter 9 points up the general economic consequences of the above prob­
lems. 
If in the end I am considered to have been too harsh on the courts of our 
land, my answer must be that my position is based on more than mere academic 
study. My attack is considered, deliberate, and to me necessary. My plea is 
simple. Before it is too late, let us restore to the individual his importance and 
dignity, and recognize and protect the fruits of his mind. A dynamic society 
led by free and encouraged creative minds – with government back in its role of 
servant and partner – oﬀers the Free World’s best hope. 

4 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 1 
The Origin and Development of The 
American Patent System 
This chapter presents a survey of the historical background of the 
American patent system and, at its conclusion, raises serious ques­
tions as to whether that system is currently either performing eﬀec­
tively the original historical purposes or meeting the needs of the 
present. 
“Oysters stuﬀed with honey” may sound like a gastronomic nightmare. To 
the authorities of the Greek colony of Sybaris 1, some ﬁve hundred years before 
Christ, however, it may well have been “an unusual and peculiar dish” that no 
one had the right to prepare and serve for a one-year period but the cook who 
originated it. 
This oﬃcial invitation to indigestion is one of the earliest recorded instances 
of a grant paralleling somewhat our concept of a patent granted for an inven­
tion. The policy of grants of numerous kinds by the state to individuals who 
had deserved well at its hands was inherited by medieval Europe from early 
times. Rome, for example, had rewarded her military heroes with triumphal 
processions, and had parceled out to them her conquered lands, upon which 
they might levy taxes. English monarchs exercised the prerogative of granting 
a right, franchise, charter, commission, oﬃce, monopoly, or the like – for exam­
ple, a title of nobility or permission to explore the New World. They did so in 
each case through the medium of a document addressed “To all to whom these 
presents shall come,” an open document termed “Litterae Patentes” or Letters 
Patent – letters openly recorded in the Patent Rolls. 
That the English king had good reason for granting at least some kinds of 
letters patent, under proper circumstances, can be understood from the follow­
ing considerations. 
Medieval Europe was a barbarous or semibarbarous ter­
ritory, not far removed from savagery. Industry and trade were in a precari­
ous condition. The nobles, not only in England but also on the Continent, as 
1Athenaeus; The Deipnosophists (3 Vols.), C. D. Yonge, Ed. , Bohn’s Classical Library, 
1854, p. 835. 
5 

6 
Create or Perish 
rulers supreme in their particular domains, demanded tolls from all who passed 
through their territories. They could do this uncontrolled by their supposedly 
superior monarchs, by fortifying themselves on hillsides and other places of ad­
vantage. Not until the invention of gunpowder were these monarchs able to 
bring their nobles under subjection. 
The trade of those days was conducted by merchants who traveled from coun­
try to country through the domains of various nobles. Because the merchants 
were subjected to great expense and risk in the carrying on of their business, 
they were compelled to charge very high prices for the goods that they intro­
duced for sale in Europe. Many articles were expensive luxuries beyond the 
reach of all but the very wealthiest. 
The Crusades, beginning in the eleventh century A.D. and continuing for 
several centuries more, brought the Europeans into contact with the Saracens, 
at that time a comparatively highly cultured people. They had developed the 
arts and were skilled in such sciences as algebra and astronomy, the very word 
“algebra” coming from the Arabic. 
Upon returning to their homes, the Crusaders carried with them much that 
they had found in the East, including knowledge of various arts and industries. 
Italian city-states, such as Genoa and Venice, the most powerful groups of their 
day, developed as a direct result of their proximity to the East. They prospered 
because of the trade that they had built up between the East and the West. 
In order to have something to sell, in return for the goods they obtained in 
the East, they stimulated new arts and industries by granting monopolies to 
favored individuals who were willing to take the risks involved. Early grants are 
reported for grain mills, and in 1474 the Venetian Senate voted the ﬁrst of all 
patent laws applying to all classes of invention. This law forbade infringement 
for a term of ten years, but gave free access to the government, provided that the 
latter dealt with the inventor and did not permit others to employ the invention 
in the government’s behalf 2 . 
To protect their trade and the industries they had established, European 
merchants banded together for common defense organized their own armies 
and navies. During the late Middle Ages they became quite powerful, as the 
Hanseatic League attests. 
Not until several centuries later, when new trade 
routes were opened up after the discovery of the New World, were the Italian 
city-states reduced to their present status as subdivisions of a larger nation. 
But the Italian cities were not the only communities thus beneﬁted. The 
goods and skills germinated by this trade with the East gradually spread over 
the whole of Europe. Because England was the farthest west and physically 
separated from the continent, it was not in the most favored position to secure 
these advantages, which the other states often guarded jealously. To overcome 
these disadvantages the English monarchs adopted the continental practice of 
granting patents, usually to foreigners, giving them for limited periods of time 
2This statement is based on information given me by some British patent lawyers who 
remembered hearing a paper entitled, ”The Early History of Patents of Patents for Invention,” 
given by M. Frumian before the Chartered Institute of Patent Agents in England sometime 
in the 1930’s. 

7 
Development of the American Patent System 
the exclusive right to carry on such new industries as, in consideration of the 
grant, they agreed to import into the realm. 
In this way the cloth industry was introduced into England. In 1331, Edward 
III granted a patent to John Kempe of Flanders, weaver of woolen cloth, and in 
1336 to Brabant weavers. In 1440, one was issued to John of Shiedame to enable 
him to import a newly invented process of manufacturing salt3 . The Tudors, 
successors of Edward IV, attracted skilled foreign artisans by negotiations – 
German armorers, Italian shipwrights, Normandy glassmakers, and French iron 
workers4 . 
Patents were also given to individuals and companies for other services to the 
state, to induce them to embark upon commercial or other ventures involving 
risk. Among these were the East India Trading Company, chartered by Queen 
Elizabeth I, and the Hudsons’s Bay Company, still very much a commercial 
force in Canada, chartered by her immediate successor. 
In the then relatively undeveloped state of industry and commerce, patents 
of this nature were undoubtedly necessary for the good of the realm and the well­
being of its subjects. The objects sought thereby were: ﬁrst, domestic supply 
of foreign, high-priced goods which would reduce their cost and consequently 
encourage their wider use; and, secondly, employment for English workmen in 
the new industries thus established. Some of the patents, indeed, speciﬁcally 
provided that English apprentices be employed. 
Gomme, late librarian of the British Patent Oﬃce5, for example, quotes from 
the 1449 patent granted by Henry VI to John of Utynam, “. . . to instruct divers 
lieges of the crown in the art of making colored glass.” It is reported6 that the 
precipitating cause of this patent grant was the requirement for colored windows 
at Eton College. 
Much later, the Court of King’s Bench clearly enunciated the rationale of 
such patents: 
But if a man hath brought in a new invention and a new trade within 
the Kingdom, in peril of his life, and consumption of his estate or 
stock . . . or if a man hath made a new discovery of anything, in such 
cases the King . . . in recompense of his costs and travail, may grant 
by charter unto him, that he only shall use such a trade or traﬁque 
for a certain time, because at ﬁrst the people of the Kingdom are 
ignorant, and have not the knowledge or skill to use it7 . 
But beneﬁcent measures are frequently attended by abuses. 
In granting 
their patents, the English kings did not always consider whether or not these 
conferred beneﬁts upon their subjects. 
The latters’ revolt against King John at Runnymede, in 1215, resulted in 
the famous Magna Carta. The monarch there had to agree that merchants were 
3A. A. Gomme, Patents of Invention, Longmans Green and Co., 1946, p. 12 
4Journal of the Patent Oﬃce Society, Vol. 18, pp. 21ﬀ. (1936). 
5A. A. Gomme, Patents of Invention, p. 12 
6H. Hardin, Patent Oﬃce Centenary, Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce, 1953, pp. 21, 34. 
778 Eng. Rep. 148 (Clothworkers of Ipswich, King’s Bench, 1615). 

8 
Create or Perish 
not to be prohibited from engaging in trade, “if they were not openly prohibited 
before.” This suggests no upsetting of current patents in trade, but restrictions 
on the monarch’s power to grant further patents in existing trades. 
The Magna Carta was not the only contract that the English kings made 
with their subjects. History shows, however, that the monarchs regarded these 
agreements much as some nations today regard treaties. When, under force of 
circumstances, kings were compelled to submit to greater force, as in the case 
of John at Runnymede, they signed anything that was put before them; but, 
as soon as the danger was over, they forgot their promises and acted as though 
they had never given them. 
In their endeavors to raise money, to reward favorites, and for other reasons, 
succeeding English monarchs thus granted many patents that became burden­
some to the people. One person would be given the exclusive right to engage 
in a certain industry, such as tanning; another to trade in soap, salt, starch, 
saltpeter, leather, paper or glass; another to buy and sell iron or steel; and still 
another to import certain articles; and so on. Sometimes the monopoly covered 
trade in all England; at other times, the sale of a particular article in a partic­
ular region. As the activities so monopolized had previously been free to the 
public, the only result was to raise prices which must be paid by the many, that 
the favored patentees might be enriched. 
In the fall of 1601, in response to protests, Queen Elizabeth I proclaimed that 
if any of her subjects felt aggrieved or wronged by reason of any of these patent 
grants, he could test the validity of the patent in the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
The very next spring, 1602, one Edward D’Arcy brought suit for infringement of 
his patent grant for making and importing playing cards. The justiﬁcation for 
the patent grant had been based upon grounds of public policy, that unless the 
grant existed subjects who might better “go to plow did employ themselves in 
the art of making cards8.” This is the famous Case of Monopolies. Though the 
court held the monopoly on playing cards to be invalid, the case has come down 
the ages as recognizing the existence of something most important, namely the 
line of division between what is proper and what is improper subject matter for 
a patent “monopoly.” To quote from the decision, 
Where any man by his own charge and industry or by his own wit 
or invention doth bring any new trade into the Realm of any Engine 
tending to the furtherance of a trade that never was used before; 
And that for the good of the Realm; That in such cases the King 
may grant to him a monopoly patent for some reasonable time until 
the subjects may learn the same, in consideration of the good that 
he doth bring by his Invention to the Commonwealth; otherwise not. 
This has been the law in England up to the present time. One can still 
obtain a patent in Great Britain, not merely for an invention that he has made, 
but also for a new article or idea imported from outside the realm. 
8D’Arcy v. Allen, 11 Coke 86 (1602), known as the Case of Monopolies. 

9 
Development of the American Patent System 
Notwithstanding the D’Arcy decision, the very next monarch, James I, who 
ascended the throne in 1603, granted more monopolies than ever, including some 
for silk and even inns. The cry against harmful monopolies in Great Britain 
accordingly grew in vigor, until, ﬁnally, by the Statute of Monopolies in 1623, 
Parliament deprived the sovereign completely of this prerogative. 
The Statute of Monopolies made an exception, however, in favor of patents 
for inventions – the very same exception that the judges had indicated in the 
D’Arcy case, and which was really, in eﬀect, declaratory of the common law, i. 
e., that no special privilege would be granted for “ . . . any letters patent and 
grants of privilege for the term of fourteen years or under hereafter to be made 
of the sole working or making of any manner of new manufacture within this 
Realm to the true and ﬁrst inventor and inventors of such manufactures which 
other at the time of making of such letters patent and grants shall not use so 
as also they be not contrary to the law nor mischievous to the State by raising 
prices of commodities at home or hurt of trade or generally inconvenient9.” 
Both the English and the American laws of patents10 come directly from 
this exception for inventions, and the very provision quoted above still exists as 
Section 6 of the present British Statute of Monopolies. 
The American colonists were fully acquainted with patents, and knew their 
value under certain circumstances, as set forth in the Statute of Monopolies. 
Like the mother country, several of the colonies, prior to the Constitutional 
Convention, had granted patents in the endeavor to introduce industries. The 
patents were not necessarily for new inventions, but sometimes for old industries, 
if brought in from abroad, and also for fostering those struggling for survival. 
The encouragement of industries was achieved not only by the grant of monop­
olies in special enactments of the local legislature, corresponding to the English 
grants from the Crown, but also through the medium of premiums, bounties, 
and the like. 
Fully aware, when granting these perquisites, of the monopolistic evils in 
the country whence they had come, the colonists took precautions against a 
repetition of those evils. For example, the Massachusetts General Court (the 
colonial legislature) in 1641 enacted that “There shall be no monopolies granted 
or allowed among us, but of such new inventions as are proﬁtable to the country, 
and that for a short time.” Connecticut had a similar provision. Massachusetts, 
Connecticut, Virginia, South Carolina, New York, and other colonies granted 
a number of patents covering diﬀerent methods of making salt, some invented 
and others imported, and sometimes on condition that saltworks be established 
within a limited time. Similar patents covering the exclusive manufacture of 
other articles, and often on similar conditions, were granted by the colonists. 
These included the manufacture of iron and of machinery, a sawmill, a grain 
mill, and a tobacco pipe factory. 
The ﬁrst patent granted by the Massachusetts General Court, pursuant to 
the enactment of 1641, was one to Samuel Winslow (1641) for a novel method 
9Statute of Monopolies, 21 Jac. I, C.3 (1623). 
10Kendall v. Winsor, 21 How. 322, 327, 328; Motion Picture Co. v. Universal Film Co., 
243 U.S. 502, 510, 511. 

10 
Create or Perish 
of making salt. The ﬁrst machinery patent granted by the same body was to 
Joseph Jenkes, in 1646, for a scythe-manufacturing mill. In 1667, Massachusetts 
oﬀered a ﬁfteen-year monopoly to anyone who would build a dry dock, and, the 
oﬀer apparently not proving suﬃciently attractive, the term of years was in­
creased in the following year to twenty-one. Several of the colonies continued to 
grant patents, even after they became states upon the adoption of the Constitu­
tion. New York, for example, issued one to Livingston and Fulton covering the 
exclusive right to operate steamboats in New York waters, a patent later an­
nulled by Chief Justice Marshall as being in violation of the interstate-commerce 
clause of the Constitution. 
The delegates to the Constitutional Convention in 1787, fully familiar with 
all the circumstances, desired to provide the new nation with the beneﬁts of 
a patent system. 
Both James Madison of Virginia and Charles Pinckney of 
South Carolina, therefore, proposed that Congress be given certain powers in 
that direction. Madison’s proposal was that it should have power: “To secure to 
literary authors their copyrights for a limited time. To encourage by premiums 
and provisions, the advance of useful knowledge and discoveries.” 
Parenthetically, the Atomic Energy Commission is doing the very thing to­
day that Madison suggested so long ago11 . Certain types of inventions deal­
ing with the production of ﬁssionable material and atomic weapons cannot be 
patented under the exclusion provisions of the Atomic Energy Act. An inventor 
may, however, make a claim for remuneration for his contribution, and, un­
der certain standards that have been set up, may be awarded a sum of money 
by the Commission. From a study of the unclassiﬁed awards and experience 
with the AEC, some authorities believe that the Constitutional founders were 
most wise in rejecting Madison’s proposal. They are convinced that the failure 
of the nuclear program to get oﬀ the ground more rapidly and extensively, in 
the way and to the same degree that our free-enterprise inventive eﬀorts with 
other nongovernment-controlled programs have historically blossomed for the 
common good, may be due, in part, to the inadequacy of this kind of so-called 
incentive. 
Charles Pinckney disliked Madison’s proposal that the government should 
evaluate and pay out sums of money for inventions. His own proposal was that 
Congress should have the power “to grant patents for useful inventions. 
To 
secure to authors exclusive rights for a certain time.” Under this concept, the 
competitive industrial marketplace would determine the value of an invention. 
As it emerged from committee and as adopted by the Convention, the Con­
stitution provided, and still provides, in Article I, Section 8, that Congress shall 
have power: “To promote the Progress of Science and Useful Arts, by secur­
ing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their 
respective Writings and Discoveries.” 
Pursuant to this provision, Congress could have granted to a person who 
makes a scientiﬁc discovery the exclusive right to his own discovery. The Con­
1142 U.S.C. 2187 (Sec. 157). (The abbreviation U.S.C. refers to the United States Code – 
a collected body of federal law.) 

11 
Development of the American Patent System 
stitution uses the words “Science,” “exclusive right,” “discoveries 12.” As will 
be made evident, however, Congress has provided for exclusive rights only in 
cases of certain kinds of advances and not for scientiﬁc discoveries per se. 
This provision is the only one in the whole Constitution which relates to the 
creation of private property rights and was intended to promote the progress of 
science and the useful arts. It rested on the great tradition and philosophy of 
our capitalistic system – the granting of limited protection to the individual in 
developing ideas for the beneﬁt of the many. 
Nothing, it will be noted, is said in this provision about granting patents 
as such. The word “securing” is used instead. Madison later explained, in the 
Federalist papers, that, though the word “securing” was appropriate only in 
connection with copyrights, which had been recognized as a natural property 
right at common law, there was no reason why the same principles should not 
apply to inventions: “The right to useful inventions seems with equal reason 
to belong to the inventors. The public seems with equal reason to belong to 
the inventors. The public good fully coincides in both cases with the claims of 
individuals.” 
Jeﬀerson, however, declined to accept the view that inventions belonged to 
inventors as a natural right. He felt that they were for the beneﬁt of the whole 
society. 
After the adoption of the Constitution, President Washington recommended 
legislation in furtherance of this constitutional provision, and a statute was 
enacted by the very ﬁrst Congress, in 1790. The founders of the Union thought 
the matter so important that they provided therein that the Secretary of State 
(Thomas Jeﬀerson), in collaboration with the Secretary of War (Henry Knox 
of Massachusetts) and the Attorney General (Edmund Randolph of Virginia), 
should examine all patent applications, and the President and the Secretary of 
State should personally sign the patent grant. That body of three eminent men, 
Jeﬀerson, Knox, and Randolph, in eﬀect constituted the ﬁrst Patent Oﬃce of 
this country, with Jeﬀerson the ﬁrst patent examiner, commissioner, and lawyer. 
Washington, Jeﬀerson, and Randolph signed the ﬁrst patents. 
Jeﬀerson, though, opposed to all forms of monopoly, and at ﬁrst including 
patents in this category, was compelled as a result of his experience to state that 
the patent law gave “a spring to invention beyond my conception,” and that, 
therefore, “nobody wishes more that I that ingenuity should receive a liberal 
encouragement13.” 
Before a patent could be issued under the law of 1790, it was necessary 
that the application be carefully examined to determine whether the purported 
invention, in the terms of the statute, was “before known or used” and whether it 
was really “suﬃciently useful and important” to warrant the dignity of a patent 
12There is a great doubt whether this word “Science” as used in the Constitution, meant 
what we mean today. My own study leads me to the conviction that the term ”science” in 
the constitutional sense, was used, rather, with philosophical and literary concepts primarily 
in mind. 
13In a letter to Oliver Evans, May 2, 1807, as given in The Writings of Thomas Jeﬀerson, 
A. E. Bergh, Ed., 1907, Vol. 5, p. 74. 

12 
Create or Perish Photograph of the first United States Patent Grant, July 31, 1790. Signed by George Washington.
Fig. 1.1: The ﬁrst United States Patent Grant, July 31, 1790 (Reproduced from 
the original in the collection of the Chicago Historical Society. This image is 
public domain and is not protected by copyright.) 
grant. 
Before three years had elapsed, however, the “suﬃciently useful and 
important” condition was removed from the statute, and patents were issued by 
mere registration and not by examination; but the matter was still under the 
auspices of the State Department. Chaos followed – frauds, vexatious litigations, 
multiple conﬂicting patents, and so on. 
At the urging of Senator John Ruggles of Maine, some forty-odd year later, 
the “American” system of granting patents only after examination was rein­
stated by the Patent Act of 1836 , and the Patent Oﬃce was reorganized and 
established as a separate bureau of the State Department, with the bureau chief 
formally titled commissioner of patents. The Patent Oﬃce was subsequently 
transferred to the Department of the Interior, upon the latter’s establishment 
in 1849; and later, in 1926, it was given its present status in the Department of 
Commerce. There has long been, and still is, agitation for making the Patent 
Oﬃce an entirely separate executive branch14, perhaps with expanded functions 
more suited to current national needs. But such expanded and modernized func­
tions still seem to ﬁt in the responsibilities of the Department of Commerce. 
14Journal of the Patent Oﬃce Society, Vol. 40, pp. 10 - 17 (1958). 

13 
Development of the American Patent System 
1.1 
Conclusion 
It is important to note that the historical purposes that lay behind our patent 
system were primarily concerned with the matter of innovation and not bald 
invention alone. 
The object was not merely to grant patents; rather it was to encourage the 
few inventive minds among us to take the risks inherent in introducing new 
products and arts or processes into the stream of commerce, for the ultimate 
beneﬁt of the many. 
This encouragement took the form of a contract: the 
sovereign oﬀering the inventor limited protection against copying in return for 
the publication of the details of his invention; and it rested upon the theory, 
now ironically applied more eﬀectively by the Soviets than by us, that rewards 
to the individual beneﬁt the public at large. 
An additional purpose was to prevent, through the publication of inventions 
in patents, a recurrence of loss of arts such as had happened formerly when 
knowledge was handed down from father to son secretly. 
But whether today’s patent system in America, its administration and its 
treatment by the judiciary, is an eﬀective stimulus to innovation, has become a 
question of the utmost importance and urgency. 
Does the system oﬀer that kind of security to the inventor and his backers 
that stimulates ready embarkation upon the risky road of innovation? 
Do its rewards stimulate the myriad engineers who, as a condition of their 
employment in much of industry and government, have assigned to their em­
ployers all their rights to any inventions they may make? 
Has its use in certain large corporate quarters been reduced largely to de­
fensive and cross-licensing needs, as distinguished from protecting an exclusive 
position as a stimulus to innovation? 
Are we today really worried about “lost arts”? 
Does the system promote the progress of useful military, nuclear, and space 
arts? 
In short, has our patent system been largely reduced in many ﬁelds to the 
granting of papers with red seals – mostly form and little substance? 

14 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 2 
The Role of the Patent Office and the 
Courts 
For the beneﬁt of readers unfamiliar with the details of patent appli­
cation prosecution and judicial review, the role of the Patent Oﬃce 
and courts is herein summarized. 
In view of the multiple-function purpose of this book and diversity of back­
grounds of its hoped-for readers, a brief review is in order of the processes 
involved in ﬁling and prosecuting patent applications in the Patent Oﬃce and 
the role of the courts of the land in patent litigation. This chapter, obviously, 
will be of little interest for those knowledgeable in this ﬁeld. 
Perhaps an interesting way to trace the procedure would be to stand in the 
shoes of an imaginary independent inventor in the ﬁrst ﬂush of success in the 
completion of an invention. In order to obtain a patent for it, he must submit 
for examination by the Patent Oﬃce a detailed description that, by law, must 
be in a certain subscribed form and be couched in legal terminology generally 
quite foreign to those who produce inventions as well as to nonlegal persons 
in general. The patent application itself must contain a clear and concise de­
scription of the invention (termed here the speciﬁcation), usually with reference 
to drawings illustrating a preferred form of the device, and a set of succinct 
terminal paragraphs, called claims, setting forth the features of novelty which 
the inventor and his attorney believe the Patent Oﬃce should allow as deﬁning 
the scope of the patent grant. 
2.1 
The Nature of the Patent Oﬃce 
It will be remembered that the Constitution authorized Congress to promote 
the progress of useful arts by securing to inventors for limited periods of time 
the exclusive rights to their discoveries. It has previously been pointed out, 
however, that, apart from a few questionably-handled procedures, as under 
the compensation provisions of the Atomic Energy Act or the Space Act, pure 
scientists have not been rewarded by Congress. Instead, the latter has seen ﬁt 
to enact patent laws applicable to the applied scientist and engineer, who takes 
15 

16 
Create or Perish 
the discoveries of the pure scientist and makes useful arts out of them. In 1952, 
Congress codiﬁed the patent laws, adding, however certain modiﬁcations that 
purported to eliminate or at least curb the disposition of some courts to strike 
down patents as a matter of social philosophy. 
The statute itself deﬁnes the structure of the Patent Oﬃce and the mode 
of its operation, charging the commissioner of patents with the responsibility 
for the examination of every patent application and for the issuance of every 
patent (and trademark). Thus the Patent Oﬃce must maintain a vast up-to-date 
technical library, otherwise the patent examiners assisting the commissioner will 
not have the facilities for making reasonably thorough investigations. 
The commissioner is further assisted by an appellate board in the Patent 
Oﬃce, termed the Board of Appeals. The members of the Board, like the com­
missioner, are appointed by the president and are given the title of examiners-
in-chief. Their function is primarily to pass on ﬁnal rejections by the examining 
corps which deny the patentability of the claimed inventions. Fortunately, they 
are selected from the experienced ranks of the Patent Oﬃce personnel and are 
not, as yet, purely political appointees. 
Before our inventor’s newly ﬁled patent application is examined for novelty, it 
is screened by classiﬁcation examiners to determine whether the subject matter 
properly relates to the class of inventions handled by a particular group of 
skilled examiners. Since, however, applications are normally examined in the 
order received, and since there is, on the average, a year’s backlog of cases, our 
inventor will probably have to wait that long before his application is reached. 
When the examiner assigned to the case reaches the application, he (or 
she) studies it with particular attention to the claims of novelty which he is 
requested to allow. These claims, if allowed, represent the metes and bounds or 
scope of the patent grant. The examiner then goes to the division ﬁles of patents 
and publications, which are broken down into many thousands of classes and 
subclasses, and starts his search. He is looking for the prior art that is closest to 
the concept claimed to be new. He looks not only for the exact device described 
in the application, but also for others similar to it. If the patent attorney in 
the case has made his own search before ﬁling the application and failed to ﬁnd 
an exact anticipation, it is likely that the examiner will not ﬁnd one either. 
However, even if the invention is not found in any prior patent or publication, 
but is the kind of thing that any mechanic skilled is the art could easily evolve 
from what is in a prior patent or publication, the device is not patentable. 
Having completed his search, the examiner usually takes the course of re­
jecting the application on the basis of the closest prior art that he was able 
to ﬁnd. There is a very deﬁnite reason for this. Being a conscientious public 
servant, the examiner is not disposed to hand out patents unless he is convinced 
that a really new invention has been made 1 . By rejecting the case, he puts the 
burden of proof on the applicant to explain why the latter should be granted a 
1If our judiciary could only experience, as practicing lawyers, the diﬃculty involved in 
successfully prosecuting a patent application in the Patent Oﬃce, their respect for patents 
would undoubtedly increase 

17 
The Role of the Patent Oﬃce and the Courts 
patent although others may have come as close to his purported invention as in 
the prior art cited by the examiner. 
The attorney for the applicant must then reply within six months of the 
examiner’s rejection, pointing out why the prior art is not pertinent to his 
client’s claim of novelty, and, if the original claims did not clearly deﬁne that 
novelty, appropriately amending those claims. 
This process of rejection (or 
partial rejection) and amendment or argument continues until the examiner 
feels that an issue has been reached. In some cases, the examiner will allow the 
amended claims or, upon reconsideration, the original claims, or some of them, 
and the patent will thereupon be granted and will take its place among over 
three million United States patents. In other cases, the examiner will not be 
persuaded as to the matter of invention. The applicant’s attorney insists; the 
examiner is adamant that there is no invention and makes his rejection ﬁnal. 
Sometimes the attorney will interview the examiner in person. He may then 
ask the primary examiner to review the assistant’s decisions. At a conference, 
the assistant examiner gives the primary examiner his reasons for rejection, 
and the attorney presents his side of the case, perhaps with the help from the 
inventor himself. The primary examiner then makes his decision. If he agrees 
with the attorney, he overrules his assistant and allows the application so that 
they patent may issue. If, on the other hand, he feels that the assistant is right, 
he will not overrule him, but will suggest that the attorney turn to the Board 
of Appeals. 
The attorney, in the latter event, ﬁles a brief before the Board in which 
he describes the history of the case, the nature and details of the invention, 
the meaning of the rejected claims, the prior art cited by the examiner upon 
which the adverse ruling was based, and the reasons, factual and legal, why the 
attorney considers the examiner to be in error. The examiner then ﬁles a reply 
brief presenting his views, and the case may be decided by the Board of Appeals 
on these two briefs alone. An oral argument may, however, be requested. The 
attorney will appear before the Board to argue his case, but the examiner from 
whom the appeal is taken usually does not appear at the hearing. 
The Board may then sustain the examiner’s rejection, or overrule it and 
order the patent to be granted. Sometimes the Board ﬁnds that, while it cannot 
sustain the examiner’s position, the claims are not patentable for reasons other 
than those advanced by the examiner. In such an event, it will oﬀer its own 
grounds for rejection, permitting the applicant to modify his claims in order to 
overcome the new objections or to ask for reconsideration of the new grounds. 
Whenever two or more applicants are claiming the same invention, “inter­
ference” examiners are assigned the task of trying to determine who is actually 
the ﬁrst inventor. Testimony is usually taken before a notary public or court 
oﬃcer, subject to cross-examination, and other evidence of invention activities 
submitted by the conﬂicting applicants. Aided by these, as well as by briefs and 
oral argument, a Board of Patent Interferences makes a decision as to who is 
the prior inventor. 
The commissioner cannot by himself, of course, decide or give attention to 
the administration of all these matters. He therefore has several assistant com­

18 
Create or Perish 
missioners of patents. And, parenthetically, lest it be considered that Russians 
are the only ones who utilize the talents of women in technical ﬁelds, we have 
recently been ably served by a lady assistant commissioner of patents on matters 
regarding trademarks. 
2.2 
Patent Oﬃce Problems 
When there is a rapid turnover in the examining crops because of attractive 
oﬀers from outside organizations, particularly to the younger examiners, the 
backlog of cases obviously mounts. The eﬀectiveness and utility of the whole 
patent system are thereby damaged. Perhaps the greater administrative prob­
lems facing the Patent Oﬃce, therefore, are, ﬁrst convincing the public and 
Congress of the importance of its functions; and, second, the urgent necessity 
for promptly dignifying the position of examiner so that it will attract competent 
career men and women. 
Automation in the form of electronic computers may come to help in the 
searching process. Indeed, an interesting experiment for facilitating the exam­
iner’s search in certain limited chemical cases by computer techniques is under 
way. 
Whether suﬃcient time and money will ever be provided to eﬀect the copious 
cross-referencing in the electrical and electronic ﬁelds, as well as in the mechani­
cal ﬁelds, necessary for the employment of computers in the task of searching, is 
a real question. An inventor who ﬁles an application for a new vacuum tube, for 
example, might ﬁnd anticipation of his tube tucked away in a prior patent for a 
radio-receiver circuit, in which prior patent the very same tube might have been 
shown incidentally, but not claimed as part of the invention. The disclosure of 
the earlier tube would, however, be a bar to patenting the new one. Unless the 
information was entered into the computer that this tube construction was dis­
closed, though not claimed, in the radio-receiver patent, it will not be furnished 
by the computer. Today, however, an examiner, in scanning a patent, can notice 
such incidental disclosures not predicted by the title or normal classiﬁcations of 
the patent. 
There is, accordingly, the stupendous problem of cross-referencing the minu­
tiae and classifying every tiny component of all the combinations shown and de­
scribed in patents, if computer searching is to be successful. This is something 
that, to some of us, looks quite impractical as yet. Classifying certain kinds of 
chemical compounds may be something else again. 
In 1935, only 31,900 applications still awaited preliminary or further action 
by the examiners, i.e., were “pending.” Recently, there were almost a quarter of 
a million of them 2 . And there are pending before the Board of Appeals about 
6,000 cases, and some hearings have been set for more than a year after the 
appeal was entered. 
The problem of speeding up the granting of patents, consistent with reason­
ably thorough examination and consideration, and particularly in the light of 
2Senate Report No. 1430, Report of the Committee on the Judiciary, 86th Congress, 2d 
Session (1958) 

19 
The Role of the Patent Oﬃce and the Courts 
limited budget and personnel, is thus still with us, though great strides have 
been made in keeping the Patent Oﬃce more nearly up-to-date. 
2.3 
Review of Patent Oﬃce Decisions 
Suppose the Board of Appeals concurs with the examiner that an application 
discloses no patentable invention, and thus decides adversely to the applicant. 
Congress has provided two alternative remedies in the nature of court review of 
such decision 3 . 
One is to ﬁle a suit against the commissioner of patents in the Federal 
District Court for the District of Columbia 4 . The complainant may ask the 
judge to review the adverse decision of the Board of Appeals, to hear the case 
for patentability of the invention afresh (a so-called action de novo), and to 
consider new and more detailed evidence as to the invention underlying the 
application and the reasons why the patent should be awarded. The District 
Court judge will either sustain the Patent Oﬃce rejection of the application 
or, if he disagrees with the Board of Appeals, direct that a patent be issued. 
At this trial, the commissioner is represented by his own solicitor, who cross-
examines the applicant’s witnesses and may present witnesses on behalf of the 
commissioner. 
From an adverse decision of the District Court, one may appeal to the Court 
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. A ﬁnal review by way of an 
appeal petition termed “certiorari” may be asked of the United States Supreme 
Court if the Court of Appeals refuses to reverse the Patent Oﬃce; but the 
Supreme Court is not apt presently to grant patents. 
If, on the other hand, the applicant does not wish to go into Federal District 
Court, and is well satisﬁed with the evidence existing in the record of the prose­
cution of the application in the Patent Oﬃce, he can alternatively appeal to the 
Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, strictly upon that record 5 . This court 
was originally a so-called legislative court, set up under the provisions of Article 
I of the Constitution to serve as a tribunal of Congress, as distinguished from 
the judicial courts of Article III, such as the Federal District Courts, Courts of 
Appeals, and the Supreme Court. Congress has recently, however, converted 
the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals into a judicial court established un­
der Article III. Five judges of the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals hear 
appeals both from customs decisions and from patent decisions. In the past, 
these judges have not been technically trained people, though recently patent 
lawyers have been considered for the bench and appointed to it, and the Court 
is looking more and more to them with regard to appeals from the Patent Oﬃce. 
If the applicant is dissatisﬁed with the decision of the Court of Customs 
and Patent Appeals, he has the opportunity of petitioning for certiorari to the 
United States Supreme Court; but, within recent years, such petitions have not 
been granted. 
Similarly, when dissatisﬁed with the decision of the Board of 
3The same remedies apply to trademarks and design patent cases also 
435 U.S.C. 145 
535 U.S.C. 141 

20 
Create or Perish 
Patent Interferences, the losing party may appeal to the Court of Customs and 
Patent Appeals, or may bring a suit in an appropriate District Court to have 
the Patent Oﬃce decision reversed, oﬀering fresh testimony and evidence. 
2.4 
The Present Mood of the Courts 
The courts of the District of Columbia are called upon, at times, to review not 
only the decisions of the Patent Oﬃce, but also the actions of nearly every federal 
administrative oﬃcer or tribunal. The Federal Communications Commission 
will award a radio station to party A rather than to party B; or the Secretary of 
the Interior will issue a land grant or a mineral lease to one party rather than to 
another; or the Secretary of State will deny the issuance of a passport; or some 
employee of the Army considers that he has lost his position unjustly. Persons 
dissatisﬁed with many administrative decisions come to the various courts of 
the District of Columbia each year. It is, of course, asking too much of a judge 
that he be skilled in the technical intricacies of all the matters handled by the 
various administrative agencies which, indeed, are presumably staﬀed by experts 
trained in the pertinent technical subject matters. Accordingly, the judge does 
not undertake in such cases to substitute his own fact ﬁnding for that of the 
administrative agency, except under rare circumstances. The courts have held 
very wisely that unless there is abuse by the administrative agency, unless the 
parties had not been given a fair hearing, unless there is no substantial evidence 
to support the agency’s decision, or unless that decision is unconscionable and 
clearly erroneous, a court will not upset the administrative agency’s ﬁndings 
even though, considering all the evidence, it might itself have decided the fact 
issues diﬀerently. A court will of course, maintain its important function of 
interpreting the law issues, and will readily substitute its interpretation of the 
law for that of the agency. 
Suits against the commissioner of patents in the District Court for the Dis­
trict of Columbia are upon a little diﬀerent footing, since the statute permits 
the District Court to receive new evidence not before the Patent Oﬃce nor con­
sidered by it and to make a decision based upon all the facts presented. During 
the relatively recent past, however, the Patent Oﬃce has been sustained in case 
after case by the District Court, apparently no matter what new evidence was 
oﬀered 6 . 
Subsequent to the recent Patent Act of 1952 , which was intended to ex­
ercise a stabilizing eﬀect upon court treatment of patents, there have been a 
number of reversals of the Patent Oﬃce. Some judges of the Court of Appeals 
of the District of Columbia, however, are apparently still hostile, as indicated 
by dissenting Judge Danaher 7: 
The philosophy permeating the majority opinion basically is one 
6Attention is invited to the anomaly (unless one recognizes the hostility to patents) of the 
court’s giving such great weight to the Patent Oﬃce ﬁndings of no invention when it has 
declined to grant a patent, and such little weight to its ﬁndings of invention and the resulting 
statutory presumption of validity in suits for infringement of patents granted by it 
7Watson v. Bersworth, 727 O.G. 445, 251 F. 2d 898. 

21 
The Role of the Patent Oﬃce and the Courts 
of nulliﬁcation of the remedy provided by Congress, a result hear 
reached (1) by according to the Patent Oﬃce the equivalent of a 
conclusive presumption of correctness; and (2) by holding that suﬃ­
ciently of disclosure raises a question of law. Relegated to zero status 
is the District Court, with its ﬁnding, its conclusions, its memoran­
dum opinion and its judgment. Judge Wilkin heard many witnesses, 
had the beneﬁt of charts and exhibits, received detailed explanations 
as to the points in issue and possessed the advantage of colloquy with 
the opposing counsel. The record discloses close and careful atten­
tion to the many aspects of the case brought under 35 U.S.C. 145 
which permits a dissatisﬁed applicant to pursue his remedy in the 
District Court with may adjudge the applicant entitled to receive a 
patent “as the facts of the case may appear.” 
We recently pointed out that under governing case law and the Fed­
eral Rules, even as to patent cases, “a ﬁnding of fact by the District 
Court, sitting without jury, may be set aside on appeal only if it is 
clearly erroneous.” We noted that in such situations we are bound to 
inquire whether the District Court’s ﬁndings are clearly erroneous. 
Here, no eﬀort is made by the majority to demonstrate that Judge 
Wilkin’s ﬁndings are “clearly wrong” or “clearly erroneous.” They 
are simply are peremptorily spurned as meaningless and nugatory in 
the context of the majority’s treatment of the problem. I shall later 
undertake to show that the District Judge, with thorough conviction, 
arrived at his amply supported ﬁndings on the new evidence before 
him. I fail to see how we could have otherwise than he did. 
And, more recently, Judge Burger of the Court of Appeals for the District 
of Columbia stated that, while he was “compelled” to follow the “present state 
of the decisions” in sustaining the Patent Oﬃce holding of no invention, he felt 
that those decisions 
impose barriers to patents far more stringent than contemplated 
either in the ﬁrst instance by the Constitution or later by Congress 
8 . 
Judge Burger continued, 
This case illustrates, to me, the inhospitable attitude toward patents. 
stemming in part from our natural aversion to monopolies. From 
the premise that monopolies are bad, it is argued that patents being 
monopolies are at least suspect. But a patent is a monopoly primar­
ily in a technical dictionary sense, much as is ownership of land, and 
we ought not let our reason be clouded by semantics. 
This lack of hospitality toward patents is suggested in the argument, 
sometimes made here by counsel for the Patent Oﬃce, that Buck 
8Boehringer Sohn v. Watson, 256 F. 2d 712, 714. 

22 
Create or Perish 
Rogers comic strips which depict rockets, jets, and the space age 
will no doubt operate and be cited as “anticipation” of some patent 
applications for such devices as the fertile brain of the cartoonist de­
picts for the children. It appears that unrestrained imagination, un­
burdened by any responsibility for the hard, patient and painstaking 
work of development, car bar future patent protection for the men 
and women who actually implement and carry out the prediction 
and prophecies of the Buck Rogers comic strips and the “Fantastic 
Stories” of the paperback trade. Indeed, Patent Oﬃce counsel advice 
us that Rube Goldberg cartoons have been used for this same pur­
pose. This hardly seems the way to encourage maximum incentive 
for those engaged in research and invention. This could mean that 
widespread research and experimentation in these areas might well, 
by economic necessity or default, ultimately become a Government 
monopoly. 
We can hope, accordingly, that the remedy in the federal courts, intended by 
Congress to grant relief from improper Patent Oﬃce decision, will ultimately be 
interpreted to have been restored by the Patent Act of 1952 to patent applicants. 
2.5 
The Reports of Patent Oﬃce and Court Decisions 
Scientists have their journals describing the latest advances in the various tech­
nological ﬁelds. Similarly, lawyers have the reports of the various administrative 
law tribunals, such as the Patent Oﬃce, and of the courts, containing decisions 
in litigated cases that illustrate the current legal interpretations placed upon the 
various statutes and regulations, as well as how various types of factual situa­
tions are currently treated by such tribunals and courts. From these decisions, 
as thus reported, a lawyer, through the process of analogy, tries to answer a 
client’s questions as to whether or not his invention is patentable, and what his 
legal rights may be in various situations. 
In its weekly Oﬃcial Gazette, the Patent Oﬃce publishes, in addition to 
regulations, rules, notices, and reports of interesting Patent Oﬃce or court de­
cisions, a brief notice of every patent that has been granted during the week. 
That notice includes a typical drawing from the patent application, where ap­
propriate, and a typical claim, perhaps representative of the scope of the patent 
grant 9 . Since the “claims” set forth the metes and bounds, or limits, of the 
exclusive privilege for which the patent was granted, an attorney, by scanning 
the Oﬃcial Gazette, may learn of recent patent grants in the ﬁelds with which 
his clients are concerned, for the purpose both of keeping up to date and of 
learning of possible conﬂict with the client’s competitors. 
Patents are classiﬁed in the Oﬃcial Gazette as general and mechanical 
patents, chemical patents, and electrical patents. Design patents, also granted 
9The United States Patent Quarterly (U.S.P.Q.) also contains Patent Oﬃce and court 
decisions bearing upon patents, trademarks, copyrights, unfair competition, antitrust matters, 
and the like; and, as later discussed, federal court decisions on all subjects, including patents, 
are also contained in other reports 

23 
The Role of the Patent Oﬃce and the Courts 
by the Patent Oﬃce for new and ornamental esthetic designs of various kinds 
of items, are also reported. 
In addition, the Oﬃcial Gazette publishes trademarks that the Patent Oﬃce 
proposes to register, to enable anyone who considers that such registration may 
hurt him to ﬁle an opposition to it. A trademark is a mark (such as a symbol 
or word or the like) that a party in business adopts and uses in connection with 
his products or services. It serves to associate these products or services, in 
the public mind, with the business entity that is the source or their origin – 
“Ivory,” for example, as used on soap by Procter and Gamble. Unlike a patent, 
a common-law trademark is not obtained by registering it in the Patent Oﬃce, 
but merely by adopting and using it. However, federal registration of a mark, 
used in interstate commerce, provides, among other beneﬁts, certain procedural 
advantages in enforcing the mark against infringers, and in obtaining trademark 
registrations in certain foreign countries. 
I have dwelt brieﬂy on this matter because there is today, in some quarters, 
renewed interest in the proposal that the Patent Oﬃce similarly publish in its 
Gazette, for opposition, its intention to grant patents. The theory is that if 
the public can oppose the granting of a patent by calling to the attention of the 
examiner some reasons why it should not be issued – such as a prior art that the 
examiner may have overlooked – the courts should give more than lip service to 
the present statutory presumption of the validity of a patent grant, discussed 
later, because the public had its chance to disprove the allegation of invention 
before the patent was issued. 
In Chapter 6, I shall analyze a series of proposals for remedial legislation, 
including the matter of oppositions, which, for reasons later presented, I now 
believe more likely to be detrimental than helpful to the American patent sys­
tem. 
2.6 
A Further Role of the Courts – Infringement Suits 
Let us assume that a patent has been granted by the Patent Oﬃce. This oﬃce 
then loses jurisdiction of the patent, with a few minor exceptions. The next 
tribunal before which a patent may come is the federal District Court. How 
does this come about? 
Somebody starts to “infringe” the patent. This may mean that someone 
other than the owner or a licensee under the patent makes, uses, or sells (or 
induces the making, using, or selling of) the invention in violation of the patent 
holder’s right to exclude others from manufacturing, using, or selling it. (A 
“licensee” is one who has obtained, by suitable contract with the patent holder 
or one authorized to act for him, a license or right to manufacture, use, or 
sell the invention with the assurance that he shall be immune from suit by the 
patent holder. 
Usually some kind of license fee, often termed a royalty and 
frequently based upon a percentage of the business involving the invention that 
the licensee may do, is involved in the license contract.) 
When the patent holder learns about the action, he demands that the person 
involved cease and desist from his infringement and account for past infringe­

24 
Create or Perish 
ment or, if the patent holder is prepared to grant him a license, negotiate such 
a license. 
Suppose the infringer declines to stop infringing or to negotiate a license. The 
patent then serves, in the words of the late Professor George Washington Pierce 
of Harvard University, as “a license to bring a law suit.” The patent holder has 
the legal right to ﬁle a complaint in the federal District Court where the infringer 
resides or where the infringer is both doing business and committing his acts 
of infringement, requesting the court to issue an injunction prohibiting further 
infringement and to award damages to the patent holder for this unlicensed use 
of his invention. 
The defendant-infringer must ﬁle an answer to the complaint, setting forth 
his reasons for defying the plaintiﬀ’s patent rights. Usually, he will list earlier 
similar patents or publications and refer to earlier alleged inventors or users of 
the invention covered by the patent, in the hope that, at the trial, he will be able 
to convince the court that no real advance had been made over what had been 
done before, of suﬃcient scope to warrant a patent grant, and so the Patent 
Oﬃce erred in issuing the patent. The defendant also usually oﬀers reasons 
why his product, in view of certain diﬀerences in construction, should not be 
considered an infringement of the precise invention described and claimed in the 
patent. Other defenses may also be oﬀered. 
I ought to mention, however, another important defense that is sometimes 
appropriate, namely, that the patent holder is misusing his patent in violation 
of our antitrust laws (including restraining or conspiring to restrain trade) 10 . 
He may have required certain illegal restrictions, such as forcing the licensee to 
purchase unpatented items for him, a restriction outside the scope of the actual 
legal right, privilege, or “monopoly” (using the latter term in a loose sense) 
aﬀorded by the patent grant. 
The defendant also customarily attacks the patent by way of a counterclaim, 
upon the same grounds used in defending a suit for infringement. He asks the 
court to issue a declaratory judgment that the patent is invalid or otherwise 
unenforceable, or that the defendant’s products are not infringements. In this 
way, should the plaintiﬀ withdraw his suit, the defendant’s counterclaim will 
still be before the court for adjudication. 
The complain, the answer, and the counterclaim are the customary docu­
ments ﬁled in the ordinary run-of-the-mill patent suit. 
By the time the case comes to trial, the judge has usually required the 
defendant to narrow down the list of allegedly prior art patents, publications, 
and uses that he is going to rely upon as anticipatory of the invention. At the 
same time, the judge has required the plaintiﬀ to state the dates of invention 
which he is trying to prove, and the particular claims on which he rests his case. 
The judge then hears the case. 
The plaintiﬀ, usually with the aid of a 
technical expert, such as an engineer or scientist familiar with the ﬁeld of the 
invention, explains to the court what the patent covers, translating engineer­
ing and technical terms and concepts into layman’s language. He explains the 
10Such as the Clayton and Sherman Acts. 

25 
The Role of the Patent Oﬃce and the Courts 
problem that this invention is supposed to solve, and then oﬀers evidence as 
to what the defendant is doing and why this constitutes infringement of the 
patent claims. The plaintiﬀ then rests his case. Why? Because our law says 
that a patent is presumed to be valid; that is, the process of examination in the 
Patent Oﬃce has given the patent an aura of being valid under the law. This 
means that the defendant has the burden of proving that the patent is not valid. 
And here the law, at least in theory, imposes upon the defendant a very heavy 
burden. The plaintiﬀ has presented what is termed a prima-facie case, and it 
is incumbent upon the defendant to proceed with his proofs. However, in the 
event that the defendant overcomes, by his evidence, the plaintiﬀ’s prima facie 
case, the ultimate burden of proof of validity rests with the plaintiﬀ. 
The defendant may call his technical expert to the stand to explain the dis­
closures of the prior patents or publications (and also prior uses) before referred 
to, trying to convince the judge that the invention was either previously dis­
closed or publicly used, or that, contrary to the patent examiner’s view, any 
individual skilled in the art (as distinguished from an expert) would know how 
to make this invention. The plaintiﬀ may, of course, cross-examine the defen­
dant’s witnesses. When the defendant has completed his defense, the plaintiﬀ 
has an opportunity to rebut. 
The judge must then make a decision. 
He studies the subsequently ﬁled 
briefs of the parties and the transcript of the testimony, makes up his mind, 
and writes a decision. The federal rules of civil procedure require that he make 
speciﬁc ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law, with regard to the validity and 
infringement of the patent. He must present his ﬁndings in writing. 
These patent decisions and other decisions in all ﬁelds of the federal District 
Courts are reported in a series of volumes known as the Federal Supplement, 
which is abbreviated as “F. Supp.,” with the volume number as a preﬁx and 
the page number as a suﬃx. 
The trial judge’s decision, however, is not ﬁnal. He is but the ﬁrst rung of 
an echelon. The losing party has a right to appeal from his decision to a Circuit 
Court of Appeals. A circuit is a geographic area generally comprising a few 
states. The First Circuit, for example, is composed of Massachusetts, Maine, 
New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and the possession of Puerto Rico. The Court 
of Appeals for the First Circuit sits in Boston, and hears appeals from all of 
the federal District Courts in its circuit. In all, there are ten circuits plus the 
District of Columbia. 
The Courts of Appeals customarily sit in panels of three judges, and review 
the District Courts’ decisions, sustaining the trial judges or reversing them, as 
the case may be. The decisions of the Courts of Appeals are reported in the 
Federal Reporter, abbreviated “F.,” for a ﬁrst series of volumes, and “F. 2d” for 
the present second series. 
Sitting above these Courts of Appeals is the Unites States Supreme Court. 
A party losing a patent appeal in a Court of Appeals does not have an absolute 
right to heard by the United States Supreme Court. Under Article III of the 
Constitution, the Supreme Court must, in theory, take certain kinds of cases, 
but these do not include patent appeals. 
The losing party must, according, 

26 
Create or Perish 
petition the Supreme Court by way of the before-mentioned petition for a writ 
of certiorari, asking the Court, in its discretion, to review the decision of the 
Court of Appeals. 
The Supreme Court grants very, very few such writs. It is more likely to 
grant certiorari in a vitally important case involving large companies than in 
the case of smaller companies, or individual litigants, even though the issues 
may be the same. 
Recent past experience has been that when a Court of Appeals sustained 
a patent, there was likelihood that the Supreme Court would grant certiorari, 
and then proceed to destroy the patent. Where a Court of Appeals has thrown 
out the patent, however, there is no case in modern times of which I am aware 
where the Supreme Court granted certiorari to reinstate it. 
The decisions of the Supreme Court are reported in several diﬀerent volumes, 
one of which is the United States Reports, abbreviated as “U.S.” I shall, for 
instance, later refer to the Bell Telephone Cases, which are reported at 126 U.S. 
Anyone desiring to ﬁnd the decisions of trial and appellate courts, accord­
ingly, may consult the Federal Supplement, Federal Reporter, and United States 
decisions (or, in the case of patents and related ﬁelds, the United States Patent 
Quarterly), and he will ﬁnd there exactly what reasons were advanced by the 
various courts for sustaining or destroying patents. 
With the aid of these reported past decisions, a lawyer can try to instruct 
his client as to the expression and application of the law by the courts, and so 
map out a procedure to meet his client’s situation. 

Chapter 3 
The Patent Law 
While the classes of patentable inventions and statutory restrictions 
are readily set forth, with illustrative cases, the question of what 
is “obvious” and what is “invention” under the 1952 Patent Act is 
unsettled . This chapter accordingly concludes with a discussion of 
this vital question which the Supreme Court has thus far refused to 
hear. Here are presented the author’s views based, in part, upon 
the current very real role played in American innovation by the in­
dependent inventor. 
There must, clearly, be a set of rules or norms by means of which to establish 
the various kinds of invention (using that word in its popular sense for the 
moment) that may be patentable or, at least, the circumstances under which 
public policy requires that a patent may not be granted. 
As noted earlier, Congress set forth, in the Patent Act of 1952, a codiﬁca­
tion of our patent laws, restating the substance of prior statutes and adopting 
constructive court-made law established prior to the 1930’s. But, in addition, 
it introduced changes in the law primarily directed at curbing the damage to 
the patent system eﬀected by recent destructive policies of the Supreme Court. 
Included in these curbs are the abolition of the doctrine of “ﬂash of genius 1” 
as the test for invention, later discussed, and the loose and ready invalidation 
of patent claims as deﬁning the invention functionally, instead of structurally. 
3.1 
Classes of Patentable Invention 
The 1952 Act was passed pursuant to the previously discussed Constitutional 
provision in Article I, Section 8, empowering Congress to promote the progress of 
useful arts by securing for limited times to inventors the exclusive right to their 
discoveries. Two words are used here: “inventors” and “discoveries.” While 
invention and discovery may involve diﬀerent concepts to the linguist, in patent 
law, they had previously meant the same thing and been used synonymously. 
The ﬁrst provision of the 1952 Act, Section 100, thus sets forth that “the term 
1Cuno Engineering Corp. v. Automatic Devices Corp., 214 U.S. 84, 91 (1941) 
27 

28 
Create or Perish 
’invention’ means invention or discovery.” As explained before, the word “dis­
covery” does not include the bald discovery of a scientiﬁc principle, and the 
deﬁnition in Section 100 appears to limit the word to mean only “invention,” 
as that term had been used in prior court decisions. 
The statute then proceeds to deﬁne various classes of invention – listing a 
process, a machine, a manufacture, a composition of matter, or a material. Some 
of these words are a little bit out-of-date today, but they came from the very 
early patent acts when the only appropriate term to describe an invention was a 
“machine” or a “manufacture.” In our modern vernacular, a “machine” is hardly 
descriptive of an electronic component or circuit; but the courts, following the 
lead of prior Supreme Courts and the actual desires and intentions of Congress, 
continue to use this older language of the statutes. Thus, a piece of apparatus 
that achieves a useful result functionally is a “machine,” and an item that can 
be produced or manufactured by a machine is an article “manufacture.” As an 
illustration, apparatus for weaving cloth is a “machine;” the cloth, when woven, 
is a “manufacture.” 
The term “composition of matter” is self-explanatory. If someone invents a 
new chemical compound, that compound may be patentable. If someone else 
merely discovers a chemical compound or element existing in nature, that is not 
patentable. Thus a claim to an electric lamp ﬁlament wire formed of ductile 
tungsten was invalidated 2 . The General Electric Company inventor, W. D. 
Coolidge, had made an important advance in a ductile-tungsten ﬁlament for 
lamps. He had accomplished this by removing impurities from tungsten as found 
in nature; but removing impurities from natural tungsten to make it ductile 
resulted only in pure tungsten, which is inherently ductile. Pure tungsten, of 
course, is a natural element, even if it never found pure in nature. It is interesting 
to note that the judge who invalidated this patent (Judge Morris of the District 
Court for the District of Delaware) had himself previously sustained the patent. 
He had not then, however, been presented with the argument that the patent 
covered merely an element of nature in its pure state; but when so informed, 
reasoned that it could not be the subject of a “monopoly,” even though never 
found pure in nature. An element is not included in the statutory classes of 
invention. 
“Material” is a new word in the statute and may have a meaning very similar 
to that of “manufacture,” though a “material” may be produced by a process 
that would not, in conventional language, necessarily be termed “manufactur­
ing.” 
“Process” is deﬁned, in part, as a “process, art, or method.” 
It usually 
embraces a series of steps for accomplishing or producing a certain result. A 
chemical process is, of course, quite easy to comprehend. The next chapter, 
which discusses the Bell Telephone Cases, will show that there may also be an 
electrical process. 
Suppose someone arranges the various parts of an old machine in a novel 
manner to perform a new operation. Is this a process or method? A case of this 
2General Electric Co. v DeForest Radio Co., 28 F 2d 641. 

29 
The Patent Law 
sort came before the United States Supreme Court in connection with adjusting 
an existing metal-perforating machine so that, instead of merely perforating 
the metal, the dies lifted the perforations out and twisted them to enlarge the 
perforations, thereby making an expanded metal sheet 3 . The defendant argued 
that this was not within the patentable classes of invention since the original 
“machine” with its dies was old and thus was not patentable, and, additionally, 
the ultimate “manufacture” – the expanded metal – was an old article. By this 
reasoning the inventor had not produced a new machine, a new manufacture, 
or, obviously, a new composition of matter. Nonetheless, the Supreme Court 
held that this invention involved a new process, although, on several occasions, 
that Court had previously intimated, by dicta, that there could not be a novel 
patentable process or method unless it involved chemical, electrical, or other 
“elemental” phenomena. This case, however, decided that a patentable process, 
art, or method could also involve mechanical manipulative steps: it could be a 
new way of operating an old machine to obtain new results. 
In addition to the deﬁnition of the term “process” as meaning “process, art, 
or method,” the Patent Act of 1952 also provides that “process” shall include 
A new use of a known process, machine, manufacture, composition 
of matter, or material. 
To appreciate the signiﬁcance of this deﬁnition, let us recall the case of Dr. 
William Morton, a Boston dentist, who is credited, in some quarters, with hav­
ing been the ﬁrst to make the discovery, and the use of ether was immediately 
adopted. The New York Eye and Ear Inﬁrmary and a number of other hospi­
tals, indeed, freely infringed upon Dr. Morton’s patent. Suit was entered which 
freely infringed upon Dr. Morton’s patent. Suit was entered for infringement 4 , 
and the court found that Dr. Morton “was entitled to be classiﬁed among the 
greatest benefactors of mankind.” But, the court questioned, was the claimed 
invention a new process? No, there was no new series of steps involved. Re­
searchers had previously inhaled ether. (Question: Had they previously inhaled 
it to the extent taught by Morton to produce the new eﬀect of anesthesia?) Dr. 
Morton was claiming the use of ether for the purpose of anesthetization. That 
is not, said the court, a new “art” or “process.” Was it a new composition of 
matter? Ether had been discovered before. Was it a new machine? No. Was it a 
new manufacture? No. The court concluded, therefore, that this epoch-making 
discovery was not one included in the limited classes that Congress deﬁned as 
among those patentable. So Dr. Morton’s patent was thrown out. 
A discovery may be brilliant and useful, and not patentable. . . . Something 
more is necessary. The new force or principle brought to light must 
be embodied and set to work, and can be patented only in connection 
or combination with the means by which, or the medium through 
which it operates. 
3Expanded Metal Co. v. Bradford. 214 U.S. 366 (1909). 
4Morton v. New York Eye Inﬁrmary, 17 Fed. Cas. 879, 5 Blatchf. 116 (1862) 

30 
Create or Perish 
To cite another illustration: the citrus fruit industry had long been troubled 
with a blue mold that formed upon citrus fruit shipped from the South. 
It 
was discovered that if oranges were coated with a solution of borax, specks or 
cuts in the fruit became thoroughly covered over and no formation of the mold 
would take place. A patent was applied for and obtained by the Brogdex Co. 
covering the product and the process for making it. It was claimed that fresh 
citrus fruit of which the rind of skin carried borax in a very small amount is 
rendered resistant to blue mold. The American Fruit Growers infringed this 
patent and Brogdex brought suit. The district court and the court of appeals 
held the patent valid and infringed. The Supreme Court, however, held that this 
invention was neither a machine nor a composition of matter 5 . It was also not 
an article of manufacture, because there was no change in form or appearance of 
the fruit (much as Coolidge still only produced tungsten). In other words, it did 
not belong to any of the patentable classes and could not, therefore, be protected 
by patent. As for claiming the discovery in method form, the Supreme Court 
held that the use of borax had been known before, not for ﬁlling up small specks 
to prevent blue mold, but for preserving fruit, and the method of applying the 
borax was the same as used here (much as Dr. Morton’s method of applying 
ether to the nostrils was allegedly old). One could not the obtain a patent for 
a new use of an old method. 
Let us assume, by way of contrast, that in the process of treating the orange 
with borax some chemical reaction took place so that the orange was no longer 
an orange, and the borax was no longer borax. We would then have a new 
composition of matter – neither orange nor borax. Would this be patentable? 
A similar case occurred where it had been found that, in dyeing fur to preserve 
it, a chemical reaction took place which actually made a new preserved ﬁber out 
of the natural hair. It no longer had the characteristics of the natural fur. It 
no longer had the characteristics of the natural fur. Under these circumstances, 
said the circuit court of appeals 6, the invention was a new article of manufacture 
and hence within the patentable classes of invention. 
One can see, accordingly, that there is room for great latitude and inge­
nuity of argument in trying to construe a discovery as being within one of the 
patentable classes. A hostile court will not permit the law to grow with scientiﬁc 
discovery, whereas a court with a zeal to protect property rights in discoveries 
(under Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution) can oﬀer great encouragement 
to the promotion of progress in the useful arts. 
We can all probably understand why Congress has not seen ﬁt to permit 
patents to be granted for mere scientiﬁc discoveries. Something is wrong, how­
ever, if a practical application of such a discovery cannot be construed as being 
within the patentable classes of invention set forth by the Congress for that very 
purpose. Dr. Morton, for example, did not try to patent ether all over again; 
he tried to patent its use for a particular new result. Should not that take it 
out of the category of pure scientiﬁc discovery? Congress, the engineering, sci­
5American Fruit Growers, Inc. v. Brogdex Co., 283 U.S. 1. 
6Steinfur Patents Corp. v. William Beyer, Inc., 62 F 2d 238. 

31 
The Patent Law 
entiﬁc, and business people, and the lawyers who were responsible for the 1952 
Patent Act appear to have answered this question in the aﬃrmative by deﬁn­
ing “process” to include “a new use of a known process, machine, manufacture, 
composition of matter, or material.” While the paucity of court decisions makes 
it too early to form an opinion as to the ultimate eﬀect of this new deﬁnition, 
the Board of Appeals of the Patent Oﬃce has already construed it to mean that 
the new use must be one not analogous to, but radically diﬀerent from, the kind 
before involved, and that the patent claim must be couched in the form of a 
process or method and not of an apparatus. 
3.2 
Conditions of Patentability 
Turning, now, to the deﬁnition in the statute of patentable invention, we ﬁnd 
that Section 101 is limited to “Whoever invents or discovers.” 
This means 
an individual or individuals, since a corporate body or other organizational 
entity cannot itself invent or discover. The individuals who do this creating and 
this inventing may, however, assign their patent rights or a portion thereof, in 
writing, to a corporation or to the government, so that a patent or a part thereof 
may actually be owned by others than the inventor. But the application must 
be ﬁled in the name of the ﬁrst inventor or inventors. The language provides 
that, in this country, a patent can be issued only to the ﬁrst inventor. In Great 
Britain, patents were and are granted to anyone who brings a new invention 
into the country. The British philosophy encourages the importation as well as 
invention of new techniques. Not so in this country, however, for if a patent 
should be granted to someone other than a ﬁrst inventor, it will be thrown out 
by the court as invalid. 
Continuing with Section 101, the inventor must invent or discover a “new and 
useful” invention. The matter of the requirement for novelty has previously been 
discussed. As for the word “useful,” nearly everything has been held to be useful. 
Among the exceptions are devices for promoting fraud or that are injurious to 
the public health or against public policy. A “perpetual-motion” machine or 
any other inoperative proposal lacks utility. There are then set forth the before­
mentioned ﬁve classes of patentable invention: “process, machine, manufacture, 
or composition of matter” or “material”; and, in addition, “any new and useful 
improvement thereof.” Not everyone can make a basic invention, but the law 
entitles one to seek a patent for an improvement in a machine, manufacture, 
composition of matter, or process. 
Section 101 also states that one may obtain a patent in the above classes, 
subject to the requirements given in Section 102, which sets out the “Condi­
tions for patentability, novelty and loss of right to patent.” The Congress has 
positively declared that “A person shall be entitled to a patent unless. . . .” This 
appears to have been an eﬀort (not yet successful) to curb the indiscriminate 
invalidation of patents. 
The ﬁrst restriction is that a patent cannot be granted if the invention was 
known or used by others in this country or patented or described in a printed 
publication in this or a foreign country, before the invention thereof by the 

32 
Create or Perish 
applicant for a patent (Section 102 [a]). 
The inventor does not have to be 
actually aware of such prior knowledge, use, publication, or patenting, for, if 
the invention was “described in a printed publication” or a prior patent was 
issued anywhere at all before he made his invention there would be an absolute 
bar to granting him a patent. 
Even if the prior patentee did not claim the 
same inventive features, but merely “described” the invention adequately in a 
patent issued prior to the present inventor’s concept, this description becomes 
a statutory bar. This restriction demonstrates the importance of patent and 
literature searches of both United States and foreign patents and publications 
before ﬁling a patent application. 
As for the phrase “known or used by others in this country,” a little history 
is in order. This was not always the law. The early patent statutes set up as 
a bar to patentability knowledge or use anywhere in the world. Realizing the 
importance of encouraging the utilization of new concepts in this country, how­
ever, Congress revised this to cover only prior knowledge or use in this country 
– a sore point in our current relations with foreign countries. If the invention 
was known or used abroad but was not patented or described in a printed pub­
lication before the invention was made here, no bar exists to obtaining a patent 
in this country, provided that the inventor did not know of this knowledge or 
use abroad. Of course, if he did know, he did not make the invention. 
The courts have interpreted the word “known,” moreover, in a very strict 
sense to mean that “an invention . . . has been completed by reduction to prac­
tice 7.” The invention is not “known” if it is a prior “conception only” (such as 
a laboratory notebook drawing or disclosure, or an unpublished manuscript), or 
if “prior machines” have not “been working machines” but “mere experiments.” 
Even the knowledge by individuals in this country, prior to an inventor’s inven­
tion here, that a certain device had been previously used abroad successfully, is 
not with the statutory term “known 8.” 
The term “used” is similarly the subject matter of much court construction. 
Brieﬂy, it means a public use 9 and not an experimental or secret use, and does 
not include mere conceptions or abandoned experiments, such as those made 
in company laboratories or in institutions of learning and not followed up by 
publication, reduction to practice, actual public use, or patenting. 
All of this has to do with knowledge, use, patenting, or publishing (Section 
102 [a]) before one makes an invention. There is also a time limitation. If an 
applicant waits too long, even though there is no prohibition under Section 102 
(a), he may be out of luck in view of the restriction of Section 102 (b), which 
provides that a person shall be entitled to a patent. 
unless the invention was patented or described in a printed publica­
tion in this or a foreign country or in public use or on sale in this 
country, more than one year prior to the date of the application for 
7Application of Schittler, CCPA, 234 F 2d 882, 887. 
8Doyle v. Spaulding, C.C. 19 F. 744; Westinghouse Machine Co. v. General Electric Co., 
2 Cir., 207 F. 75, City of Milwaukee v. Activated Sludge, Inc., 7 Cir., 69 F. 2d 577. 
9Paddies, Inc. v. Broadway Dept. Stores, 147 F. Supp 373. 

33 
The Patent Law 
patent in the United States. 
Even though he may be qualiﬁed under Section 102 (a), therefore, if he does 
not ﬁle the patent application until more than a year after publishing a thesis 
or scientiﬁc paper on the invention, he is too late to obtain a patent. If, before 
ﬁling, he waits more than a year after someone else has described his invention 
in a publication, again it is too late to obtain a patent. And the same is true 
if he ﬁles more than a year after his invention ﬁrst went into public use or was 
put on sale. 
In some foreign countries, it is too late to ﬁle for a patent after any docu­
ment describing the invention has been made public in the country in question; 
this is the case, for example, in Great Britain. In Germany, a description of 
the invention in public print in any language or country, before the German 
application is ﬁled, bars a German patent. It is not entirely safe, therefore, to 
delay ﬁling until after publication to obtain foreign patent protection. 
The last-named restrictions of Section 102 (b) in connection with “public 
use” or “sale” are very important to the applied scientist or engineer. His new 
products are always going out for tests, for sale, for use; and the question arises 
as to when he should ﬁle a patent application. Perhaps one of those fundamental 
cases that partially answered this question arose in Boston in the late nineteenth 
century in connection with the invention of wooden paving blocks. The patent 
was not applied for until several years after these blocks had been in use in a toll 
road. The defendant infringed that patent, contending that it was invalid since 
the blocks had been in public use on the street more than two years before the 
inventor had ﬁled his patent application. (At that time, the statute provided for 
two years of public use instead of one year, as at present.) The Supreme Court 
found 10 that there was no way of proving the eﬃcacy of this invention except 
by actual test on a street, and the circumstances showed that the inventor was 
merely trying to test whether or not the invention was any good. The Court, 
accordingly, construed this, not as a “public use,” but rather as an experimental 
one. 
Along came the case of a gentleman who invented steel stays for women’s 
corsets, in place of whalebone as before. He gave a sample to a lady friend 
to try out, and she used it for several years. Then the inventor ﬁled for his 
patent. When the case reached the court, the defendant set up as a “public­
use” argument the the fact that this corset had been worn for more than two 
years before the inventor ﬁled his patent application. The inventor, on the other 
hand, argued according to the rule of the paving-block cased before mentioned. 
The court thereupon laid down a second important rule 11, namely, that even a 
single use by a member of the public, except under such restrictions or conditions 
as would clearly delineate experimental or conﬁdential use, constitutes a bar to 
the granting of a patent, unless the application is ﬁled within the statutory 
period. And this very rigid rule had been discovered by several companies, with 
important patents, much to their sorrow. 
10Elizabeth v. Pavement Co., 1877, 97 U.S. 126, 134-135. 
11Egbert v. Lippman, 104 U.S. 333. 

34 
Create or Perish 
In a recent case 12, suit was brought for infringement of a patent dealing 
with a process for casting patterned plastic sheets. The defendant showed that 
more than a year before the application for patent the plaintiﬀhad sold several 
hundred plastic sheets made by the patented process. Thereupon, the plaintiﬀ 
insisted that this use of the patent and sale of the product created by its process 
were merely experimental to determine the “production controls” necessary for 
the successful commercial exploitation of the patent; but the court held that 
this constitutes a “prior use” within the meaning of the statute. 
This decision points out signiﬁcantly the importance of ﬁling a patent ap­
plication not only for the new article, but also for the process involved in the 
manufacture of the article, within a year after the ﬁrst sale. The safest proce­
dure is to ﬁle before the public obtains the article, and even before it is put on 
sale. The term “sale,” moreover, has been interpreted by the courts to include 
an oﬀer for sale. Thus the matter of patent protection, both for the article and 
for the method of making it, should be very carefully explored well within the 
year after any oﬀer to sell or any public use. 
Returning to the restrictions in Section 102, we see that part (c) bars a patent 
if the inventor has abandoned his invention. Even if one has produced and tested 
an invention, so as to establish its so-called reduction to practice, but has put 
it away on a shelf and forgotten it, and in the meantime it is independently 
invented by another person, he cannot prevail as the ﬁrst inventor against the 
second person. Abandonment does not promote the useful arts, and accordingly 
it is not in accordance with our public policy to reward such inactivity. It is 
very important, therefore, to realize that one cannot put ideas away and forget 
about them, and then hope to resurrect early dates for them at a later time. 
Those early dates not utilized are of no avail against the diligence of others. 
Section 102 (d) relates to the eﬀect of foreign patent ﬁling. One must ﬁle 
a separate patent application in each country in which one wishes the inven­
tion protected, though it now appears likely that a single European Economic 
Community patent may be established within a very few years, as discussed in 
Chapter 7. Under the Universal Copyright Convention 13, a copyright regis­
tration in one country serves also as one in the other foreign countries which 
are members of the convention. Patents, on the other hand, must be obtained 
through the individual patent oﬃces of the respective countries. Section 102 
(d) provides that, if one has ﬁled in a foreign country more than twelve months 
before ﬁling in this country, and if the patent issues abroad before the ﬁling of 
the United States application, he is barred from obtaining a patent here. 
This goes hand in hand, however, with a provision of a diﬀerent convention 
14, by which one may ﬁle abroad in any foreign country that is a member of 
12U.S. Chemical Corporation v. Plastic Glass Corporation, 3 Cir., 243 F. 2d 892 (1957). 
13The United States is a signatory to this 1952 Convention, implemented into our law by 
Public Law 742, 83d Congress, eﬀective September 16, 1955. 
14Convention of Paris for the Protection of Industrial Property of March 20, 1883, as 
amended December 14, 1900 (Brussels); June 2, 1911 (Washington, D.C.); November 6, 1925 
(The Hague); June 2, 1934 (London). A further conference at Lisbon, October 6 - 31, 1958 
resulted in further amendments. 

35 
The Patent Law 
this other convention, and thereby obtain the eﬀective beneﬁt of the earlier 
ﬁling date in the United States, provided the foreign ﬁling is done within twelve 
months of the United States ﬁling date. Similarly, foreigners may ﬁle here with 
reciprocal privileges. There is thus a year’s leeway in which to decide whether 
or not to ﬁle abroad; and foreign applications claiming the convention beneﬁts, 
if ﬁled with that year, will be treated as if they had been ﬁled simultaneously 
with the United States application. 
The United States Government, however, does not permit its citizens to ﬁle 
abroad as an absolute right. This is because of national-defense statutes. The 
patent application ﬁled in the Patent Oﬃce is examined by Army, Air Force, 
AEC, and other personnel, assisting the commissioner of patents, to see whether 
it contains information which might jeopardize the security of the country. If 
the answer is in the aﬃrmative, the commissioner will issue a secrecy order, 
prohibiting any ﬁling abroad before obtaining a license from the government to 
do so. If, under those circumstances, one still wishes to ﬁle abroad, he may 
petition the commissioner, oﬀering reasons why secrecy should not be required 
in the particular case. The commissioner will take up the matter with the branch 
of the service which, in the ﬁrst place, considered that the invention involved 
classiﬁed material and then a decision will be reached as to whether or not to 
permit ﬁling abroad, and in what countries. If, however, after one has ﬁled an 
application, he does not hear within six months from the Patent Oﬃce that 
the case has been put under secrecy orders, he automatically obtains a license 
to ﬁle abroad, except that special permission may be required for Iron Curtain 
countries. 
Section 102 (e) provides that if an invention has been described in a patent 
granted to another on an application ﬁled before one has himself independently 
made the same invention, there is a bar to his obtaining a patent in this country. 
If the prior patent claims the invention, and if the independent inventor made 
his invention before the ﬁling date of the application for the prior patent, then 
he may ask the Patent Oﬃce to declare an interference contest between himself 
and the other patentee. In this way, he may have the right to take inter partes 
testimony for a determination as to who is really the ﬁrst inventor. If the patent 
discloses, but does not claim the invention, however, and again, the independent 
inventor made the invention before the ﬁling date of the application for the prior 
patent, the independent inventor may present ex parte evidence, by means of 
aﬃdavit 15, to demonstrate his earlier date of invention, and thus remove the 
other patent as a bar to the granting of his. 
Section 102 (f) deals with the necessity, previously discussed, for the appli­
cant to be the ﬁrst inventor. 
3.3 
Interference 
Section 102 (g) provides for interference contests mentioned above to determine 
priority of invention where more than one person is claiming to be the original 
inventor. The statute describes the court-established rule that the ﬁrst applicant 
15Patent Oﬃce Rule of Practice No. 131 

36 
Create or Perish 
to ﬁle is not necessarily, in law, the ﬁrst inventor. The inventor is the ﬁrst to 
reduce it to practice, but there is one exception to this rule. If, though the last 
to reduce it to practice, he was the ﬁrst to conceive, and was diligently working 
at it when his rival entered the ﬁeld and continued to do so until his reduction 
to practice, then he is the ﬁrst inventor. 
Perhaps a few deﬁnitions of interference terminology may be helpful. Con­
ception involves obtaining the complete mental picture of the invention, even 
tough one has not yet built it. If one is to rely upon a drawing or a notebook 
disclosure or the like to prove conception, he must show that all of the elements 
of the claimed invention in controversy are present or implied therein. 
The 
keeping of full notes is thus greatly to be desired. Reduction to practice of the 
invention means either building and successfully testing the invention (though 
there are some exceptions to this necessity in the case of very simple devices) 
or ﬁling a patent application for a theoretically operative model. Building and 
successful testing is termed “actual” reduction to practice, ﬁling a patent appli­
cation may constitute a “constructive” reduction to practice. Corroboration by 
a qualiﬁed witness to the inventor’s tests is important, since the courts, in order 
to avoid possible fraud, require such independent corroboration of the inventor’s 
testimony before accepting the latter’s alleged dates. 
Many times, however, particularly if an individual with neither money nor 
time with which to build and test an invention is satisﬁed with the theoretical 
operativeness of the invention, he may protect his rights by ﬁling a patent 
application, and thus obtain a constructive reduction to practice. The United 
States Government currently takes the position, in contracts granted to develop 
or adapt inventions, that, no matter how much money one may have spent in 
developing a conception or in reducing it to practice by ﬁling patent applications 
and the like, if government money in substantial amounts is appropriated to 
build the invention for the ﬁrst time under the contract, the government must 
be granted a free license, with no strings attached 16 . The government may then, 
with impunity, give to others than the inventors and developers the business of 
building the invention commercially for it. 
As a former member of a bar-association committee on government patent 
policies, I can state that, unfortunately, many lawyers are apathetic in this 
matter, which puts a particularly onerous burden on the small company. It is 
the government, however, that suﬀers in the long run when individual inventors 
and their companies are discouraged from suggesting the creative ﬂashes from 
which have sprung the seeds, not only of our weapons of defense and oﬀense, 
but also of our economic expansion and development. 
3.4 
The Statutory Test of Invention 
The court-made law relating to the requirement for the exercise of a “ﬂash of 
creative genius,” in order to support a patent, laid down by Mr. Justice Douglas 
16The Armed Services Procurement Regulations provide an exception in cases where the 
Government funds are relatively small and in other similar circumstances. 

37 
The Patent Law 
17, was overthrown by Congress in the last sentence of Section 103 of the Patent 
Act of 1952: 
Patentability shall not be negatived by the manner in which the 
invention was made. 
It has been superseded by another and entirely diﬀerent test which assumes 
that the requirements of Section 102 have been met. It reads: 
A patent may not be obtained though the invention is not identically 
disclosed or described as set forth in section 102 of this title, if 
the diﬀerences between the subject matter sought to be patented 
and the prior art are such that the subject matter as a whole would 
have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person 
having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. 
Patentability shall not be negatived by the manner in which the 
invention was made. 
The Supreme Court has, as yet, declined every opportunity oﬀered it to 
interpret this statutory provision of the ultimate test of whether an improvement 
is or is not suﬃciently signiﬁcant to warrant a patent grant. Since this question 
is the most pressing to every inventor, engineer, or other party concerned with 
inventions, a discussion of the history of this legislation and at least certain 
lower-court views with regard to it may be helpful. 
A “person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter per­
tains” has been the standard set up ever since at least 1850 18 . Unfortunately, 
however, that standard has not always been met, but has varied with the diﬀer­
ent courts. When one court was desirous of sustaining a patent, one standard 
was set up. When another court desired to invalidate a patent, the standard 
was quite diﬀerent. Matters reached such a state that, as before mentioned, the 
standard became no longer a “person having ordinary skill in the art to which 
said subject matter pertains” but rather one inspired by “the ﬂash of creative 
genius.” 
This “ﬂash-of-creative-genius” standard has raised a storm of protest through­
out the country, since in practice it is almost impossible to attain. Such a yard­
stick would have invalidated many of our most important patents, including Eli 
Whitney’s cotton gin, McCormick’s reaper, the sewing machine, the air brake, 
the telegraph, the telephone, and the electric lamp. Such invalidation, of course, 
would have discouraged invention. 
Whether or not this result would have pleased a minority of justices of 
the Supreme Court, it certainly did not please Congress. 
And the reaction 
of Congress, moreover, did not arise out of any solicitude for our large corpora­
tions: 
17Cuno Engineering Corp. v. Automatic Devices Corp., U.S. 84, 91 (1941). 
18Hotchkiss v. Greenwood, 11 How. 248, 267 (1850). 

38 
Create or Perish 
Rather, through the operation of the patent system the small com­
pany and the newcomer has been able to gain a foothold without 
being subject to appropriation of developments by the larger en­
trenched ﬁrms. Polaroid, Thiokol, Mallory, and many others, rep­
resent small and modest sized businesses which have launched new 
products against the competition of an existing industry . . . It should 
not be assumed that every time an excuse is found to invalidate a 
patent, competition necessarily beneﬁts 19 . 
Even so, Congress had no desire to change the law, but rather to lower the 
“ﬂash-of-creative-genius” standard to the level of the “person having ordinary 
skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains.” Congress itself said so, 
in the Reviser’s Note to Section 103: 
This paragraph is added with the view that an explicit statement in 
the statute may have some stabilizing eﬀect. . . 
It is of interest to observe, therefore, that the late Judge Learned Hand 
held 20 that Section 103 does not actually constitute new legislation, but rather 
restores the law to what it was “twenty or thirty years ago” before the courts 
began to adopt the standard of “the ﬂash of creative genius.” Some courts have 
followed Judge Hand’s decisions; others have not. 
Congress seemed convinced that only by such a restoring of the law would 
the conﬁdence of inventors be re-established and the progress of the useful arts 
promoted. Therefore, it is again studying the problem with the object of en­
acting further legislation. 
A subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the 
Judiciary has been hearing testimony and collecting evidence for some years. 
Several reports by that subcommittee have expressed dissatisfaction with the 
large number of patents still being invalidated by the courts. 
It may be well here to state that Section 103 had its origin in this very 
dissatisfaction. In the report of the National Patent Planning Commission, 1943, 
headed by the late Charles F. Kettering, for example, appears the following: 
The most serious weakness in the present patent system is the lack 
of a uniform test or standard for determining whether the particular 
contribution of an inventor merits the award of the patent grant. 
There is an ever-widening gulf between the decisions of the Patent 
Oﬃce in granting patents and decisions of the courts who pass upon 
their validity. It would be highly desirable and a great step forward 
if patents could be issued with a greater assurance that their validity 
would be upheld by the courts. No other feature of our law is more 
destructive to the purpose of the patent system than this existing 
uncertainty as to the validity of a patent. 
19George E. Front, “The Patent System and the Modern Economy,” Senate Subcommittee 
on Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights, of the Committee on the Judiciary, Study No. 2, 
page 77, 84th Congress, 2d Session (1956). 
20Lyon v. Bauch & Lomb Optical Co., 2 Cir., 224 F. 2d 530 (1955), certiorari denied 350 
U.S. 911, 955. 

39 
The Patent Law 
3.5 
Obviousness of “Subject Matter as a Whole” 
The restriction that an invention is not patentable if it is obvious as a whole, and 
not merely in part, has been in force at least back to Supreme Court decisions 
in the late 1800’s 21 . 
The Century Dictionary gives the following deﬁnition of “obvious”: “easily 
discovered, seen, or understood; plain; manifest; evident; palpable.” The way 
to determine whether an invention is obvious, accordingly, is by evidence. 
In patent-infringement suit after patent-infringement suit, the plaintiﬀ has 
oﬀered evidence to show that he was the ﬁrst to have oﬀered a sought-after 
solution to an existing problem and that, after disclosure of his solution, the 
defendant appropriated it. The courts, in sanctioning this appropriation, have 
rarely disagreed with the plaintiﬀin his showing, but have thrown out his patent 
as involving merely an “obvious” step or device. 
But such reasoning raises 
questions. 
If the solution of the problem disclosed by the inventor was obvious, why 
did not the defendant adopt it earlier? Why did he wait until the invention was 
placed upon the market by the plaintiﬀ? If the prior-art developments constitute 
satisfactory solutions of the given problem, as every defendant argues, why do 
not the defendant use that prior art, instead of spending money in litigation in 
order to obtain the right to use the plaintiﬀ’s invention? If, on the other hand, 
the prior art is not satisfactory, can it really be contended that the plaintiﬀhas 
accomplished no more in his device than, “as a whole,’ was obvious in the prior 
art? 
But in case after case the courts have insisted in holding the invention “obvi­
ous” in the light of hindsight in prior-art knowledge, in the face of indisputable 
showings that there was no “person having ordinary skill in the art to which 
said subject matter pertains” to whom the invention was as that time “obvious.” 
Recently, a court of appeals sustained a district court’s holding 22 that “I am 
not so troubled” about “Monday-morning-quarterbacking” as more “sensitive 
judges” would have been; “it does not seem to me to require inventive genius” 
to make the plaintiﬀ’s invention; “I am unable to perceive invention.” 
In an earlier day, a district court judge similarly remarked 23 . “I am satisﬁed 
that is amounts to nothing more than . . . I am unable to see how . . . ”; and the 
court of appeals reversed the decision, holding that these statements were not 
ﬁndings of fact, but merely expressions of opinion, with “no testimony in the 
record to support it.” 
The statute in Section 103, however, makes it plain that the question to be 
decided by the court is not what may seem obvious after the event to lay courts 
or even technical experts, but, rather what 
21Bates v. Coe, 98 U.S. 31, 48 (1878), Imhauser v. Buerk, 101 U.S. 647, 660 (1879), Parks 
v. Booth, 102 U.S. 96 (1880). 
22Glagovsky v. Bowcraft, 164 F. Supp. 189, 190, 1 Cir., 267 F. 2d 479 (1969), certiorari 
denied 361 U.S. 884. 
23Gray v. Eastman Kodak Co., 7 F. Supp. 321, 322, reversed 3 Cir. 67 F. 2d 190, 194 
(1933). 
Though the Supreme Court reversed at 292 U.S. 332 (293 U.S. 628), it was only 
because of a defect in appellate procedure. 

40 
Create or Perish 
would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a 
person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter 
pertains. 
This opinion has been reiterated recently by the Court of Customs and 
Patent Appeals 24: 
What amounts to patentable “invention” . . . is simply whether the 
diﬀerence between what is claimed and the prior art would have been 
obvious to one of ordinary skill in the art at the time the invention 
was made. 
Certainly this does not mean whether the invention may seem obvious to 
the court through hindsight. 
The views of the late Judge Parker 25, of the Court of Appeals for the Fourth 
Circuit, may be of interest: 
The state of the prior art, the problem to which the invention was 
addressed, its success in solving the problem, its acceptance by the 
art, and its success commercially should be accorded more weight 
than what the judge, who is unfamiliar with the art or with the 
problems of industry generally, may chance to think, in the light of 
the problem’s solution, as to what one skilled in the art should have 
known or should have been able to do. 
He went on: 
And especially should the judge be on guard against permitting an­
ticipation to be found in the bone yard of abandoned experiments 
and mere paper patents. In such case the searching and conclusive 
inquiry is: “If what has caused such a great change in the art and 
such an improvement in the industry was old and ready at hand, 
why did not it occur to someone else to use it?” 
As one court of appeals 26 remarked: 
It is usually, if not indeed always, easy to discover a genesis some­
where for any patentee’s contribution. But if patents were to be held 
invalid on such reasoning, few would survive. 
An invention, moreover, is always “simple” and “obvious” after it has been 
disclosed. The Supreme Court of an earlier era said 27: 
24Application of Ruﬀ and Dukeshire, CCPA, 256 F. 2d 590, 598 (1958). 
25“Recurrence of Fundamentals,” in American Bar Association Journal, Vol. 30, p. 623 
(1944). 
26S.D. Warren Co. v Nashua Gummed and Coated Paper Co., 1 Cir., 205 F. 2d 602, 605 
(1953). 
27Loom Co. v Higgins, 105 U.S. 580, 591 (1854). 

41 
The Patent Law 
At this point we are constrained to say that we cannot yield our 
assent to the argument, that the combination of the diﬀerent parts 
or elements for attaining the object in view was so obvious as to 
merit no title to invention. Now that it has succeeded, it may seem 
very plain to any one that he could have done it as well. This is 
often the case with inventions of the greatest merit. It may be laid 
down as a general rule, though perhaps not an invariable one, that 
if a new combination and arrangement of known elements produce 
a new and beneﬁcial result, never attained before, it is evidence of 
invention. 
The invention of the patent in suit in the Barbed Wire Patent case 28 lay in 
wrapping the barb several times around the carrier wire, so that a bearing was 
provided for the barb, which was thus held permanently at right angles to the 
carrier wire. The prior art disclosed the same barb, but without the bearing, 
so that it wobbled about the carrier wire instead of being held rigidly at right 
angles. 
The Supreme Court remarked that “it may be strange” that this simple 
device was not “obvious.” Yet, “simple” and “obvious” as this improvement 
appeared in retrospect, it laid a foundation for accomplishing something that 
the prior art could not do. By the new barbed-wired invention, cattle could be 
kept within their wired enclosures. 
A short time later 29, in sustaining a patent, the Supreme Court spoke of 
an invention that “appears to the ordinary mind so simple as to excite wonder 
that it was not thought of before.” And, still later 30: 
Its simplicity should not blind us as to its character. Many things, 
and the patent laws abounds in illustrations, seem obvious after they 
have been done. . . . Knowledge after the event is always easy, and 
problems once solved present no diﬃculties. 
The invention involved in the Eibel Process case 31, in retrospect, was again 
“simple” and “obvious.” It merely raised slightly the rear end of the belt of the 
Fourdrinier papermaking machine, in order the the liquid pulp traveling thereon 
could move a little faster, by gravity. Small as the advance was, however, it was 
promptly adopted by the industry. 
Again, the invention in the Ray-O-Vac case of the early 1940’s 32 was “a 
very narrow one in a crowded art.” It consisted of enclosing a ﬂashlight battery 
in a steel casing to render it leakproof. But this idea had never occurred (and 
hence manifestly was not obvious) to those persons (other than the inventor) 
“having ordinary skill in the art” who had long been troubled with the battery 
leakage. 
28143 U.S. 275, 283 (1892). 
29Potts v. Creager, 155 U.S. 597, 608 (1895). 
30Diamond Rubber Co. of N.Y. v. Consolidated Rubber Tire Co., 220 U.S. 428, 434 (1911). 
31Eibel Process Co. v. Minnesota and Ontario Paper Co., 261 U.S. 45 (1923). 
32Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., Inc., v. Ray-O-Vac C., 321 U.S. 275, 279 (1944). 

42 
Create or Perish 
And so it would seem that honest adherence to the spirit and scope of the 
tests of Section 103 should go a long way toward stabilizing the ultimate test of 
patentable invention. 
3.6 
Statutory Presumption of Validity of a Patent 
Numerous decisions indicate that, certainly as codiﬁed by Section 282 of the 
Patent Act of 1952, 
a patent shall be presumed valid. The burden of establishing inva­
lidity of a patent shall rest on a party asserting it. 
The Supreme Court had previously held 33 that “the burden of proof to make 
good this defense” is “upon the party setting it up,” and “every reasonable doubt 
should be resolved against him.” 
But the courts of the mid-twentieth century have paid little attention to this 
presumption. As Judge Galston has said 34 , 
in the last two decades, though courts had said prior thereto that 
patents were entitled to a presumption of validity, during the latter 
years only lip service has been given to that doctrine. Now it becomes 
clear that since there is a statutory presumption, it may not be 
ignored. 
This policy followed the dissent in the early 1940’s of Mr. Justice Black 35: 
In the absence of a statutory prescription to the contrary, I see no 
reason for extending the presumption of validity arising from the 
mere issuance of a patent. . . . 
Section 282 of the Patent Act of 1952 now provides that “statutory prescrip­
tion.” The presumption is greatly increased, moreover, when the art cited by 
a defendant in an infringement suit is substantially the same as the art before 
the examiner in the Patent Oﬃce. 
If it were not for prejudices in the ﬁeld of patents, the trend of decisions in 
the administrative law ﬁeld would seem to indicate that there should be, though 
there is not, a steadily growing tendency to follow the proposal of an earlier 
court of appeals 36 in giving special weight to the use of skilled examiners in 
the Patent Oﬃce in determining patentability. Surely, by Section 282, Congress 
intended that patents should not be held invalid merely by “Monday-morning­
quarterbacking.” 
33Radio Corp. of America v. Radio Engineering Laboratories Inc., 293 U.S. 1, 7 - 8 (1934). 
3413 F.R.D. 463, 469. 
35Williams Mfg. Co. v. United Shoe Machinery Corp., 316 U.S. 364, 392 (1942). 
36United Shoe Machinery Corp. v. Muther, 1 Cir., 288, 287 (1923). 

43 
The Patent Law 
3.7 
Commentary–The Case for Sympathetic Legal Recognition of Inventions 
There is certainly a feeling in some judicial quarters that patents should not be 
granted for “gadgets” or trivial devices, as contrasted with such inventions as 
the atomic bomb; and perhaps this may seriously aﬀect the construction put on 
the Patent Act of 1952. 
This was certainly the public policy advocated by Mr. Justice Douglas in 
his opinion in the A&P case 37: 
The patent involved in the present case belongs to this list of incred­
ible patents which the Patent Oﬃce has spawned. 
If I understand Mr. Justice Douglas correctly, he regards a patent for an ev­
eryday household item as an “incredible patent.” Certainly he so classiﬁed one 
for a collar. 
Apparently Mr. 
Justice Douglas views a collar as among “the 
simplest of devices,” one of a “host of gadgets,” for the improvement of which 
men should not be encouraged to devote their inventive faculties. This view, it 
should be observed, was merely Mr. Justice Douglas’s opinion, concurred in, at 
that time, by Mr. Justice Black and by no other justice. 
The records show, however, that at another time a particular invention in 
a collar was important enough to revolutionize a whole industry, and a patent 
for it was sustained by one of our greatest judges, Learned Hand 38 . Probably 
Justices Douglas and Black themselves have beneﬁted by that very invention, 
for it is doubtful whether they still wear the prior-art collars. Furthermore, 
the Supreme Court itself has sustained a patent for a bare collar button 39, and 
many patents for articles of wearing apparel and other “gadgets” of considerable 
value to the public have heretofore been sustained. 
As later will be made more evident, the part played by individual inven­
tors and small companies in the development of such inventions is still great. 
And still pertinent is the unheeded call in late depression years of the then 
commissioner of patents, the Honorable Conway P. Coe: 
What a patent issues to an inventor we purport to give him the 
right, the exclusive right, for a term of 17 years to prevent others 
from making, using, or selling the invention covered by it. But we 
say that with our tongue in our cheek, for we know better than he 
that by our present method of adjudicating patent rights he will 
ﬁnd it exceedingly diﬃcult to prevent the wrongful appropriation 
of his property and may be compelled to stand helpless while he is 
despoiled. . . . 
My conviction is that the poor inventor, and through him the pub­
lic, suﬀers injustice precisely for the reason and to the extent that 
the monopoly, the exclusive right, purportedly bestowed on him is 
37Great Atlantic and Paciﬁc Tea Co. v. Supermarket Equipment Corp., 340 U.S. 147, 158 
(1950). 
38Van Heusen Products, Inc. v. Earl and Wilson, 300 F. 922, 925 (1924). 
39Krementz v. The S. Cottle Co., 148 U.S. 556 (1893). 

44 
Create or Perish 
not now fully safeguarded. What we need is not to decrease but 
to enhance the monopoly called a patent. 
Genuine protection in 
that form would be the last surviving bulwark standing between the 
inventor and the onslaught of mighty corporations. 
A patent should function as a leveler whereby an individual or a 
company of small means may be enabled to hold his or its rights of 
property against the prssure of the strongest adversary. It should 
have a protective character like that of a high-power riﬂe in the 
hands of a puny man beset by a wildly charging bull elephant. Un­
fortunately, that patent aﬀords no safeguards. . . . 
The patent system of the United States, more than any other in the 
world, oﬀers hope, encouragement, opportunity and recompense to 
an individual or a company of small resources. It is as democratic 
as the Constitution which begot it. 
Congress has recognized this problem at least partially and has tried to 
solve it. The Patent Act of 1952, it is to be hoped, has restored the standard 
of invention at least to what it was originally and continued to be up to very 
recent years. If questions of public policy are involved, therefore, Congress has 
made plain that its purpose in enacting the new Patent Act was to remove the 
discouragement of inventors induced by prior decisions of the courts. 
Particularly in view of the extremely large number of important and break­
through inventions that still ﬂow from independent inventors and small com­
panies 40, we cannot sit back and merely wait for the fruits of government-
sponsored and large-corporation research. Never before in modern history has 
America been threatened so seriously from abroad – both economically and 
militarily – and hence never before has it needed so desperately to encourage 
invention from all quarters. 
With the same end in view of encouraging invention, Congress, in 1954, in 
Section 1235 of the Internal Review Code, allowed capital-gains tax treatment to 
professional inventors and their backers, under certain circumstances, while dis­
criminating against authors. Recent interview studies of independent inventors, 
conducted under the auspices of The Academy of Applied Science at Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, revealed fully the error of the Treasury Department’s proposed 
repeal of this Section 1235 together with the removal of sales of patents by an 
inventor (even an amateur inventor) from possible capital gains treatment 41 . 
Now these independent inventors represented a wide range of experience in 
innovation engaged in from six to more than forty years. Their more impor­
tant inventions included: methods of calibrating D.C. instruments; magnetic 
ampliﬁed control systems; mechanical-electrical transducers; systems to con­
vert capacitance changes to output voltages; shades that keep out heat but let 
in sunlight; inventions in image intensiﬁcation; medical instruments; methods 
40Donald A. Schon, “Champions for Radical New Inventions,” Harvard Business Review, 
Vol. 41, No. 2, p. 77 (1963). 
41“Angry Inventors,” in Wall Street Journal, May 10, 1963. 

45 
The Patent Law 
of compacting continuously sheet materials at a high rate of speed – used in 
paper, textiles, and plastics; the fuel oil whistle; gasoline tank design; rever­
beration devices for sound; UHF tuner; electric motors; broad-band ampliﬁers; 
power steering; the RC oscillator; the dynamic noise suppressor; stereo ampliﬁ­
cation systems; the hydrogen thyratron; cryotrons; ﬂash lamps; electron tubes; 
cathode-ray tube displays for analog computers; high-vacuum apparatus; gauge 
calibration equipment; pressure and temperature sensitive switches – widely 
used in space vehicles. (The inventions which I have italicized have revolution­
ized industries.) 
Most of these inventors sell or exclusively license their inventions, thereby 
placing themselves under the capital-gains category of Section 1235; or they own 
their own companies, which in most cases have been built around one or more 
of their own inventions, with the capital-gains provision used to build up the 
company. Their technically successful inventions ranged from about 20 to 80 
per cent, with a mean about one in three. Of these, only about one in ﬁve has 
been a substantial income-producer to the inventor; the average yearly return 
from licensing or selling inventions being from $10,000 to $50,000. 
The average time lag between the making of an invention and the receipt 
of returns therefrom was ﬁve years; and more than half of all the commercially 
successful inventions had to be pioneered on the market by the inventor himself 
before others could be persuaded to adopt them. Only one of these inventors 
received any ﬁnancial backing from a government contract in the making of his 
inventions. 
The inventors interviewed, moreover, had not only provided the country with 
many new products and processes, but had, in the process, created thousands 
of new jobs, and tens of millions of dollars of new sales. Dare we risk discour­
aging this well of current invention by making an already highly dangerous and 
speculative profession untenable to pursue 42 . Unsympathetic decisions by the 
courts or administrative agencies can only negate the policy of Congress which 
would encourage inventors to continue to invent and businessmen to take risks 
on the development of invention. 
42Benjamin F. Miessner, “Today’s Inventor – A Study in Frustration,” in American Engi­
neer, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 38 - 40 (1963). 

46 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 4 
Patents in Action 
(The History of the Basic Telephone Patent) 
This chapter carries an illustrative approach found most eﬀective 
in lecturing, tying together a complete picture of the invention, en­
trepreneuring, business, and legal cycles often involved in innovation 
– and through the medium of the Bell Telephone Cases. This par­
ticular invention was selected because its technology is familiar to 
all types of reader and because almost everything that could happen 
did happen to Bell; except that he was saved by a single vote in the 
Supreme Court from the anonymity experienced by many current 
inventors. 
By turning to a detailed study of the so-called Bell Telephone Cases, in­
volving an invention understandable and intimately known by everyone 1, we 
can both tie together many of the various principles of patent law heretofore 
discussed, and set up a real laboratory experiment by which to observe the 
rather typical actions and reactions of American industry and business to inde­
pendent innovation. In this way we can learn something about the intricacies 
and mysteries of patent litigation in the courts. 
4.1 
The Circumstances Underlying Bell’s Invention 
A little, ﬁrst, about Alexander Graham Bell. He was not a native-born American 
2 . This has some signiﬁcance for what happened in this case. At the time here 
involved, only American citizens could ﬁle an intention, called a “caveat,” and 
ﬁle later a patent application for an invention. If the caveat was seasonably 
followed by a patent application, the inventor could thereby obtain the beneﬁt 
of the early date of the caveat ﬁling. Had Bell been an American citizen with 
1Frederick V. Hunt, Electroacoustics, Harvard Monographs in Applied Science, No. 
5, 
Harvard University Press and John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1954, pp. 23-25. 
2The large number of basic inventions heretofore made by foreign-born Americans should 
give us cause for concern in light of present-day security restrictions and their eﬀect upon the 
encouragement of invention 
47 

48 
Create or Perish 
the right to ﬁle a caveat, certain alleged prior inventions by others could not 
have been asserted against his claim of prior inventorship. Bell had to wait until 
he had completed his inventive processes, at least theoretically, before he could 
ﬁle his application in the Patent Oﬃce. 
Bell was born on March 3, 1847, in Edinburgh, the son of a teacher of 
elocution. At a very early age, he naturally became interested in the problems of 
speech and lip reading and ultimately assisted his father, who was the professor 
of elocution at the University of London. When the latter was oﬀered a position 
in this country, he sent his son, in his stead, to join the staﬀof the Boston School 
for the Deaf. 
At this time, the Western Union Company, having bought up the small 
individual operating telegraph systems in the country, was in control of the 
country’s ﬁrst national communications chain. One of the problems that it was 
facing was that of the simultaneous transmission of a plurality of Morse-code 
messages over the same wires. Its engineers were heavily engaged in trying to 
solve this problem. Bell heard about it, became interested, and decided to set 
out to solve it. Fortunately, in his impecunious state, he met a Boston attorney, 
Gardner Greene Hubbard, who, becoming intrigued with the potential ﬁnancial 
return from an invention that could solve this problem, agreed to supply funds 
with which Bell could carry on his researches. 
The concept that Bell evolved related to the simultaneous transmission of 
a plurality of diﬀerent tones, each carrying a diﬀerent telegraph message. At 
the receiving end, a number of tuned reeds were provided, each tuned to one of 
the diﬀerent tones. Bell reasoned that only the reed tuned to a particular tone 
would reproduce that tone, and so each message would be selectively received 
by its corresponding reed. 
It is important for our purposed to remember that this multiple-telegraphy 
problem, called the“harmonic telegraph,” was the concept that Bell set out to 
explore. This is important because it illustrates what often happens when an 
inventor or applied scientist sets out to solve a problem. Frequently, the inves­
tigator makes an accidental auxiliary discovery or observes some phenomenon 
he cannot explain. When given the freedom to drop the planned research goal 
for the moment and to explore this diversion, inventors have made far more im­
portant inventions than the original research project contemplated, devices that 
solved diﬀerent and ofter more important problems. There is the serious ques­
tion whether today, under government sponsorship of research, and even under 
the research policies of many industrial companies, the investigator would have 
that freedom to stop momentarily, to lay aside the original goal, and to explore 
the striking new channel. 
Bell was joined in his experiments by Thomas A. Watson, and the two worked 
together in a garret, as the popular story has it, on the harmonic telegraph. One 
day Watson misadjusted a reed, so that instead of vibrating back and forth, to 
make and break an electrical circuit and thereby to reproduce the telegraphic 
dot-and-dash message, the reed became stuck fast in a closed-circuit position. 
Bell, being in the room at the time, heard something he had never heard before, 
a kind of muﬄed tone of entirely diﬀerent quality and clarity from the ringing 

49 
Patents in Action 
tones of make-and-break reeds. He was puzzled as to how, in a completely closed 
circuit, the tone could be reproduced. This was perhaps the ﬁrst inkling that 
communication results could be obtained other than by making and breaking 
electrical circuits. Here was a tone that was coming through when the circuit 
remained closed, the stuck reed apparently responding to current variations in 
the winding behind it. 
Mind you, Bell was still working on this harmonic­
telegraph problem. 
At this point, however, realizing the signiﬁcance of this discovery, Bell went 
to Mr. Hubbard and requested permission to stop work on the harmonic tele­
graph, and to start investigating the problems inherent in speech reproduction. 
Mr. Hubbard, interested in the big bounty awaiting the ﬁrst person to solve 
Western Union’s problem of multiple telegraphy, was unable to see any future 
in a speech machine, and so repeatedly instructed Bell to continue on the har­
monic telegraph and to forget esoteric speech problems. 
The record shows, 
however, that Bell slanted his work towards a speech machine, under the guise 
of a modiﬁed version of the harmonic telegraph. 
On February 14, 1876, Bell ﬁled a patent application. This application pur­
ported to cover the harmonic telegraph for simultaneously producing multiple-
tone messages. The application clearly explained, however, that it covered also 
a machine that would reproduce vocal sounds. Bell put both inventions in one 
case. On March 7, less than one month later, the Patent Oﬃce issued the ﬁrst 
Bell patent on that application. The patent number was 174,465. Note that it 
took Bell less than a month to get his patent. Contrast that with the several 
years that may be involved in issuing a patent today, particularly in the light of 
the events to be subsequently related, where others soon commenced to violate 
Bell’s rights. At least Bell, unlike a present-day inventor, promptly obtained a 
patent that enabled him to try to enforce his rights, instead of having to sit back 
and wait in frustration. Here is the fortuitous circumstance that Bell obtained 
his patent promptly. 
4.2 
Bell’s Basic Patent 
Figure 2 reproduces part of the basic Bell patent relating to the original tele­
phone, with Fig. 7 thereof illustrating a mouthpiece at A, into which the voice 
sounds were to be directed. There was a metal diaphragm a that would vibrate 
in accordance with those voice sounds. Behind the diaphragm a was an electro­
magnetic winding b that was connected in the following electrical circuit: from 
ground E, through a battery, to and through the winding b, along the line e, 
to a similar receiving winding f, and then back to ground again, at g. Thus 
there is provided a closed circuit for the ﬂow of electric current. In this patent, 
Bell explained that as the diaphragm a moved closer to and farther away from 
the winding b, in response to voice vibrations, the eﬀect of its varying position, 
relative to the winding b, would be able to induce, in this winding b, varia­
tions in the current ﬂowing therein. By this technique, the exact undulations of 
sound produced by the voice can be converted into corresponding electric cur­
rent undulations or variations in the above-mentioned circuity. The receiving or 

50 
Create or Perish 
reproducing diaphragm i would thus be attracted to and repelled from the re­
ceiving winding f, causing air in front of the diaphragm i to be correspondingly 
set into vibration, thereby to reproduce the original voice sound. Drawing from Alexander Graham Bell's original telephone patent.
Fig. 4.1: Part of Bell’s original telephone patent. (This image is public domain 
and is not protected by copyright.) 
Now this is the theory that Bell proposed in his patent. The evidence ad­
duced in subsequent litigation involving his patent demonstrated that Bell had 
never made this device work for voice sounds until after he had received his 
patent. It is important to note, however, that he did have a valid theory of 
operation. More of this later. 
His attorney presented two kinds of claims in the patent. It is to be recalled 
that one of the patentable classes of invention is a new piece of apparatus, 
which may be a new combination of old elements, operating in a new cooperative 
manner to achieve a new result. It will be recalled, also, that the law permits the 
patenting of a new process or art or method, namely a new series of steps capable 
of performance with any of a host of diﬀerent types of apparatus. The concept 
that Bell had evolved was a method wherein a continuous electric current was 
to be maintained, but whose value was to be changed in accordance with voice-
sound undulations, and without interrupting the complete-circuit ﬂow of the 
current. That, Bell asserted, was his new method. His attorney worded the 
claims in both method and apparatus form, and it is wise that he did so. It will 
be demonstrated shortly that, had he worded the claims in speciﬁc apparatus 
form alone, some of Bell’s early competitors might have been free of the charge 
of infringement. 
But, having worded a broad claim to embrace the method 
also, the attorney provided the court with grounds for construing the infringing 
devices, which were pieces of apparatus diﬀerent from Bell’s, as falling within 
the scope of Bell’s invention. To quote claim 5: 

51 
Patents in Action 
The method of, and apparatus for, transmitting vocal or other sounds 
telegraphically, as herein described, by causing electrical undula­
tions, similar in form to the vibrations of the air accompanying the 
said vocal or other sounds, substantially as set forth. 
Of course, the Patent Oﬃce would not let a claim like that be written today 
because of present-day requirements for the recitations of structure in more 
precise form, nor would the courts be likely to sustain such a general wording. 
The Patent Oﬃce (and the courts) have become very ritualistic and formal. 
The important thing for our story, however, is that Bell’s attorney obtained a 
patent both for the steps of the method and for a piece of apparatus. 
Watson, working under Bell’s direction, evolved the principle of substituting 
for this electromagnetic apparatus a permanent magnet. This simpliﬁed the 
commercial construction, a second patent, No. 186,787, issued the following 
year, on January 30, 1877, principally for the improvement of a ﬁxed magnet. 
Bell, still struggling under the adverse conditions usually besetting the in­
dividual inventor and entrepreneur, did the natural thing. He went to West­
ern Union, the party most interested in communications, and oﬀered his basic 
patent for the telephone for $100,000. Western Union, in turn, consulted with 
the ablest scientiﬁc people and engineers and the best business minds of that 
day and came to the conclusion that there was no commercial future for an 
instrument that would reproduce voice sounds. Hence, it turned down Bell’s 
oﬀer 3 . 
It may be interesting to depart brieﬂy from the main theme to point out that 
the supposedly ablest industrial, scientiﬁc, and government people of our own 
day make similar unimaginative decisions over and over again. Where inventors 
formerly persisted and proceeded somehow on their own, as did Bell, in the true 
American tradition, and sometimes made a success of their inventions to the 
beneﬁt of the country, the recent policies of our government, our industry, and 
our courts, as will be shown later, have tended to kill or at least hamper much 
of the incentive. 
4.3 
The Founding of Bell’s Company – and the Pirates 
In Bell’s day, however, the American pioneering spirit still existed, and Bell, 
unthwarted, determined to promote his invention himself. He and his associates 
raised capital in Boston and formed the American Bell Telephone Company. 
Within a year or two, they were actually supplying instruments to the public. 
Having now embarked upon a business, as distinguished from a research venture, 
Bell needed to and did obtain practical improvement patents for commercially 
acceptable structures. And the demand for these crude telephone instruments 
was so great that the new company could not keep up with its orders. 
Two short years later, in 1879 (once Bell had shown the way) the Western 
Union reversed its decision that there was no commercial future in the speaking 
3The technical and ﬁnancial advisers to industrialist Chauncey Depew were instrumental 
in the later turn-down of an oﬀer of a one-third interest in Bell’s enterprise for the sum of 
$10,000. 

52 
Create or Perish 
telegraph toy, and it formed the American Speaking and Telephone Company. 
In typical free-enterprise fashion, stimulated by the fact that Bell had obtained 
a patent, Western Union employed two renowned inventors to work around what 
Bell had done and to avoid his patent 4 . The whole world is familiar with the 
names of Thomas Alva Edison and Elisha Gray, the men selected by Western 
Union. 
Thomas Edison, upon his employment by Western Union, went to work to 
devise what we would today call a transducer for using the voice vibrations 
to aﬀect the magnitude of the electric current far more eﬀectively than Bell’s 
did, and came up with the carbon-button microphone, which is still in use. 
Western Union, accordingly, treated Bell’s patent as limited to armatures and 
diaphragms and put on the market its own telephone, using Edison’s invention. 
This carbon-button microphone performed inﬁnitely better than did Bell’s crude 
electromagnetic device, so that the quality of the Western Union instrument was 
far above that of the American Bell Telephone Company’s. One can begin to 
see the problem facing the latter company when customers could obtain a much 
improved instrument from its competitor. 
To solve this, Bell’s company decided to employ inventors other than Bell, 
in an eﬀort to produce as good an instrument as Edison’s carbon-button mi­
crophone. They therefore hired Emil Berliner, who had eﬀected a ﬁling in the 
Patent Oﬃce two weeks earlier than Edison’s patent application for the carbon­
button microphone. (And this was, of course, one of the reasons why he was 
selected.) While Berliner did not invent a carbon-button microphone, he did 
devise a type of metal-contact microphone that could be termed a variable­
resistance microphone. This was an apparatus operating upon a diﬀerent physi­
cal principal (variable resistance) from that of Bell’s inductive armature-diaphragm 
apparatus, and, if new, was entitled to independent patent protection. The sig­
niﬁcance of this is that, since variable resistance is also the principle underlying 
the operating of the Edison carbon-button microphone, if Berliner could obtain 
broad patent claims to a variable-resistance microphone, the Bell Company 
would have another tool with which to ward oﬀ Western Union’s challenge. 
The Patent Oﬃce set up an interference proceeding between Berliner and 
Edison to determine which was entitled to the broad variable-resistance-microphone 
claims. It is interesting to observe that years later, when Berliner’s patent ﬁ­
nally issued, it had the eﬀect of extending the basic “monopoly,” as that term 
is popularly used, of the American Bell Telephone Company. The patent was 
attacked unsuccessfully upon the ground of extension of monopoly by the At­
torney General 5, though later it was invalidated by the Circuit Court for the 
District of Massachusetts as anticipated by Edison’s work 6 . 
The American Bell Telephone Company held the view that Bell’s basic 
patent was very broad and was not restricted to any particular form of appara­
4History shows over and over again that, far from stiﬂing progress, the granting of im­
portant patents causes industry to look for alternative approaches in an eﬀort to avoid the 
patent, thereby further promoting the progress of the useful arts. 
5United States v. American Bell Telephone Co. & Emil Berliner, 167 U.S. 244 (1897). 
6109 F. 976 (1901). 

53 
Patents in Action 
tus. Under such interpretation, of course, a telephone using Edison’s improved 
transducer, the carbon-button microphone, would infringe the broad telephone 
claims of Bell’s patent. Bell could not, therefore, stand by and sanction the 
Western Union infringement upon his patent. 
Claim 5 of the basic patent, 
quoted earlier, does not specify whether the electrical undulations similar in 
form to the vibrations of the air are caused by use of a variable resistance or by 
use of a magnetic armature circuit, but very broadly covers that they are made 
to do so. Thus, on the theory that this broad claim covered any way found to 
do this equivalent to Bell’s disclosed magnetic armature-diaphragm apparatus, 
American Bell Telephone Company sued Western Union. 
I have said nothing yet about Elisha Gray, who, like Edison, had been em­
ployed as an inventor by Western Union. One of the reasons for his employment 
was that on the very same day, February 14, 1876, that Alexander Graham Bell 
had ﬁled his patent application for the basic patent, Elisha Gray, an American 
citizen, had ﬁled in the Patent Oﬃce a caveat for a telephone. He had appar­
ently independently conceived the idea of having a closed circuit and of varying 
the value of the current therein, in accordance with voice sounds. (See Figure 
3.) As the voice vibrations moved a diaphragm a (Fig. 1) back and forth, a 
wire A was simultaneously inserted to varying depths into a conducting water 
solution B. Hence, in theory, the resistance between the wire A in the water and 
water solution B varied because there was more or less contact area between the 
wire and the water. This, then, was a variable-resistance device, moving back 
and forth in the same way as the air undulations, in an uninterrupted electrical 
circuit. But Gray did not follow up this caveat with a patent application, and 
his rights were accordingly lost. He was still useful to Western Union, however, 
because, whether or not he obtained a patent, Bell’s patent could be invalidated 
if Gray had actually made the invention before Bell. There was also a charge of 
fraud raised in the Telephone Cases to the eﬀect that word of Gray’s caveat was 
passed to Bell’s attorney, and that the latter supposedly arranged for Bell’s ap­
plication to be changed in the Patent Oﬃce to include Gray’s variable-resistance 
principle, but the Supreme Court found no evidence at all of such fraud. 
A great deal of testimony was taken in the suit between Bell Telephone and 
Western Union, and the attorneys for the latter advised their client that they 
thought Bell was going to win the case. Since they had an interference in the 
Patent Oﬃce, Edison v. Berliner, on the broad variable-resistance issue, and 
since they had this court litigation on the basic Bell patent, Western Union 
decided to see if a compromise could be reached. 
It should be added that, 
although Western Union had infringed Bell’s claim 5, the Bell Company, on 
the other hand, could not operate commercially without using Edison’s carbon-
button microphone invention. 
In other words, the Western Union attorneys 
were sure they would lose their suit, but Bell was also anxious to settle it to 
obtain the rights under Edison’s invention. 
Accordingly, a settlement was reached on the basis that, for a period of 
seventeen years, the American Bell Telephone Company would pay one-ﬁfth of 
all its proceeds to Western Union, Western Union would give the rest of its 
stock of telephone equipment to the America Bell Telephone Company, and 

54 
Create or Perish Drawing of a part of Elisha Gray's caveat.
Fig. 4.2: A part of Elisha Gray’s caveat. (This image is public domain and is 
not protected by copyright.) 
from that time on Western Union would not engage in the telephone business 
for the seventeen-year period. This, of course, was a business decision, forced 
perhaps by the patent diﬃculties. It certainly stands out, however, as one of 
the most fateful management decisions imaginable. Looked at with hindsight, 
it was responsible for the subsequent decline of Western Union. 
4.4 
Enters the Supreme Court 
After the court litigation with Western Union was settled, other equally ambi­
tious entrepreneurs, in the normal American tradition, sprang up all over the 
country, each setting up a small telephone company and proceeding along its own 
merry way in deﬁance of Bell’s patent. Suits were thereupon brought against 
one Dolbear, a professor at Tufts College, against the Molecular Telephone 
Company in the southern district of New York, against the Clay Commercial 
Telephone Company, in the eastern district of Pennsylvania, and against the 
People’s Telephone Company and the Overland Telephone Company, both in 
the southern district of New York. In each suit, Bell’s patent was sustained. 
Finally, all these cases came up before the United States Supreme Court, which 
decided to consolidate them and to hear all the appeals at one time. These Tele­
phone Cases are reported in a complete volume of the Supreme Court decisions, 
referred to as 126 U.S. 
The defendants contested the validity of Bell’s patent. They also denied 
infringement upon the basis that the latter’s patent must be limited to what is 
shown in the patent, and none of the supposedly infringing telephones used the 
magnetic armature-diaphragm apparatus of the patent. I shall now examine 
how the Supreme Court treated these various defenses, and what its decisions 
were. 
First of all, the reader may gain a picture of how close to the prior art 
important inventions often are, by learning that these defendants cited some 
ﬁfteen diﬀerent men who, they maintained, made this invention before Bell. 

55 
Patents in Action 
They included a Philip Reis of Germany, the before-mentioned Elisha Gray 
and Thomas Edison, Professor Dolbear, and one Daniel Drawbaugh. The de­
fendants also asserted that there were eight United States patents, six British 
patents, and a French one, all issued before Bell’s basic patent and disclos­
ing the same invention. The defendants alleged, further, that there were six 
United States patents, three British patents, and a Canadian one for the same 
invention as Bell’s second improvement patent, before mentioned. They cited 
some sixty-three publications before Bell’s, including French, British, German, 
United States, Italian, and Irish publications, all supposedly anticipating Bell’s 
concept. And in connection with the latter’s second patent, they listed ﬁfty-one 
publications to show that others had thought of the invention before Bell. 
Now these were technical people, applied scientists, business people, and 
attorneys, who were advancing rational arguments; they were trying to persuade 
a court that Bell’s contribution was anticipated. I proceed, therefore, to the 
details of these defenses and how the court handled them. 
The ﬁrst defense here involved is that Bell was attempting to patent a natural 
force, a scientiﬁc fact. He was purporting, in claim 5, to monopolize the scientiﬁc 
fact that, if one varies the electric current in the same way that the sound 
produced by the voice varies, speech will be reproduced. This, the defendants 
maintained, is a fact of nature to which our patent laws do not extend. And they 
cited a Supreme Court decision to support that principle, O’Reilly v. Morse 
(15 How. 62). In that case, Samuel F. B. Morse, the inventor of the telegraph, 
tried to claim all uses of electricity for transmitting intelligence from one point 
to another. The Supreme Court there held that an attempt to patent all such 
possible uses of electricity is too broad and is really an attempt to patent a force 
of nature. The court struck down Morse’s broadest claim, claim 8. 
So the defendants in Bell’s suits, by analogy, argued that Bell’s claim 5 gave 
him the monopoly of all possible ways of making these electrical currents cor­
respond to the voice undulations, and, as such, represented merely a discovery 
of nature that was not one of those things that, under our patent laws, was 
susceptible to patent protection. As previously explained, a scientiﬁc discovery, 
per se, is not patentable under our laws. 
What did the court answer? To quote from page 534: 
In O’Reilly v. Morse, 15 How. 62, it was decided that a claim in 
broad terms (p. 86) for the use of the motive power of the electric 
or galvanic current called ’electromagnetism,’ however developed, 
for making or printing intelligible characters, letters or signs . . . was 
void, because (p. 20) it was a claim for a patent for an eﬀect pro­
duced by the use of electromagnetism, distinct from the process or 
machinery necessary to produce it. 
The court continued that in Bell’s case, on the other hand, 
the claim is not for the use of a current of electricity in its natural 
state as it comes from the battery, but for putting a continuous 

56 
Create or Perish 
current in a closed circuit into a certain speciﬁed condition suited 
to the transmission of vocal and other sounds, and using it in that 
condition for that purpose. 
The court was not unmindful of the fact that 
it may be that electricity cannot be used at all for the transmission 
of speech except in the way Bell has discovered, and that, therefore, 
practically, his patent gives him exclusive use for that purpose, but 
that does not make his claim one for the use of electricity distinct 
from the particular process with which it is connected in his patent. 
It will, it is true, show more clearly the great importance of his 
discovery, but it will not invalidate his patent. 
Hence, concluded the Supreme Court, this is not a case where Bell is taking 
raw nature, the force of a battery, the force of a current, and trying to claim 
all uses of it for speech reproduction. 
This is a case, rather, where Bell is 
molding the current into something that was not there originally, and varying 
that current in accordance with the variation of air pressure produced by voice 
sounds. This is a method or process. It is not pure scientiﬁc discovery. It is, 
rather, the application of scientiﬁc discovery to a particular problem. It is the 
kind of invention that our patent laws cover. 
The next defense advanced was that Bell did not really make his invention 
work until after his patent issued. It will be recalled that Bell had witnessed 
the experiment of the stuck reed, but that was not voice. He had not actually 
transmitted voice at that time, and, in fact, he did not suceed in doing so until 
after his basic patent issued. So, said the defendants, Bell did not really make 
the invention until after he had obtained the patent. 
How did the court answer that? To quote from page 535: 
It is quite true that when Bell applied for his patent he had never 
actually transmitted telegraphically spoken words so that they could 
be distinctly heard and understood at the receiving end, but, 
the court continued – and this is very important – 
in his speciﬁcation he did describe accurately and with admirable 
clearness his process, that is to say, the exact electrical condition that 
must be created to accomplish his purpose, and he also described, 
with suﬃcient precision to enable one of ordinary skill in such mat­
ters to make it, a form of apparatus which, if used in the way pointed 
out, would produce the required eﬀect, receive the words, and carry 
them to and deliver them at the appointed place. 
The court concluded on that topic (p. 536) 
The law does not require that a discoverer or inventor, in order to 
get a patent for a process, must have succeeded in bringing his art 

57 
Patents in Action 
to the highest degree of perfection. It is enough if he describes his 
method with suﬃcient clearness and precision to enable those skilled 
in the matter to understand what the process is, and if he points 
out some practical way of putting it into operation. This Bell did. 
Hence arises the rule of law, previously treated, that the ﬁling of a theoreti­
cally operative patent application constitutes, in contemplation of the law, a 
constructive reduction to practice of that invention. An inventor does not need 
to wait until he can accumulate the several million dollars necessary to build 
a computer and test it. If he has some new principles that are worthy of pro­
tection and he can theoretically demonstrate their operability, he can obtain a 
patent. 
The next defense advanced was that there was no infringement because, 
as earlier pointed out, claim 5 of that patent called for the apparatus “sub­
stantially as set forth.” Bell set forth an electromagnetic armature-diaphragm 
microphone. The defendants maintained that they were not using those electro­
magnets. Professor Dolbear 7, for example, employed a microphone that appears 
to resemble what we would now describe as an electrostatic microphone, acting 
as a variable impedance in the circuit. This defendant’s position was that his 
apparatus, which was restricted to inducing current variations by moving the 
diaphragm nearer to and farther from the electromagnetic winding. 
The court dealt with this defense of noninfringement as follows (p. 538): 
The patent is both for the magneto and variable resistance methods 
and for the particular magneto apparatus which is described, or is 
equivalent. 
What the court is saying here is that, insofar as the method is concerned, it 
may be practiced whether one uses a magneto, meaning the Bell electromagnetic 
armature-diaphragm structure, or a variable-resistance device. The use of either 
device still involves the method of causing the electric current to vary with the 
voice-sound undulations. As for the apparatus, however, the court agreed that 
the apparatus described in the patent claim was only the magnetic armature­
diaphragm apparatus that Bell disclosed, or its equivalent. While it is not clear, 
the court later appeared to imply that the variable-resistance device was also 
an equivalent of the “magneto.” At any rate, it can be seen how important was 
the decision by Bell’s attorney to insert the magic word “method,” as well as 
apparatus, in the claim. 
To continue with the court’s analysis: 
It is undoubtedly true that when Bell got his patent he thought the 
magneto method was the best. Indeed, he said, in express terms, 
he preferred it, but that does not exclude the use of the other if it 
turns out to be the most desirable way of using the process under any 
7United States Letters Patents Nos. 239, 742 and 240, 518, issued April 5 and 26, 1881, 
respectively. 

58 
Create or Perish 
circumstance. Both forms of apparatus operate on a closed circuit 
by gradual changes of intensity, and not by alternately making and 
breaking the circuit. 
It will be apparent hereinafter that the prior art came very close to Bell. The 
whole distinction was that, instead of keeping the circuit closed all the time, 
and varying the current in it, the prior-art inventors interrupted the circuit, 
by actually make-and-break switching, which was unable to reproduce complex 
waveforms, such as speech, although it could reproduce musical tones. 
The court concluded (p. 539): 
Surely a patent for such a discovery is not to be conﬁned to the mere 
means he improvised to prove the reality of its conception. 
Hence, another important point of patent law. If an invention is a broad 
invention, a court could construe it broadly. If the advance is a pioneer advance, 
one cannot escape infringement by trying to obtain the same result in another 
equivalent way. This matter of range of equivalents returns again to the matter 
of the attitude of the court and its conclusion as to the scope of an invention. If 
a court considers that a real advance has been made, and that the defendant is 
using the substance of the invention, the range of equivalents may be broad. If, 
on the other hand, a court considers the invention to be narrow, it may ﬁnd the 
somewhat diﬀerent structures of the defendant to be noninfringing, by refusing 
to grant a substantial range of equivalent structures. 
Now I come to the details of the prior art set up by the defendants as 
anticipating Bell’s invention. 
One of the prior-art publications was that of 
Bourseul in Paris, in 1854. This, it should be understood, was twenty-two years 
before Bell’s invention. Here is what the Supreme Court held that Bourseul had 
in mind (p. 542): 
As early as 1854 Bourseul, in his communication which has already 
been referred to, had said, substantially, that if the vibrations of air 
produced by the human voice in articulate speech could be repro­
duced by means of electricity, at a distance, the speech itself would 
be reproduced and heard there. As a means of stimulating inquiry 
to that end he called attention to the principle on which the electric 
telegraph was based and suggested an application of that principle 
to such a purpose. He said “. . . Suppose that a man speaks nears 
a movable disk, suﬃciently ﬂexible to lose none of the vibrations 
of the voice, that this disk alternately makes and breaks connec­
tions with a battery, you have at a distance another disk which will 
simultaneously execute the same vibrations.” 
This operation is show in Figure 4. 
Bourseul, however, was merely proposing a problem insofar as speech was 
concerned. He had everything there – almost. He was even proposing to use the 
principle of the telegraph to make the electric current vary the same way that 

59 
Patents in Action Drawing of Bourseul's make-and-break concept.
Fig. 4.3: Bourseul’s make-and-break concept. (This image is public domain and 
is not protected by copyright.) 
the voice vibrations vary. But note that he had in mind making and breaking 
the electrical circuit. 
The next prior art was that of Philip Reis of Germany, some ﬁfteen years 
before Bell made his invention. 
Reis’s work involved a device for reproduc­
ing musical sounds wherein a diaphragm moved back and forth in response to 
sound waves, and caused an arm correspondingly to move back and forth and 
make and break the connection with an electric circuit. The Supreme Court 
invited attention to Reis’s own description of his apparatus as involving a sys­
tem wherein “each sound wave causes a breaking and closing of the current.” 
Figure 5 illustrates the Reis construction, as shown in a paper of von Legat, 
embodying a diaphragm c that moves an arm e into and out of contact with 
a contact point d. The screw h can adjust the extent of this make-and-break 
adjustment. It could even produce Bell’s kind of operation, if properly adjusted 
to that the circuit did not make and break, but gave rise to a variable-contact 
resistance phenomenon. This was proved by the experiments of Blake 8 . 
8126 U.S. 196. 

60 
Create or Perish Drawing of Philip Reis's construction.
Fig. 4.4: Philip Reis’s construction. (This image is public domain and is not 
protected by copyright.) 

61 
Patents in Action 
Professor Hunt 9 has an extremely interesting account of Reis’s work in his 
book already cited. Here brieﬂy is his conclusion, as a scientist, as to the nature 
of Reis’s work. 
In spite of stout eﬀorts to show the contrary, no evidence could be 
found in Reis’s writings that he had ever contemplated any mode of 
operation of his transmitter other than one involving complete inter­
ruption of the current. What made this conclusion convincing was 
the additional fact that his receiver was so insensitive that it could 
not have produced an audible reproduction of speech even when his 
transmitter was in the rare condition of adjustment necessary for 
the production of an undulating current. 
The Supreme Court summarized Reis’s work as follows (p. 544): 
It was left for Bell to discover that the failure was due not to work­
manship but to the principle which was adopted as the basis of what 
had to be done. He found that what he called the intermittent cur­
rent – one caused by alternately opening and closing the circuit – 
could not be made under any circumstances to reproduce the deli­
cate forms of air vibrations caused by the human voice in articulate 
speech, but that the true way was to operate on unbroken current 
by increasing and diminishing its intensity. 
So, the court concluded, 
if Reis had kept on he might have found out the way to succeed, but 
he stopped and failed. Bell took up his work and carried it on to a 
successful result. 
Lastly, with regard to the alleged prior investigation of Drawbaugh, the 
People’s Telephone Company came upon this proliﬁc inventor who, long after 
the event, was prepared to claim having built a large number of telephones before 
Bell. For some unexplained reason, he only had bits and pieces of them to show, 
none of which worked. But he produced some ﬁfty witnesses, farmers and the 
like, all of whom swore that they had heard speech coming over these various 
instruments long before Bell made his invention. In view of other circumstances 
the majority of the court just could not believe this. While Drawbaugh had 
indicated that he did not have money to ﬁle patents and that he did not realize 
in time the signiﬁcance of the invention, the court found that he had been able 
to raise money to ﬁle patents on other inventions, that he had gone with friends 
to a centennial exhibition at which Bell made a demonstration, and had seen 
Bell’s instrument, but never claimed to his friends that he had already done the 
same. This distinct feeling of prior inventorship was apparently not brought 
out in Drawbaugh until after the People’s Telephone Company had considered 
him as a possible champion by whom to defeat Bell. The majority of the court 
9Frederick V. Hunt, Electroacoustics, p. 28. 

62 
Create or Perish 
found that Drawbaugh did not make the invention before Bell, although three 
judges disagreed. So, by a 4-to-3 vote, two of the judges not participating, Bell’s 
patent was sustained by the Supreme Court. 
It may be relevant to point out that four days after delivering the majority 
opinion Chief Justice Waite died. What would have happened to Bell’s patent 
without the persuasion of Chief Justice Waite? Suppose he had died a little 
earlier? Would there have been a 3-to-3 sustaining of the patent, or would no 
American schoolchild today know of Alexander Graham Bell? 
Another point of interest is the reluctance of the courts to trust oral testi­
mony, alone, with regard to dates of invention and demonstration 10 . If Draw­
baugh had made the invention and had kept proper written records and mod­
els, these, together with the attestations of technically qualiﬁed witnesses, would 
have undoubtedly led the majority of the court to a diﬀerent conclusion 11 . This 
is a lesson for the applied scientist and inventor on the importance of keeping 
dated records and models and having them witnessed by those who understand 
the invention. 
Another interesting fact is that Bell’s invention gave rise to a situation 
whereby, within the quarter of a century following it, more than 3000 patents 
are reported to have been issued for improvements relating to the telephone. 
Supposedly informed and well-meaning people have sometimes attacked that 
patent system as discouraging invention, because the pioneer gets a basic patent 
and can, for a limited time, exclude others. 
The history of patents shows, 
however, that, far from discouraging invention, the system fosters and stimulates 
a myriad of new devices to get around the patent or to improve upon it, in 
order to bargain for an exchange or rights, as demonstrated above. Truly this 
accomplishes the end set forth in the Constitution “to promote the progress of 
science and useful arts.” 
It is of interest, also, to note the considered opinion of Professor Edward 
L. Bowles, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who has made a deep 
study of the history of the American Telephone Company and its subsidiaries. 
Professor Bowles has reason to believe that the Telephone Company policy, with 
regard to equipment ownership, may well have resulted from the inﬂuence of the 
equipment-leasing policy of the United Shoe Machinery Corporation. It appears 
that, while Bell has sometimes been credited with altruism in establishing the 
policy of not requiring the telephone user to own his equipment, his ﬁnancial 
backer, G. G. Hubbard, was a close associate of Gordon McKay, the former 
guiding light of the United Shoe Machinery Corporation and its policy of leasing, 
not selling, equipment. 
10See also American Optical Co. et al v. Shuron Optical Co., 9 F. 2d 932, 936. 
11There is always a question, however, whether it is in the public interest to give eﬀect to 
an alleged prior invention that is suppressed to concealed or put aside and ignored. Does this 
“promote the progress of useful arts”? See, for example, Mason v. Hepburn, 84 O.G. 147. 

63 
Patents in Action 
4.5 
How Would Our Present Supreme Court Probably React to Bell’s Patent? 
What might have been Bell’s fate if he had to come before our Supreme Court 
today? We must assume, of course, that he had already obtained his patent, 
and had not already been worn out by interferences, in the Patent Oﬃce, with 
one or more large corporations. As I shall show, later, such corporations have 
been notorious for provoking interferences by unwarrantably reading into one 
of their thousands of applications on ﬁle in the Patent Oﬃce an invention of an 
outsider that has come to their attention, and that they fear they might want to 
use later. We must also assume that the patent has issued relatively promptly, 
so that well-ﬁnanced copyists have not already been able to put the enterprising 
inventor out of business. 
For purposes of analysis, we shall refer to the classic Supreme Court decision, 
Jungerson v. Ostby and Barton Co.. 12 The Supreme Court threw out a patent 
for an invention dealing with centrifuging wax into a mold for the purpose of 
intricately reproducing designs in jewelry and the like. It did this in the face of 
the fact that this invention had made possible novel results that had long been 
sought by the whole industry, that it was slavishly copied, once made known, 
and that it was the ﬁrst technique ever to reproduce accurately and intricately 
this kind of jewelry. The Supreme Court held (p. 563): 
Jungerson’s process is nothing more that a reﬁnement of a method 
known as “cere perdue” or “lost wax” process, which was in use as 
early as the sixteenth century. The treatises of Benvenuto Cellini 
. . . 
The prior art, the Supreme Court said, has been there for over 400 years; all 
one had to do was use it! 
Let us draw the parallel, in Bell’s situation, to Reis’s work some ﬁfteen years 
before Bell, and Bourseul’s writings some seven years before that, which told 
the world that, if one caused the undulations of the air produced by sounds to 
produce corresponding variations in electric current, and employed telegraph­
type apparatus therefore, the telephone would be born. Does this not correspond 
to Cellini’s telling the world in the sixteenth century that one can use wax models 
for goldsmithing, and to what the Supreme Court, in the Jungerson case, termed 
the recognition, by those skilled in the art, of the necessity for making “molten 
materials ﬁt snugly the intricate details of the mold”? 
Jungerson’s invention, the Supreme Court held, was merely “a reﬁnement” 
of Cellini’s method, including an application of centrifugal force thereto. Cer­
tainly Jungerson did not discover centrifugal force! Bell’s invention similarly 
could have resulted as before explained, merely by “a reﬁnement” of Reis’s 
apparatus by proper adjustment of Reis’s screw h. 
Screw adjustments were 
certainly recognized before Bell! 
The Supreme Court made a point of the fact that “those skilled in the 
art recognized and disclosed the necessity for the application of force” – though 
12335 U.S. 560. 

64 
Create or Perish 
not, of course, of Jungerson’s particular successful centrifugal-force action in this 
technique, a fact which, however, the court found to be “of no legal signiﬁcance” 
(p. 566). 
That no one before had ever produced Jungerson’s long-sought result, despite 
Cellini’s age-old teaching and the recognition that a force was required, was of 
no signiﬁcance to the court. Why, then, should the fact that no one had attained 
Bell’s results, despite Bourseul’s teaching, be of any more signiﬁcance? Had not 
Bourseul himself “recognized and disclosed the necessity for the application of” 
electrical undulations that would correspond to the voice sounds? 
The answer may lie in the dissent in the Jungerson case. Justice Frankfurter, 
adopting the words of dissent of Judge Learned Hand of the Court of Appeals 
below, pointed out (pp. 569-570). 
My point is that, if there is a new combination, however triﬂing the 
physical change may be, nothing more is required than that, to take 
the step or steps, added “invention” is needed, and the “invention,” 
whatever else it may be, is within the category of mental activities 
and of those alone. . . . Indeed it is the very basis of the defense that 
for years all the elements lay open and available, and that nothing 
was needed but the paltry modiﬁcation which has proved so fruitful. 
. . . What better test of invention can one ask than the detection of 
that which others had all along had a strong incentive to discover, 
but had failed to see, though all the while it lay beneath their eyes? 
But the time has long since passed when we can aﬀord to engage in pretenses. 
The real philosophy, it seems to me, is involved in Justice Jackson’s honest 
appraisal in his dissent (p. 572). 
It is the strong passion in this Court for striking them [patents] down 
so that the only patent that is valid is one which this Court has not 
been able to get its hands on. 
The reader is left to speculate whether Bell, before our present Supreme 
Court, would have had his patent sustained, whether, today, he would ﬁnd back­
ers who would invest in such a speculative, risky, and revolutionary business, 
knowing that ultimately it would probably receive this same kind of treatment 
at the hands of the court, and whether we could today build a private-industry 
American Bell Telephone system, with the remarkable advances and services 
it provides and which foreign government-owned telephone companies cannot 
begin to approach, let alone match. 

Chapter 5 
The Rights, Obligations, and Problems of 
Inventors (Employee-Employer Relations) 
Strongly threaded through the fabric of the invention-innovation cy­
cle is the interplay between inventor and employer and between in­
ventor and potential user or licensee. These relationships, including 
typical industrial, university, and governmental contract provisions, 
are herein set forth. Because the appropriation of inventions is a dif­
ﬁcult matter to prove – though it happens every day – reference is 
made to one of the very rare proven instances, one that took several 
decades to resolve – the pioneer piezoelectric circuit inventions. This 
may aid in forewarning the inventor of the pitfalls in his path and 
in encouraging business and government to recognize rather than to 
circumvent or try to destroy the proprietary position of independent 
inventors. 
In this era of conformity and considerable abdication of the right to negotiate 
employment terms and conditions, engineers and applied scientists appear to 
know little about their obligations to employers or to the ﬁrms who hire them 
as consultants, especially in the matter of inventions and patents. It may be 
in order, therefore, ﬁrst to deal brieﬂy with some general principles of law, 
and then to examine the policies of some of our leading institutions, industrial, 
educational, and governmental, as well as speciﬁc current contract provisions. 
Whether an agreement between an employer and an employee relating to the 
disposition of patents and inventions is oral or in writing does not matter. Long 
ago, in England, a so-called Statute of Frauds 1 was enacted for the purpose 
of preventing litigation in cases almost impossible to resolve, involving certain 
kinds of oral contracts. The plaintiﬀwould allege the terms of an oral agreement, 
and the defendant would deny those terms. There was no written evidence to 
prove the contentions of either side. How could the court resolve the dispute? 
The Statute of Frauds, therefore, made certain kinds of contracts unenforceable, 
unless in writing. American law has adopted this Statute of Frauds, but an 
129 Chas. II. 
65 

66 
Create or Perish 
oral agreement in which an employee undertakes to assign his invention to his 
employer is not included in the oral agreements that the courts will refuse to 
enforce under the Statute. They will enforce it if it can be proved to exist 2 . 
While an actual assignment of a patent must conform to a speciﬁc statutory 
provision that requires a writing, the understanding between employer and em­
ployee as to who is to own the invention or patent may be oral. Now, how do 
you prove the oral agreement? One way is to examine the relation between and 
the conduct of the parties, which may cast light upon the rights of the several 
parties. The mere relation of employer and employee does not, of itself, mean 
that the employee is obligated to assign his invention to the employer. 
As an illustration, if one is employed by a corporation as a sales engineer or as 
a secretary, and makes inventions extremely useful to the employer, including, 
even, improvements upon the employer’s products, those inventions are the 
employee’s property, in the absence of an understanding to the contrary. And it 
makes no diﬀerence what kind of employer is involved. The employer may be a 
corporation, an individual, a university, or the United States Government. The 
last situation was decided by the Supreme Court 3: 
An employee, performing all the duties assigned to him in his depart­
ment of service, may exercise his inventive faculties in any direction 
he chooses, with the assurance that whatever invention he may thus 
conceive and perfect is his individual property. 
Why is this so? Perhaps the best answer is another illustration. 
Let us 
suppose that a man is employed as a mill carpenter. He receives his salary in 
return for performing duties as a carpenter. It so happens, however, that he is 
observant and thoughtful, and one day has an inspiration as to how to make a 
new type of ﬂoor rack, which could well be used even in his employer’s business. 
Should this invention belong to the employer for either legal or moral reasons? 
Certainly the employer did not include inventing as one of the carpenter’s duties, 
and he certainly had not paid the carpenter for using his inventive abilities. 
Now this is the test. Was the employee being paid for the purpose of making 
inventions? 
Were his duties merely those of carpenter or was he employed 
speciﬁcally to make inventions? 
In just such a case the court held: 
It is true that at the time he made and disclosed the invention to the 
defendant, ... [he] was one of its employees. His work, however, was 
that of mill carpenter. It had nothing whatever to do with ﬂoor racks 
or ﬂoor rack hinges. In no sense can it be said that his invention 
was made in the course of his employment 4 . 
If the understanding is that an employee is a sales engineer, a secretary, 
a director, and that he is employed to perform the customary duties of such 
2Dalzell v. Dueber Manf. Co., 149 U.S. 315, 320. 
3Solomons v. U.S., 137 U.S. 342. 
4Massie v. Fruit Growers Express Co., 31 F. 2d 463, 466. 

67 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
employment, this is not an understanding that the employee is expected to 
invent. In the absence of further rights deﬁned by contract between the parties, 
anything such an employee may invent is his own property, no matter how he 
was stimulated to make the invention. This is the general rule of law. 
It has previously been pointed out that sometimes government oﬃcials in 
the United States think they should have special rights that others do not have. 
This kind of tactic has been rejected by prior Supreme Courts 5: 
The government has no more power to appropriate a man’s property 
invested in a patent than it has to take his property invested in real 
estate; nor does the mere fact that an inventor is at the time of his 
invention in the employ of the government transfer to it any title to, 
or interest in it. 
This is important, because we shall see very shortly what the government short­
sightedly demands today by way of special contract, both from direct employees 
and from people working under contract for the government. 
Now, let us consider a slightly diﬀerent situation. Let us suppose another 
case of an individual who is not employed for the purpose of inventing, but who 
does, nevertheless, make an invention. Assume, also, that he uses his employer’s 
facilities and the services of other fellow employees to perfect this invention. Is 
it still the inventor’s property? Yes – but this time the employer is contributing 
something to further the invention. Under such circumstances, a so-called “shop 
right” for the employer is created: the employer acquires a nonexclusive, royalty­
free, irrevocable, personal license to use the invention himself. He cannot give 
this license to anyone else; it is personal with him, and he may use the invention 
royalty-free. The invention, however, still belongs to the employee. 
Consider now a situation involving an employee of the United States Gov­
ernment. The employee is a naval oﬃcer, and his duties involve devising plans 
to protect the Philippines. If he ﬁnds a method and apparatus for adapting 
torpedoes to airplanes, the question arises whether his assigned duties implied 
making inventions such as this. If it does, the invention belongs to the govern­
ment. At the very least, however, these facts 
establish an irrevocable license in the government to the use of plain­
tiﬀ’s invention and patent 6 . 
In another case 7, an industrial chemist employed by the Public Health 
Service was relieved of his duties so that he might try to solve a particular 
problem at the Edgewood Arsenal; but he was still paid his regular salary. This 
is not the case of an invention made by an employee whose duties of employment 
do not contemplate conceiving and perfecting an invention. In such a case, the 
court reiterated, “the rule is that the invention is the property of the employee.” 
Nor is this a case where the only claim of the employer arises out of the fact 
5See above, fn. 3. 
6Moﬀett v. Riske, 51 F. 2d 868, 870. 
7Houghton v. U.S., 23 F. 2d 386. 

68 
Create or Perish 
that the employee used the property of his employer and the services of other 
employees to develop his invention, and has assented to the employer’s use of 
the latter. Here, the court again reiterated, “the invention is the property of 
the employee, subject to an irrevocable license on the part of the employer to 
use it”; that is, a “shop right.” 
The case presented here is rather that of an employee who makes an invention 
while employed to conduct experiments for the purpose of making it. 
The 
court drew no distinction between work for the Public Health Service and that 
performed at the Edgewood Arsenal and paid for by the government. Thus, 
concluded the court, 
he did merely that which he was being paid his salary to do. Un­
der such circumstances, we think there can be no doubt that his 
invention is the property of his employer, the United States. 
It is interesting to contrast this case with that involving two engineer em­
ployees of the Radio Section of the Bureau of Standards 8 . These men were 
assigned to various radio-research projects for the government. They conceived 
an idea in the very same radio ﬁeld that was of use in commercial equipment, 
namely of constructing a power pack for operating from the mains to supply 
plate voltage for radio receivers without resort to B-batteries. They obtained 
patents for this invention and granted an exclusive license thereunder to the Du­
bilier Condenser Corporation, but reserving to the government a nonexclusive 
license, because of their use of government facilities for perfecting this inven­
tion. The government, believing that it was entitled to complete ownership of 
the patents, not just a nonexclusive free license, brought suit to obtain a court 
decree to such eﬀect. As the court explained: 
The United States is not content with such licenses and seeks in 
these three suits ... to obtain a decree compelling the defendant’s 
right, title, and interest in the patents. 
The test applied by the court was whether or not the inventions arose as a result 
of the employment of the engineers to solve certain problems for the government. 
The court concluded that their superior had given no speciﬁc instruction to 
engage in any research problem involving the inventions in controversy. That 
is the important point. While the engineers were instructed, as part of their 
employment, to engage in certain research projects and problems in the radio 
ﬁeld, these had nothing to do with eliminating batteries in radios. The court 
found, accordingly, that 
the most that can be said is that Lowell and Dunmore were per­
mitted by Dr. Dellinger, after the inventions had been brought to 
his attention, to pursue their work in the laboratory and perfect the 
inventions which had theretofore been made by them. 
8U.S. v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 49 F. 2d 306. 

69 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
The court refused to hold that all patents of research workers in the Radio 
Section of the Bureau of Standards belong to the United States, unless there was 
a special agreement. Only those patents dealing with inventions made within 
the speciﬁc scope of the employment would become government property. 
5.1 
University and Government Relations 
In the light of these principles of law, it is in order to examine the manner in 
which various educational and business entities contract with their employees. 
Consider ﬁrst Harvard University. Harvard has adopted the attitude, fully con­
sistent with the general law, that a student or a professor is not employed nor 
given facilities for the purpose of inventing, and so any inventions that he may 
make become his own property, which he may do with as he desires. There is, 
however, one exception adopted under President Lowell’s time under the impe­
tus of a certain unpleasantness in connection with the respirator invention of Dr. 
Philip Drinker. No member of the university may now take out a patent that 
is concerned primarily with the ﬁeld of public health or therapeutics without 
the consent of the President and Fellow of Harvard College (the legal name of 
the governing body of the university). While embarrassment may be created 
in other ﬁelds, apparently nothing is quite so touchy, from the public relations 
angle, as public health. 
In connection with government contracts, however, Harvard’s policy is con­
siderably modiﬁed. 
The United States Government requires in its contracts 
with Harvard that the latter assume certain obligations, among them that its 
staﬀ and other people working at Harvard under government contracts shall 
grant the government certain rights. The general Harvard-employee agreement, 
in connection with work under a government contract, commences as follows: 
In order to enable Harvard University to fulﬁll its obligation under 
Contract between the President and Fellows of Harvard College and 
the United States Government and as a condition of my employment. 
... 
Then comes a term used over and over again in government contracts – “sub­
ject invention.” Most government departments require that if, during the per­
formance of a contract, an employee under the contract conceives an invention 
for the ﬁrst time, or ﬁrst actually reduces it to practice by constructing and 
operating it successfully under the contract, the government shall have a free 
right to practice that invention and to have the invention made for it by other 
people. Hence, in this employee agreement, a so-called “subject invention” is 
deﬁned in the following terms: 
Any invention, improvement, or discovery (whether or not patentable) 
conceived or ﬁrst actually reduced to practice by me ... either (A) in 
the performance of work called for or required under said contract, 
or (B) in the performance of ... work ... which was done upon an 
understanding in writing that a contract would be awarded. 

70 
Create or Perish 
In connection with such invention, the employee agrees and thereby grants 
to the United States Government irrevocable, nonexclusive, non­
transferable and royalty-free license to practice, and cause to be 
practiced by or for the Government throughout the world, each 
“Subject Invention.” 
The employee also agrees to disclose the invention promptly to his contracting 
oﬃcer. Under this particular contract, the employee has an option 9 either to 
ﬁle the patent application himself or to give the government the opportunity to 
do so. The employee may thus have the commercial nongovernmental rights to 
his invention if he exercises the ﬁrst option. 
It will be recalled that certain bars to obtaining a patent reside in the pub­
lication of the invention, or public use or sale in this country of the invention, 
more than a year before the application is ﬁled. Under this government con­
tract, therefore, the employee agrees to notify the project director, not later 
than eight months after any such publication, public use, or sale of his inven­
tion, that he does not intend to ﬁle an application. The government will then 
have four months in which to ﬁle an application, if so minded. Furthermore the 
government demands the right to reproduce copyrightable material, data, plans, 
speciﬁcations, without any interference whatsoever; and such rights are granted 
together with the patent licenses under these contracts. A similar agreement is 
executed by the project director himself, the terms of the employee agreement 
being directly incorporated by reference into his own. 
Now let us turn to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The Institute 
has a little diﬀerent philosophy. It concurs with Harvard only to the extent that 
inventions or developments made by the staﬀ members, and not related to any 
Institute program of research with which the members may be concerned and 
to which the Institute does not contribute any funds, 
shall be the exclusive property of the individual producing the inven­
tion or development. The Institute will not construe the payment 
of salary or the provision of normal academic environment as con­
stituting grounds for equity by the Institute in such invention. 
Formerly, if a staﬀ member or student made an invention in which the Insti­
tute had an equity, patent applications were usually ﬁled through the Research 
Corporation of New York City, a nonproﬁt organization that endeavors to pro­
mote inventions in order to obtain funds for further research. Net income from 
the inventions, after expenses, was divided equally between the Research Cor­
poration and the Institute, the latter employing such receipts to further its 
own educational and research policies. The inventor normally received 12 per 
cent of the gross royalties that the Research Corporation negotiated under the 
invention. 
At present, arrangements with the Research Corporation have been termi­
nated, and it remains to be seen what new policies will be adopted. The actual 
9Army, Navy, and Air Force contracts. 

71 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
paucity of patents stemming from the millions of dollars spent in research at 
M.I.T. should cause consideration over the kind of policy that will stimulate 
the staﬀ to carry new discoveries and techniques to the patentable invention 
stage. As at Harvard, the Institute staﬀ must execute the previously discussed 
invention and copyright agreements, in connection with government contracts. 
A little diﬀerent situation arises in connection with contracts with the Atomic 
Energy Commission. It will be recalled that the law prohibits the granting of 
patents in the ﬁeld of atomic energy when those patents relate primarily to the 
production of ﬁssionable material, processes, or instrumentalities used in the 
production of such material, or in weapons themselves. Consequently, the AEC 
takes a somewhat stronger position and declines to let the inventor himself ﬁle 
for a patent. Instead, it claims the right to decide who shall own the invention. 
Under an AEC patent clause, therefore, the following provision is set forth: 
Whenever any such invention or discovery results from such work 
paid for in whole or in part from Commission funds ... the Com­
mission shall have the sole power to determine whether or not and 
where a patent application shall be ﬁled. 
Even if the contractor spends his own money under an AEC contract to make 
an invention, the AEC demands certain rights. Under those circumstances, the 
Commission 
shall retain at least a nonexclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free license 
under said invention, discovery, application for patent. 
Under the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, the administra­
tor, through appropriate determinations and unless he waives the government’s 
rights, is empowered to claim for the United States the exclusive right to inven­
tion under this program. If these restrictions remain, only history can record 
whether American industry and the American inventor will be actually stimu­
lated and challenged by these provisions, or by the system of monetary awards 
for signiﬁcant scientiﬁc or technical contributions to aeronautical and space 
activities, that Section 306 of the Act empowers the administrator to grant. 
Recent congressional hearings have not, in my view, resulted in any real change 
of attitude. 
5.2 
Summary of Current Governmental Agency Regulations Concerning Patents 
The Department of Defense, as provided by Section IX of the Armed Services 
Procurement Regulations, acquires a royalty-free, nonexclusive license to make 
and have any inventions arising under its research and development contracts, 
and acquires no license or other patent rights on contracts involving the delivery 
of supplies or products. Similar policies govern contracts of the Veterans’ Ad­
ministration, the Post Oﬃce Department (which agrees not to use its license to 
compete with the contractor or its commercial licensees), and the General Ser­
vices Administration. Under the Research and Marketing Act, the Department 

72 
Create or Perish 
of Agriculture requires that inventions resulting from its research and develop­
ment contracts be either dedicated to the public or assigned to the government 
for the issuance of royalty-free, nonexclusive licenses to qualiﬁed parties. 
The Department of Health, Education and Welfare reserves the right of 
the government to determine the ownership and the disposition of inventions 
ﬂowing from its research and development contracts. In the case of industrial 
research contracts in the ﬁeld of cancer chemotherapy, on the other hand, the 
right to patent may be left with the contractor, but with that right vested in 
the Surgeon General to protect the public interest, as, for example, by assuring 
royalty-free, nonexclusive licenses to own the public. 
Nonproﬁt institutional 
contractors may also own patents on inventions arising under a research and 
development contract, subject to stipulations necessary to protect the public 
interest. 
While the Department of the Interior has a present policy of attempting 
to have patents assigned to the government, it will, in the case of recalcitrant 
contractors, accept a royalty free, irrevocable, nonexclusive license. The Depart­
ment of Commerce also follows a ﬂexible course as to whether the government is 
to own patents or obtain a royalty-free nonexclusive license. In the case of Mar­
itime Administration research and development contracts, the same provision is 
applied to marine research, but the patent provisions of the Atomic Energy Act 
of 1946, as amended, are employed where nuclear material or atomic energy is 
involved. That Act, under which the Atomic Energy Commission also operates, 
requires the retention by the government of the sole power to determine and 
dispose of patent rights. 
The National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, previously alluded to, was 
modeled after the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, as amended, and requires even 
more broadly that the Administration itself shall be deemed to have made or 
conceived any invention or discovery “made or conceived under any contract, 
subcontract, arrangement, or other relationship with the Administrator, regard­
less of whether the contract or arrangement involved the expenditure of funds by 
the Administrator.” 
Merely discussing an idea with the Administrator would, if this Space Act 
provision is literally interpreted, be a “relationship” or “arrangement” that 
would vest all rights in the government. 
It is small wonder that many rep­
resentatives of American industry, science, and law have protested this wording 
of the statute 10, and that proposed revisions are under consideration. Indeed, 
the principal ﬁnding of a recent thorough two-year study by the Denver Re­
search Institute is that only negligible commercial inventions have spun oﬀfrom 
the multi-million-dollar NASA research programs: about six patent applications 
ﬁled each year of the life of NASA for developments from NASA-funded con­
tracts. How long does government have to wait to learn that few companies 
with real competence and backbone will produce under this kind of so-called 
stimulus? 
10“Property Rights and Inventions made under Federal Space Research Contracts,” Hearings 
before the House Subcommittee on Patents and Scientiﬁc Inventions of the Committee on 
Science and Astronautics, 85th Congress, 1st Session (1959). 

73 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
An analogy to Soviet philosophy is striking evident, as discussed in a Con­
gressional report on proposed revisions 11: 
Contrasts were drawn between the American patent system and its 
operation, on the one hand, and the Soviet patent system and its 
method of operation, on the other. The argument goes about as 
follows: Whereas the American patent system depends upon free 
and open competition for commercial markets, the Soviet system 
depends upon a determination by the Government as to the eco­
nomic or commercial necessity of producing an article as a basis for 
its industrial operation. There is some similarity between the so-
called patents of the Soviet system and the wording of sections 305 
and 306 of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (which 
are substantially the same as patent and compensation or award 
provisions of the Atomic Energy Act). The Government ownership 
provisions of the NASA and AEC statutes, if carried out literally, 
would correspond to the “public patents” provision of the Soviet 
system in that there can be no private commercialization of the in­
ventions with Government approval. The “compensation or award” 
provisions of the NASA and AEC statutes correspond to the “private 
patent” provisions of the Russian system in that the inventor will 
not be rewarded unless the Government allows commercialization or 
use of the invention in the interest of the public. 
5.3 
Industrial Employment Agreements 
Let us now turn to industrial organizations. Two typical illustrations of employer­
employee contracts are provided by the General Electric Company and the Radio 
Corporation of America. The General Electric Company does not treat invent­
ing engineers as a class separate from other employees. It provides a sweeping 
provision “in consideration of my employment in any capacity” If one wants 
the position, therefore, he agrees that “all inventions made or conceived by me 
. . . from the time of entering the Company’s employ until I leave” will be the 
sole and exclusive property of General Electric. There is a qualiﬁcation, how­
ever. Only two ﬁelds of invention are so included, namely inventions which are 
along the “lines of business, work or investigations of the Company . . . or which 
result from or are suggested by any work which I may do for or on behalf of 
the Company.” The employee then agrees to assist GE in obtaining the patent 
and to keep adequate written records of the invention, the records to remain 
the property of the company. 
Another important clause covers matters with which a company, as distin­
guished from a university, is vitally concerned. Some things, as I have previously 
noted, are not susceptible of patent protection, or there is no purpose in patent­
ing them. Know-how and trade secrets are in this category. The general rule 
11“Proposed Revisions to the Patent Section, National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958,” 
march 8, 1960 (Mimeo). 

74 
Create or Perish 
is that a conﬁdential relationship exists between employer and employee, and 
that the employee is not free to disclose trade secrets, even after leaving the 
employer. 
In an interesting recent case, for example, the makers of Rise instant shaving 
cream, the Carter Company, sued the Colgate Company for patent infringement 
and for unfair competition in hiring one of the key employees (the inventor) 
away from the Carter Company and using the trade secrets that the employee 
had acquired 12 . The court not only sustained the patent, but also awarded 
attorney’s fees and costs because of the wanton character of Colgate’s action in 
hiring away an employee and using trade secrets that he had obtained in his 
prior employment. 
In order to have this protection in writing, and not be compelled to rely 
on the general rule alone, however, the General Electric Company employment 
agreement states that, as a condition of employment, the employee agrees “not 
to disclose at any time either during or subsequent to my employment, any in­
formation, knowledge or data of the Company . . . relating to formulas, business 
processes, methods, machines, manufactures, compositions, inventions, discov­
eries or otherwise, which is of a secret or conﬁdential nature 13.” 
In the second example, the corresponding employment agreement of the 
Radio Corporation of America does not apply to all employees. The patent 
agreement is restricted to employment in a capacity where the employee is 
“reasonably expected to make new contributions and inventions.” So if one is 
employed as a janitor or a secretary at RCA, he still has the common-law right 
to inventions, even if stimulated by what he has seen in the RCA laboratory. 
The employee who is expected to invent agrees to assign all inventions, made 
during employment, that relate to the business or interests of the company, 
or that result from tasks assigned by the company. In order to safeguard its 
obligations under government contracts, however, RCA requires that even if it 
employs a person in an occupation where he is not expected to invent, and where 
there is normally no obligation to assign inventions, RCA obtains rights under 
two exceptions; if the employment is under a government contract, and if the 
work is intended to lead to the granting of a government contract. The RCA 
agreement, like that of other companies, excludes all inventions made prior to 
employment with the company. 
A few words now about the way in which the employer compensates the 
inventor for his inventions. Recently a very liberal policy was reported to have 
been adopted by a relatively small company 14, that not only pays a token 
sum of $25 when patent application is ﬁled and another $50 when the patent 
is granted, but also agrees to pay to the employee, as a stimulus to invention, 
royalties starting with 10 per cent of the net cash royalties that may come from 
licensing others. Most companies, of course, have no such policy. GE pays a 
bonus of $100, partly in cash and party in company stock, upon the ﬁling of the 
12Carter v. Colgate Palmolive Company, 230 F. 2d 855. 
13The terms “conﬁdential” and “secret” are used in the ordinary sense and not in the 
government security sense. 
14Electronic Manufacturing (a monthly newssheet), Oct., 1957, p. 115. 

75 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
application. RCA also pays $100 upon the ﬁling of the application. This is based 
upon the belief that it is frequently impossible to determine what important 
contributions may have been made to the development by employees other than 
those whom the law identiﬁes as “inventors.” To attempt to approximate an 
evaluation for “inventions” only and to make individual payments based on 
such evaluations to “inventors” could, it is stated, result in inequities and could 
hamper team play, a result which, in turn, would slow down progress. Instead, 
reward comes at GE by promotion in position and salary. 
Another interesting topic is the situation when engineers and applied scien­
tists approach outside companies, asking them to consider ideas and inventions 
with a possible view to negotiating a license agreement. Two illustrations will 
suﬃce to show the reason for the present attitude of the large companies. 
An individual suggested an advertising idea to the manufacturer of Chester­
ﬁeld cigarettes, indicating that he expected reasonable compensation if the com­
pany used it. The company never replied, but several years later its advertising 
agency, which purportedly had never seen the submitter’s idea, hit upon a very 
similar proposal. The company adopted this proposal and was thereupon sued 
by the original submitted for misappropriation of his idea. A sizable jury verdict 
for the plaintiﬀ was sustained by the Supreme Court of Indiana. 
The second case is that of a manufacturer of three-way light bulbs. In order 
to avoid adverse publicity, and because it was diﬃcult to prove independent 
conception, it settled a suit out of court for a reported $150,000 with a stranger 
to it, but who had some years earlier voluntarily sent it a similar idea. 
In order to protect themselves, therefore, many companies will absolutely 
refuse to receive any disclosures from outsiders, unless the disclosure is covered 
by a ﬁled patent application, or unless the submitter agrees that there is no 
conﬁdential relation involved in the disclosure and that he will rely upon his 
patent rights alone. Only under these conditions will these companies receive 
for examination an outsider’s invention. 
5.4 
The Problems and Dangers in Negotiation – One of the Rare Proven Cases 
The dangers inherent in making such disclosure need examination, however, as 
well as the shameful record of certain large companies in dealing improperly 
with eminent men of science and of the engineering profession, in order that the 
risks involved may be understood. 
Professor Frederick V. Hunt describes some of these risks in resume form 
15 . His account, which constitutes an important part of the history of radio, 
will now be supplemented by additional information relating to past experiences 
in connection with inventions submitted to the Western Electric Company and 
to the International Telephone and Telegraph Company. These are among the 
very, very few instances where such conduct was actually exposed; and even 
here it took several decades to prove. 
We shall begin with the piezoelectric crystal and circuit inventions of Pro­
fessor Walter G. Cady, formerly of Wesleyan University. Dr. Cady’s name is 
15Frederick V. Hunt, Electroacoustics, pp. 23 - 25. 

76 
Create or Perish 
extremely well known in the electronics ﬁeld as one of the pioneers in stabiliz­
ing electric oscillations with the aid of quartz crystals. During World War I, 
he was one of a number of American scientists engaged in trying to solve the 
submarine problem. He heard about the work of Professor Paul Langevin, in 
France, who had found that he could employ Curie’s discovery of piezoelectric­
ity for submarine detection: if sound energy from a submarine strikes a quartz 
plate, the piezoelectric eﬀect will produce a small voltage that can be detected. 
Conversely, if an alternating voltage is applied to the crystal, the crystal will 
be forced to vibrate and to transmit sound into the water. This was the kind 
of apparatus with which Cady and a number of others were concerned at New 
London. 
After the war, Cady continued his investigations with these quartz devices 
and made several inventions which were lumped together into two patents 16 . 
When it was appreciated that more than one invention actually was involved in 
each of these patents, applications for so-called “reissue patents” were ﬁled. 
A reissue patent may be granted under the following circumstances. If one 
has, through inadvertence, made a mistake in his patent, or has failed to appre­
ciate or understand the true scope of the invention, he may in certain instances 
reﬁle that patent. This does not result in extending the patent “monopoly” 
since the reissue patent dates from the issue of the original patent, but at least 
the patentee will have an accurate patent. 
This is what happened to Cady, so that his original patents were released as a 
group of reissue patents 17 . Included in these inventions were what have become 
known as the crystal stabilizer and the crystal-controlled oscillator. Figure 6 
shows in Fig. 3 of the patent drawing an electron tube 4 having an input tuned 
circuit comprising coil 7 and condenser 9 and an output circuit having a coil 
8 coupled to the coil 7 to form an “Armstrong oscillator,” the frequency of 
which is controlled primarily by the values of the coils and the condenser. Cady 
discovered that if a piece of quartz were connected into this circuit at 12, then, 
in a very narrow range of adjustment of this oscillating circuit, a phenomenon 
took place in the circuit (region 4 in Figs. 5 and 6 of the patent drawing) where 
the crystal seemed to lock the frequency. If the condenser 9 was adjusted a bit 
further, the crystal lost control, so that the crystal could stabilize the oscillator 
only over a very limited range. That is the stabilizer invention. 
Cady also found that if he employed a long bar of quartz, as shown at 12 in 
Fig. 2, connecting one end of the quartz to the input 1-4 of the ﬁrst tube of a 
train of ampliﬁers and the other end of the quartz to the output 5 of the last 
ampliﬁer, the quartz bar 12 would itself mechanically couple energy between 
output and input, and sustain oscillations without the use of coils and con­
densers, and at a frequency controlled and determined by the dimensions of the 
16U.S. Patents Nos. 1,450,246 (April 3, 1923) and 1,472,583 (Oct. 30, 1923). 
17Reissue Patents Nos. 
17,245 (four-electrode crystal stabilizer); 17,246 (four-electrode 
crystal oscillator); 17,247 (crystal stabilizer for “Armstrong” oscillator); 17,355 (piezoelectric 
crystal resonator); 17,356 (piezoelectric crystal wavemeter); 17,357 (crystal resonator cou­
pled to another medium); 17,358 (ﬁlter embodying piezoelectric crystal); and 17,358 (crystal 
resonator coupling two circuits). 

77 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
bar of quartz. In view of the inherent necessary size of the four-electrode crystal 
bar, the frequency of oscillations was not very high. This was, nonetheless, the 
ﬁrst crystal-controlled oscillator. Drawing of Cady's patent.
Fig. 5.1: Cady’s patent drawing. 
(This image is public domain and is not 
protected by copyright.) 

78 
Create or Perish 
And so, very excited about these developments, Cady went to the logical 
corporate giants in the ﬁeld of communications and solicited the interest of 
the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the Western Electric 
Company, Inc., in his inventions. He freely disclosed all of his patent application, 
permitted the company engineers, including his former student, H. D. Arnold, 
the director of research, to visit his laboratory at Wesleyan University on several 
occasions, and freely gave the company samples of his apparatus. Cady expected 
that the company was evaluating this material in order to decide whether or 
not to use his invention and thus to take a license. Let us see, however, the 
dilemma in which Cady soon found himself. 
Only recently has it been admitted 18 that, as far back as June 1924, 
the American Telephone and Telegraph Company began utilizing a quartz-
crystal oscillator to obtain constant-frequency oscillations for a radio trans­
mitter. Cady’s aﬃdavit in the record before the District Court in Pierce v. 
American Communications Company, Inc.. 19 says: 
The engineers of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company 
and Western Electric Company, Incorporated, concealed this fact 
from me, and, on the contrary, led me to believe that piezoelectric 
crystals were not of any commercial value to them. 
The letters Cady has received appear as Plaintiﬀ’s Exhibit CXXI in this 
suit. They state that the company had no interest in the inventions, though the 
facts now show that they had already appropriated them, unknown to Cady. 
As if this were not enough, Cady continues: 
I was suddenly plunged into the said Interference 50, 545, Cady v. 
Nicolson, under the claim that the said Alexander McLean Nicolson 
had made all three of my inventions . . . long before I did 20 . 
And Cady further stated that this interference was based upon claims that 
were copied in exactly the form that they were in at the time I gave 
said copies of my patent applications to Dr. Arnold, in 1921. 
“Concealment” and “interference” were thus the rewards that this eminent man 
of science received from this gigantic company with which he had been dealing 
frankly and freely. 
Now, on what basis did the Western Electric and American Telephone and 
Telegraph attorneys claim that Nicolson had made these inventions? The record 
shows that, upon Arnold’s return from a Washington conference in 1917, where 
the work of Langevin with piezoelectric crystals had been disclosed by the French 
and British to a group of American scientists, Nicolson was set upon the problem 
of developing Langevin’s work. He did make some original contributions with 
18Raymond A. Heising, Quartz Crystals for Electrical Circuits, Van Nostrand, 1946. 
19111 F. Supp. 181. 
20Nicolson was an engineer in the employ of Western Electric Company, Inc. 

79 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
Rochelle salt crystals as Hunt’s account explained 21 . Figure 7 shows part of 
Nicolson’s original patent, the application for which was ﬁled April 10, 1918. 
21Frederick V. Hunt, Electroacoustics. p. 52. 

80 
Create or Perish Drawing from part of Nicolson's original patent.
Fig. 5.2: A part of Nicolson’s original patent. 
Claim 12 reads, “Means for 
translating acoustical energy into electrical energy, a space current device hav­
ing a control member, and a connection between said means and said device, 
said means comprising a substance capable of generating electromotive force in 
response to a change in pressure.” (This image is public domain and is not 
protected by copyright.) 

81 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
In Fig. 12 of the patent, a Rochelle salt crystal 53 is placed in a tunnel near the 
enemy trench. The crystal is connected to a pair of earphones 54 so that the en­
emy movements can be detected. As one modiﬁcation, the crystal may modulate 
an alleged electric oscillator (Fig. 11 of the patent), and an antenna may trans­
mit the oscillation signals to a remote receiver, instead of using wires between 
the Rochelle salt crystal picking up vibrations and the earphones. That was 
Nicolson’s original case. One of his ﬁrst claims (12) speciﬁed the combination of 
crystal means comprising a substance capable of generating electromotive force 
in response to a change of pressure for translating acoustical energy into electri­
cal energy, the space-current oscillator tube 50, and a connection between the 
translating means and the tube. But how can this possibly bear upon Cady’s 
crystal-controlled oscillator, where the crystal is used not to pick up sounds, 
but, on the contrary, to determine and generate the oscillation frequency itself? 
How can there be an interference? 
The American Telephone and Telegraph attorneys, having inspected Cady’s 
patent applications before permitting the Nicolson patent to issue, split this Fig. 
11 out, and made it the subject matter of a so-called “divisional applications.” 
That is, where there is more than one invention disclosed in an application, 
the additional invention may be divided out and made the subject matter of a 
separate application, being, however, entitled to the ﬁling date of the original 
application. So the American Telephone and Telegraph Company now had an 
application with an early 1918 ﬁling date, showing an oscillator and a crys­
tal, though, in the words of Judge Ford, in the case of Pierce v. American 
Communications Company, Inc., the original Nicolson disclosure 
shows only the use of the crystal as the equivalent of a telephone 
transmitter or a microphone. He teaches nothing about the control 
of the frequency of the oscillations. 
Armed with an eﬀective early-date application showing an oscillator and a 
crystal, irrespective of its operation as originally described and intended, the 
American Telephone and Telegraph attorneys copied Cady’s claims from his 
patent applications, and so provoked the before-mentioned interference. 
As 
Judge Ford pointed out, it was not until “after Cady had made his disclosures” 
that the Nicolson circuit allegedly became a crystal-controlled oscillator. 
So Professor Cady found himself enmeshed in a legal contest with the gi­
ant American Telephone and Telegraph. He thereupon sold out to the Radio 
Corporation of America. Hunt explains how, through improper handing, the 
claims that belonged to Professor Cady were later awarded to Nicolson. Thus, 
one ﬁnds in the Nicolson patent the claims for Cady’s invention, namely a de­
vice where the circuit is stably nonoscillatory when not under the control of 
the crystal vibrator, and where the frequency of oscillations, when the system 
oscillates, is stably determined by the frequency of vibration of the vibrator. 
The signiﬁcance of that improper handling is evident from Judge Ford’s later 
determination in Pierce v. American Communications Company, Inc. 
Indeed it appears that although Nicolson may have believed he had 

82 
Create or Perish 
a crystal-controlled oscillator, in fact he did not. Professor Cady 
showed by his later experiments with the Nicolson circuit that os­
cillations were not controlled by the crystal but were determined by 
the other elements of the circuit. The evidence of Professor Edward 
L. Bowles’ aﬃdavit is to the eﬀect that the function of the crystal in 
the Nicolson circuit is to modulate the oscillations (the only function 
he originally claims for them, and the basis for his earlier patent) 
and not to control their frequency. 
Defendant has introduced pages from Nicolson’s note book written 
in 1918 . . . Dr. F. W. Kranz, who signed these pages as witness, 
testiﬁed that Nicolson at that time said nothing to indicate he had 
discovered that crystals could be used to control the frequency of the 
oscillations, nor did Nicolson make any such claim when he originally 
ﬁled his application in 1918. 
5.5 
Professor Cady Was Not Alone 
The A T & T, however, was not partial only to Professor Cady. 
Take the 
application of Professor Langevin, who was thousands of miles away in France. 
Langevin’s application showed a quartz crystal driven by alternating-current os­
cillations in a coil to generate sounds. Conversely, sound waves striking the crys­
tal would be converted into electric energy and received. This was Langevin’s 
invention. 
So into the Nicolson application went a claim reading, “An oscillating cir­
cuit comprising a piezoelectric device.” This is, of course, what Langevin had 
invented. An interference was declared. Langevin complained that French rep­
resentatives, Majors M. Fabry and H. Abraham, had disclosed his invention to 
a whole group of scientists, including Dr. Arnold and others of the Western 
Electric Company, as before mentioned, before Nicolson’s 1918 ﬁling date. But 
again A T & T prevailed. Nicolson was awarded priority, because Langevin’s 
long-distance stipulated proofs were not technically suﬃcient. Thus, the Court 
of Customs and Patent Appeals 22 ruled: 
The record in the case so far as the testimony on behalf of both par­
ties is concerned is very informal and very unsatisfactory . . . deﬁciency 
occasioned by an inferior record. 
The court was forced to reject as unproved the facts of the actual disclosure at 
the 1917 Washington meetings (as testiﬁed to by Professor Cady in Pierce v. 
American Communications Company, Inc). In the court’s words, quoting the 
Board of Appeals, 
Whether or not Langevin had the invention or had imparted knowl­
edge of it to Fabry or Abraham, the fact remains that no documen­
tary evidence has been produced showing what was disclosed at the 
Washington meeting. 
22110 F. 2d 687, 690. 

83 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
It is extremely signiﬁcant that the A T & T and Western Electric attorneys 
did not use Dr. Frederick W. Kranz, formerly of their employ, as a witness in 
this interference. Dr. Kranz’s statement in Pierce v. American Communications 
Company, Inc., is most revealing: 
In 1918, Nicolson and I occupied adjoining desks. . . . I recall a con­
ference at the laboratory about 1917 in the course of which Dr. 
Crandall informed us of the work of Professor Paul Langevin, of 
France, involving the use of piezoelectric crystals as sound transmit­
ters and receivers. . . . 
Having been successful in appropriating the inventions of Professors Cady 
and Langevin, why should not A T & T attempt to appropriate the commercially 
practical and most important crystal-controlled oscillator inventions of the late 
Professor George Washington Pierce, former Rumford Professor of Physics and 
Gordon McKay Professor of Applied Physics at Harvard? The Pierce oscillator 
is of two principal types (Figure 8): ﬁrst, as shown in Fig. 2 of the patent, 
an appropriate two-electrode crystal 2 connected between the grid 26 and the 
anode or plate 30 of the electron tube 24; and, secondly (Fig. 11 of the patent), 
the two electrode crystal 2 connected between the grid 28 and the ﬁlament or 
cathode 26. 
But Nicolson’s mammoth Rochelle salt crystal for responding to sound waves 
has at least three electrical connections and one can trace some kind of connec­
tion to each of the tube electrodes. Why, therefore, should not Pierce’s inven­
tion, too, be claimed by Western Electric on the basis of the Nicolson application 
and by A T & T on the basis of an application of an A T & T engineer, Bail­
ery? So A T & T copied Pierce’s claims and provoked interferences. This time, 
however, it came up against an applied scientist who was prepared to ﬁght in 
defense of his rights. 
There were years of litigation which ﬁnally culminated in victory for Pierce 
23 . When it appeared that Bailey was beaten, Western Electric urged Nicolson 
as the prior inventor. Pierce’s attorney took the position that A T & T and 
Western Electric were really the same company, the former owning more than 
98 per cent of the stock of the latter. He set out to prove that they had the 
same management control and were, in eﬀect, the same entity. Therefore, since 
Pierce had beaten Bailey (A T & T), he was not compelled to have another suit 
against Western Electric on the Nicolson application. The contention was that 
the matter was res judicate – decided, once and for all. Not long after, an A T 
& T attorney, George E. Folk, visited Cambridge, thrust out his hand, and said 
to Professor Pierce, “Call me George.” 
When the basic Pierce oscillator patent issued, Professor Pierce carefully 
claimed therein only what represented his advance over Cady and he would 
take no claim broad enough to dominate Cady, though I am informed that as a 
result of the settlement with A T & T he could have had any of the oscillator 
claims that later issued in the Nicolson patent. 
23Interference 67, 863, Pierce v. Bailey v. Nicolson. 

84 
Create or Perish 
The Western Electric Company Nicolson patent then issued, with Langevin’s 
claims and Cady’s claims, and, for years A T & T used this patent as a club to 
collect royalties on every crystal-controlled oscillator – collect, that is, except 
from those who knew the real meaning of the Nicolson patent. 
Let me give an illustration. Claim 1 of the Nicolson patent that was taken 
from Professor Langevin, reads: “An oscillating circuit comprising a piezoelec­
tric device.” This claim, in its true history, refers to Langevin’s idea of having 
an oscillating circuit drive a crystal. It has nothing to do with a crystal control­
ling the oscillations itself. And yet, in their licensing policy, the A T & T has 
read this, or tried to read this, on crystal-controlled oscillators. This is what is 
known as “verbal infringement.” The words of the claim sound as if one were 
infringing, but the meaning of the claim, as shown by the ﬁle history, is not the 
same thing. There is, therefore, no infringement. I stress this point because 
very often one cannot tell, merely by reading the claims of a patent, what they 
actually cover. 
In rewriting history a few years ago, through the eyes of the Telephone Com­
pany 24, an eﬀort was made to try to evolve the Pierce oscillator from Nicolson’s 
maze of crystal-modulator connections. In Pierce v. American Communications 
Company, Inc., however, Professor Edward L. Bowles discussed 
the circuit diagrams of page 15 of the Heising text which are labeled 
“Nicolson’s oscillator circuit.” In the interest of accuracy, I point 
out that the alleged Nicolson circuit and its variations shown on 
page 15 do not either accord or agree with the Nicolson circuit of 
patents 1,495,429, ﬁled April 10, 1918; and the alleged divisional 
patent directed to Fig. 11, 2,212,845, ﬁled April 23, 1923. This is 
clear from a mere cursory inspection. 
Professor Bowles explained the details of this and, as stated by Judge Ford, 
showed 
that although Nicolson may have believed he had a crystal-controlled 
oscillator, in fact he did not. 
Judge Ford found, moreover, that 
Nicolson still shows the same whole Rochelle salt crystal of his earlier 
patent, with three electrodes arranged so as to operate as two pairs 
of electrodes. . . . The Pierce oscillator is so designed as to oscillate 
only at the frequency determined by the crystal, the presence of 
which is necessary if the system is to oscillate at all. Nicolson, on 
the other hand, while claiming that his system may oscillate at a 
frequency determined by the natural frequency of the crystal and 
under the control of the crystal, is also careful to point out that by 
proper use of reactances it may also be made to oscillate at some 
24See above, fn. 19. 

85 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems 
other frequency than that determined by the crystal. Clearly, this 
does not purport to be the same thing as the Pierce oscillator. 
. . . Defendant . . . argues that in 1918 Nicolson had already hit upon 
the circuit which Pierce later patented. But these only show that 
in 1918 he was working on circuits which may superﬁcially resemble 
that of Pierce, as do those, for instance, of his earlier patent, which, 
however, discloses only a diﬀerent function and mode of operation of 
the crystal. . . . These pages furnish no warrant for a conclusion that 
Nicolson in 1918 had anticipated what Pierce was later to discover. 
I should now like to recount, apropos of the plight of scientists when bringing 
inventions to our corporate manufacturers, the latest pronouncement relating 
to such activity, this time in connection with the International Telephone and 
Telegraphy Company. And the same Professor Pierce was involved. The deci­
sion is reported in Pierce v. International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation 
25 . Judge Hartshorne of the District Court for the District of New Jersey found 
that 
Following Pierce’s patent applications in the 1920’s or early 1930’s, 
Pierce at I T & T’s request, not only opened up his secret papers to 
I T & T for their examination anent the possibility of its taking out 
a license thereunder, but he also permitted I T & T’s representatives 
to visit his laboratory. In the complaint and at the trial the question 
was raised as to whether Pierce’s disclosures were conﬁdential and 
whether such conﬁdence had been breached by I T & T. 
The court went on to tell the kind of tactics that I T & T promoted: 
I T & T doubtless used every possible means to secrete its circuit 
diagrams from Pierce, who had so freely showed I T & T all he knew 
about his invention. 
And again: 
Here we must bear in mind that, as seen above, I T & T had acted 
in a peculiarly secretive manner, particularly with respect to the 
man who, in previous years, had given it every assistance, in the 
form of access to secret documents and in personal visitations and 
conferences at his laboratory. 
5.6 
Conclusion 
The dilemma facing the inventor who discloses inventions to outside organiza­
tions is thus pointed up by the typical (but rarely proved) speciﬁc experiences 
just recounted. The law, as presently applied, is inadequate; and something 
must be done more properly to protect the rights of inventors. 
25147 F. Supp. 934. 

86 
Create or Perish 
In the next chapter, I shall discuss some of the proposals before Congress for 
improving the patent system and the enforcement of patents by the courts. If 
an eﬀective program can be activated, our corporate giants may be more wary 
about appropriating the inventions of others and wearing the inventors down by 
costly and vexatious litigation. 
Judge Wyzanski, of the Massachusetts Federal District Court, in connection 
with Professor Rudenberg’s electron-microscope patent 26, deplored the condi­
tion of “the individual holder of patents” who is 
at the mercy of large corporate enterprises which could use the in­
vention, decline to accept the inventor’s reasonable oﬀers, allow him 
to sue for infringement and in the end, if beaten in the infringement 
suit, pay him not even a royalty high enough to cover the expenses 
of the litigation. 
To similar eﬀect are the words of Judge Hayes of the District Court for the 
Middle District of North Carolina 27: 
The result is not encouraging to an inventor. Indeed a patent, how­
ever valid and however ﬂagrantly infringed, would be worthless in 
the hands of a person with small means if it had to survive the ob­
stacles which have confronted the patent in suit. This is battle by 
the defense to ignore the patents until a court of last resort compels 
a course otherwise. 
So the time has come for frank talk. If Congress, in these precarious times, 
is anxious to encourage inventors (and I have tried to show herein that many 
of the important advances have come and still do come from individual inven­
tors entirely outside established research laboratories and organizations), then 
Congress must make the inventor more secure at the hands of the potential 
infringers and in the courts. 
26Rudenberg v. Clark, 81 F. Supp. 42, 45. 
27Davis Co. v. Baker-Cammack Hosiery Mills, Inc., 86 F. Supp. 180, 187. 

87 
Rights, Obligations, and Problems Drawing of a part of Pierce's patent.
Fig. 5.3: A part of Pierce’s patent. (This image is public domain and is not 
protected by copyright.) 

88 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 6 
The Future of American Patents 
Recent proposals for improving the patent system are discussed, in­
cluding conﬂicting philosophies in Congress and in the courts. 
A number of proposals have been made to Congress for consideration as 
bases for possible future legislation which may improve the patent system and its 
operation. They may also undo what the courts and other governmental agencies 
have done to dishearten and discourage both inventors and persons with venture 
capital, from taking a bolder approach in exploiting and developing new ﬁelds, 
unless under government direction or some other inherently restricting and ofter 
unimaginative sponsorship. 
6.1 
Previous Suggested Improvements in the Patent System 
Among the scientists who have been active in the ﬁeld of patents is Vannevar 
Bush, wartime director of the Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research and Development. Dr. 
Bush, a number of other scientists, and lawyers haven the initiative in trying 
to recover and increase, in this country, fertile ground for invention and a more 
rapid progress in the development of the useful arts. To this end, an analysis 
and series of proposals has been provided in a study for the Subcommittee on 
Patents of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary 1 . 
Unfortunately, as will later be evident, I do not agree that the underlying 
problems can be solved by the principal proposals that have been advanced; but 
the proponents are to be commended for their initiative, purpose, and sincere 
eﬀort. As part of constructive criticism, moreover, substitute proposals will be 
oﬀered, which I believe can eﬀectively reverse the present unhealthy trend in the 
operation of the patent system. The role of the applied scientist and engineer 
in helping to reverse those trends will also be discussed. 
1Senate Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights, Study 1, p. 
18. 
84th 
Congress, 2d Session (1958). It should also be noted that the Patent Oﬃce would still not be 
equipped to investigate prior use or sale, which are other bars to a “valid” patent grant. 
89 


91 
The Future of American Patents 
nesses, and the nature of the parties are of no consequence in the ultimate result 
of the truly “valid” patent? And if, as stated in earlier chapters, the United 
States Supreme Court is going to call upon the suggestions of Cellini in the six­
teenth century 3 to overthrow a patent in the mid-twentieth century – a patent 
representing an invention that had solved a long-time problem and the solution 
of which no one could see in Cellini except certain Supreme Court judges whom 
Justice Jackson characterized as having a “passion” to strike down patents – we 
might just as well abandon the hope that a more thorough search will result in 
the truly “valid” patent. 
Another illustration is found in a case 4 where the judge had before him 
the very same prior patents that the examiner himself had considered in the 
Patent Oﬃce, and on the basis of which the latter had ruled that invention was 
present. The search, thus, was perfect. The defendant was not able to ﬁnd prior 
art any better than that which the examiner had fully considered. The judge 
admitted that the best prior art had been “cited by the Patent Oﬃce Examiner 
and his allowance of the claims of the Kline patent was a ﬁnding on his part 
that the patents do not disclose a tensioning spring with means of adjustment.” 
The court continued: “With this I do not concur.” And then the judge went 
on to say that all the inventor had done was to employ “familiar applications 
of mechanical skill respecting adjustability.” The court, therefore, on the same 
record as that before the technical patent examiner, reached the conclusion that 
the advance made was due to mere “mechanical skill,” an adjustment that any 
mechanic could have made, and hence lacked the unobviousness for which a 
patent should be granted. 
So long, therefore, as the real test of invention is a matter of the opinion 
as to whether or not what has been done represents a real advance, how can 
this aﬀect the matter of perfect searching? The court can always disagree with 
the Patent Oﬃce opinion, particularly if the court is imbued with the before-
mentioned “passion.” Hence I am convinced that, while more thorough and 
easier searching is a desirable end, Dr. Bush’s hope that this will result in truly 
valid patents is vain. The late Supreme Court Justice Jackson, as previously 
noted, has frankly admitted that “the only patent that is valid is one which this 
Court has not been able to get its hands on.” 
Suﬃce it for present purposes, therefore, to state that if one can now be 
thwarted in court by the writings of Cellini in the sixteenth century, it will 
require not only the detailed cataloging of the mere 11,000,000 documents 
presently accumulated in the Patent Oﬃce, but almost every piece of litera­
ture ever recorded – including the fantastic predictions of science ﬁction 5 . 
6.3 
Opposition Proceedings 
The next proposal made in this Bush study is to set up in this country a system 
of opposition. When the Patent oﬃce intends to grant a patent, it must publish 
3In the Jungerson case. See above, p. 65. 
4Kline v. Creative Textiles Inc., 146 F. Supp. 65. 
5236 F. 2d 713 (1958). 

92 
Create or Perish 
that intention and thereby permit any interested person to oppose the grant by 
presenting evidence to the examiner in the Patent Oﬃce which may dissuade 
him from issuing the patent. In this way, it is hoped, the court will feel that the 
public has had an opportunity to call the attention of the Patent Oﬃce to the 
very best prior art in existence so that, if the Oﬃce should grant the patent, the 
presumption of validity would be strengthened. This proposal, however, is also 
really based upon the hypothesis that the inadequacy of the search is at least one 
principal reason why the courts have thrown out patents. I shall now endeavor 
to show that there is no validity to this hypothesis, and that instituting such an 
opposition proceeding would only delay the issuance of patents and complicate 
further the procedure and expense of trying to obtain a patent in the many 
thousands of cases where there will be no litigation. 
Of sixty decisions of the various Courts of Appeals prior to 1963, in which 
patents were invalidated upon the ground that they did not disclose a suﬃciently 
important advance over what had been done before to warrant such a grant, the 
court speciﬁcally indicated in eight cases that it was invalidating the patent on 
the basis of new art that the Patent Oﬃce had overlooked. In my study of some 
of those cases, moreover, based on my education and experience as a physicist 
and a lawyer, I came to the considered view that the so-called “overlooked” 
patents were actually no more pertinent than the ones actually considered by 
the examiner. As a matter of fact, the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 
remarked that 
it is as reasonable to conclude that a prior art patent not cited was 
considered and cast aside because not pertinent, as to conclude that 
it was inadvertently overlooked 6 . 
The patent examiner cannot possibly cite all the patents that bear on a given 
invention. He picks out what he considers the closest to an anticipation of the 
applicant’s concept, and places on the applicant the burden of demonstrating 
that he has exercised invention. 
In seven of the Court of Appeals decisions mentioned above, moreover, the 
courts were perfectly satisﬁed that the Patent Oﬃce had made a thorough 
search, and so did not rely on any additional prior art to that cited and con­
sidered by the examiner. They just had an opinion diﬀerent from that of the 
Patent Oﬃce as to the matter of invention. 
For the remaining cases of this group of decisions, there is nothing to indi­
cated an inadequate search. 
It does not appear, therefore, that the courts are primarily rejecting patents 
because of inadequate search. How, indeed, can a more exhaustive search solve 
the problem of disagreement between a court and the examiner as to whether a 
given step represents the work of a mere mechanic or of a creative inventor? If 
the reason for opposition proceedings rests upon the supposition that the court 
must be convinced that a thorough search has been made, it seems that the 
underlying hypothesis has been proved fallacious. 
6Helm v. Lake Shore, 107 U.S.P.Q. 313. 

93 
The Future of American Patents 
While all patents represent potential litigation, and should therefore be care­
fully prosecuted by attorneys and closely scrutinized by the Patent Oﬃce, the 
District Courts throughout the land actually adjudicated only about 0.3 per 
cent of all patents during the period from 1948 to 1963. Opposition proceedings 
in every case would have resulted in holding up the issuance of 99.7 per cent of 
the patents for the supposed beneﬁt of three tenths of a per cent. Still, even 
this might be worthwhile if the courts could thereby be persuaded to dispense 
justice fairly and so to contribute to a constructive and healthy growth in the 
law of patents. 
We can obtain a clue, however, from what happens in foreign countries that 
actually do employ opposition proceedings. In Great Britain, there is no rigid 
examination, such as we have here. After an application is accepted, however, 
it is published for opposition. The grounds for opposition are the same as those 
for invalidating a patent in an infringement suit, namely anticipation by prior 
inventors and prior use or disclosure in Great Britain. In 1958, for example, 
18,531 patents were sealed, but only 382 oppositions were ﬁled. In Great Britain, 
furthermore, there is also a delayed opposition. Any time within twelve months 
of the issuance of a patent, revocation proceedings may be instituted, but in 
1958, there were only 81 such proceedings. So the total of oppositions in Great 
Britain that year was actually about 2.5 per cent. 
If this country could operate with but 2.5 per cent of oppositions, these pro­
posals might warrant some consideration. But it should be pointed out that, in 
the period from 1950 to 1960, without any real search or any statutory presump­
tion of validity inuring to the patent, such as supposedly exists in our law, the 
appellate courts in Great Britain sustained more than half of the patents before 
them. This seems to reﬂect an attitude of property rights and of encouragement 
of new ideas, new products, and new industries, diﬀerent from ours. 
In Holland, a country that has a rigid patent-examination system, 10,593 
applications were published from 1951 through 1954, 803 of which were opposed, 
or about 7.6 per cent. Again, this is a relatively small proportion. As a result 
of those oppositions, however, the Dutch Patent Oﬃce reconsidered its decision 
to grant the patent in slightly more than half of the opposed cases; so mistakes 
were apparently caught before the patent grant. 
In Sweden, another country with a rigid examination system, 5,005 patents 
were published for opposition in 1954, of which 409 were opposed, approximated 
8 per cent. 
The real test, however, comes in calling attention to the one country closest 
to the United States in aggressive industrialization, namely West Germany. The 
situation there provides a real indication of what might happen if oppositions 
were instituted in the United States. The German search is rigid, just as ours is; 
but it has not been my experience that the search made by patent examiners in 
Germany, even as a result of opposition proceedings, is any more thorough than 
that in the better examining divisions or groups of the United States Patent 
Oﬃce. 
After a German patent is published by the Patent Oﬃce for opposition, 
interested outsiders may ﬁle opposition briefs and sometimes appear at oral 

94 
Create or Perish 
hearings, to try to persuade the Oﬃce that the patent should not be granted. 
In 1954, 16,743 applications were published, and 5,710 were opposed – 34 per 
cent of the total number of published applications. 
Oppositions in more than a third of the cases in the United States would 
play havoc in the overburdened Patent Oﬃce, and would make the way of the 
small inventor and the small company even more unbearable. Large companies 
and even smaller organizations would undoubtedly oppose almost all patents in 
their ﬁelds as a matter of course, and we would probably have something like 80 
per cent or more of all patents opposed, in contract to West Germany’s slightly 
more than a third. 
And to what advantage – particularly where it is doubtful whether the sup­
posed inadequacy of the search is what fundamentally inﬂuences the court to 
throw out patents? Again we query: Would opposition proceedings have helped 
in the Jungerson case where the Supreme Court reached back to the suggestions 
of Cellini in the sixteenth century to throw out a patent in the twentieth? 
6.4 
Technically Trained Tribunals 
We come now to a third proposition, namely, that there should be a special 
scientiﬁc or technical tribunal that would ﬁnd scientiﬁc and technical facts for 
the judge. Dr. Bush says, “It is unreasonable to require judges, skilled in the law 
but not in science, to judge the merits of highly technical or scientiﬁc matters 
7.” 
Similar remarks, however, apply to litigation in other ﬁelds, economics, 
admiralty, medicine, and other specialized areas in which the lay judge generally 
is not trained. The question really resolves itself as follows: Has the invalidating 
of patents been shown to reside in a wrong understanding of the science or the 
technical points involved? 
Rarely does one hear the complaint that a judge who has conscientiously 
done his “homework” did not understand adequately the scientiﬁc issues in­
volved. These are always reduced to common, simple terms that an intelligent 
lay judge can understand. Technical experts on each side explain the few crucial 
points in everyday language, with analogies to matters understood by the court. 
There is room for complaint, however, where the judge abdicates and makes 
no real eﬀort to do a conscientious job. Most patent lawyers appear to agree 
that they much prefer the judicial temperament of a judge who hears all kinds 
of cases, and can himself weigh the issues in a patent case – provided that he is 
free of the “passion” to which Justice Jackson referred. Reliance upon factual 
determinations by a technical advisor is dangerous, particularly in view of the 
fact that, once a technically trained individual knows the solution of a problem, 
that solution often has become obvious. By virtue of his very training, a man 
with only technical training is not usually equipped to determine whether an 
advance was or was not something a skilled mechanic could have done. It is the 
judge who is trained to weigh and deal with obscure standards which deﬁne the 
7Senate Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights, Study 8, 86th Congress, 
2d Session (1961), cites numerous instances where court-appointed experts have been used to 
explain details. 

95 
The Future of American Patents 
“mechanic skilled in the art” in patent cases and “reasonable or prudent man” 
in negligence cases. 
The British patent bar has succeeded in relatively recent times in having a 
judge with some engineering background appointed to hear only patent cases. 
Soon this judge, thus restricted in his judicial duties, fell into the rut of making 
such decisions as one might expect from a technician and not legally tempered 
decisions which reﬂected judicial perspicacity and temperament. Within a very 
short time, the House of Lords had to reverse this judge in seven of his patent 
decisions. One of our British associates appraised the judge as having become 
“lost in technical aspects without judicial consideration.” 
Another illustration of the dangers of a strictly technician attitude and the 
safeguard of impartial judicial consideration is aﬀorded by a comparison of the 
decisions, involving the same invention, of the appeal department of the Dutch 
Patent Oﬃce (heavily controlled by its chairman, the commissioner of patents) 
and the District Court for the District of Columbia, in General Radio Co. v. 
Watson 8 . The invention in issue related to a discovery that, in certain kinds of 
autotransformers operating in industrial uses with carbon brushes that tap oﬀ 
diﬀerent voltages from diﬀerent portions of the copper winding thereof, burn-out 
failures were initiated by a destructive type of high-temperature copper oxide 
emanating from the winding itself, and not from overheating of the carbon brush 
and its assembly, as had been believed for years by those skilled in this art. 
A solution was found in preventing the development of the high-temperature 
copper oxide by an appropriate coating. 
The examiners of both the Dutch and United States Patent Oﬃces cited 
precisely the same prior art dealing with coatings for diﬀerent purposes on dif­
ferent types of electrical devices, and ﬁnally rejected the respective applications. 
The technical Board of Appeals of the United States Patent Oﬃce upheld its 
examiner’s ﬁnal rejection. 
In Holland, however, the before-mentioned commissioner’s appeal depart­
ment – from which no further appeal or review may be taken - overruled the 
examiner as to the pertinence of the prior art and found that the inventor was 
actually the ﬁrst to have made the discovery, despite the fact that engineers 
all over the world had sought for many years to solve the problem. Whether 
motivated by a desire to protect Dutch industry, as I ﬁrmly believe from my not 
inconsiderable experience, or by some other conviction, the technician-controlled 
appeal department certainly evolved a new doctrine of unpatentability. It ruled 
that even though no one had solved the problem before, and since the failure 
could only have come either from the carbon brush side or the winding side, it 
should have occurred to engineers that if it wasn’t the carbon brush that was at 
fault, it must be the winding: 
The Appeal Department is of the opinion that, since in the present 
case there was only a choice between two possibilities, no invention 
can be appreciated in ﬁnding the true cause of the burning-out of 
8188 F. Supp. 879 (1960). 

96 
Create or Perish 
the known transformers (namely the cupric oxide formation on the 
copper turns), even when on reasonable grounds the abnormal be­
havior of the carbon brush would at ﬁrst sight be suspected as the 
cause. 
This confusion of hindsight with foresight, once the solution of a problem has 
been made clear, has been observed in many able technically trained men with 
whom I have worked. 
The ability to put matters in proper perspective and to weigh the likelihood 
of events without becoming entangled in details – in short, to see the forest and 
not the trees – is particularly a forte of the well-trained legal mind. Thus, in 
overruling the United States Patent Oﬃce, Judge Morris of the District Court 
for the District of Columbia held: 
There can be no question but that the method discovered by Mr. 
Smiley, employed by plaintiﬀ, and described in the application con­
stitutes a marked improvement over the original patented device, 
especially when employed in industrial plants, and that it has com­
pletely overcome the failure diﬃculties inherent in the original device 
for such use. . . . Indeed the Board did not deny the commercial ac­
ceptance and the obvious success of the method discovered by Mr. 
Smiley, and aﬃrmed that “the problem of transformer failure under 
certain adverse conditions or operation was an elusive matter for 
some period of time,” and that the “problem of transformer failure 
was not found until an extensive research program was conducted.” 
The rare interdisciplinary man, however, who combines judicial tempera­
ment with a scientiﬁc background can not only preserve rights in the matter 
eﬀected by Judge Morris, but can do so with a conviction as to the technical 
soundness of his ﬁndings that most lay judges do not have. Couple this with 
creative ability, and the law of patents as well as that aﬀecting other phases 
of science and technology will blossom as we grow up out of our mid-twentieth 
century infancy. 
It is incumbent upon society – including our engineering and scientiﬁc com­
munity – to persuade the few talented interdisciplinary men of the present gen­
eration to give their country the beneﬁt of this kind of leadership. The nation 
must not continue to struggle with well-meaning and able political and judicial 
personnel, who, though educated by early twentieth-century standards in the 
arts, law, and the social sciences, lack an interdisciplinary training and the real 
experience in technology and science that is essential for intelligent, conﬁdent, 
and progressive decision making in this era. Many decisions of government to­
day turn upon scientiﬁc and technological considerations far beyond the genuine 
understanding of those called upon to make the decisions. 
It is frightening when a judge, or a cabinet member, or a president, must 
rely upon technical advisors, not just for details or analyses of problems and 
opinions as to courses of action (which appears proper and essential), but also 
for very fundamental and underlying scientiﬁc and technical bases of decisions. 

97 
The Future of American Patents 
Who, then, really makes the decision? We desperately need the experienced 
interdisciplinary and creative man in government, and we must strive to educate 
such rare individuals if we expect to manifest the leadership and growth essential 
to develop America’s future greatness in this age of science. Otherwise we shall 
merely maintain custodianship of America’s prior standard of accomplishment 
by “politicians as usual.” 
Let us turn now from the general to the speciﬁc. If judges selected from 
among the most able practicing lawyers who have stemmed from, and have in­
terdisciplinarily employed, a substantial scientiﬁc background and experience, 
and who have demonstrated record of creative talent, were appointed, this would 
breathe new life into the law of patents and other facets of our rapidly merging 
social-scientiﬁc way of life. Since such appointment is purely political (the pres­
ident having power to select all federal judges at all echelons), pressure by the 
engineering and scientiﬁc community can conceivably have its eﬀect. Rather 
than provide for the virtual abdication of decision by the judiciary (or, more 
generally, by governmental oﬃcers) to a technical tribunal or board of advisors, 
therefore, I propose the upgrading of the political and appointive oﬃcers by in­
cluding some really talented interdisciplinary men who are now, almost without 
exception, engaged in private pursuits. 
6.5 
Are Today’s Patents Worth Saving? 
In the course of his testimony before the Senate Subcommittee on Patents, 
Trademarks, and Copyrights (October 10 - 12, 1955) the late Judge Learned 
Hand was interrogated by the late Senator O’Mahoney as follows 9: 
Is it in your opinion a good and useful thing, I am substituting 
“good and new” now, for Congress to exercise the power that the 
Constitution gave to it to provide by law for the exclusive use of the 
inventions or discoveries of inventors? Is it a good and useful thing, 
does it promote the arts and sciences? 
Judge Hand replied: 
That is just the question. Nobody knows and nobody can know until 
they examine how the system which has been working after all for 
150 years works in our present very complicated industrial society. 
. . . Each side is beating the air. On one hand you have a lot of people 
that say the country would fall down without the patent system and 
on the other hand you have people like Thurman Arnold, former 
judge in the Court of Appeals in the District of Columbia, who say 
the patent system has outlived its usefulness, it is no good any more, 
it’s now a tool for misuse on the part of the big corporations. 
Then, giving his own views as a result of his many years on the bench, Judge 
Hand continued: 
9Senate Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights, Study 1. 

98 
Create or Perish 
The place for stimulus, I think, is those people who are very com­
petent and would be induced by that hope of a pecuniary reward to 
devote themselves as entirely as is necessary. 
And when he was speciﬁcally asked: 
In all of your experience on the bench on patent cases, have you 
received no glimmering or notion as to whether or not the patent 
law has served a useful purpose? 
Judge Hand replied: 
I have an opinion. . . . I think it has a great one. 
At the end of his report, there are statements by oﬃcials of some of our 
more promising small companies and by individual inventors on what the patent 
system has mean to them. For example, counsel for Polaroid says 10: 
The company obviously places great reliance upon its patents. Its 
business is very largely dependent upon its patent structure and it 
has from the outset followed a vigorous patent policy of obtaining 
protection on all of its commercial products and in addition on such 
developments of its research group as may possess potential com­
mercial value. . . . We think there is no question but that Dr. Land’s 
success in commercializing and developing his inventions in light po­
larizing materials was to a large extent due to the patents obtained 
on those inventions. 
Pursuing further the question whether the patent system is worth saving, let 
us refer to Study 3 before this same Congressional committee and a subsequent 
staﬀ “Analysis of Patent Litigation Status 11.” In the period from 1949 through 
1960, 58.5 per cent of all issued patents were assigned to corporations. (There 
was no way of ascertaining how many of these assigned patents had originally 
been the fruits of independent inventors who later assigned their applications.) 
Forty per cent were issued to individuals and were unassigned to corporations. 
The remainder of patentees included foreigners, the United States Government, 
and others. Of this 58.5 per cent, however, only a little more than one-third 
represents the large corporations of the United States. A total of 73 per cent 
of all patents granted from 1939 through 1960, accordingly, were granted to 
individuals (private inventors or backers) who held their own patents, or to the 
small corporations. 
The little fellow is, of course, the one who requires the most protection 
– and he is the one who is stimulated by the assurance of protection to risk 
all, and thereby to advance the progress of the useful arts. The little fellow, 
10Ibid., 266. 
11Senate Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights, Study 3, 86th Congress, 
2d Session (1961). 

99 
The Future of American Patents 
however, rarely if ever reaches the Supreme Court, because the Court, with its 
heavy burdens, has refused to grant certiorari in certain kinds of patent cases 12 . 
Indeed, any case it does hear that in any way involves patents is heard as a result 
of most unusual circumstances, as where the government joins in requesting the 
Court to take the case. Small corporations and individual inventors thus suﬀer 
because the lower courts feel compelled to follow in all instances the precedents 
laid down when the Supreme Court exercises what Justice Jackson termed its 
“passion” to strike down the patents of the giant corporations. 
I have mentioned in previous chapters some of the many individuals whose 
practical breakthroughs, in many diﬀerent ﬁelds, have given the technological 
advances that we enjoy today, and who have led to the development and growth 
of many new companies that play important roles in our present economy. They 
were small individuals when they started. Fortunately, the process is not dead. 
In the very recent past, many of the basic developments of the Atomic Age, 
so called, were brought about by individuals, not by the larger companies and 
not by government-sponsored research. This is the history of Einstein, Ruther­
ford, Fermi, Dunning, Edgerton and others, working originally as individuals in 
college laboratories and the like. 
Former Patent Commissioner Casper Ooms points out 13: 
Many of the names of large corporations of today are the familiar 
names of the individuals who founded them; Westinghouse, Dupont, 
Goodyear, Singer, Ford, Edison, Bell, Wright – the list is endless. 
The individual is not yet to be discarded. It is from his single mind 
and single-minded purpose that invention comes far more frequently 
than most suspect or than the statutes revel. 
Look not alone to 
the great contributions of the 19th century but look to our own 
generation or even this decade. There was De Forest with his tri­
ode, Armstrong with radio circuitry, Land with the Polaroid camera 
and so many others. The inventor working alone. Small business 
growing upon the advancing the individual’s contributions, and all 
in ﬁelds in which large corporate enterprises with vast and proved 
research facilities were outdistanced by those single minds and the 
small businesses in which they worked. Yet in spite of these superior 
facilities and the broader range of interests to which the research 
of these larger institutions is directed very frequently the “break­
through,” the startling innovation comes from small business and 
small laboratories. . . . Small business is a challenge for the bold and 
venturesome who ask only that they be permitted to continue the 
ﬁght under the rule under which they have so successfully fought 
mediocrity, stagnation, and decline. 
12Since the passing of the 1952 Patent Act, the Supreme Court has declined to review every 
case submitted to it in which the issue turned on the question of what is or is not invention 
under this law. 
13“Patents, Small Business, and the Age of Research,” in Journal of the Patent Oﬃce 
Society, Vol. 40, p. 5 (January, 1958). 

100 
Create or Perish 
To the same eﬀect is the report of Attorney George E. Frost before the 
Senate Judiciary Committee in Study 2 14: 
It remains for the nonconformist, often an inexperienced outsider, 
to take the steps that lead to signiﬁcant development. History is 
replete with incidents of this kind. 
The experienced designers of 
shoe manufacturing machinery considered and underestimated the 
cement process. The engineers of a smaller, less experienced concern 
recognized the potentialities and made a success of the process. It 
was the “practical” worker and “tinkerer” in a comparatively small 
company who devised the ﬁrst successful adhesive cellophane tape 
and not the Dupont scientists who were working on the same prob­
lem. General Electric and Westinghouse – research-conscious orga­
nizations with large budgets – both misjudged the value of the wire 
type photoﬂash lamp. The result was that a comparatively small 
company, Wabash Appliance Company, exploited this product. 
Recent studies at the University of Chicago by Professor John Jewkes show 
that of sixty major inventions since 1900 (the era of substantial industrial and 
government research activities), thirty-three – more than half – sprang from the 
work of individual inventors! Included in these inventions were penicillin, the 
electron microscope, the synthetic light polarizer, streptomycin, the domestic 
gas refrigerator, the helicopter, quick-freezing, the cyclotron, the ball-point pen, 
chromium plating, the self-winding wrist watch, and the slide fastener. 
And in many cases, as history shows over and over again, important inven­
tions are made by others than those who are experts in the ﬁeld and by complete 
outsiders to the organized research organizations. Jewkes illustrates: 
The jet engine was invented and for a time developed by men who 
were not specialists in engine design. The gyro-compass was invented 
by a youth who was neither a scientist nor a sailor. Power steer­
ing, basic radio inventions, cracking petroleum, magnetic recorders 
– these and other major developments occurred outside companies 
concerned with their use 15 . 
The facts thus show that we cannot rely upon government and large-company 
research alone if we are to maintain our technological and economic superiority 
in this day of serious challenge from the Soviet Union. 
In reporting on a panel discussion before the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers 16, S. W. Herwald revealed that the Soviets 
have copied many of the good parts of our private-enterprise system. 
. . . Incentive systems are used to encourage new ideas. 
14Senate Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights, Study 2, p. 
18, 84th 
Congress, 2d Session (1957). 
15John Jewkes, The Sources of Invention, Macmillan, 1959, p. 50. 
16S.W. Herwald, “Economics and Incentive Plans,” report of panel discussion, American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, Feb. 1-6, 1959. Unpublished. 

101 
The Future of American Patents 
Patents are one of our primary present-day incentive systems. Discourage in­
vention by individuals and “outsiders,” and you dry up one of our historical 
sources of important advances. 
A further article 17 reveals the following disturbing facts with regard to 
the pace of invention in the United States. When it is remembered that all 
government-sponsored research contracts require patent disclosures; that the 
government itself employs at least ﬁve diﬀerent and independent agency staﬀs of 
patent attorney working full time to ﬁle applications to protect the government 
on patentable advances; and that private industry still scrupulously ﬁles for 
patents at least for defensive purposes so that it may make its own products 
without lawsuits; then it will be seen that the number of patents may be some 
kind of an index of the number of inventions made in this country. I have drawn 
the following conclusions from the data presented in the article referred to: 
1. While research and development spending has risen tenfold from 1930 
to 1960, the number of patents issued each year has remained substantially the 
same. 
2. There is a lower yield of invention in government research work and mixed 
government-industry research work than in industrial-commercial work. 
3. In today’s industrial research laboratory, each invention probably repre­
sents a minimum of about 7.5 man years of eﬀort. 
4. The national average of eﬀort underlying each patent issued to an Amer­
ican corporation appears to be about 30 man-years. 
5. The United States, in the community of Western-bloc nations, is below 
Switzerland, Sweden, Germany, Norway, Denmark, and Great Britain in per 
capita inventions. 
Can we aﬀord, in these perilous times, to do less than maximize the eﬀectiveness 
of all our incentive systems, including patents? 
While the foregoing discussion, it is hoped, demonstrates that patents still 
serve a vitally important function today, particularly in the case of the individual 
inventor or small company, the question is frequently raised whether patents 
do not stiﬂe progress, particularly when in the hands of corporate enterprises. 
Why this question should even arise today – when many corporate giants have 
abdicated to the wishes of our government antitrust lawyers, and have, in eﬀect, 
thrown open their patents to avoid litigation – is hard to understand. As former 
patent commissioner Robert C. Watson, now chairman of the Advisory Council 
of the George Washington University Patent Foundation, has pointed out: 
As a result of the RCA, IBM, and A T & T [consent] decrees, 22,500 
patents were dropped down the drain, so to speak thrown open, and 
I’m wondering when and where an evaluation of the economic eﬀect 
of this disaster will ever be made 18 . 
In answer to this question of patents allegedly stiﬂing rather than promot­
ing the progress of the useful arts, moreover, I might refer to a typical example. 
17Frank A. Howard, “The Lagging Pace of U.S. Invention,” Product Engineering, July 18, 
1960, p. 75. 
18Samuel W. Bryant, “The Patent Mess,” Fortune, Sept., 1962, pp. 111-112, 226, 231-232. 

102 
Create or Perish 
When the Radio Corporation developed its color-television tube, the so-called 
shadow-mask tube, CBS-Hytron was prodded, not discouraged, to develop im­
proved methods of making such tubes; General Electric Company developed the 
alternative post-accelerator type of color tube based upon a diﬀerent principle; 
the late Professor E. O. Lawrence developed the Chromotron, based on still 
another principle; and the Philco Company developed the “Apple Tube,” based 
on still another technique. Thus the issuance of patents, even to large corporate 
entities, does not stiﬂe progress. On the contrary, it impels other corporations 
to ﬁnd ways of getting around the patent, and in that sense admirably serves 
the purposes of Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. 
The present utility of a patent-sparked competitive system as compared 
with solely government-sponsored research and development is discussed also 
by Attorney Frost 19: 
Experience with government-sponsored research and manufacture – 
where the pressures of competition are normally absent – also brings 
out the value of competition in research. It was a group of “out­
siders” who insisted that the gaseous diﬀusion process be pursued 
to separate isotopes in the atomic bomb development – and this 
process ultimately proved most successful. In the wartime synthetic 
rubber program, the RFC, thinking primarily in monetary terms, 
ﬁrst authorized only the construction of butadiene plants based on 
petroleum as raw material. Yet it turned out that 80 percent of the 
butadiene produced in 1943 came from the alcohol-base plant con­
structed under pressure from Congress. The postwar experience in 
synthetic rubber is even more revealing. . . . An analyst of research 
progress in industry reports that all of the 6 major postwar tech­
nical developments, however, have come in large measure from 4 
companies that did not participate in the government program and 
conducted research in a competitive atmosphere. Similarly unsatis­
factory experience has been reported in connection with government­
contracted development in aircraft engines. The lesson of history is 
clear. . . . The patent system is a powerful force toward maintenance 
of a competitive atmosphere. Existing concerns are forced – upon 
pain of payment of royalties or even foreclosure from a successful 
development – to explore all alternatives with an open mind. On 
the positive side, the availability of patent protection encourages 
the entrance into industry of new companies with fresh approaches 
unbiased by mental blocks that often result from experience. 
To give another illustration: At the time the atomic energy program reached 
the point, during World War II, where it critically needed certain specialized 
electronic apparatus, it was merely necessary to adopt the inventions of a pro­
fessor who, in our free economy and under the encouragement of our patent 
19See above, fn. 13. 

103 
The Future of American Patents 
laws, had previously been stimulated to develop the art. What if, however, he 
had not struck out on his own? 
6.6 
What is Wrong 
But what faces the professor, other individual inventors and small businessmen 
today? They face the “passion” mentioned earlier and the apparent fact that the 
only valid patent is the one that the Supreme Court cannot get its hands on. And 
they face the likelihood that the lower courts will follow what Judge Learned 
Hand stated were “our orders” from the Supreme Court. They face, also, the 
attitude of many large companies and the government, who are convinced that 
they can appropriate inventions in the knowledge that the patents will probably 
be thrown out in court and the claimant worn down. 
Recall the earlier-quoted condemnation of this practice by Judge Wyzanski. 
Recall, also, the situation of Professors Cady and Pierce and the American 
Telephone and Telegraph Company, with which I dealt previously. The scientiﬁc 
community, moreover, mourns the suicide of Major Edwin Armstrong at a time 
when he was locked in a harassing battle with several large infringing corporate 
enterprises in connection with his frequency-modulation patents. 
Even before the complication of the present-day Supreme Court attitude, 
Thomas A. Edison was quoted from the New York World of June 3, 1900: 
There is no such thing in this country as an inventor’s monopoly. 
The moment he invents something that is an epochmaker in the 
world of science and commerce, there will be pirates who spring up 
on all sides and contest his rights to his ideas 20 . 
Thirty years later, Edison remarked: 
Counting the expense of experimenting and ﬁghting for my claims 
in Court, these patents have cost me more than they have returned 
me in royalties. . . . We have a miserable system in the United States 
for protecting inventions from infringement. I have known of several 
inventors who were poor. Their ideas would have made them mil­
lionaires, but they were kept poor by the pirates who were allowed 
through our very faulty system of protection to usurp their rights. 
. . . I had to ﬁght a long time in court over my claims . . . persisting 
in litigation sometimes for ten, twelve, or fourteen years 21 . 
Another roadblock in the path of the engineer and applied scientist and the 
small company trying to produce new inventions is the position of some members 
of the patent bar itself, who have taken full advantage of the hostility of the 
courts by themselves challenging all patents as a matter of course. They should 
not now be heard criticizing the courts when attempting to sustain patents, 
since they taught the courts how to be hostile. 
20Remisen Crawford, “Patents, Proﬁts and Pirates – An Interview with Thomas A. Edison,” 
Saturday Evening Post, September 27, 1930, p. 3. 
21Ibid. 

104 
Create or Perish 
The practice of the United States Government itself in wearing down inven­
tors claiming compensation from the government for its use of their inventions 
is another discouraging feature. The Department of Justice has had a policy to 
the eﬀect that, when a royalty owed by the government to an outside inventor 
was substantial, the inventor’s claim was to be denied. The investor, in making 
claim against the Army, the Navy, the AEC, the Air Force, moreover, is sub­
jected to a diﬀerent investigation by the patent departments of each branch, a 
process extending over many years and which, if the sums involved are large, 
usually results in sending the inventor into court with the government cards 
stacked against him. 
There are numerous cases, furthermore, where small companies have sold 
their commercial instruments to the government and then found the latter freely 
disseminating details of these proprietary items and letting them out for com­
petitive bids to anyone who comes along, regardless of patent or other rights 
involved. Then the originators had to seek their remedies (if any) in court 22 . 
Government contracts, as before explained, include clauses to the eﬀect that 
no matter how much work a person may have done in perfecting an inven­
tion before the contract, and despite the existence or prior patents or patent 
applications, unless he had, prior to the contract, suﬃcient resources to build 
completely and operate successfully the invention, the government obtains at 
least a free license to the invention and, in atomic and space developments, it 
even obtains complete ownership thereof, with no obligations to the inventor. 
Senator Russell B. Long 23 believes the public interest is served by vesting in 
the public complete title to any inventions resulting from government-sponsored 
contracts. His belief stems apparently from the misconceptions that the proﬁt 
from government contracts is in any measure related to or compensatory for the 
investment in background of the contractee 24, or that the most able workers 
and companies will meekly sell their brain children for whatever the government 
oﬀers, or that whoever is forced to take the government terms will be able to 
do the job as the “public interest” deserves. Representative Emilio Q. Daddario 
25, on the other hand, would settle for a compulsory royalty-free nonexclusive 
license to the government. 
The late President Kennedy’s recent directive 26 
still appears to leave the government agencies to their own devices within cer­
tain prescribed ground rules, including prompt use of inventions by companies 
22See above, fn. 18. 
23Russell B. Long, “A Government Patent Policy to Serve the Public Interest,” and E. Q. 
Daddarios, “A Government Patent Policy to Serve the Public Interest,” 47 American Bar 
Association Journal, 675-681 and 671, respectively (July, 1961). 
24John T. Connor, “Innovators and Patents,” The Patent, Trademark, and Copyright Jour­
nal of Research and Education, Vol 6, p. 145 (1962): “in selecting a contractor, the government 
takes advantage of an already existing situation in most cases by turning to a contractor with 
accumulated experience, knowledge, and know-how in a speciﬁc ﬁeld – gained at the contrac­
tor’s expense. Consequently, it can hardly be said that the government has borne the full cost 
of developing the invention, if one should emerge.” 
25See above, fn. 23. 
26October 10, 1963, memorandum from the President to heads of executive departments 
and agencies on government patent policy, with statement attached. Federal Register, Oct. 
12, 1963. 

105 
The Future of American Patents 
retaining commercial rights on pain of compulsory licensing; but there is still 
unrest in some quarters of Congress 27 . 
But, just as any employee, consultant, or contractee with a spark of pride 
or spunk insists on freedom to contract with an employer or contractor as to 
the terms under which he will perform his work, so those who are to carry out 
government contracts should be entitled to negotiate freely with the govern­
ment. They should be able to obtain ﬂexible and fair terms of compensation 
for the use of inventions arising under diﬀerent types of circumstances, even 
if developed with the aid of government funds. Many a talented employee or 
consultant refuses to consider salary alone or a pittance proﬁt ﬁgure adequate 
payment for picking his brains, but insists on negotiating a return bearing more 
realistic relation to the value of the work to the contractor. Should government 
be deprived of the abilities of the most able minds, because Congress forbids 
government negotiators ﬂexibility in reaching the kind of terms that such talent 
generally insists upon? 
If we are to accede to the presently popular philosophy that we should wel­
come the paternalistic guidance of enlightened government, are we not entitled 
to expect Congress to trust its government contractors with freedom to nego­
tiate? If government oﬃcials cannot be so trusted, but must be ﬁtted into the 
“uniform policy” currently advocated in high circles, then we cannot complain 
because the results are uniformly mediocre. Attorney Reed C. Lawlor of the 
California bar 28 points out that 
Employees can negotiate special contracts with employers respecting 
their inventions. Why should government contractors be forbidden 
by law to negotiate special contracts with the government? . . . There 
are many individuals who refuse to work for industrial employers 
who require them to assign all inventions made by them to their 
employers. . . . These men who have refused to become employees 
of companies that would bind them with such contracts often form 
their own companies and create new industries and new businesses 
to the beneﬁt of the entire public and of mankind. . . . The rights of 
the individuals are destroyed where laws are enacted which destroy 
the freedom of contractors to negotiate equitable contracts with the 
government which would provide fair compensation for the use of 
inventions developed by the contractors. 
Recent Congressional hearings have, indeed, revealed a decided reluctance 
on the part of very talented technical organizations and personnel to oﬀer their 
ideas to, or to work for, the government monopoly in space and atomic technol­
ogy. Is the “public interest” served by depriving government of the talents of 
unusual people and organizations? 
27Senate Bill S1290, 1963, 88th Congress, 1st Session. 
28Reed C. Lawlor, “The Public Interest: Government Patent Policy and Equity,” 47 Amer­
ican Bar Association Journal 972 (Oct. 1961). 

106 
Create or Perish 
As a corollary, it is simple to predict the fate of the well-intentioned, but 
patently immature policy of “not-for-proﬁt” contracts now oﬀered by govern­
ment. The strong professorial sponsorship of this policy reﬂects the dangers of 
extrapolating into the real world the well-meaning theories evolved in university 
and other ivory-tower experiences. 
It is rather ironical that we should be grabbing all rights for the state in 
the so-called “public interest,” at a time when even the Soviet Union has rec­
ognized and adopted our tested, but now abandoned, capitalistic schemes for 
stimulating creativity through reward to the individual. The Soviets, apparently 
unimpressed by the government ownership and control programs that today are 
being proposed in America, make payments, over and beyond mere salary even 
to their own state-employed inventors, for government use of the inventions that 
the state itself has ﬁnanced! 
Admiral Luis deFlores put it this way 29: 
The patent system was created to reward and stimulate ingenuity 
and inventiveness. Classifying a novel idea as the inventor’s property 
which could be reserved for exclusive use or sold or leased for a roy­
alty permits the idea to be used openly without fear of competition 
for 17 years and with due recourse to law if infringed. 
These rights and beneﬁts have produced a powerful incentive for 
people to exercise their ingenuity and devote their eﬀorts to ﬁnding 
new, improved ways to do things and new tools with which to do 
them. There is no doubt that the existence of the patent and patent 
rights has had a profound inﬂuence on the rapid industrial growth 
of our country and served to bring native ingenuity to the force. 
In recent years, however, there has been a tendency on the part of 
the government to appropriate patent rights of individuals which will 
reduce and tend to kill the incentive they were originally designed 
to produce. History tells us that socialism, despite its well-meaning 
ideals, just doesn’t work in the competitive world in which man has 
evolved. Man’s natural tendency is to try to outdo his fellow man. 
If his eﬀorts are not rewarded or are frustrated by rules, he will drift 
aimlessly. 
We also have a tax situation where, except for a previously discussed capital­
gains beneﬁt given to a restricted class of patent holders, there is no opportunity 
for the research organization or the individual investor to recoup from his suc­
cesses the costs of his unsuccessful experiments, thus insuring funds for further 
work. The newly formed Academy of Applied Science is hard at work analyz­
ing the real needs of inventors and commercial research institutions so that a 
sensible, planned tax incentive program can be suggested which will reward and 
stimulate the ultimate goal of successful innovation. 
29“Ingenuity: A Quality of Victory,” The Technology Review, Vol. 64, No. 8, pp. 35, 36 
(June, 1962). 

107 
The Future of American Patents 
Where is the incentive today? 
Of course, a few of the more hardy will 
always go ahead and take risks. 
But is it any wonder that in the oﬃce of 
many patent lawyers are new ideas for further development that are not being 
actively exploited? Or that the inventor today is wary of sinking money into 
the inventor’s wild idea? Where is return? Where is his protection? 
It is surprising that most new entrepreneurs go to the government for spon­
sorship, and then get tied down to work only on those things which the gov­
ernment employees dare to authorize. Rarely can they work on the radical and 
unusual things that have seemed “impossible” but that have given rise to the 
creation of new industry in the past, and rarely with the all-important freedom 
to take advantage of serendipity, for exploring the unexpected discoveries of a 
project often more important than the original goal? 
Is it any wonder that 
many clients are not interested in adapting their own commercial advances to 
government purposes 30? 
It is ironical that the totalitarian menace to our way of life should be encour­
aging research and invention when we are in the process of destroying the patent 
system and encouraging the piracy of proprietary rights. The part played by 
the courts is believed to be the most signiﬁcant agent in such encouragement, 
since its checks and balances should have been used to correct the abuses by 
other branches of government that have gone hog wild. The real crux of the 
situation is explained frankly by Justice Douglas: 
The Justice comes to formulate his own views. The reexamination of 
precedent in Constitutional law is a personal matter for each judge 
who comes along 31 . 
In keeping with this philosophy, apparently, such judges as a personal mat­
ter, have determined that they do not agree with Article I, Section 8 of the 
Constitution, providing authority for the granting of patents. In a recent book, 
John P. Frank, former law clerk of Justice Black, frankly admits that “Black has 
pronouncedly unfavorable views on the patent system.” In order to thwart this 
“passion,” the late Justice Stone, says Mr. Frank “though he assigned Black 
many good cases, . . . never assigned him one that had to do with patents 32.” 
The readiness of the present Supreme Court, moreover, to utilize “particular 
constitutional clauses to force states to conform to a social philosophy as policy 
espoused by a majority of the Supreme Court” is well recognized 33 . 
In a recent address before the American Bar Association, Justice Arthur 
Goldberg seemed to reiterate the philosophy of Black and Douglas, apparently 
also shared at least by Chief Justice Earl Warren and Justice William Brennan, 
30“State Business – Where are the Tinkerers?” Time, September 21, 1962, p. 81. “Instead 
of innovation in the area of consumer products, there is modiﬁcation and trimming up . . . stiﬀ 
government laws may be stiﬂing inventiveness. . . . ” 
31William O. Douglas, We the Judges, Doubleday, 1956. 
32John P. Frank, Marble Palace, Knapp, 1958, pp. 77-78. 
33J. R. Schmidhauser, The Supreme Court as Final Arbiter in Federal-State Relations, 
University of North Carolina Press, 1958, p. 185. 

108 
Create or Perish 
Jr., that the function of the Supreme Court is to act as the “national school­
master” who knows what social institutions are and are not good. Justice John 
Marshall Harlan, in rebuttal, cautioned however 34; 
One of the current notions that holds subtle capacity for serious 
mischief is a view of the judicial function that seems increasingly 
coming into vogue. This is that all deﬁciencies in our society which 
have failed of correction by other means should ﬁnd a cure in the 
courts . . . Some well-meaning people apparently believe that the ju­
dicial, rather than the political, process is more likely to breed better 
solutions of pressing or thorny problems. This is a compliment to 
the judiciary, but untrue democratic principle. 
A judicial decision which is founded simply on the impulse that 
“something should be done,” or which looks no further than to the 
“justice” or “injustice” of a particular case, is not likely to have 
lasting inﬂuence . . . Our scheme of ordered liberty is based, like the 
common law, on enlightened and uniformly applied legal principle, 
not on ad hoc notions of what is right or wrong in a particular case. 
The one feature that has heretofore distinguished our system of government 
from that of totalitarian states has been that we were a nation of laws and not 
of men; that our rights were determined by some measure of legal precedent 
and not by the personal views of the judges. Now we have the anomaly where 
people not even responsible to the electorate are able to foist their own personal 
precepts upon the land – despite the Constitution. 
Professor Rodell of the Yale Law School says: 
Granted great government power to be wielded for the rest of their 
lives with no real responsibility save to their own prejudice-propelled 
consciences, the judges sometimes begin to mistake their separate 
selves, however liberal or conservative they may be, for God, and 
Supreme Court Justices are men 35 . 
And Professor Rodell points out case after case where the decision is based, not 
on precedent, not on what the law is, not on what the Congress intends, but 
on “the judges’ personal views on morals and ethics.” The way in which the 
“passion” referred to by Justice Jackson can take hold is thus made clear. 
6.7 
The Task 
Suppose, for a moment, that there were in the judiciary judges desiring to ﬁnd 
reasons to sustain the property rights authorized under Article I, Section 8 of 
the Constitution, wherever proper and feasible, much as the courts jealously 
protect personal liberties under another Constitutional provision – the Fifth 
34Reported in Time, August 23, 1963, p. 17. 
35Fred Rodell, Nine Men, Random House, 1955. 

109 
The Future of American Patents 
Amendment. 
The large corporations would then no longer dare to defy the 
individual inventor so cavalierly. And venture capital would be encouraged to 
back new ideas, because of the assurance that the patent, when granted, would 
have a real chance of being sustained. Our economic advantage would thereby 
be stimulated, and without government subsidy. 
The United States Government would no longer deny so readily the individ­
ual inventor’s claims nor violate so notoriously the proprietary rights of small 
business. Outsiders would begin to think about government problems, knowing 
that they would be rewarded for their work. The whole defense eﬀort would 
beneﬁt, without all the thinking having to be sponsored by government funds. 
Unless reform from the judiciary itself takes place, however, it is diﬃcult to 
see how the court-sanctioned license to piracy can be checked, and the disastrous 
consequences ﬂowing therefrom. The recent history of the Patent Act of 1952, 
speciﬁcally intended to curb certain Supreme Court techniques for destroying 
patents, shows that legislation, without a more positive and unmistakable char­
acter, cannot alone accomplish the desired end – and certainly not within a 
reasonably short period of time. 
The Supreme Court, as previously stated, 
has refused to hear case after case that would have led to a showdown on its 
interpretation of the meaning of “invention” in the 1952 Act. 
Two avenues to inﬂuence the courts may be open: ﬁrst, the strongest kind 
of language from Congress with regard to protecting inventors’ rights; and sec­
ondly, new appointees to the bench who can win the respect of their colleagues 
because of their understanding of the inventive process and the requirements 
for its nurture and encouragement. 
We should not be content, moreover, merely to put the patent law back to 
where it was before the 1930’s. We need constructive development by the courts 
to suit modern times, development that comes naturally in other branches of law 
which, unlike patents, have been moving forward. Contrast, for example, the 
Supreme Court disposition of patents upon the basis of Cellini’s writing of an­
tiquity, in the Jungerson case, with the decision of the Circuit Court of Appeals 
for the second circuit in 1892, on Edison’s carbon-ﬁlament incandescent-lamp 
patent 36, where, despite the fact that 
all-glass globes, with lead wires passing through the glass and sealed 
with it, had been used before . . . and although the prior art . . . indicated 
. . . the use of burners of high resistance and small radiating surface, 
and although pencils of carbon had been tried in imperfect vacua .., 
invention was found in the successful use of a carbon ﬁlament in an exhausted 
glass container. Edison had made it work! 
Not only would Bell, Edison, and Westinghouse not be inventors in the eyes 
of the present-day Supreme Court, but Marconi was even stripped of the title of 
inventor, some forty years after the fact. As stated, in that case, by dissenting 
Justice Frankfurter 37 , 
36Edison Electric Light Co. v. U.S. Electric Lighting Co., 52 F. 300, 307, 308. 
37Marconi Wireless Telegraph Co. v. U.S., 320 U.S. 1 (1943). 

110 
Create or Perish 
because a judge . . . is able to demonstrate by a process of intricate 
rationalization that anyone could have drawn precisely the interfer­
ences that Marconi drew and that Stone hinted at on paper, the 
Court ﬁnds that Marconi’s patent was invalid. . . . 
and this, despite the fact that 
nobody except Marconi did in fact draw the right inferences that 
were embodied into a workable boon for mankind. 
And then, stating the real reason for the court’s decision: 
Judges . . . should [be] . . . vigilant against importing their own no­
tions of the nature of the creative process into Congressional legis­
lation, whereby Congress “to promote the Progress of Science and 
useful Arts” has secured “for limited times to . . . Inventors the ex­
clusive Right to their Discoveries.” 
So, also, in the case of the Westinghouse airbrake (Patent 88,929 and Reissue 
Patent 5,504), invention was recognized, though the idea of operating railway 
brakes by air pressure and many of the devices employed in such operating had 
been conceived earlier, but not successfully applied, by others. Similar com­
ments apply to the invention of barbed wire by J. S. Glidden (Patent 157,124) 
38; to the invention of the alternating-current loading coil Nikola Tesla 39; and 
to many other inventions which have helped companies to start up so to build 
the America we have heretofore known 40 . 
It does not take an experienced engineer or scientist to interpret the graph of 
Figure 9, which shows the fate of patents in the United States Supreme Court 
since 1925. 
And what will happen if nothing eﬀective is done? 
In view of 
the attitude of the Supreme Court in the period 1950-1952, one had only a 28 
per cent chance of winning on both validity and infringement in the District 
Court, an 18 per cent chance of reversal of an unfavorable lower-court decision 
in the Court of Appeals, and no chance at all in the United States Supreme 
Court. Contrast this with the greater than 50 per cent chance in Great Britain, 
a country without a rigid examination system and without legal presumptions 
of validity of a patent, but with a desire to foster its economy by encouraging 
the creative spirit of the individual for the ultimate good of the nation. 
There is still a Constitution-authorized patent system on our books which is 
intended to promote useful arts through giving exclusive limited-period rights 
to inventors. 
As in other phases of our wonder-working capitalistic type of 
economy, the rewarding of the creative individual inures to the beneﬁt of a 
38143 U.S. 275. 
39Westinghouse Electric & Mfg. 
Co. 
v. 
New England Granite Co. 
et al., 103 F. 951, 
aﬃrmed 110 F. 753. 
40An interesting treatise relating to these particular patents is contained in an article by 
Lawrence P. Dodds and Francis W. Crotty, entitled “The New Doctrinal Trend,” Journal of 
the Patent Oﬃce Society, Vol. XXX. pp. 83 - 120 (1948). 

111 
The Future of American Patents Graph of interest of the United States Supreme Court in patents.
Fig. 6.1: A measure of the interest of the United States Supreme Court in 
patents. 
whole society that progresses through the pioneering work of the gifted few and 
the later industry of the many. The patent system, even though not always best 
suited to our present needs, represents a primary source of material reward to 
the creative engineer and scientist. To pass it by, or to refuse to become active 
in insisting upon its preservation, seems to me to be a serious mistake. It is up 
to the engineer and scientist to take an active interest in the patent system and 
to contribute the ideas vitally needed for its improvement, modernization, and, 
indeed, survival. 
The diﬃculty is not with the concept of the system, but with an adminis­
tration and operation thereof not fully suited to current requirements or to the 
direction of an unmistakable social trend apparently desired by most people. 

112 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 7 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
The possible eﬀect upon our system of current planning for a com­
mon European patent is discussed in this chapter, with several of the 
author’s views for modernizing and improving the American patent 
system and its administration. 
At a time when most of the thinking at the United States Patent Oﬃce 
appears directed toward such matters as obtaining a new building, speeding up 
the government’s patent examination procedures, streamlining interference and 
other processes within the Oﬃce, and providing more incentive to skilled people 
to wish for Patent Oﬃce careers, our European friends are engaged in a far more 
basic modernization program. More important than the details of the programs 
under consideration in the United States and abroad is the spirit of enthusiasm 
and vigor of the European experiment. This spirit stems from a ﬁrm conviction 
that the state beneﬁts when individuals are encouraged and their proprietary 
rights are protected – concepts that, at least formerly, were an integral part 
of American pride and tradition. Serious revision of the basic concepts of a 
patent system to suit modern times cannot take place in the climate that we 
have now created for ourselves; where, indeed, there are some who apparently 
are no longer sure that reward to the individual is consistent with the so-called 
“public interest 1.” 
Let us explore, brieﬂy, the rather radical ideas in Western Europe with regard 
to the economic and social needs of a mid-twentieth-century patent system. In 
doing this, we must bear in mind that the great postwar impetus is still at work 
in an awakened European Economic Community which ﬁlings aside the petty 
roadblocks of mere nationalism and refuses to retain long-established systems 
of a bygone era simply because they have been so long established. 
1A measure of this spirit seems now to have been kindled by S. Herbert Hollomon, Assistant 
Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, who has established a patent panel of the 
Commerce Technical Advisory Board to delve into these matters with a sense of urgency. Also, 
Dr. Donald A. Schon, head of the Commerce Department, Oﬃce of Technical Services, and 
Professor Charles Stark Draper, Chairman of the National Inventors Council, are instituting 
studies. 
113 

114 
Create or Perish 
7.1 
Present Proposals for a Common European Patent and Judiciary 
In an eﬀort to meet the needs of a modern Europe, and despite the wide range 
of diﬀerences in national laws and requirements for the issuance of patents in 
Belgium, France, Holland, Italy, Luxembourg, and West Germany, these coun­
tries have banded together with the exciting purpose of trying to create a single 
European patent. Appreciative of the limitations upon the courts of law in the 
growing maze of technology, but also cognizant of the necessity for the safe­
guards of the judicial process, these people propose a single European Patent 
Oﬃce which will perform both administrative patent examining and judicial 
functions, complementing the processes of the national courts of law of the 
individual countries. 
Preliminary plans 2 proposed by representatives of the respective govern­
ments, and made more ﬁrm at the Berlin 1963 summer conference, are somewhat 
as follows: 
An inventor may ﬁle for a single, common European patent either in the 
European Patent Oﬃce directly or in any one of the national patent oﬃces for 
forwarding to the European Patent Oﬃce. The international group of examiners 
staﬃng this latter oﬃce, under ﬁnancial support from all the member countries, 
ﬁrst checks the formal suﬃciency of the application papers and then forwards 
the application to an International Patent Institute, probably at the Hague, 
where an international group of trained technical oﬃcers will make a novelty 
search and report on the closest prior art that can be found. No opinion will 
be expressed, however, as to whether the claimed invention is or is not actually 
a patentable invention in the light of this prior art. On the contrary, one of 
the purposes of this novelty search is to enable the patent applicant himself 
to decide whether, in the light of the prior art, he actually has a patentable 
invention and should maintain his application or whether his claims should be 
modiﬁed to show more clearly how his inventive step is an advance over what 
has been done before. 
The European Patent oﬃce will then, as a matter of course, publish the 
application as an initial grant, including the original or modiﬁed claims of the 
applicant together with the novelty search report of the International Patent 
Institute. The public thus will know what the applicant is claiming and what 
prior art the international search has developed, and any interested member of 
the public can make his own evaluation of such claim. 
This published patent will automatically be treated as abandoned after ﬁve 
years from publication unless either the applicant or a member of the public 
ﬁles a petition for a ﬁnal examination and determination of the validity of the 
patent by the European Patent Oﬃce. Such a petition must be published so 
that anyone interested in this patent-claim assertion may, within a limited time, 
join in the petition and inform the European Patent Oﬃce of any prior art or 
other reasons for invalidity of which they are aware. 
2Committee of National Institutes of Patent Agents, “European Convention for facilitating 
the ﬁling of applications for patents in respect of the same invention in several States and the 
examination thereof,” Unpublished draft, June 14, 1962. 

115 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
Thus, before making a ﬁnal determination as to whether the initial scheme is 
or is not patentable, the European Patent Oﬃce examiners have before them not 
only the results of the search of the International Patent Institute but also all 
the prior-art references which the technical community of all the countries has 
been able to assemble. Prosecution of the claims will then place much as in the 
West German, Dutch, or American systems, with rejections and amendments, 
and appeal to a special board of the European Patent Oﬃce for a ﬁnal decision. 
One reason for this two-stage procedure in the granting of the European 
patent is the fact that the average life span of patents in countries such as 
Western Germany (voluntarily cut short by the failure to pay the successively 
increasing renewal taxes) is about seven years. And the period elapsing between 
the original ﬁling of an application for a common European patent and the ﬁve-
year period for ﬁnal examination is expected to approximate the same length 
of time. 
At the end of that time, about half the patents will probably be 
abandoned, and the European Patent Oﬃce and the national courts will not 
be cluttered with litigation over uneconomic or unimportant patents. A party 
being threatened by, or concerned with, an initial or preliminary patent grant, 
moreover, does not have to wait for the patentee to descend upon him in order 
to obtain a binding determination of patent validity. 
Upon election to ﬁle for a common European patent, the applicant will 
be barred from obtaining an individual national patent in any of the separate 
countries. However, for the initial phases of this proposed program, the right 
to ﬁle for individual national patents is retained. 
In the event that a suit for patent infringement is brought in any of the 
national courts, after the publication of the initial patent by the European 
Patent Oﬃce but prior to ﬁnal examination and ﬁnal patent grant, the national 
courts, with power to decide infringement only and not validity, must suspend 
proceedings to enable the European Patent Oﬃce to make its ﬁnal examination 
and rule on validity. Should the European Patent Oﬃce decide that there is no 
invention or that for some other reason the initial patent is invalid and no ﬁnal 
patent of any kind can be granted, appeal may be made to a board of appeals 
of the European Patent Oﬃce, whose decision is ﬁnal. 
Even after the ﬁnal granting of a patent, and at any time during its life, 
the public, and not merely an infringer, has the right to bring a suit before a 
special board of the European Patent Oﬃce for a declaration that the patent 
is invalid. And appeal to a European Patent Court staﬀed by internationally 
selected judges is available. 
Once a ﬁnal patent has been granted, however, the national courts may 
proceed with suits to determine whether the patent is infringed. If doubt as to 
validity is shown before such courts and if the validity board of the European 
Patent Oﬃce of the European Patent Court is also to consider the matter, the 
national courts may, if they so desire, postpone infringement decisions until 
the ﬁnal decision on validity has been rendered by the European Patent Court. 
In such infringement actions, the national courts may request the European 
Patent Oﬃce to act as an expert as to technical matters, including the scope 
of protection intended for a patent, or they may request the European Patent 

116 
Create or Perish 
Court to interpret doubtful provisions of European patent law. The decision of 
the courts as to infringement may be appealed to the national appellate courts, 
as in present-day fashion, but the ﬁnal appeal will not be to the supreme courts 
of the individual countries but to the European Patent Court. 
Instead of waiting to be sued for infringement in a national court, moreover, 
any person who is concerned over whether or not he may be infringing a patent 
may ask the before-mentioned special board of the European Patent Oﬃce to 
declare whether his product or process is an infringement. The resulting deter­
mination may be appealed to the same court, but a decision of the European 
Patent Court as to infringement is to be binding upon the national courts. Thus 
national judicial sovereignty is being radically curtailed in an eﬀort to establish 
common standards of validity and infringement and uniformity of law under the 
supreme guidance of the European Patent Court. 
More than this, litigation in the national courts and prosecution of eco­
nomically useless patents in the European Patent Oﬃce are to be minimized. 
Searches, examination, validity, and infringement proceedings are to be stream­
lined and standardized, as they must be if the present terrible waste of time, 
eﬀort, and skilled manpower (involved in separate national patents, compet­
ing patent oﬃces, separate judicial procedures, and varying standards) is to be 
eliminated. 
These radical and far-reaching modernizing steps, in the race for survival 
with an aggressive, enthusiastic, and hostile competitive society 3, are being 
considered abroad at a time when, in the United States, there is more concern 
with putting the law back to where it was forty years ago; with having a spank­
ing new building for the Patent Oﬃce; and with speeding up the searching and 
cutting short negotiations between attorneys and the Patent Oﬃce. Indeed, we 
seem to consider ourselves clever enough to produce the “valid” ﬁnal patent in 
shorter and shorter time, despite the increasing problems involved: obtaining 
and holding competent career examiners and the growing complexity of tech­
nology. This is how we have always done it, and apparently all that is needed 
to introduce time-study and eﬃciency “experts” and computers to speed up the 
process. 
A lesson for present-day American from its elders can be gleaned: namely 
to concern ourselves with substance, not form, and not to cling to procedures 
and format which have proved themselves long out-dated economically, socially, 
and politically 4 . 
The economic and political eﬀect upon the United States of real progress in 
the competent administration and sympathetic protection of industrial property 
in Europe is another issue with which apparently few, if any, in government are 
presently concerned. If America is to be a world “leader” forging “new frontiers” 
in fact, and not merely in ﬁne words, platitudes, and wishful thinking, it must 
shore up the sagging foundations of our free-enterprise capitalistic society before 
3Edward E. McGrath, “How Should the U.S. React to Reds ’Man-in-Space Feat’,” Boston 
Globe, April 13, 1961. 
4Report No. 148 of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 87th Congress, 2d Session 
(1962), p. 12: “The very survival of the patent system, as it now exists, is at stake.” 

117 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
adding ﬂoors to the superstructure. 
What are the reasons behind our out-dated Patent Oﬃce procedures and 
the general hostility or lack of interest and a sympathy for industrial property 
protection from top to bottom of our judiciary? It is no accident that both Re­
publicans and Democratic judges are less than cordial to patents and complaints 
as to unfair competition predicted upon proprietary rights. It is no accident that 
vast groups of our industrial society have become less than enthusiastic about 
patents and about ﬁghting to maintain their proprietary rights. It is no accident 
that our engineering community is far from “on ﬁre” and, like many other groups 
in our society, looks for security rather than for the excitement and adventure 
of its work with dreams of giant rewards. 
By recent interviews of applied scientists and engineers in university, govern­
ment, large corporation, and small company electronics laboratories in greater 
Boston, interviews conducted by my classes in invention, patent, and innovation 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and analyzed by the Academy of 
Applied Sciences, a shocking apathy was uncovered. Those working under gov­
ernment sponsorship or employment felt no personal incentive from the patent 
system and, indeed, showed no concern for patents whatsoever since the latter 
would be the property of the government. In many cases, they reported that 
the lack of recognition of their personal eﬀorts, coupled with the great diﬃculty 
in persuading superiors to try out something new or radically diﬀerent, was 
responsible for their attitude of doing a day’s work for a day’s pay. 
In one major space laboratory, it was frankly conceded that if the germ 
of a really novel concept came to mind, it would be brought to completion in 
other commercial company endeavors outside the NASA program, because of 
the grab-all patent policy of the government. This puts a premium on solving 
NASA’s problems safely and regularly. Three patents applications, to be sure, 
have been ﬁled in the past four years out of the millions of dollars of space 
research conducted by this laboratory; but the commercial section of the same 
company has ﬁled hundreds of such applications during the same period. 
Much as the government patent policies have quashed creative ingenuity, so 
the company employment agreements have reduced the interest of the engineers 
in inventing. Two principal reasons for this lack of incentive were advanced: 
ﬁrst, the companies resist really new ideas; and second, the reward and recog­
nition procedures are actually not tied to creativity. Most of the commercial 
company engineers and applied scientists who were interviewed stated that they 
presently had some rather new ideas that they felt would be useful as products 
for their companies. But they were not even suggesting them because of the 
diﬃculty and even political danger in getting new ideas considered fairly and 
accepted. Possible inventions in ﬁelds outside their speciﬁc employment had 
also occurred to many of those interviewed; but the universal explanations for 
doing nothing about them were either that the company employment agree­
ment made them the employer’s property, or that the time, expense, and risks 
involved in our present patent system were formidable. Many felt, moreover, 
that any recognition would go to others higher up on the company ladder. Are 
industry and government managers awake to this lack of morale; or don’t they 

118 
Create or Perish 
realize its eﬀect? The prevalent American management concept of equality of 
talent and interchangeability of applied scientists and engineers saps at the roots 
of creative accomplishment. Flowers will not bloom without roots! 5 . 
7.2 
Some Diﬀerent Ideas for Revision of the American Patent System 
Looking, then, at the foundation of our American patent system, I question 
whether it is suited to hold up the social order of today and tomorrow. The 
system cannot but crumble if it rests upon fundamental concepts not in tune 
with modern trends. It is of no use to long for “the good old days,” because most 
Americans, rightly or wrongly, have unmistakably shown in modern elections 
that they wish to adopt a diﬀerent kind of social structure. 
So, unless the 
purposes and eﬀect of the patent system are matched to modern trends, the 
good that resides, even in an out-dated patent system may disappear. 
We should question, for example, whether it is sensible, in all instances, to 
give to certain large corporations the same amount of power of exclusion in a 
patent that is given into smaller hands for the establishment of new businesses 
or growth. Is it not perhaps a terrible waste to have one branch of government 
(the Patent Oﬃce) grant a right after years of consideration and then to have 
another branch (the Antitrust division of the Department of Justice) limit or 
abolish such right? Isn’t this particularly true where the trend of Supreme Court 
thinking is directed, not toward real antitrust violations, but to the possession 
of instruments that, if improperly used, could conceivably result in violations 
6? 
We should question whether, as the country proceeds unmistakably along 
the path of more and more federal supervision, in accordance with the will of 
the majority, the same social purpose is served by our present type of patents 
for inventions in the highly sensitive ﬁeld of public health as exists in other 
less sensitive ﬁelds of industrial products. 
The must be examined because, 
though the late Senator Estes Kefauver was unsuccessful in his attack upon 
pharmaceutical patents in 1962, the handwriting is on the wall to be read 7 . 
The engineering, scientiﬁc, legal, and business communities of the nation 
should now, before it is too late, explore policies that can preserve the impor­
tant stimuli of the patent system even under conditions where the public is 
highly sensitive. We who are generally friendly to the patent system shall have 
performed a disservice to future generations if we refuse to examine our present 
form of patent system to see if it is any longer as meaningful and proper in 
our present society as it was in the early part of this century. We shall have 
performed a further disservice if we do not plan to integrate our patent system 
with that of the European Economic Community. 
With regard to the procedures, indeed, it seems that our emphasis ought 
to be making the path of the inventor easier in the Patent Oﬃce, rather than 
5Robert H. Rines, “Current Problems in the Protection of Creative Ideas and Writings,” 
IEEE International Convention Record, Part 10 (1963). 
6United States v. Dupont & Co., 366 U.S. 316 (1961). 
7Science, Vol. 134, pp. 89-90 (July 19, 1961). 

119 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
approaching the problem solely from the present point of view of making it easier 
and quicker for the government to speed up its consideration of patents. Neither 
the Patent Oﬃce examiners nor any other group of individuals can do creative 
work in an atmosphere of speed. In fact, the examiners should better be given 
more time for thorough consideration of the matter of patentability and the 
application of the judicial tests of obviousness and other standards of invention, 
if judges are to be asked to give great weight to the examiners’ conclusions. 
Speed is not, and never has been, a substitute for thorough work; and so we 
must decide whether the issuing of good patents is more or less important than 
the prompt issuing of large numbers of possibly inferior patents. This, again, is 
the question: Is America interested in substance or in mere form? 
Let us consider, therefore, another approach predicated upon the hypothesis 
that a patent examiner is not just a servant of the public at large, but under 
the very constitutional provisions whereby the patent system exists also has 
a responsibility to the individual inventor. 
He should not engage merely in 
the destructive process of rejection, but should speed the process of patent 
examination through active assistance to inventors, in order that patents be 
issue promptly when invention appears to be present. It should be as important 
for an examiner to feel content when assisting an inventor in obtaining a patent 
with claims of proper scope as it is now for many examiners when sustained by 
the Board of Appeals in a rejection. 
To this end, a reformulation of present Patent Oﬃce practice can be made 
by administrative order of the commissioner which will take into account the 
long-overlooked Patent Oﬃce responsibility to the inventor. Speciﬁcally, when 
an examiner is convinced that an invention is present but is dissatisﬁed with the 
claims of the applicant, he should be required to suggest diﬀerent claims or call 
for an interview for the purpose of formulating such claims with the inventor 
or his counsel. This is the common practice of the West German Patent Oﬃce. 
And this is the healthy way to speed prosecution, a much better way than 
arbitrarily limiting the applicant to two Patent Oﬃce actions, as now proposed 
in so-called “compact” patent prosecutions. 
Could we also move a step further in order to expedite prosecution and 
eliminate the necessity for so many appeals before the Board of Appeals and 
the courts? When the Patent Oﬃce is convinced that invention is present, but 
agreement as to the working of the claim cannot be reached with the inventor’s 
counsel, might not the Patent Oﬃce thereupon give the applicant his choice: 
either suﬀer a ﬁnal rejection or accept a prompt patent containing a claim of 
the scope that seems proper to the Patent Oﬃce; but including in the patent 
document claims not approved by the Oﬃce but which the applicant still feels 
describe the invention more fairly. 
The whole purposed of claims is to alert the public as to the metes and 
bounds of the patent grant. No one, from reading a claim, however, understands 
what the claim covers or what if actually means without recourse by skilled 
counsel to the ﬁle history of the patent. 
Since counsel must study this ﬁle 
history to interpret the claims anyway, it would seem that he could equally 
well determine whether the claim granted by the Patent Oﬃce under this new 

120 
Create or Perish 
proposal was broad enough, or whether the inventor’s claim represent more 
adequate allowable protection. The public can thus be alerted as to what the 
court will probably hold with regard to the ultimate scope of the patent, which 
seems to be the only reason for having claims in the ﬁrst place. 
Healthy expedition of patent applications prosecution and the elimination of 
much appellate procedure would appear to be the dividends accruing from such 
a system. This would be particularly true where the matter of presumption of 
validity (which would only attach to the Patent Oﬃce allowed claims) is purely 
a procedural beneﬁt as interpreted in practice by the modern courts. 
Another suggestion I would oﬀer for expediting patent application prosecu­
tion is also peculiarly within the province of the commissioner to accomplish, 
namely to abolish some of the ritualistic and formalistic rules of claim drafts­
manship. While at one time in our development of the law it was probably 
sound to adopt greater strictness in this regard, in order to introduce clarity 
and deﬁniteness and to establish how claims should be construed, I question 
whether this is still valid 8 . 
In the 1952 Patent Act, Congress went part way in authorizing functional 
claim language (“means” plus function), with a statutory provision that this is to 
be interpreted to cover the kind of structure disclosed in the patent speciﬁcation 
and equivalents. This was intended to curb court criticisms and to simplify claim 
drafting, consistent with permitting proper scope of coverage. 
Should we not also remove, however, the time-consuming obstacles involved 
in trying to connect and agree with the Patent Oﬃce upon broad claim ter­
minology, simply because the rules forbid the use of alternative or illustrative 
expressions, to wit; “of metal or plastic or wood or the like,” or “such as elec­
trical or mechanical or electro-mechanical members,” etc? 
Shouldn’t we re­
examine these expressions to see whether they actually introduce indeﬁniteness 
and vagueness, or whether, on the contrary, they do clarify what is intended? 
An additional proposal relates to encouraging prompt disclosure of ideas 
without fear of litigation and appropriation. It is doubtful if any agency outside 
the Patent Oﬃce receives so many new ideas. The Patent Oﬃce, moreover, 
generally receives these ideas years in advance of their publication either in 
periodicals or in pieces of commercial equipment; and certainly the long delay 
in the issuance of patents prevents the rapid informing of the public as to the 
contents of the applications. Is it in the public interest that our system, which 
requires in this era acceleration in new-product and in new-idea development, 
should be stymied by the secrecy with which these ideas must be held in the 
Patent Oﬃce until the inventor dares to risk disclosure? 
I have proposed 9 that the Patent Oﬃce or a related arm of the Commerce 
Department should assume the added function of lending its good oﬃces for 
bringing together promptly inventor and interested potential licensee under a 
predetermined set of safeguards. The inventor must, of course, be free to refuse 
8Robert H. Rines, “Recent Attitudes – Judicial, Executive, and Legislative – Foreshadowing 
the Demise of the Present Form of American Patent System,” Bulleting of the Canadian 
Patent Institute, January, 1962. 
9Ibid. 

121 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
this proposal if he so desires, and to proceed as he does now. If, however, he 
wishes the beneﬁt of this proposal, he would agree (1) that the details of his 
invention may be brought to the attention of possible licensees subscribing to a 
Patent Oﬃce service and (2) that, should the potential licensee be interested, 
the inventor agrees to terms as provided in a predetermined set of royalty or 
other payment standards related to the industry involved. 
Those who wish to be subscribers to or recipients of this conﬁdential infor­
mation as potential licensees, on their part, will agree to keep the disclosures in 
conﬁdence and, if they decide to adopt the ideas and if the Patent Oﬃce grants 
a patent covering the same, to respect the patent and to enter into arrangement 
under the provisions of the predetermined set of standards. The potential li­
censees subscribing to this service would have the right to call to the attention 
of the Patent Oﬃce any prior art or prior use of which they are aware so that 
the examiner would not inadvertently issue a patent where it should not be 
granted. This procedure protects the potential licensee and should not hold up 
the prosecution of the patent applications. The potential licensee would still 
have rights to contest infringement, or to contest inventorship on the basis of 
any application then pending, but this right should probably be restricted to 
pending applications in order to protect the inventor from interference contestd 
on matters that the license may have independently previously evolved but did 
not consider important enough to act upon. 
This would also encourage the 
potential licensee to ﬁle more punctually and thus disseminate more rapidly 
information beneﬁcial for the progress of the useful arts. Toward the same end, 
moreover, beneﬁcial tax provisions might be provided, though this would not 
be a necessary or required condition. 
Under such a system, inventors would feel free to have subscribing potential 
licensees examine their inventions and, by subsequent direct contact, further 
conﬁdential information not contained in the patent application, without fear 
of legal entanglements. This should also protect potential licensees from being 
held up by inventors who demand an unreasonable price; and it also protects 
the potential licensees with respect to their own independent developments and 
to the prevention of inadvertent issuance of patents. 
All of this may be accomplished, moreover, by the utilization of the type of 
examiner presently employed in the classiﬁcation division. Such examiners are 
skilled in determining the ﬁeld and nature of inventions, as they are ﬁled, and 
are able to correlate the same with requests that will similarly be ﬁled by the 
subscribing potential licensees. It would appear to be in the decided interest 
of the United States Government itself to subscribe to this service. In such 
event, indeed, a great many of the present-day complications and distrust of the 
government by inventors could be eliminated. 
Since the rules of practice of the Patent Oﬃce, made pursuant to the statu­
tory authorization of the patent laws, have long recognized the right of the 
Patent Oﬃce to permit others to inspect applications, provided permission is 
given in writing by the applicant, no new legislation or other action on the part 
of Congress would seem to be required to institute this program. Rather, it 
would appear to be peculiarly within the jurisdiction of the commissioner of 

122 
Create or Perish 
patents to set up such a liaison function. The Patent Oﬃce has already as­
sumed jurisdiction of a somewhat similar, though less comprehensive program, 
in connection with inviting attention to patents that are available for licensing. 
This proposal, moreover, goes far beyond the concept of the National Inven­
tors Council and the products list circular of the Small Business Administration, 
and should stimulate inventors to complete their thinking on ideas that relate 
not only to their own businesses or ﬁelds of endeavor, but to entirely diverse 
ﬁelds; all with assurance that such disclosure is worthwhile and does not involve 
the likelihood of costly legal procedures and litigation. 
If we are to enjoy the luxury of having many of our best engineers and 
scientiﬁc people work in ﬁelds and on devices that have no bearing on pressing 
problems in military and other high-priority ﬁelds, we must ﬁnd some incentive 
– the above system or something like it – which will impel these engineers 
and scientists to work on problems not immediately concerned with their daily 
duties. Certainly the important inventions that have been contributed in various 
ﬁelds by workers outside those ﬁelds demonstrate the value of such a result. This 
may be part of the answer to the problem of maintaining our freedom to select 
what we wish to work on in our daily lives, while competing more eﬀectively 
with the Soviet society, where the very best brains are forced to work upon 
military and other pressing state problems. 
Lastly, we should explore more promptly whether the patent system can 
ever be adequate as virtually the only universal government reward for advance­
ments in the useful arts. Scientists and engineers are stimulated to creativity, of 
course, by mechanisms other than the patent system, including an enthusiasm 
for science or technology itself, the approbation of the scientiﬁc or engineering 
community, the publication of papers, the winning of a Nobel prize, and the 
attainment of a higher position in an organization. Privately sponsored eﬀorts 
toward this goal of providing reward and recognition for various degrees of cre­
ative advances in applied science and engineering, as distinguished from those 
of pure science, are under way under the auspices of The Academy of Applied 
Science. 
Furthermore, we should select that situation dealing with the useful arts 
and applied science in which monetary, business, and prestige rewards can 
be achieved through patents and modernize the patent system so that it will 
eﬀectively satisfy present needs and provide the stimulation necessary to re-
encourage creativity in the mid-twentieth century applied scientiﬁc and engi­
neering community 10 . 
Most important, however, we should decide promptly whether it is invention 
per se that we should stimulate primarily, or the executing of actual innovation 
– requiring development and entrepreneuring, as well 11 . 
If it is the latter, 
10Note also the suggestions of Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, “Science, Man, and Politics,” Saturday 
Review of Literature, Oct. 20, 1962, p. 24, concerning the necessity for talented scientiﬁc 
people to become actively interdisciplinary in this era where “the dominant inﬂuence of science 
is perhaps the outstanding fact of today’s world.” 
11Not all “innovation” requires invention. Should we not seek to deﬁne “innovation,” if this 
is what we are after, and reward it? 

123 
The Modernization of Patent Systems 
as I strongly suspect, then perhaps a keying of tax-preference beneﬁts to the 
innovator over a period of years, rather than the creation of exclusive rights and 
a belaboring of the patent system, will be a more eﬀective stimulant which, as 
an ancillary beneﬁt, would carry with it great simpliﬁcation of our litigation 
problems. 

124 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 8 
Court Modernization for Aiding the Patent 
System and the Law, in General 
Since there is a decided legal, as well as technical, side to the prob­
lems of patents and of protecting proprietary rights, a pin-pointing 
of diﬃculties in our current system of judiciary review is necessary 
in the interest of completeness. This is done here in language that 
the nonlawyer also can understand. Included are some suggestions 
that would have far-reaching eﬀects for patent litigants as well as all 
those having property rights. 
The suggestions for improving the attitude of the courts toward the property 
rights of the creative individual, in order restore incentive to our present patent 
system, are arrived at perhaps piecemeal. 
If the Supreme Court’s hostility 
to or disinterest in patents is overcome, there may still remain other personal 
prejudices relating to other facets of the law. 
A more generalized proposal 
for trying to remedy all these disturbing inﬂuences is thus in order, especially 
since we recognize the fact that the complexion of the court cannot be changed 
overnight. 
8.1 
The Nature of the Criticism 
Altogether apart from partisan or ethnic dissatisfaction with decisions of the 
Supreme Court in particular cases (which will probably always persist but may 
perhaps be tempered by a better selection of justices from many legal ﬁelds and 
experiences) there are serious, more deep-seated worries among legal profession­
als. They are naturally reluctant to criticize the august institution, not because 
of undue awe for the intellects or judicial perspicacity of the appointees to the 
high bench but, rather, because of the importance of the historically stabilizing 
eﬀect of prior courts upon our way of life. 
Informed criticism of the conduct of the Supreme Court covers a wide range. 
Some critics feel, generally, that the number of cases crowding the court makes 
impossible well-considered, well-written decisions, worthy of respect. Profes­
sor Henry M. Hart, Jr., of the Harvard Law School, has presented “The Time 
125 

126 
Create or Perish 
Chart of the Justices 1” showing the actual impossibility of reaching conscien­
tious, erudite decisions under present conditions, quite apart from fair play for 
litigants. Under Professor Hart’s assumptions, the justices, if in fact they do 
study all petitions and appeals, can give each of 1300-odd annual petitions for 
writ of certiorari and appeals about ten minutes’ consideration 2: 
Others feel that they court pays little attention to, and indeed is disposed to 
ignore, many, many ﬁelds vital to our way of life, including patents, copyrights, 
and property rights in general, in favor of multitudes of perhaps nationally 
trivial, minor abuses of other kinds of rights 3 . Among the justices themselves, 
indeed, there appears to be great resentment over the conversion of the Supreme 
Court into an appellate tort court: 
To review individualized personal injury cases, in which the sole issue 
is suﬃciency of the evidence, seems to me not only to disregard the 
Court’s proper function, but to deﬂect the Court’s energies from the 
mass of important and diﬃcult business properly here 4 . 
Many lawyers object strenuously to the philosophy that justices – appointed 
for life – should foist upon an electorate their own personal views as to matters 
of social, economic, and legal conduct. Still others decry the lack or respect 
among certain justices for legal precedent, the legislative functions of Congress, 
and the historic duty of the Supreme Court to try, at least, to bring some mea­
sure of stability and order to our judicial and legal processes. In the Holmes 
Lectures at Harvard in 1958, Judge Learned Hand frankly explained this dan­
gerous condition: 
I trust it is not disrespectful to say that I ﬁnd it impossible to predict 
what attitude the Court would take towards a statute of which it 
much disapproved even where it concerned economic issues only; and 
... the answer becomes decidedly more obscure when the statute 
touches those other interests, now called “Personal Rights 5.” 
How correct was Mr. 
Justice Roberts’ earlier prediction in Mahnich v. 
Southern S.S. Co. 6: 
The evil resulting from overruling earlier considered decisions must 
be evident. In the present case, the court below naturally felt bound 
173 Harvard Law Review, pp. 84 - 125 (1959). 
2By the same computation formula, the ten minutes had been whittled down in 1960 and 
1961. 74 Harvard Law Review, pp. 99, 100 (1960) and 75 Harvard Law Review, pp. 85, 86 
(1961). 
3Robert H. Rines, “Some Legal Considerations in Presenting Technical Information,” In­
stitute of Radio Engineers Transactions, Vol. EWS-2, No. 3, pp. 84-88 (1959); Harry G. 
Hehn, “Current Developments in Copyright Law,” American Bar Association Ninth Annual 
Symposium on Copyright, p. 10. 
4Mr. 
Justice Stewart, Sentilles v. 
Inter-Carribean Shipping Corp., 361 U.S. 107, 111 
(1959). 
5“Personal Rights” refers to the Bill of Rights. 
6321 U.S. 96, 113 (1944). 

127 
Aiding the Patent System and the Law 
to follow and apply the law as clearly announced by this court. If 
litigants and lower federal courts are not to do so, the law becomes 
not a chart to govern conduct but a game of chance; instead of set­
tling rights and liabilities it unsettles them ... and ... the deplorable 
consequence will inevitably be that the administration of justice will 
fall into disrepute. Respect for tribunals must fall when the bar and 
the public come to understand that nothing that has been said in 
prior adjudication has force in a current controversy. 
And coupled with this is the apparent philosophy that the ends of justice 
are served by attaining the desired result of favoring or disfavoring a class of 
litigant, even if this is done on the ﬂimsiest of rationalization. In the words of 
one of our ablest federal judges 7: 
In my opinion there was no evidence whatsoever of negligence on the 
part of the engineer. I cannot read the record as a whole in a way 
to ﬁnd any evidence of negligence. But I know that my method of 
reading the record is diﬀerent from that of a majority of the Supreme 
Court of the United States as exhibited in past cases, and I hope I 
am a lawful judge, and I recognize the limits of my authority, whether 
appellate judges do or not. 
The host of relatively recent Congressional countermands of the eﬀects of the 
Supreme Court decisions demonstrates, others point out, an unhealthy conﬂict. 
The readiness of certain justices to overturn long-established and well-considered 
law and legal rules, to attain a given result, has been particularly frustrating to 
conscientious law-enforcement oﬃcers, also. Recent episodes of this character 
are illustrated by Rios v. United States and Elkins et al v. United States 8 . 
Under this procedure, we may expect newly fashioned reversals of law every 
time that the court changes its members, or the members change their personal 
views. 
As another illustration: in reviewing the past two decades, without ﬁrst 
looking at the actual decisions of the Supreme Court, I found it possible to pre­
dict with almost 100 per cent accuracy, which justices would ultimately decide 
against the patentee. And this was true even in the absence of knowledge as to 
the merits or issues of a patent case or a case in which a patentee was somehow 
involved. 
While recognizing the necessity for the justices to exercise discretion in mat­
ters of certiorari, many lawyers protest the clear usurpation of Constitutional 
power by the court in declining to hear matters concerning which the Consti­
tution directs that the Supreme Court “shall have the appellate Jurisdiction.” 
It declines by dismissing appeals for “want of a substantial federal question.” 
If the work load is too onerous, some feel 9, it behooves the court to protest 
7Judge Charles E. Wyzanski, Jr., New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad Company 
v. Henagan, as quoted and aﬀ., 272 F. 2d 163, 155 (1959). 
8364 U.S. 253 and 364 U.S. 206. 
962 Harvard Law Review, pp. 488-496 (1948-1949). 

128 
Create or Perish 
to Congress, since the Constitution distinctly provides that the Supreme Court 
“shall” hear appeals “arising under this Constitution” and “the Laws of the 
United States,” and that it is the province of Congress, not the court, to make 
“Exceptions 10.” 
Every active practitioner before the court feels the frustration of this free 
and easy ﬁat by which 
The Court has for some years been in the process of interpreting 
away the diﬀerence between appeals and certioraris, reducing the 
appeals also to a matter of its own discretion 11 , 
despite the Constitutional mandate, so that today 
it has long since become impossible to defend the thesis that all the 
appeals which the Court dismisses (for want of a substantial federal 
question) are without substance 12 . 
In connection with the practice of my own ﬁrm, for example, I would inquire 
1. Whether a case involving a construction of a State statute that authorized 
deprivation of a right to trial by jury by an order for a new trial, issued pursuant 
to a secret hearing, held without notice, in a locked private room of the court 
house from which counsel was deliberately excluded by a judge, presents no 
“substantial federal question 13.” 
2. Whether a case involving a novel construction of the Patent Act of 1952 
that permitted the destruction of a patent for a device that the Court of Ap­
peals14 had to admit was (1) “useful and ingenious,” (2) “not known prior,” (3) 
had “solved these problems” of the prior art, and (4) had “commercial success” 
(in short, all the tests heretofore known to the law for demonstrating patentable 
invention) was of import for decision; particularly where, under similar circum­
stances, other Courts of Appeals had interpreted the Act contrarily, and the 
parties before such Courts of Appeals joined with plaintiﬀ in seeking a ﬁrst 
interpretation from the Supreme Court of the Act 15 . 
3. Whether a patent for an invention widely used in radio can be valid in 
one circuit and invalid in another 16 . 
10Art. III, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. 
11John P. Frank, “The United States Supreme Court: 1950 - 1951,” The University of 
Chicago Law Review, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 165, 231 (1952). 
1273 Harvard Law Review, pp. 84 - 125 (1959). 
13Rines v. Justices of the Superior Court, 330 Mass. 368, appeals dismissed, 346 U.S. 919. 
14Glagovsky v. Bowcraft, 164 F. Supp 189, 190; 1 Cir., 267 F. 2d 479 (1959), certiorari 
denied 361 U.S. 884. 
15The Supreme Court has denied every petition to date for an interpretation of what is 
and is not patentable under the Patent Act of 1952, despite the conﬂicts in the Circuits and 
despite the fact that the Patent Oﬃce, totally in the dark, is granting thousands of patents 
weekly! 
16Pierce v. American Communication & MacKay Radio, 280 F. 2d 278, 1st Cir. (1960), 
Pierce v. Allen B. DuMont Laboratories, Inc., 297 F. 2d 323, 3rd Cir. (1962) cert. denied 
Oct. 9, 1962, Pierce v. Aeronautical Communications Equipment, Inc., 307 F. 2d 790, 5th 
Cit. (1962), cert. denied 371 U.S. 954 (Justice Douglas dissenting), rehearing denied 372 
U.S. 925. 

129 
Aiding the Patent System and the Law 
4. Whether the havoc wreaked among thousands of mineral lease applicants 
by a split-decision of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 17, per­
mitting the Secretary of the Interior to ignore his own admittedly mandatory 
regulations to divest an oil-lease applicant of his rights under the Mineral Leas­
ing Statute, was of suﬃcient importance for the consideration of the Supreme 
Court, particularly where, within a one-month period of this decision, three 
diﬀerent panels of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in parallel 
cases diﬀered, also by split decisions in each case, as to whether to follow or to 
decline to follow this decision. 
Other lawyers could easily supplement and complement these illustrations 
with even more deserving and far-reaching questions – but questions that ap­
parently are of no concern to some Supreme Court justices. 
What can be done about it? 
8.2 
A Few Measures Already Proposed 
There have been proposals to lighten the burden of the Supreme Court and 
the complete federal judiciary by eliminating certain kinds of cases of federal 
jurisdiction, to wit, those based solely upon diversity of citizenship. It appears 
that this has had the support of some of the courts and some members of 
Congress 18 . But it has evoked serious objection by those who believe that it is 
vitally necessary for the federal courts to exercise such jurisdiction 19 . Though 
a compromise in the raising of the jurisdictional sum from $3,000 to $10,000 
was adopted, our troubles still persist. 
Justice Harlan has proposed increasing the number of law clerks. Certainly 
this should be done in any event – but not to substitute the views of law clerks 
for those of the justices as to whether or not a case should be heard, or as to the 
decision to be rendered. Others have suggested that administrative assistants 
of commissioners be given to the court, or experienced lawyers be appointed 
to aid the justices in the pursuit of their tasks 20 . These proposals, however, 
clearly cannot obviate the real diﬃculties before recounted, as pointed out by 
the late Justice Jackson 21 . 
Still other suggestions for an enlarged court and for sitting in sections of 
chambers have been found wanting 22 . 
17McKenna v. Seaton, 259 F. 2d 780, certiorari denied, 358 U.S. 835 (1958). The gravity 
of the question involved was described by dissenting Judge Prettyman (p. 786). “The basic 
problem is the ’rule of law.’ We have laws – either statutes or rules legally adopted – and we 
are supposed to be governed by them. If our governors merely do whatever strikes them as 
just and fair and reasonable at the moment, we have rule by men instead of by law. These 
are no cliches. Rule by law alone is the precise essential which diﬀerentiates our system from 
the totalitarian system. ... Not law but the will of the Secretary will then govern.” 
18Justice Frankfurter in Burford v. Sun Oil Co., 319 U.S. 315, 348; and Senator Norris, 
Senate Report No. 691, 71st Congress, 2d Session (1930). 
19Donald S. Cohan and Mercer D. Tate, “Manufacturing Diversity Jurisdiction,” Villanova 
Law Review, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 201, 242 (1956). 
20Doris M. Yendes, 25 Univ. K. C. L. Rev. 178 (1956-57). 
21Robert H. Jackson, The Supreme Court in the American System of Government, Harvard 
University Press, 1955, pp. 19 - 22. 
22Felix Frankfurter and James Landis, The Business of the Supreme Court, pp. 82 - 83, 

130 
Create or Perish 
8.3 
A Diﬀerent Proposal 
An answer may lie in the lightening of the load of the Supreme Court, also 
providing a most desirable review of the decisions of the often conﬂicting panels 
of the various Circuit Courts of Appeals, by a newly created Intermediate Court 
or Courts of Appeals, sitting between the Circuit Courts of Appeals and the 
United States Supreme Court. 
This would enable the review of cases that 
presently should be heard by the Supreme Court but which that court just 
cannot handle physically or, because of personal interest or disinterest, is not 
disposed to handle23 . 
Our society may presently be so complex, indeed, that individual judges of 
the Intermediate Court of Appeals, more knowledgeable in specialized ﬁelds, 
such as patents, unfair competition, taxes, copyrights, and the like, can guide 
the Court in those ﬁelds, but without the danger possibly inherent in making 
the trial court a tribunal of specialists or technicians. Such an Intermediate 
Court of Appeals with the Supreme Court as a tribunal above it, would not be 
disposed to foist its personal views upon the public or to decide cases on other 
than legal precedents and principles. Some measure of stability and uniformity 
in the law, moreover, could thus be introduced and many facets of our way of 
life, including property rights, no longer ignored. 
This, moreover, would leave the Supreme Court free to hear mandatory 
appeals and the very occasional cases certiﬁed from, or through, such an In­
termediate Court of Appeals. Perhaps, indeed, the mandatory ﬁeld could be 
restricted or limited (as the court has done for itself by the “insubstantial federal 
question” doctrine) and all cases relegated to the realm of certiorari – somewhat 
as in the New York appellate practice. Special provision, in certain limited cases, 
for sidetracking the Intermediate Court of Appeals and proceeding directly to 
the Supreme Court might also be provided. 
This proposal, it appears to me, might to a long way toward solving the 
diﬃculties before recounted, yielding a stabilizing single-court review, to which 
our citizenry is entitled and which the Constitution contemplated, but releasing 
the Supreme Court itself from all cases but those that it should be required to 
hear and carefully to consider and decide. The proposal could serve, moreover, 
to protect the court from most of the citizenship-diversity appeals that clutter 
its schedule, and as to which there has been great criticism. 
Ancillary beneﬁts from such an intermediate tribunal would inure in other 
cases of jurisdictional dispute between the Supreme Court justices, as in Florida 
Lime and Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Jacobsen, et al. 
24, where the objection 
was raised by Justices Frankfurter and Douglas that the eﬀect of the decision 
of a three-judge District Court enjoining a State statute on the grounds of its 
unconstitutionality not only serves to expand the Supreme Court’s 
obligatory jurisdiction but contradicts the dominant principle of hav­
98 - 101 (1928); Hearings before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S. 1392, p. 1871, 
75th Congress, 1st Session(1937). 
23Robert H. Rines, Unpublished Law Lecture, Detroit College of Law, November, 1959. 
24362 U.S. 73, 92, 93 (1960). 

131 
Aiding the Patent System and the Law 
ing this Court review decisions only after they have gone through 
two judicial sieves. 
So, also, might the disputes as to improvidently granted writs, as in Needleman 
v. United States 25, be at least partially obviated. 
8.4 
Conclusion 
The time has come to consider positive action. Lawyers have heretofore histor­
ically protected our freedoms with their checks and balances. These are now 
in serious jeopardy from within. We of the present generation should not be 
found wanting in our interest and determination to ﬁnd a prompt and workable 
remedy. 
25Certiorari granted 361 U.S. 808; dismissed (1960) as improvidently granted. 

132 
Create or Perish 

Chapter 9 
A Formula for Economic Decline 
While this book in some portions has covered a fairly large canvas, it has specif­
ically dealt with the need to revamp the patent laws, or at least return their 
practice to the original intent of the founding fathers of the nation as stated in 
Article I of the Constitution. At this time, I would like to stress that this is 
but one small part of a much larger picture. In fact, if this picture were viewed 
as a work of pointlisne, that school of painting in which the whole is developed 
by the employment of thousands of small dots of color instead of brush strokes, 
patent reform would be but a single though arresting dot. 
The larger pictures is that after developing an industrial technology that can 
and has outproduced the world – after investing sixteen billion dollars annually 
in research – what this nation would seem to have acquired is a sure-ﬁre formula 
for economic decline. 
If there is any doubt that our creative industrial capability is standing still – 
and to stand still is to lose ground in modern technology – consider that for the 
third successive time in as many decades the automobile industry again appears 
as the only prime mover capable of pulling the country out of the economic 
doldrums. But this time it is increasingly evident that even that great industry, 
no matter how prodigious and brilliant its performance, cannot single-handedly 
absorb all the unemployed and lift the gross national product growth rate to 
the desired and necessary level. 
While we have always considered ourselves as the most inventive of all mod­
ern nations – with the telephone, the combine harvester, the electric lamp, the 
mass-produced airplane and automobile as icons of this faith – the truth of the 
matter is that modiﬁcation rather than innovation has become the accepted rule 
in American industry. Plastics, processed foods, outboard motors and synthetic 
textiles all appeared in the marketplace before World War II. 
9.1 
The Pity of Serendipity 
Despite vast expenditures in research and the siren song of serendipity with its 
promise that our probings into space would result in unexpected discoveries, 
that they would unlock a cornucopia ﬂow of new, amazing, and revolutioniz­
133 

134 
Create or Perish 
ing products that would change all prior concepts of living and accelerate the 
economy at a rate never envisioned before, nothing more remarkable than some 
cooking utensils can be traced directly to this mighty eﬀort. And even here the 
manufacturer denies NASA’s claim that these articles are a result of space re­
search. The fact is that American technology has not developed a major product 
that every family has felt a compelling need to acquire since television. 
Not only is private industrial research not paying oﬀ, but the expected spill­
over from the titanic technological expenditures of the government has yet to 
appear. 
One of my friends, who has never been an alarmist, said that he didn’t real­
ize the trouble we are in until seeing the furor in print that greeted the advent 
of colored ﬁlm for the Land Polaroid camera. “It certainly is a distinguished 
and creditable accomplishment, but the only thing ’awesome’ about it is that 
Newsweek should use that word to describe it.” He went on to say that nothing 
he had read had so disturbed him since Calvin Coolidge’s 1928 pronouncement 
that the miniature golf boom of that year would prevent any recession or de­
pression. 
9.2 
“Mind-Forged Manacles” 
There has been some expressed concern. A member of the President’s cabinet 
has admitted that “international competition is beginning to run rings around 
us. The nation’s research eﬀort is not producing the new consumer products, the 
new machines, the new industrial process that the country needs for a growing 
healthy economy.” 
Scientists in top management posts are not unduly alarmed. “There is an 
adequate base for pure research, but is has just not been applied,” insists the 
director of long range planning for an industrial giant noted for its research 
depth. Other august opinions are: “We are not lacking in the capability to 
invent. Where we have trouble is in the incentive to invent.” and “Increasing 
the economic rewards would give a real lift to U.S. inventiveness. 
. . . It’s a 
matter of getting the risks and incentives into balance.” 
Unfortunately there is more to the matter than just getting risks and incen­
tives into balance. If this were all, patent reform and recognition by the courts 
and government of the risks involved could probably restore the old incentives 
that in the ﬁrst stages of the technological revolution enabled America to race 
ahead and provide a stream of goods on a scale never seen before. It was a time 
when Thomas A. Edison, “Tin-Lizzie” Henry Ford , Willie “Airbrake” West­
inghouse, Alexander Graham Bell, Wilbur and Orville Wright were folk heroes 
and every other American youth dreamed of emulating them. 
Today, not a single contemporary inventor is a household name, and most 
industry is so shackled with what William Blake termed “mind-forged manacles” 
that it is extremely doubtful that Edison, Ford, or Bell would be employed and, 
if employed, allowed to function successfully by the companies that now bear 
their names – for all three were nonconformists in terms of what are now ﬁrmly 
established industrial management rules and personnel selection procedures. 

135 
A Formula for Economic Decline 
9.3 
“Conformity Is a Psychotic State” 
Applied to the present state of industrial and technological organization in these 
United States and the mounting challenges we face, there may be more truth 
than shock value in this diagnosis by playwright Cliﬀord Odets. He insists rather 
violently that “this is the frontier that has to be opened. This is a new kind of 
Calvinism that allows no individualism. It is a frightening phenomenon and as 
rigid as any Calvin ever practiced.” 
Whether this is a new kind of Calvinism and psychotic is certainly debatable, 
but that conformity is the enemy of innovation is not. And since conformity is 
the climate in most large business organizations, we may have pair far too high 
a price for some of our greatly revered achievements in mass production and 
management. 
9.4 
Mental Containers 
According to oﬃce wits, nothing is more sacred to executives than a table-of­
organization chart. This is probably true, for the had of the nation’s largest 
advertising agency seemed to realize that he was treading on dangerous ground 
when he said, “It never has been our idea that the organization structure should 
be complicated or an end in itself.” 
Organization charts can be impressive 
and yet have no meaning – in fact can be restrictive. Whether or not a large 
corporation or organization can function without charts to clarify the lines or 
executive responsibility has no bearing on creativity and inventive incentives – 
but the outlined rectangles that dangle down like earring ornaments in these 
paper pyramids do. 
Probably the most eﬀective mental container ever devised is the t.o. box – 
it lets little fresh thought in, and none out. If that is its main purpose, it is 
certainly successful. But if the encouragement of creative thinking and action 
is an objective of a ﬁrm or organization, then it is the greatest barrier Man has 
ever erected against himself. Every week more ideas are smashed, squashed, and 
ignored within four ruled sides than were suppressed by the Spanish Inquisition 
in the four centuries of that institution’s existence. 
Former Olympic diving champion Fred V. Zendar, now a consultant in 
oceanic research for both government and private industry, recently made some 
rather penetrating comments on the subject of chains of command and lines of 
communication. He said, “In all big organizations there is a submerged layer 
that eﬀectively blocks all communication from above and below. Oddly enough, 
sonar has detected a similar stratum of blocking water in the oceans, but here 
the level itself doesn’t remain stationary but periodically rises and sinks and 
sometimes parts.” 
He wrily added, “No such phenomena seem to occur in 
its human counterpart.” When asked what this layer is composed of, Zendar, 
who was a favorite ﬁshing and ﬂying companion of Ernest Hemingway and who 
doesn’t mind putting his shots below the waterline, replied, “In both cases, sus­
pended silt. But I imagine if you examined it closely you’d ﬁnd plankton and 
dead minute marine life in one; supervisors and paper-shuﬄers in the other.” 

136 
Create or Perish 
9.5 
The Degree Slide Rule Won’t Work This Time 
Certainly if the aim is to reinvigorate creativity – and for industry and the nation 
to survive it must be – special attention must be paid to personnel procurement 
processes. 
In educational circles there is already a wide divergence of opinion regarding 
college admission and aptitude test interpretations. Two University of Chicago 
psychologists hold that a high IQ is not a reliable sign of “giftedness” and may 
simply indicate mental grey-ﬂannelism. In one series of experiments they found 
that 30 veritable Quiz Kids with IQs of about 150 showed few creative abilities, 
while an equal number in a much lower bracket were exceptionally good at 
putting facts into exciting new forms. 
At Cambridge University in England, physical science students were found to 
be less intellectually ﬂexible than art specialists and more restricted emotionally. 
It was found also that the ability to deal logically with facts and the ability to 
see new ways of doing things do not necessarily go together. 
Of course, to a patent attorney, this is neither new nor surprising. The roll 
call of great inventors reveals that the initial “breakthrough” discoveries were 
often the brain children of men singularly lacking in expert knowledge in the 
ﬁelds that they ultimately revolutionized. Or as Sir Henry Bessemer, inventor 
of the steel-making process that bears his name, put it, “I had no ﬁxed ideas 
derived from long established practice to control and bias my mind.” 
All of this indicates that if the genes of inventiveness are to be sought and 
recognized, current yardsticks and measuring rules will have to be discarded. 
This will, or course, call for re-education of the sternest sort and a complete 
re-orientation of management thinking. Up to now the employment interviewer 
and personnel procurement manager have been able to play it safe by operating 
within a few time-tested guidelines tailored to the safe customs, folkways, and 
beliefs of this organization. Some of these shibboleths are unbelievable until one 
accepts the fact that every corporation is really a self-contained subculture. 
Here are a few gathered at random: a S.B. will ﬁt one job . . . another rates 
a Sc.M. . . . but a Sc.D. would be overqualiﬁed. . . . Anyone holding both a S.B. 
and LL.B. is apt to prove argumentative with his superiors. So far quite basic 
and undoubtedly time-tested. 
But listen to these: a man who has worked 
three diﬀerent places in less than ﬁve years is either unstable or a “drifter.” 
. . . rockhunters are dependable. . . . drivers of low gas consuming compact cars 
are seldom absentees. 
. . . sports car addicts are just the opposite, but often 
make good application engineers. . . . skiiers usually write good proposals. 
How to press home the hard fact that the supposedly unstable man made 
three changes because he found the tasks assigned boring and oﬀering no chal­
lenge to his talents, or that one “drifter” is apt to prove more creative than ﬁfty 
handbook engineers or benchwarming drones is something that I would like to 
call to the attention of the various schools of business administration and see 
what they come up with. 

137 
A Formula for Economic Decline 
9.6 
A New Use for Senior Scientiﬁc Statesmen 
That many established ways of doing things are held in place not by logic 
or even by habit but by the enormous restraining force of vested interests is 
acknowledged by all who have studied the problem. And in many cases, the 
“vested interests” of employees, particularly at the supervisory level, have been 
found to be as strong as those of top executives, if not stronger. 
For this reason instead of launching a direct attack on the deadly rigidity 
which stiﬂes innovation and inventiveness in many organizations, or even at­
tempting to eradicate the choking underbrush of custom and precedent which 
smothers originality, a new approach to the situation has been proposed and, in 
the case of one government department, has been given a trial run. This new 
approach calls for the creation of a new profession which will function outside 
regular channels of administrative responsibility and lines of authority, will be 
capable of gaining and maintaining the conﬁdence of all employees, will be able 
to intimidate supervisory retaliation, and will at all times have access to and 
the respect of top management. 
This calls for a large order in a man. But fortunately there are ready and 
available a number of men of this stature. These men are our senior scientiﬁc 
statesmen who have passed the age of compulsory retirement in corporations 
(many of which they headed) and have reached emeritus standing in our great 
technical educational institutions. 
Among their ranks are some of our most 
renowned inventors, respected educators, experienced administrators, and orig­
inal thinkers in almost every scientiﬁc discipline. In the opinion of the Board 
of Governors of The Academy of Applied Science, these men represent a na­
tional resource which in our present predicament it would be treason to leave 
immobile. It may be added that The Academy of Applied Science is compiling 
a roster and setting up an activity that will make this great national resource 
available to the country. 
9.7 
Create or Perish 
While the particular problems I have enumerated in this summary would seem 
to be the particular province of management, boards of directors, stockholders, 
and possibly the investing public, such is not the case. 
Creativity and any 
obstacles to it that exist or are put in its path are the concern of every person 
in the United States, and apply to every section of society and every ﬁeld of 
endeavor. The conquest of disease can be seriously delayed, the most promising 
inquires into the nature and control of illness, the rate of new drug discovery 
which will enable us to score an ultimate victory over heart disease, cancer, and 
mental illness, are all jeopardized when incentives for research are not given 
ample recognition, but instead are objects for demogogic political attack. 
We have all rather facetiously referred to the disappearance of the buggy-
whip manufacturers, but how many of us realize that the ﬂight engineering craft, 
which promised such a roseate future to hundreds of thousands of people, has 
had a life span of but ﬁfteen years – from the coming in of the multi-engine 
propeller plane to its replacement by the jet. That in another year only two 

138 
Create or Perish 
of our great plane makers will be making planes and that the nation has just 
about decided to sit out the next round – supersonic carriers. 
Vexing unemployment will become more and more a civic problem as whole 
communities and even states are dealt broadside blows by the increasing tempo 
of skill obsolescence. The answer is not as one government spokesman has said 
that the American craftsman should not seek permanence in residence and the 
schooling of his children but should be prepared to migrate like the birds to 
wherever new work opportunities peculiar to his skills arise – but that industry, 
government, ﬁnance, and the people themselves should go all out to reinvigorate 
the creative gift that from the varied nature of our people and our environment 
is our birthright and for nearly two centuries was the identifying mark of our 
genius. 
Certainly it will call for an overhaul of our educational processes, a reassess­
ment of many facets of our technology, and a recognition on the part of the 
scientiﬁc community that “the statesmanship of science requires that science be 
concerned with more than science.” But nothing less will do, for time is running 
out. 
During the ninety momentous days of the Cuban crisis, we heard a great deal 
about “military options” and there were said to be arguments in the highest 
quarters that the Cuban missile threat was a diversion and that the real Soviet 
goal was the seizure of Berlin. 
Let there be no argument of misconception about Soviet basic aims. The 
armed threat of total thermonuclear war is the diversion – the Soviet goal is to 
take over the world by economic and industrial domination. 
Here there are no options. For America and the free world there is only one 
course of action – 
CREATE OR PERISH 

Index 
A T & T, 78–80, 97 
Academy of Applied Science, 40, 102, 
113, 118, 133 
Air Brake, 33, 106 
Airplane, 129 
Alexander Graham Bell, viii, 43–47, 49, 
50, 52–54, 57–60, 95, 105, 130 
Alexander McLean Nicolson, 74, 75, 77– 
79, 81 
American Bar Association, 103 
American Bell Telephone Company, 47– 
49, 60 
American Fruit Growers, 26 
American Institute of Electrical Engi­
neers, 96 
American Speaking and Telephone Com­
pany, 48 
American Telephone and Telegraph Com-
Bell Telephone Cases, viii, 22, 24, 43, 
49, 50 
Benvenuto Cellini, 59, 60, 87, 90, 105 
Bessemer Process, 132 
Board of Appeals, 12–15, 27, 78, 91, 
115 
Board of Patent Interferences, 13 
Bourseul, 54, 60 
British Patent Oﬃce, 3 
Brogdex Company, 26 
Bureau of Standards, 64, 65 
Cady v. Nicolson, 74 
Calvin Coolidge, 130 
Calvinism, 131 
Cambridge University, England, 132 
Carter Company, 70 
Case of Monopolies, 4 
pany, 74, 77, 99 
American Telephone Company, 58 
Antitrust, 18, 20 
Apple Tube, 98 
Armed Services Procurement Regula­
tions, 67 
Atomic Energy Act, 6, 11 
Atomic Energy Act of 1946, 68 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), 6, 
67–69 
Atomic Energy Commissions (AEC), 
100 
Attorney General, 48 
Automobile, 129 
Autotransformers, 91 
Ball-Point Pen, 96 
Barbed Wire, 37, 106 
Casper Ooms, 95 
Caveat, 43, 44, 49 
CBS-Hytron, 98 
Charles F. Kettering, 34 
Charles Pinckney, 6 
Chesterﬁeld Cigarettes, 71 
Chromium Plating, 96 
Chromotron, 98 
Circuit Court, 48 
Clay Commercial Telephone Company, 
50 
Cliﬀord Odets, 131 
Colgate Company, 70 
Collar, 39 
Computers, 112 
Conditions of Patentability, 27 
First Inventor, 31 
Foreign Patents, 30, 31 
New and Useful, 27 
139 

140 
Create or Perish 
Prior Patent or Publication, 27 
Prior Patents, 31 
Public Use, 29, 30 
Time, 28, 29 
Congress, viii, 6, 7, 11, 12, 14, 15, 17, 
18, 23–28, 30, 33, 34, 38, 40, 
41, 82, 85, 86, 93, 94, 98, 101, 
104–106, 116, 117, 122–125, 
136 
Congress, 23 
Constitution, 6, 7, 11, 15, 17, 21, 23, 
26, 40, 93, 98, 103, 104, 106, 
115, 123, 124, 126, 129 
Constitutional Convention, 5, 6 
Conway P. Coe, 39 
Copyright, 7, 18 
Cotton Gin, 33 
Court of Appeals, 15–17, 21, 22, 26, 
36, 88, 93, 105, 106 
Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, 
15, 16, 36, 78 
Courts of Appeals, 124–126 
Intermediate, 126 
Cyclotron, 96 
Daniel Drawbaugh, 51, 57, 58 
Denver Research Institute, 68 
Department of Agriculture, 68 
Department of Commerce, 8, 68 
Department of Defense, 67 
Department of Health, Education and 
Welfare, 68 
Department of the Interior, 8, 16, 68 
Department of the Treasury, 40 
District Court, 15–17, 19–21, 24, 89, 
91, 92, 106 
Divisional Applications, 77 
Dr. F. W. Kranz, 78 
Dr. Philip Drinker, 65 
Dubilier Condenser Corporation, 64 
Dunning, 95 
Dupont, 95 
Dutch Patent Oﬃce, 89, 91 
East India Trading Company, 3 
Edgerton, 95 
Edison v. Berliner, 49 
Edmund Randolph, 7 
Edward D’Arcy, 4, 5 
Edward L. Bowles, 58, 78, 80 
Eibel Process, 37 
Einstein, 95 
Electric Lamp, 33, 129 
Electron Microscope, 82, 96 
Elisha Gray, 48, 49, 51 
Elkins et al v. United States, 123 
Emil Berliner, 48 
Emilio Q. Daddario, 100 
Ernest Hemingway, 131 
Ether, 25, 26 
European Economic Community, ix, 30, 
109 
European Patent Oﬃce, 110–112 
Federal Communications Commission, 
16 
Federal Reporter, 21, 22 
Federal Supplement, 21, 22 
Federalist Papers, 7 
Fermi, 95 
Florida Lime and Avocado Growers, 
Inc. v. Jacobsen, et al., 126 
Ford, 95, 130 
Fred V. Zendar, 131 
Gardner Greene Hubbard, 44, 45 
General Electric (GE), 69–71, 96, 98 
General Electric Company, 24 
General Radio Co. v. Watson, 91 
General Services Administration, 67 
George E. Frost, 96 
George Washington, 7 
George Washington Pierce, 79, 81, 99 
Pierce Oscillator, 79, 81 
German Patent Oﬃce, 89 
Germany, 29 
Goodyear, 95 
Gordon McKay, 58 
Government Contracts, viii, 65, 66, 97 
Great Britain, 27, 29, 89, 106 
H. D. Arnold, 74 

141 
A Formula for Economic Decline 
Harvard University, 65, 67 
Harvester, 129 
Helicopter, 96 
Henry Knox, 7 
Henry M. Hart, 121, 122 
Holland, 89, 91 
House of Lords, 91 
Hudson’s Bay Company, 3 
I T & T, 81 
IBM, 97 
Infringe, 2, 4, 16, 19–21, 25, 26, 29, 30, 
35, 38, 46, 49, 50, 53, 54, 70, 
80, 82, 89, 99, 102, 106, 111, 
112, 117 
Verbal Infringement, 80 
Interference, 31, 32, 48, 78 
Conception, 32 
Corroboration, 32 
Reduction to Practice, 32 
Internal Review Code, 40 
International Telephone and Telegraph 
Company, 71 
International Telephone and Telegra­
phy Company, 81 
James Madison, 6, 7 
Jet Engine, 96 
John Jewkes, 96 
John P. Frank, 103 
John Ruggles, 8 
Joseph Jenkes, 6 
Judge Learned Hand, 34, 39, 60, 93, 
94, 122 
Judge Morris, 92 
Judge Thurman Arnold, 93 
Judge Wyzanski, 82 
Jungerson, 59, 60, 105 
Jungerson v. Ostby and Barton Co., 
59 
Justice Black, 38, 39, 103 
Justice Brennan, 103 
Justice Douglas, 39, 103, 126 
Justice Frankfurter, 60 
Justice Frankfurther, 126 
Justice Goldberg, 103 
Justice Harlan, 104, 125 
Justice Jackson, 60, 87, 90, 125 
Justice Marshall, 6 
Justice Roberts, 122 
Justice Waite, 58 
Justice Warren, 103 
Kline v. Creative Textiles Inc., 87 
License, viii, 19, 20, 41, 61, 63, 64, 66– 
68, 70, 71, 74, 80, 81, 100, 
101, 105, 116–118 
Light Bulb, 105 
Magna Carta, 3, 4 
Mahnich v. Southern S.S. Co., 122 
Mallory, 34 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), 58, 66, 67, 113 
Mineral Leasing Statute, 125 
Molecular Telephone Company, 50 
Monopoly, 7 
monopoly, 24 
National Aeronautics and Space Act of 
1958, 67–69 
National Aeronautics and Space Ad­
ministration (NASA), 67–69, 
113, 130 
National Patent Planning Commission, 
34 
Needleman v. United States, 127 
Nobel Prize, 118 
O’Reilly v. Morse, 51 
Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research and Devel­
opment, 85 
Oﬃcial Gazette, 18, 19 
Overland Telephone Company, 50 
Patent Act 
Patent Act of 1836, 8 
Patent Act of 1952, viii, 16, 18, 
23, 25, 27, 33, 38–40, 95, 105, 
116, 124 

142 
Create or Perish 
Patent Oﬃce, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14–21, 27, 
34, 38, 44, 45, 47–49, 59, 85– 
92, 109, 112–115 
Paul Langevin, 72, 74, 78–80 
Penicillin, 96 
People’s Telephone Company, 50, 57 
Philco Company, 98 
Philip Reis, 51, 55, 57, 59 
Photoﬂash Lamp, 96 
Pierce v. 
American Communications 
Company, Inc., 74, 77–80 
Pierce v. International Telephone and 
Telegraph Corporation, 81 
Piezoelectric Circuit, viii, 61, 71 
Polaroid, 34, 94, 95, 130 
Post Oﬃce Department, 67 
Power Steering, 96 
Procter and Gamble, 19 
Professor Dolbear, 50, 51, 53 
Public Health Service, 63 
Quick-Freezing, 96 
Radio Corporation of America (RCA), 
69–71, 77, 97, 98 
Ray-O-Vac, 37 
Reaper, 33 
Refrigerator, 96 
Reissue Patents, 72 
Research and Marketing Act, 67 
Research Corporation of New York City, 
66 
Rios v. United States, 123 
Robert C. Watson, 97 
Russia, 14 
Rutherford, 95 
Samuel F. B. Morse, 51 
Samuel Winslow, 5 
Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 34 
Subcommittee on Patents, 85 
Senate Judiciary Committee, 96 
Senate Subcommittee on Patents, Trade­
marks, and Copyrights, 93 
Senator O’Mahoney, 93 
Sewing Machine, 33 
Shop Right, 63, 64 
Singer, 95 
Slide Fastener, 96 
Space Act, 11 
State Department, 8 
Statute of Frauds, 61 
Statute of Monopolies (1623), 5 
Streptomycin, 96 
Subject Invention, 65, 66 
Supreme Court, viii, 15, 21–26, 29, 33, 
35–39, 43, 49–52, 54, 55, 57– 
60, 62, 63, 87, 90, 95, 99, 103– 
106, 114, 121–126 
Supreme Court of Indiana, 71 
Surgeon General, 68 
Sweden, 89 
Synthetic Light Polarizer, 96 
Telegraph, 33, 44, 45, 51, 54 
telegraph, 45 
Telephone, 33, 45, 47–50, 54, 57–60, 
129 
Tesla Coil, 106 
Thiokol, 34 
Thomas A. Watson, 44, 47 
Thomas Edison, 48, 49, 51, 95, 99, 105, 
130 
Thomas Jeﬀerson, 7 
Trademark, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19 
Triode, 95 
United Shoe Machinery Corporation, 
58 
United States Patent Quarterly, 22 
United States Reports, 22 
Universal Copyright Convention, 30 
Vannevar Bush, 85–87, 90 
Veterans’ Administration, 67 
Wabash Appliance Company, 96 
Walter G. Cady, 71, 72, 74, 77–79, 99 
Watch, 96 
West Germany, 89, 90 
West Germany Patent Oﬃce, 115 
Western Electric Company, 71, 74, 78– 
80 

143 
A Formula for Economic Decline 
Western Union Company, 44, 45, 47– 
50 
Westinghouse, 95, 96, 105 
Willie Westinghouse, 130 
Wright Brothers, 95, 130 

