
Copyright © 2011 by Thor Hanson
Published by Basic Books, 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information,
address Basic Books, 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United States
by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please contact the Special
Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103,
or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hanson, Thor.
Feathers : the evolution of a natural miracle / Thor Hanson.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
eISBN : 978-0-46502346-2
QL697.4.H36 2011
598.147—dc22 2011003272



Table of Contents
ALSO BY THOR HANSON
Title Page
Dedication
Author’s Note
Acknowledgements
Preface
Introduction
Evolution
CHAPTER ONE - The Rosetta Stone
CHAPTER TWO - Heat Shields, Gliders, and Insect Scoops
CHAPTER THREE - The Yixian Formation
CHAPTER FOUR - How to Catch a Muttonbird
Fluff
CHAPTER FIVE - Keeping Warm
CHAPTER SIX - Staying Cool
Flight
CHAPTER SEVEN - Ground-Up or Tree-Down?
CHAPTER EIGHT - A Feathered Hammer
CHAPTER NINE - The Perfect Airfoil
Fancy

CHAPTER TEN - The Birds of Paradise
CHAPTER ELEVEN - A Feather in Her Cap
CHAPTER TWELVE - Give Us Those Nice Bright Colors
Function
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - Of Murres and Muddlers
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - The Mighty Penna
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - The Featherless Head
CONCLUSION
Appendix A - An Illustrated Guide to Feathers
Appendix B - Feathers and Conservation
Notes
Bibliography
Image and Quotation Credits
Index
Copyright Page

ALSO BY THOR HANSON
The Impenetrable Forest: My Gorilla Years in Uganda

For Eliza

Author’s Note
Throughout this book, birds are referred to using English names standardized by
the International Ornithological Union. By this convention, individual species
are capitalized (e.g., Winter Wren, Lesser Bird of Paradise), while groups of
birds or generic references are not (e.g., the wrens, the birds of paradise). The
IOC species list is maintained online and updated regularly by an international
panel of ornithologists (see Gill and Donsker 2010). It eliminates the need to
clutter up the text with endless parenthetical Latin binomials. I’ve similarly
avoided in-text citations in favor of trailing phrase notes, which identify
quotations and highlight important source material for each chapter. See the
notes section, which begins on page 283. A complete list of references is
included in the bibliography.

Acknowledgments
Writing a book of this kind relies on the generosity of others. From scientists
and museum curators to fishing guides and fashion designers, people throughout
the world of feathers have come to my aid time and again—assisting with
research, answering questions, sharing data and specimens, and sitting down for
long feather-filled conversations. Here, in no particular order, are some of the
people and organizations that have helped me along the way:
Bob Pyle, Hilda Boshoff, CP Nels Museum, Rob Nixon, Sarah Abrevaya
Stein, Jodi Favazzo, Marios Ignadiou, Greg Willson, Scott Hartman, Xing Xu,
Wyoming Dinosaur Center, Alan Feduccia, Richard Prum, Carla Dove, Pete
Menefee, Rainbow Feather Company, Marian Kaminitz, Leah Chalfen, Simon
Thomsett, Laila Bahaa-el-din, Anziske Kayster, Graaff-Reinet Museum, the
family of Russel W. Thornton, Peter Liotta, National Audubon Society, Kathy
Ballard, Kim Bostwick, Patrick Kirby, John Sullivan, Tony Scruton, Bernd
Heinrich, Edward Bormashenko, Yan-chun (Daniel) Xu, Peter Harrison, Julian
Vincent, Ken and Suzanne Franklin, Suzanne Stryk, Shirley Reuscher, Ken Dial,
Ellen Thaler, Angela Linn, University of Alaska Museum of the North,
Smithsonian Feather Identification Lab (National Museum of Natural History),
National Museum of the American Indian, Pacific Coast Feather Company,
Jeffrey Long, Travis Stier, Glenn Tattersall, Brenda Boerger, David Houston,
Maureen Goldsmith, University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and
Anthropology, Elana Kitching, Linda Lorzechowski, Glenn Roe, ARTFL
Encyclopédie Project, Tom Whiting, Whiting Farms, David Roberts, Cliff Frith,
Jane Grayer, Ian Strange, Donald Jackson, Chris Strachan, Robert Petty,
Impington Village College Model Aeroplane Club, Peter Stettenheim, William
T. Cooper, Robert Petty, Theiunus Piersma, Max Platzer, Gwen Bisseker,
Nickolay Hristov, Airling Gunderson, and Petra Quillfeldt.
Special thanks are due to Paul and Ann Hanson and Erin Braybrook for some
very timely child care. I’m also deeply indebted to the entire staff of the San
Juan Island Library, and particularly Heidi Lewis for her patience with my
endless interlibrary loan requests.
Frank Gill kindly lent his expert eye to early drafts of the manuscript and
provided valuable and encouraging feedback.
I’m grateful to my agent, Laura Blake Peterson, for shepherding a field

biologist through the world of publishing and for connecting me with T. J.
Kelleher at Basic Books. T. J.’s editorial savvy and enthusiasm for this project
have been a boon. Whitney Casser, Cassie Nelson, Sandra Beris, Annette
Wenda, and the rest of the team at Basic have also been a pleasure to work with.
Finally, none of this would have been possible without the unwavering
support of my wife, Eliza Habegger. Along with our baby boy, Noah, and the
rest of my family and friends, she patiently puts up with my quirks, queries,
travels, and lengthy retreats to the Raccoon Shack.

Preface
O! I am Fortune’s fool.
—William Shakespeare,
Romeo and Juliet (ca. 1595)
Vultures made me do it. That’s my stock answer now, whenever people ask me
about this book. It was vultures that first spurred my interest in feathers, years
ago on a research project in Kenya. Watching the great birds hiss and squabble
around a carcass, I thought of how perfectly their feathers (and lack thereof)
were suited to the lifestyle. Bare heads and necks provided for cleaner feeding as
well as heat regulation, stretched out long to keep cool during the day and tucked
back into a plush, downy collar at night. Their dark body plumage resisted
bacteria and absorbed the hot African sun, helping them stay warm in the chilly
high altitudes where they soared, searching for the next kill.
The vultures started me thinking about feathers, and I’ve never stopped. I’ve
seen flycatchers and nightjars burdened with breeding plumes three times their
body length and watched penguins plunge beneath ice floes, comfortably
watertight inside their satiny coats. I’ve huddled in a goose-down sleeping bag
on subzero nights, while the tiny kinglets I studied kept perfectly warm nearby,
fluffed up against the icy winter wind. I’ve traced feather shapes in the stone of
dinosaur fossils and seen them in flying machines, fishing lures, Victorian hats,
shuttlecocks, fletching, and ancient Peruvian artwork. As ornithologist Frank
Gill observed in his classic textbook, Ornithology, “The details of feathers have
fascinated biologists for centuries; it is an enormous topic.” Perfect for a book,
I’d often thought, but it would take another vulture to set me on the path.
Let me explain. As a field biologist, I’m never at a loss for things to study or
topics to write about: everything in the natural world is fair game. If I’m not
intrigued and excited every time I step outside, it just means I’m not paying
attention. Some people find it excruciating to go for a hike with me and my
constant distractions: bird nests, butterflies, lichens, ant hills, soil types, bug
frass, rocks—you name it. At home, my wife, Eliza, puts up with dead voles and
songbirds tucked into the freezer; plant specimens filling the fridge; boxes of

unidentified bees, old bones, and owl heads; and a big tank full of interesting
grubs. (Our baby, Noah, puts up with a lot, too, but he’s never known anything
different!) I’m a fundamentally curious person, and it’s never hard finding
subjects of interest; the challenge lies in narrowing them down.
In the world of scientific research, competition for funding quickly eliminates
most possibilities. Science takes money, and you need a timely, sexy topic to
pick up grants. It’s not surprising that whales and tigers get more attention than
liverworts, click beetles, or mold. Basic field biology can be a tough sell, and I
usually frame my work in the context of larger themes: habitat fragmentation,
species conservation, population genetics, or even the ecological impacts of
warfare. When my schedule finally opened up to start a new book, however, I
found the range of potential topics almost overwhelming. On the first morning, I
sipped coffee and stared at an empty page before finally starting a vulture story
I’d been meaning to jot down for years (you’ll find it in Chapter 15). I hoped it
would at least get the creative juices flowing, and it might come in handy if I
ever wrote “the feather book.”
I’m not the world’s fastest scribe, but I had a few rough paragraphs by the
time I broke for a midday run. We live on an island, five miles from town on a
country lane that slopes gently downhill through dense woods and out between
two farm fields. As I jogged along, thinking about vultures and feathers, my nose
registered the growing rot-and-copper reek of a dead animal. I entered a stand of
trees, and there, sure enough, lay the upended rib cage of a road-kill deer,
splayed out beside the ditch. Overhead, a young Bald Eagle kept vigil on a fir
branch, and above him, higher in the same tree, sat four Turkey Vultures. They
hunched together in a dark row, their red heads lowered, silent and staring.
I slowed, and the vulture on the end suddenly started up, flapping awkwardly,
each wing beat a whistling strain for lift in the cool autumn air. It tilted and
angled through the branches, banking sharply to gain the unobstructed sky above
the roadway. As it passed overhead, I saw something drop from its left wing and
drift, spinning, then wafting, then spinning again, to the ground at my feet. It
was a flight feather—long, dark, and beautifully curved, lying there on the
pavement like an open parenthesis.
Now, I’m a scientist and a bit of a skeptic. I don’t read horoscopes, visit
clairvoyants, or spend a lot of time worrying about fate. I do, however, have
several friends capable of staging elaborate practical jokes. My first reaction was
to look for the hidden camera, or listen for the sound of muffled laughter coming
from behind a hedgerow. But of course there was nothing, just my breathing, the

quiet woods, and the retreating flight noise of the bird. It really did appear that
after spending the morning writing about vultures and their feathers, I’d gone for
a run and bumped into a bunch of vultures, and that one of them had practically
dropped a feather on my head.
“You don’t choose what to write—it chooses you.” I first heard that maxim
intoned with great significance during an undergraduate creative writing
seminar. At the time, it made me glad I had a double major in ecology, where I
could balance such notions with a dose of comfortably prosaic tables, graphs,
and data sets. Now, the phrase seemed less cliché than command. Ancient
Egyptians revered vultures as far-seeing symbols of empire, truth, and justice,
never to be denied. Fortunately, these birds had given me a mandate I was glad
to fulfill. Decision made: I would write the feather book.
With a nod to the trio still perched in their fir tree, I picked up the feather and
carried it home. It’s here with me now, the vulture’s benediction, token of an
exploration just beginning, and a fascination that will never end.

Evolution
For the interesting point about a feather is really this, that it grew. It was not made
in a moment, like a bullet poured red-hot into a mold: its little airy plumes,
branched like a fern into tiny waving filaments, were developed by slow steps,
piece after piece, and spikelet after spikelet. And what is true of this particular bit
of down which I hold in my fingers, trembling like gossamer at every breath and
every pulse, is also true of plumage as a whole in the history of animal evolution.
—Grant Allen, “Pleased with a Feather” (1879)

CHAPTER TWO
Heat Shields, Gliders, and Insect Scoops
The sight of a feather in a peacock’s tail, whenever I
gaze at it, makes me sick!
—Charles Darwin ponders feather evolution,
1860, from a letter to Asa Gray
Rock crushes scissors. It’s axiomatic, a truth established by countless school-
yard matches of “Rock-Paper-Scissors.” But what if the game were called
“Rock-Paper-Feathers”? Well, it turns out that rock destroys feathers, too.
Fossils of any kind are rare—the vast majority of creatures and plants die and rot
away far from the accumulations of silt, ash, or other sediments that might
preserve them—but feathers are exceedingly scarce. Like skin, hair, or soft body
tissues, they face a double challenge on the road to fossilization. They
decompose faster than bone or shell, and they’re easily damaged by the heat and
pressure required to form even the softest mudstone or shale. It’s no coincidence
that the Wyoming Dinosaur Center and other paleontology museums resemble
giant bone yards; the hard bits are the ones most likely to survive.
In fact, the conditions necessary for feather fossilization are so unusual that
for well over a century, Archaeopteryx stood virtually alone. Jurassic dinosaurs,
pterosaurs, fish, insects, plants, and even early mammals continued to appear
from sites around the world, but only Solnhofen produced any additional
feathered fossils of similar age. And those were just variations on a theme: a
handful of new Archaeopteryx specimens. In spite of great interest and
thousands of research papers examining bird and feather evolution, the physical
evidence remained incredibly thin.
Into this void, generations of paleontologists, ornithologists, biologists, and
even chemists and physicists have launched their theories, thoughts, and
conjectures. Along the way, the evolution of feathers has often become lost in
arguments over the origin of birds and avian flight. The beautifully preserved

feathers on an Archaeopteryx wing make conflating these stories almost
irresistible, but it’s important to keep the questions separate. How, why, and
when feathers evolved may have less to do with birds than people usually think.
Traditionally, theories about the rise of feathers focused on the question of
why they evolved, proposing some particular use as the original driver of their
evolution. These are called functional theories, and chief among them was the
idea that feathers evolved for flight, that their obvious aerodynamic traits could
have developed only in the context of airborne creatures. Though evidence
increasingly points to a more nuanced story, a vocal group still adheres to this
view. Others have suggested that comparatively simple plumes must have
predated the flight feathers seen in Archaeopteryx. These may not have been
good airfoils at all but probably provided insulation or bore colors used for
display and courtship. Some theories argue for the waterproofing or protective
function of feathers, and one imaginative hypothesis pictures dinosaurs using
feathered wings as heat shields to shade their eggs and hatchlings from the
punishing Jurassic sun.
Even the best minds have succumbed at times to fancy. John Ostrom, who
revived Huxley’s theories and whose “hot-blooded” dinosaur ideas transformed
the field, also proposed the notion of feathers as an “insect scoop.” In this
scenario, Archaeopteryx and other protobirds raced along, beating their feathered
wing tips against the ground to scare up insects, or thrusting them in front of
their open mouths like a great net, scooping bugs straight from the air. Though it
made for a terrific illustration, even its author eventually admitted that such
awkward lurching about was less likely to net a meal than a stumble face-
forward into the mud.
Peppered with phrases like trash, garbage, and quackery, the debate on
feather evolution is pretty saucy stuff for scientific literature. It can read like a
tabloid drama, with each faction holding up some minutely measured detail of
Archaeopteryx as its primary evidence. Functional theories invite such wars of
words because they share the same basic drawback: in the absence of a complete
fossil record, or a time machine, they’re almost impossible to test.

John Ostrom’s “insect scoop” theory featured ancestral birds using their feathers
to trap flying insects.
Feathers possess a range of highly adapted physical qualities, and no scientist
doubts that natural selection has shaped and reshaped their design. The presence
of modern-looking flight feathers on Archaeopteryx tells us that at least some of
their varied functions were already fine-tuned by the late Jurassic. But the lack
of earlier specimens leaves a gap into which functional logic stumbles. How can
the first use of the first feathers be parsed out from the complex, fully developed
traits of a later fossil?
Imagine you’re an archaeologist from far in the future who finds a cell phone,
just one, while excavating an early-twenty-first-century Earth site. Let’s say it’s
an iPhone, a compact, glass-fronted device that can send e-mail, surf the
Internet, take photographs, store and play music, identify pop songs, recommend
a good steak house, and swiftly carry out a hundred thousand other applications.
Without additional evidence, how could you deduce the history and original
purpose of the device? Would you ever guess that its complex, multifaceted
interface developed from a bulky box and receiver handset with only one
function, sending voice messages over a copper wire? Even if that was your
theory, you’d have nothing to support it unless you stumbled across a telephone
from the twentieth century (or from the office of a certain Luddite field

biologist).
Interpreting feather evolution from Archaeopteryx is much the same. The best
specimens boast clearly identifiable wing and tail feathers and the suggestion of
contour feathers on the legs. There is no reason to believe that down wasn’t also
present or that the feathers weren’t as bright as those of a parrot or as cryptic as
those of a quail. In fact, Archaeopteryx tells us little more about the origin of
feathers than does an eagle, a penguin, or the sparrows futzing about in your
yard. Just like their ancient ancestor, they too boast an array of feather types
adapted to a range of functions. All Archaeopteryx really tells us is that modern
feathers have been around for a long, long time. To know why they evolved may
not be possible until we answer the question of how.
Clues to the how of feather evolution lie in their development, unraveling the
way they grow into such an incredible diversity of forms. Hair and scales pale by
comparison—the structural complexity of feathers surpasses any natural
integument in the history of life. In size alone they can vary by several orders of
magnitude on the same bird. The male Paradise Flycatcher, to pick one example,
sports facial bristles that measure less than a millimeter and tail plumes that
stretch more than two hundred times as long. When an Indian Peacock raises his
tail, its glittering, iridescent coverts form a display more than fifteen hundred
times longer than his shortest feather. If human hair were similarly diverse, a
person might combine a neatly trimmed Van Dyke beard with a teased hairdo
taller than the Statue of Liberty.
To truly get my head around this diversity of form and function, I decided I
needed to dismantle a bird. I needed to see how the feathers grew, how many
types there were, and just what differentiated one from another. This is the kind
of idea that makes our chickens nervous.
My office occupies the southern half of what I call the Raccoon Shack, an old
orchard shed we spruced up and named for its former inhabitants. The raccoons
used to live underneath it, emerging on summer evenings to stage leisurely raids
on the plum trees, apples, or anything else in season. These days it might be
more appropriate to name the shack after our four laying hens. They can usually
be found pecking and scratching right outside the door, occasionally hopping up
on the porch to peer in at me, hunched over my books, computer, or microscope.
Three of the hens were getting on in years, and I had my eye on Trouser, a surly
old Wyandotte who’d never been much of a layer and spent most of her time
plotting attacks on our lone Rhode Island Red.
Honestly, I wasn’t sure I had the heart for premeditated chicken killing, and

lucky for Trouser I didn’t have to find out. The next time we defrosted our chest
freezer I discovered, nestled between the halibut and old soup, a salsa bin
labeled “Thor’s Kinglet.” Sure enough, it held a beautiful Golden-crowned
Kinglet, a species we’ll talk about in detail in Chapter 5. But right next to the
kinglet sat a bonus, a tiny Winter Wren I’d forgotten about completely. Jackpot.
With its head cocked, eyes open, and stumpy tail turned up, the bird looked
ready to leap from my hand. Of course, it was frozen solid, a roadkill I’d picked
up near our house the previous winter. Like other wrens, this little brown skulker
lived in dense underbrush and was probably hit trying to dart across the road
from one thicket to the next. The old postal scale in my office told me it weighed
less than a half ounce, and that in 1958 I could have mailed it anywhere in the
continental United States for only four cents, first class. But Winter Wrens were
far more accomplished travelers, having long ago crossed the Bering Sea to
explore Siberia and beyond. The only wren species found outside the Americas,
their range now extends throughout temperate Asia and Europe, even reaching
the mountain forests of North Africa.
In terms of plucking, the wren offered several obvious advantages over
Trouser. Measuring less than four inches from stem to stern, it was one of the
smallest species in North America and seemed a manageable specimen for a
novice plucker to tackle. Also, it was already dead and wouldn’t involve testing
my resolve for the ax-and-stump routine. Finally, plucking the wren would
demonstrate once and for all that I do occasionally make use of the nasty dead
things I’m constantly squirreling away around our house.
I thawed my wren on a stormy November morning and retired to the Raccoon
Shack with the only reference on plucking that I could think of, The Joy of
Cooking. Though Irma A. Rombauer didn’t offer any recipes specific to wrens,
she did have a section devoted to wild fowl where she strongly recommended
dry plucking and noted, “It is much easier to draw and pluck a bird that is
thoroughly chilled.” The wren was still good and cold, so with a pair of tweezers
and some needle-nose pliers, I was ready to go.

A Winter Wren.
The world record for plucking a bird belongs to Vincent Pilkington of
Cootehill, County Cavan, in Ireland. Before his retirement, Mr. Pilkington could
defeather a whole turkey in one minute and thirty seconds, and he once plucked
244 of them in a single day. Two hours into my wren project, it was clear that I
posed little threat to Mr. Pilkington’s records. Feathers and bits of feather fuzz
covered my desk, and the carcass still had quills and pinfeathers poking out from
odd places, like some kind of morbid pincushion.
Of course, Pilkington hadn’t been trying to count the feathers (208 per wing;
12 on the tail; more than 375 on the belly, breast, and back; and more than 400
on the neck, head, and face). He also hadn’t bothered sorting them by type into
neat little piles. Nor had he wasted additional time swearing and resorting those
piles every time a stray elbow, draft, or sneeze scattered everything willy-nilly.
As for the bird, I’m glad I hadn’t planned on serving it. Not only had I failed
to achieve the tidy dressed look pictured in Joy of Cooking, but the bedraggled,
skinny remnant wouldn’t have made much of a meal. In fact, it would have left
room on a toast point. If you ever find yourself plucking a songbird, you’ll be
amazed at how little is left when you’re done. It speaks to the importance of
feathers that in spite of their lightness, they exceed the dry weight of a bird’s
skeleton by two to one in most species. Naked, the wren looked impossibly
small and utterly unlike the lively sprites that scolded me from the shrubs around
our house. I couldn’t help feeling I’d done the bird a great indignity and said a
word of thanks before burying it under an apple tree.
The feathers, on the other hand, looked like works of art. I took one from the

“left wing” pile and held it up to the light. From a tiny quill it broadened into a
tapering vane, its leading edge brindled in chestnut and chocolate stripes. Backlit
against a window, each individual barb in the plume stood out, divided again
into tiny barbules that interwove to make a seamless, curving whole. It was
asymmetrical, a primary flight feather with its rachis offset forward and widest
point slightly toward the tip. Other piles held distinctly different varieties:
contour feathers from the head and breast, tiny bristles from the face, and a large
pile of dark semiplumes and down from the belly, so soft their touch was like the
faintest brush of air, less a sensation than an anticipation.
In spite of such variety, every feather shares the same basic structure, rising
from a hollow quill to branch from a central shaft, with the degree and pattern of
divisions resulting in myriad feather types. Until recently, learning the details of
feather structure and naming different feathers was a ritual reserved for
undergraduate courses in ornithology. Flight feathers on the wing are remiges;
tail feathers are retrices. The central shaft in the vane is called the rachis. The
base of the quill is the calamus. There are filoplumes, powderdown, wing
coverts, tail coverts, and so on. Most students memorize these terms and forget
them soon after the first exam. But a theory put forth by Dr. Richard Prum
shows that learning how a feather grows may also answer the question of how
feathers evolved.
A typical contour feather. For examples of other feather types, turn to Appendix
A, “An Illustrated Guide to Feathers.”

“The realization actually came to me at the chalkboard,” he explained.
Energetic, with reddish hair and an informal manner that still conveys intensity,
Prum likes to talk about feathers. We spoke several times on the phone and met
once at his office, where piles of papers and opened books cover every surface
like a hundred thoughts in process. He now holds the Coe Professorship of
Ornithology at Yale, but he was teaching at the University of Kansas when the
idea struck him. “I was giving my class the standard scales-to-feathers theory,
and by the end of the lecture I realized it didn’t make any sense. Feathers
couldn’t have evolved that way!”
Until Prum’s epiphany, common wisdom held that feathers evolved directly
from elongated scales that had frayed and divided in response to selection for
flight (or whichever functional theory was in vogue at the time). The emphasis
always lay on what feathers were used for, with scant attention paid to the
mechanics of their transformation. What Prum recognized now seems obvious:
there is a fundamental structural difference between scales and feathers and how
they grow. Scales form like plates, flat ridges protruding outward as extensions
of the epidermis. Feathers, on the other hand, are inherently tubular. It’s like the
contrast between a napkin and a straw. Fold the napkin and you have a scale,
with the outer surface—the epidermis—covering both top and bottom. To flatten
a straw you could of course smash it, but that’s not how a feather grows.
Feathers flatten by opening up. The outer surface becomes the top, and the inside
is revealed to become the bottom. So while a mature feather and a scale may
both appear flat, their surfaces simply don’t correspond.
“I had just prepped a lecture on feather development,” he told me, describing
a late night in Kansas spent poring over old books. “I’d finally gotten it, how
helical feather growth happens. It’s an amazing and distinct biological process.”
When Prum talks, his boyish enthusiasm belies the distinguished professorship
and his long list of academic honors. He explains things eagerly, as if willing
you to understand everything he knows so that together you can take the ideas
further. “From that moment, feather evolution became a big part of my classes.
We did all of this jamming on a chalkboard.”
Over time, Prum’s jamming turned into the most lucid theory of feather
origins to date. The theory is developmental, focusing on how feathers grow and
not worrying about what they’re used for. It hinges on one of the essential nubs
of evolution: novelty. Evolution relies on the introduction of new traits to give
natural selection and other processes something to act upon. No novelty, no

change. The developmental theory identifies five unique attributes that had to be
“invented” before the growth process could produce modern vaned feathers.
This sequence of changes occurred within the feather follicles, those distinctive
raised dimples of skin where feather growth takes place. Each novelty led to
increased structural complexity, from an unbranched quill (Stage I) to simple
branched filaments (Stage II), to the organization of filaments around a rachis
(Stage III), to the development of interlocking barbules and pennaceous vanes
(Stage IV), and finally to asymmetrical flight feathers (Stage V). Prum argues
that each step required a new innovation in the follicle: barb growth led to a
divided, downy feather; helical growth led to the rachis; paired barbs led to
barbules; and so on. The growth of a fully modern, vaned feather would be
impossible without the previous evolutionary steps.
The logic of Prum’s theory is immediately appealing. It proceeds from the
simple tubular quill, a universal feather feature, to increasingly complex forms.
It remains neutral on function, concentrating instead on the novelties required for
a feather to grow the way that it does. The theory’s real strength, however, lies in
its testability. Without hypothesis testing, even the most logical scientific ideas
remain little more than conjecture. Support for functional theories has relied too
often on traits or behaviors that leave no discernible fossil trace, but Prum makes
specific testable predictions. If he’s right, then every feather type produced by
the five developmental stages should appear somewhere in the fossil record. As
he puts it, the earliest feathers “need not precisely resemble any modern feathers,
but should be plausibly grown by a conceivable feather follicle.” Even more
intriguing, and more controversial, is his prediction that finding these fossil
feathers in the theropod dinosaurs will confirm the ancestry of modern birds.
Though Prum’s research makes bold statements and some criticize his
interpretation of feather growth, his ideas found quick acceptance, and their
inclusion in every major ornithology textbook ensured that, in fewer than ten
years, the developmental theory went from one chalkboard in Kansas to
classrooms around the world. This being an evolutionary question, however,
particularly one involving feathers and birds, there remain a few doubters,
skeptics, and outright naysayers.

Developmental Model of Feather Evolution. The developmental theory proposes
a series of cumulative evolutionary steps leading to modern feathers: an
unbranched quill (Stage I), simple filaments (Stage II), filaments centered on a
rachis (Stage III), interlocking barbules and pennaceous vanes (Stage IV), and
asymmetrical flight feathers (Stage V).
“I’m not too keen on neutral evolution,” Alan Feduccia told me over the
phone. A longtime professor at the University of North Carolina, he spoke with
an affable Southern drawl that seemed at odds with the sometimes strident tone
in his articles on the topic. “Rick Prum is a bright guy and his theory looks good
on paper, but does it really answer the question? I don’t think so.”
Nearly forty years ago, Feduccia found himself in the role of doubting
Thomas, countering his friend John Ostrom’s idea that birds evolved from
warm-blooded theropod dinosaurs. It’s a part he has played ever since, though
increasingly from the sidelines, as Ostrom’s views took hold to become what
Feduccia calls “the new orthodoxy.” A diminished but stalwart group agrees
with him, informally calling themselves the BAND (Birds Are Not Dinosaurs).
Though his positions now seem iconoclastic, Alan is anything but a crank. His
scientific credentials include scores of peer-reviewed papers and a book, The
Origin and Evolution of Birds, that is widely considered a classic.
“Maybe I’m too much of an old-school Darwinian,” he went on, “but I don’t

see feathers evolving outside the clear contexts of adaptation and natural
selection.” Feduccia argues that novel features must be adaptive—if they don’t
confer some discernible benefit to the organism, then they’re unlikely to persist.
With that in mind he questions the usefulness of Prum’s downlike Stage II
feathers. As any camper in a rainstorm knows, down loses most of its insulative
value when wet. Adult birds keep their down dry under layers of water-resistant
contour feathers, and downy chicks must huddle beneath their parents to survive.
Young ostriches caught out in the rain often die of exposure, even in the African
heat. In Prum’s model, however, contour feathers evolved after downy plumes,
calling into question the notion that the first feathers were used for insulation.
“Feathers are unbelievable,” Feduccia said, and his voice took on a tone of
wonder I would hear again and again in my research—from scientists,
hatmakers, engineers, fashion designers, even fly-fishermen. “They have all of
these incredible aerodynamic features—lightweight, with graded flexibility;
they’re perfect airfoils; they can work together in slotted wings with high lift at
low speeds. I just don’t see how they could have evolved outside of an
aerodynamic context.” He adheres to the view that flight feathers evolved first,
from scales, and that body feathers, down, quills, and all the other feather types
came later.
“That’s backward thinking,” Prum dismisses, reiterating the intractable
structural differences between flat scales and tubular feathers. Flight aside, early
feather stages fit with any number of functional theories, from display to thermal
regulation to touch, but choosing among them is highly speculative. “Concluding
that feathers evolved for flight is like maintaining that digits evolved for playing
the piano.”
Until recently, Prum and Feduccia would have had little but their opinions to
argue over. Feathered fossils remained limited to Archaeopteryx and a few late
Cretaceous birds too young and fully avian to provide many clues.
“I might not have published when I did if Zhonghe Zhou hadn’t taken my
class,” Prum recalled. After giving one of his feather evolution lectures in 1997,
an exchange student had walked to the front of the room and told him how
important his ideas were, practically pleading with him to write them up. The
student was a paleontologist taking ornithology on the recommendation of his
thesis adviser. What he knew that Prum didn’t was that his colleagues back
home were busy unearthing an unprecedented trove of feathered fossils.
After a century and a half with Archaeopteryx as the lonely linchpin in the
feather debate, quills, down, and clearly vaned plumes began appearing on

literally dozens of new specimens. The fossils were a revelation, as if a
menagerie of perfectly plumed creatures had purposely plunged themselves into
an ancient lake bed to die, beautifully preserved in the muck. They shook the
scientific world. They allowed Prum’s predictions and other ideas to finally be
tested. And they also left anyone with an interest in the evolution of feathers or
birds asking one another the same question: “How’s your Chinese?”

Fluff
It was the strangest sensation conceivable, floating thus loosely in space, at first
indeed horribly strange, and when the horror passed, not disagreeable at all,
exceeding restful; indeed, the nearest thing in earthly experience to it that I know
is lying on a very thick, soft feather bed.
—H. G. Wells, The First Men in the Moon (1901)

Flight
There is an art … or rather, a knack, to flying. The knack lies in learning how to
throw yourself at the ground and miss.
—Douglas Adams, Life, the Universe, and Everything (1982)

CHAPTER SEVEN
GroundUp or Tree-Down?
GINGER: We haven’t even lifted off. Why?
MAC: Throost! … Wot we’re miss’n’ is throost.
ROCKY: I didn’t get a word of that… . I swear she
ain’t using real words.
GINGER: She said we need more thrust.
ROCKY: Thrust!?! Of course we need thrust!
—Chickens discussing aerodynamics,
from Chicken Run (2000)
Before Eliza and I had a child, we had chickens. And to a certain degree,
acquiring them resembled the process of bringing a baby into the world. First
came a long gestation period of planning, reading, discussing, fencing, and
multiple trips to the Web site “Findmychicken.com.” This was followed by the
challenges of birth, as the two of us science types struggled with the practicality
of hammer and nail to build a functional coop. After a trip to the county fair and
a fierce bidding war at the 4-H livestock auction, Trouser, Fatty, and White One
finally arrived. We got them as pullets, young hens a few months shy of laying
eggs and still very much learning the art and Zen of chickenhood. They didn’t
know how to scratch, they couldn’t cluck properly, and they seemed entirely
unsure of whether they should be flying like the sparrows that flitted nimbly in
and out of their coop, making off with beaks full of grain.
When we first got them home, the birds spent much of their time dashing
madly about the orchard, flapping their stubby wings and even lifting themselves
into the air for short, low flights. All three were Silver-laced Wyandottes, a
beautiful breed whose white plumage is elegantly lined with black. In flight,
however, not even pretty feathers could give their stout bodies a semblance of
grace. They hurtled awkwardly forward like overfed wind-up toys, necks jutting
out and wings beating frantically to gain a few brief inches of altitude. Wile E.

Coyote had a similar look in the old Roadrunner cartoons right after he ran off a
cliff—his pumping legs kept him airborne for a few seconds, but gravity always
won in the end. Watching this spectacle from the porch of the Raccoon Shack, I
realized that our chickens might be acting out a scene from their own evolution.
Or not, depending on which story you believe.
A running, flapping chicken gets right at the heart of one of ornithology’s
most divisive questions: groundup or tree-down? I’ve posed it to any number of
scientists, and they always have a ready answer. The question draws a clear line
in the sand between competing camps in the great debate over the evolution of
flight. “Ground-uppers” believe that flight developed in fleet-footed theropod
dinosaurs, who began flapping and taking short leaps much like our young
Wyandottes. The “tree-down” camp is adamant that flight evolved in arboreal
creatures as a means to extend their hops from branch to branch. The
controversy is irrevocably intertwined with questions about the origins of birds
and feathers, and both sides claim supportive evidence from the fossil record—
sometimes from the same specimens. The exact sequence of events may be
unknowable, but exploring this dichotomy (and a promising alternative) reveals
a range of evolutionary possibilities for the origin of that first feathered flight.
A Silver-laced Wyandotte hen.
The groundup theory traces its origin directly to Thomas Huxley and his
famous papers and lectures linking Archaeopteryx with Compsognathus. From

his suggestion that birds evolved from terrestrial bipedal dinosaurs, it followed
that the first fliers were also two-legged runners. Flight makes great sense in this
context as a predation strategy, where prolonged leaps, glides, and eventually
wing strokes could give theropods and birds sudden access to a sky filled with
tasty insects. (Insect flight evolved at least 150 million years before the earliest
known birds.) The ground-uppers also note that only a two-legged ancestor
would have had its arms free to evolve into independent wings. Most other
vertebrate fliers and gliders like bats or flying squirrels descended from
quadrupeds who relied on all four legs for locomotion—they couldn’t possibly
have learned a bird’s two-armed flapping without falling face first into the
primordial muck. Finally, learning to fly from the groundup offers a safe
environment for the adaptation and refinement of balance, steering, and
sophisticated aerodynamics. As many pioneering human aviators (and their
survivors) learned, falling or crashing from a low glide carries a lot less risk than
leaping from trees or cliffs.
Like the theropod-bird theory in general, the groundup hypothesis fell out of
favor and languished for much of the twentieth century. It reemerged with John
Ostrom’s reexamination of Archaeopteryx and warm-blooded dinosaurs in the
1970s and gained ground as new discoveries underscored numerous similarities
between theropods and birds, from wishbones and gizzards to nesting habits and
sleep postures. Rick Prum’s ideas added fuel to the fire by suggesting that flight
adaptations came relatively late in the evolution of feathers. Though he was
careful not to preclude a tree-down origin for flight itself, he noted in a 2002
essay that “the major components of the flight stroke had already evolved in
bipedal theropods in a wholly terrestrial context.” When Sinosauropteryx and
other clearly feathered bipedal theropod fossils began emerging from the Yixian
shales, ground-uppers greeted them as a confirmation and suddenly found their
theory pushed into the mainstream.
In spite of this renaissance, however, the groundup theory still suffers from a
major weakness, one key point where its logic falters. It’s a lesson that young
Fatty, Trouser, and White One learned very well during their abortive sprinting
around our orchard: taking off from the ground is difficult. Most birds do it by
way of specialized flight muscles and a shoulder joint that give their wings a
flexible, powerful downstroke. A series of vigorous flaps provides them both the
lift and the thrust necessary for powered flight. Those adaptations appear to be
lacking or primitive in Archaeopteryx, however, as well as the feathered
theropods. (Chickens have the right structure to get airborne, but the wrong

body-mass-to-wing ratio for a sustained flight!) There is little doubt that
theropods could run and leap, but could that strategy have ever provided the
thrust and lift required for takeoff? This is the question that keeps the tree-down
theory very much alive.
“There’s a certain euphoria in the dinosaur community about having solved
the problem,” Alan Feduccia told me, but he and other BAND members reject
the idea that flight could have evolved in a terrestrial setting. “It’s almost un-
Darwinian!” he exclaimed. “Look, every group of vertebrates has evolved some
kind of flight. There’s Draco (a gliding lizard), sugar gliders (a marsupial), frogs,
flying squirrels, pterosaurs, bats—all have one thing and one thing only in
common. They all evolved flight from the tree down, taking advantage of the
cheap energy of gravity.”
Dropping from a branch or other high place certainly has been the most
prevalent route to the skies, and the list of gliding tree dwellers is impressive.
Even ants follow the tree-down model. In the Peruvian Amazon, certain species
living in the rain forest canopy have developed flattened, aerodynamic heads and
legs that enable them to glide back to their tree trunks after a fall. The tree-down
theory puts ancestral birds in that same environment, dashing along limbs and
vines and leaping from branch to trunk to branch. An early illustration of the
hypothetical species Proavis, “before-bird,” helped cement this image in our
consciousness, and almost every image of Archaeopteryx that followed showed
it gliding or climbing through such a habitat. It’s a setting where any
aerodynamic adaptation has immediate and obvious benefits, an important
consideration for the incremental process of evolving complex flight. Tree-
downers argue that it’s hard to envision those intermediate stages developing in
a terrestrial ancestor—what use is half a wing for an animal that cannot get off
the ground? This is the key element to the tree-down argument: the evolution of
flight requires the “cheap energy” of gravity to overcome the lift-and-thrust
conundrum so challenging to earthbound chickens and theropods.

Gerhard Heilmann’s Proavis, a hypothetical bird ancestor that climbed and
glided between trees.
The logic is appealing. Even bats, the most nimble nonavian fliers, are
helpless on the ground. They require a drop of at least a few vertical feet to reach
flight speed, but then their awkwardness gives way to immediate agility. I’ve
watched them emerge at dusk from a roost box on our porch, spreading their
wings as they fall and turning immediately at right angles to slip between the
deck rails. The air force gives out medals for that kind of maneuver. But while
the tree-down theory’s cheap gravity is indeed a powerful evolutionary force,
feathers complicate things. Feduccia failed to mention something else that all
other vertebrate fliers and gliders have in common. Whether marsupial,
mammal, amphibian, or lizard, they stay aloft on membranes, thin flaps of skin
stretched taut between body parts.
If this book were called Membranes instead of Feathers, we could spend
chapters exploring the more than two dozen independent and unrelated times
that membranes evolved for vertebrate gliding and flight. In bats, they connect
the fingers of the hand and stretch back to the ankle of the hind foot. For Draco
lizards, the membrane extends between flexible, elongated ribs. Pterosaurs had

oddly long fourth fingers connected by a fibrous membrane to the hind leg.
Wallace’s flying frogs soar on giant platterlike feet, their outstretched toes neatly
webbed with translucent tissue. Among all flying or gliding animals, only the
avian lineage developed the use of feathers for an airfoil. This fact makes
Feduccia’s argument work even better turned on its head. If time and again the
evolutionary answer to tree-down flight is a membrane, then bird feathers are an
exception that suggests a different history. With their unique follicles and helical
growth, their complex structure and diversity of forms, feathers seem grossly
overqualified for the job. Why go to all that trouble when a simple flap of skin
would do?
Wallace’s flying frogs glide on oversized, broadly webbed feet.
The groundup–tree-down debate puts many of the familiar figures at odds, but
the lines are not entirely clear-cut. As Rick Prum pointed out, a terrestrial origin
for feathers does not necessarily mean a terrestrial origin for flight. Surely, it’s
possible that some already feathered theropod figured out how to climb a tree.

Scientists increasingly view the groundup or tree-down argument as a false
dichotomy, proposing new hypotheses that look for a middle path. The
discoveries of Xing Xu and his colleagues sum up the situation nicely. On the
one hand, fossils like Caudipteryx and Beipiaosaurus demonstrate that terrestrial
bipedal dinosaurs had complex feathers. But Microraptor and Anchiornis
boasted flight feathers on the legs as well as wings, an ungainly arrangement for
a running, leaping animal. Xu now believes that such “four-winged” theropods
lived in trees and helped bridge the gap from ground to air.
“If you look at all taxa on the line to birds,” he explained over the phone,
“many flight-related characters evolved in a terrestrial context. The problem is
the final step for flight… . It needs help from gravity. Arboreal dinosaurs can fill
this gap.” Though Xu admitted he didn’t yet know how the leg feathers on
Microraptor or Anchiornis contributed to flight, he saw them as a critical
transitional step. “Four-winged dinosaurs definitely suggest that groundup
cannot explain it alone.”
Like so many questions about events in deep time, unraveling the origin of
flight is hampered by a woefully incomplete fossil record. Even the wonderful
specimens coming out of Liaoning Province provide only glimpses—a few
species of theropods and early birds separated from one another by millions of
blank years. It’s like trying to get the gist of a complex novel by reading one
random page from every chapter. Sometimes, the best insights come from
studying modern living analogues. Just as Rick Prum looked to the way feathers
grow for clues about their evolution, so might the growth of birds tell us
something about the beginnings of flight. Could a young bird learning to use its
wings unconsciously mimic its own evolutionary history? An ornithologist
named Ken Dial asked that question about the Chukar Partridge, an Asian game
bird not so different from the young hens running around our orchard. His
surprising results formed the basis of a new theory that may be the best bridge
yet between groundup and tree-down.
“We discovered a new behavior, something no one had ever noticed before,”
he told me by phone from his office at the University of Montana. Ken’s voice is
low and clear, and he talks with the confidence of someone used to explaining
things. In fact, he is—he hosted a series of nature documentaries, called All Bird
TV, on Animal Planet during the late 1990s. Filming the show took him to field
sites around the world, where he saw a pattern in how young pheasants, quail,
tinamous, and other ground birds ran along behind their parents. “They jumped
up like popcorn,” he said, describing how they would flap their half-formed

wings and take short hops into the air. So when a group of graduate students
challenged him to come up with new data on the age-old groundup–tree-down
debate, he designed a project to see what clues might lie in how baby game birds
learned to fly.
Ken settled on the Chukar Partridge as a model species, but he might not have
made his discovery without a key piece of advice from the local rancher who
was supplying him with birds. When the cowboy stopped by to see how things
were going, Ken showed him his nice, tidy laboratory setup and explained how
the birds’ first hops and flights would be measured. The rancher was
incredulous. “He took one look and said, in pretty colorful language, ‘What are
those birds doing on the ground? They hate to be on the ground! Give them
something to climb on!’” At first it seemed unnatural—ground birds don’t like
the ground? But as he thought about it, Ken realized that all the species he’d
watched in the wild preferred to rest on ledges, low branches, or other elevated
perches where they were safe from predators. They really only used the ground
for feeding and traveling. So he brought in some hay bales for the Chukars to
perch on and then left his son in charge of feeding and data collection while he
went away on a short work trip.
Barely a teenager at the time, young Terry Dial was visibly upset when his
father got back. “I asked him how it went,” Ken recalled, “and he said, ‘Terrible!
The birds are cheating!’” Instead of flying up to their perches, the baby Chukars
were using their legs. Time and again Terry had watched them run right up the
side of a hay bale, flapping all the while. Ken dashed out to see for himself, and
that was the “aha” moment. “The birds were using their wings and legs
cooperatively,” he told me, and that single observation opened up a world of
possibilities.
Working together with Terry (who has since gone on to doctoral studies in
animal locomotion), Ken came up with a series of ingenious experiments,
filming the birds as they raced up textured ramps tilted at increasing angles. As
the incline increased, the partridges began to flap, but they angled their wings
differently from birds in flight. They aimed their flapping down and backward,
using the force not for lift but to keep their feet firmly pressed against the ramp.
“It’s like the spoiler on the back of a race car,” he explained, which is a very apt
analogy. In Formula One racing, spoilers are the big aerodynamic fins that push
the cars downward as they speed along, increasing traction and handling. The
birds were doing the very same thing with their wings to help them scramble up
otherwise impossible slopes.

Ken called the technique WAIR, for wing-assisted incline running, and went
on to document it in a wide range of species. It not only allowed young birds to
climb vertical surfaces within the first few weeks of life but also gave adults an
energy-efficient alternative to flying. In the Chukar experiments, adults regularly
used WAIR to ascend ramps steeper than 90 degrees, essentially running up the
wall and onto the ceiling. In the wild, precocial species like the Australian
Brushturkey use WAIR from the day they hatch and appear to prefer it to flight,
even when full grown. As Ken put it, “As soon as you give an animal a three-
dimensional environment—a boulder, a cliff, a tree—it will find the best way to
climb it.”
In an evolutionary context, WAIR takes on surprising explanatory powers.
With one fell swoop, the Dials came up with a viable origin for the flapping
flight stroke (something gliding animals don’t do and a shortcoming of the tree-
down theory) and an aerodynamic function for half-formed wings (one of the
main drawbacks to the groundup hypothesis). In terms of feathers, WAIR
provides an adaptive role for the transition from a body covering to the modern
flight feather. Trimming or removing wing feathers from the Chukars
consistently caused them to slip backward on ramps—even the youngest
partridges were gaining significant thrust from their half-grown plumes. “The
feather stuff fits right in,” Ken assured me. “What we’re finding is in complete
and total agreement with Prum’s work.”

A young Chukar Partridge uses its wings to ascend steep slopes—did avian
ancestors do the same on the path to flight?
The great appeal of the WAIR hypothesis lies in its ability to provide
incremental, adaptive stages between a bipedal, terrestrial ancestor and a
flapping, feathered flier. Both the ground-uppers and the tree-downers have
reasons to embrace it. For ground-uppers, it shows that even a half wing had
potential advantage for a terrestrial theropod and that increased aerodynamics for
feathers and wings could lead to greater survival of young birds. For the tree-
downers, here was a way for protobirds to start climbing trees in the first place,
from which they could have transitioned to true flight. “That’s the other half of
the story,” Ken explained. “WAIR gets the birds up onto an elevated refuge, but
they still need to get back down again. So what do they do? Jump and flap!”
Many ornithologists and paleontologists have embraced WAIR as the best
flight evolution story to date, but it’s not the only new hypothesis out there. I
stumbled across another idea at the Wyoming Dinosaur Museum, where one
display featured a Velociraptor, the voracious predator best known for
terrorizing (and steadily reducing) the cast of Jurassic Park. The specimen
appeared frozen in midchase, leaning into a turn at an alarming angle with its

forearms stretched out and clawed feet digging into the sand. In the
accompanying description, an illustration showed the beast richly plumed with
purple feathers, its wing tips brushing the ground. Though some fossils of
Velociraptor boast quill knobs—the bony attachment points for flight feathers—
no actual Velociraptor feathers have been discovered. I called Scott Hartman,
the paleontologist and artist who had articulated the skeleton and asked him why
he’d given the beast such birdlike wings.
“Steering,” he said simply, and explained how theropod dinosaurs lacked the
hip flexibility to turn sharply when running at high speeds—an essential skill for
a predator. Hartman believes that Velociraptor and the other bipedal hunters
could have developed aerodynamic wings and feathers to help them turn before
they ever dreamed of flapping. “Trees may have played a role in flight,”
Hartman admitted, “but I can tell you that the animals who climbed them already
had wings!”
Decoding every step in the evolution of flight is probably impossible. The
story played out over 150 million years in the past, and there’s enough ambiguity
in the fossils to keep the debate going for decades. As Alan Feduccia told me,
“This is the same old stuff I was arguing with John Ostrom about thirty years
ago!” But regardless of how birds achieved it, scientists do agree that flight gave
the avian line access to a huge range of new evolutionary possibilities. Once
airborne, birds spread out and diversified into every available niche, and their
bodies continued adapting to life in the skies. Spongy, hollow bones filled with
air sacs; toothless, lightweight bills; small, efficient lungs; unidirectional
breathing—some of these features have been found in theropods, but all became
highly refined in the aerial birds. Flight feathers, too, continued to adapt, the
rachis thickening to withstand the strain of flapping, asymmetrical vanes
overlapping to work together as a fine-tuned, infinitely adjustable wing.
Watching chickens run and exploring the various theories helped me visualize
the different ways flight may have evolved. But seeing birds on the wing, with
all their grace and casual agility, made me realize that debating groundup or tree-
down hadn’t explained something vital. I still didn’t understand how bird flight
actually works.

Fancy
As long as there are women in the world there will always be feather buyers.
—Parisian feather merchant, Cape Times (1911)

CHAPTER TWELVE
Give Us Those Nice Bright Colors
They give us those nice bright colors
They give us the greens of summers
Makes you think all the world’s a sunny day, oh yeah
I got a Nikon camera
I love to take a photograph
So Mama don’t take my Kodachrome away.
—Paul Simon, “Kodachrome,” 1973
“We can’t show you the process,” he said flatly. “We can’t even talk about how
we dye the feathers.” The voice on the line sounded gruff and wary, like
someone used to fending off the curious. I assured him that my interest was
purely academic, that I just wanted to stop by for a chat about the feather
business. He sounded doubtful, but with a little persistence, he finally put me
through to the owner.
“We can’t show you how we dye the feathers,” she told me immediately, and
for a moment I thought the conversation was over. But she didn’t hang up, so I
started explaining about the book project, and pretty soon she got curious. For
people in the small world of feathers, there’s a sense of shared fixation that
usually trumps everything else, even when carefully guarded trade secrets are at
stake. We spoke for only a few minutes before she invited me down to the shop
for a visit.
The Rainbow Feather Company occupies a low cinder-block building five
blocks and a million miles from the Las Vegas Strip. The neighborhood is light
industrial, home to discount tire stores, an auto body shop, metal fabricators, the
Opportunity Village Thrift House, and Acme Bail Bonds. On the day I walked
through, a dry desert wind whipped grit into the air and plastered trash bags to
the chain-link fences circling vacant lots and car parks. It was like going
backstage to see the mundane pulleys, ropes, and winches that made Jubilee!’s

elaborate props and dancers soar, a glimpse of the everyday, nuts-and-bolts
businesses that prop up all the Vegas glitz.
In that sense, Rainbow Feather was right at home. Though it seems a long step
removed from the stage and bright lights of a show like Jubilee! the work done
in that nondescript building was every bit as important as the choreography, the
music, and the showgirls. The glamour of a Vegas show depends on costumes,
and the costumes depend on feathers, and the feathers must be bright and
colorful. And when you need ten thousand plumes died hot pink, orange, yellow,
green, or any other color, Jodi Favazzo is the only person in North America who
can help you.
“I’ve been around feathers all my life,” she told me, explaining how her
mother did piecework from home, crafting little feathered flowers for the hat and
craft industry. Frustrated by the lack of colors available at the time, she
convinced her husband to start dying small batches for her in the kitchen sink.
Soon he’d left his construction job to found the Rainbow Feather Company as a
full-time enterprise. That was nearly fifty years ago, and it’s been a family
operation ever since.
“You can’t dye feathers with a machine,” Jodi said. “It has to be done by
hand.” We were inspecting an array of her finished products in the small retail
space at the front of the building. It was set up like a clothing store, but instead
of jeans and sweaters, the racks held long strands of brightly colored turkey,
goose, duck, and chicken feathers, as well as ostrich boas of every imaginable
shade. There were whole bird skins, too, and packets of loose plumes, not to
mention bins bristling with peacock and pheasant tails. For their custom work,
Rainbow Feather takes orders from clients as varied as Jubilee!, Cirque de
Soleil, and Victoria’s Secret, but the retail shop struck me as even more
intriguing. It must be the only place in the world where burlesque dancers
regularly rub elbows with fly-fishermen and bow hunters. “We sell to everyone,”
Jodi confirmed, and while we were talking, a man came in to pick up a
headdress for his Mardi Gras costume.
A trim, attractive woman with perfect posture, Jodi looked like she could have
had a career onstage if she’d cared to. But life behind the scenes suited her just
fine. “This is a great business,” she told me at one point. “I come in here every
day, and I’m amazed.”
My visit had interrupted her in the middle of a batch, and I could still see
traces of turquoise dye on her hands when she held up some rooster hackle and
started explaining the details. “From the time they’re plucked, all the feathers

from each side of the bird have to be kept separate. If they’re mixed they won’t
string right, and they rub against one another in the vat and come out streaked.”
She told me that no two feathers took a dye in quite the same way. “It depends
on the bird’s environment—what it was eating, the weather, the minerals in its
water. All of that affects the feather.”
Dying a feather is a surprisingly tricky, multiple-step process. The first
challenge lies in bleaching out the natural pigments and preparing the keratin to
soak up new colors. “In the old days my father used sulfuric acid and wore
rubber boots, gloves, the full suit,” she explained. The process is more benign
now, using a combination of chemicals known only to Jodi, her husband, and a
few other family members. When all goes well, the feathers come out white and
supple, ready to take on any shade that Jodi dreams up. People often send in
color swatches for her to match, just like ordering paints at the hardware store.
“We can do any color, but there’s one thing that sometimes frustrates people,”
she said, and led me over to the Wild Turkey flats and pheasant tails. Their
barred vanes had been dyed to various hues, but they still glowed with their
natural bronzy sheen. “We can dye them, but I can’t take out the iridescence,”
she explained. “That’s just part of the feather.” With that simple observation,
Jodi summed up the physics of feather coloration as neatly as any textbook.
As the birds of paradise demonstrated, sexual selection and female choice
have played a powerful role in the development of showy displays, but
camouflage, social signaling, parent-offspring recognition, and a range of other
functions also added pressure for the evolution of color. Over time, feathers
responded with two main strategies: pigment-based colors and structural colors.
Though the resulting shades sometimes look similar, the two approaches differ
in the fundamental way they treat light waves.
Pigments work by selective absorption. When light hits a pigment-bearing
feather, part of the spectrum is absorbed, and the rest is reflected back to our
eyes as a color. If all the light is reflected, we see white. If it’s all absorbed, we
see black. Gradations in between give us a wide range of hues, from the earth
tones of a Song Sparrow to the yellow on a Goldcrest to the brilliant red crown
of a Pileated Woodpecker. Pigment-based colors are familiar to us—the melanin
tinting a sparrow feather is the same molecule that darkens human hair and
causes skin to tan. We paint our houses and cars with pigments and use them to
color our clothes. When Jodi Favazzo dyes a feather, she is stripping out the
natural pigments and replacing them with those of her own choosing. The same
thing goes on every day at hair salons around the world.

Some pigments are easy for birds to manufacture right in the cells of their
developing feathers, while others, particularly yellows and reds, must be
acquired through their food. Flamingos, for example, remain pink only so long
as their diet includes a healthy dose of algae and crustaceans rich in beta-
carotenes (the family of pigments responsible for the red in a lobster shell and
the orange of carrots). Captive birds grow paler with every passing molt and will
ultimately turn white unless their feed is supplemented with dyes. New eating
habits can also change the coloration of birds in the wild. When Cedar
Waxwings in the northeastern United States feed on berries from an invasive,
nonnative honeysuckle, the tips of their tail feathers shift dramatically from
yellow to orange the next time they molt, responding to an unfamiliar pigment in
the fruit.
A Cedar Waxwing.
Pigment-based coloration accounts for a wide range of feather patterns and
shades, but structural colors generate some of the most dramatic displays. The
scarlet iridescence of a hummingbird throat, the metallic glint of motmots, and
the radiant blue of a jay—these colors are all created not by absorption but by
the scattering of light. For structural colors, the whole spectrum is reflected back
from the feather surface by nanoscale features built into the keratin. If that
reflection is a random scatter, we perceive it as white, but when the wavelengths
are ordered, we see them as rich, shimmering colors.

To understand how physical structure alone can create something so vivid, I
decided to conduct an experiment. I did the dishes. In our house we use a
biodegradable dish liquid in an old-fashioned ceramic sink. The soap is clear and
pigment-free and so is our tap water, so without some kind of structural
phenomenon, filling the basin with dishwater should be an entirely colorless
experience. I plugged the drain, ran the faucet hot, and squeezed in a good
dollop of soap. Predictably, a thick foam quickly bubbled up and spread across
the surface of the water. Two structural effects became immediately apparent.
Where the bubbles were small, the foam looked as fair as the driven snow—light
striking their complex surfaces was scattered in a million directions, a
randomness my eyes saw as white. But the larger bubbles shimmered, their taut
surfaces twisting the light into iridescent prisms of red, violet, blue, and orange.
If I popped them or swept the foam aside, the soapy water looked clear again,
and I could see straight through to the bottom of the sink. Without the structure
inherent in the bubbles, all color disappeared, but when they were present, I
could see rainbows.
In feathers, structure and pigment often go hand in hand. The luminous green
of parrots, for example, comes from a blue structural color at the surface blended
with underlying pigment-based yellows. Knowing this, I eagerly scooped up a
layer of dish foam onto a bright-yellow salad plate and peered at it intently. It
did not look like a parrot. The white foam remained white, the plate stayed
yellow, and the sheen on the big bubbles still held the same swirling mix of
colors. Clearly, there was more to the intricacies of feather coloration than I
could learn at the kitchen sink.
Whole careers have in fact been devoted to it, revealing scores of different
structural designs and nuances of pigment. There are crystalline lattices and self-
organizing matrices, complex metabolic pathways, and molecules stacked like
pancakes or carefully arranged around air pockets. Every combination tweaks
light in a subtly different way, and the result is an unparalleled diversity of
colors and effects. To complicate things further, birds perceive a whole range of
ultraviolet shades invisible to the human eye; they see in what one expert calls “a
third dimension of color.”
Although the physics of feather colors may be complex, their evolutionary
history recently got a whole lot clearer. When I met with Rick Prum, he showed
me an artist’s rendition of Anchiornis huxleyi, the feathered dinosaur that Xing
Xu had found deep below the Yixian shales. Anchiornis first made headlines for
predating Archaeopteryx, but now it had another claim to fame. By examining

the specimen with an electron microscope, Prum and a group of colleagues
found evidence of coloration in the presence and arrangement of certain
molecules. “We literally have the tools to start writing an illustrated field guide
to dinosaurs!” he said excitedly, as if he could hardly believe it himself. And if
Anchiornis is any indication, it will be a colorful book. Prum’s picture showed
an animal with dramatic black-and-white-striped plumes and a fiery reddish
crest, like a four-winged woodpecker with teeth. The discovery suggests that
colorful plumage has been around as long as feathers themselves, strengthening
the argument that beauty and display played an early role in feather evolution.
If dinosaur feathers were bright, then birds evolved with color from the very
beginning. This long history helps explain how feather pigments, structures, and
their resulting palette became so varied and so intimately involved in avian
courtship. But birds are not the only animals attracted to color. Even before
human hunters co-opted plumes to guide their arrows, human artists gathered
them to express their creative visions. Before the invention of modern acrylics,
dyes, oils, and pastels, what other medium offered the artisan such brilliance?
Fish could be gaudy, but they faded quickly out of the water. Butterfly wings
were too fragile, beetle backs too brittle, and gemstones too rare. For hunter-
gatherers and even early civilizations, only bird feathers offered ubiquitous,
varied, and durable color. Human cultures everywhere co-opted them for
artwork and handicrafts, to decorate their bodies, and as symbols of status.
Fossilized pigment molecules reveal that Anchiornis huxleyi, the oldest feathered
dinosaur discovered to date, sported pied wings and a fiery reddish crest.

No one can put a date on the first feather decoration, but archaeologists
continue to find older and older examples of other bird-derived handiwork. The
world’s earliest known musical instrument, a flute, was carved forty thousand
years ago in Germany from the hollow wing bone of a Griffon Vulture.
Excavations near France’s famed Lascaux Caves have revealed bird-bone
needles, pendants, and beads, as well as bird-bone flasks that the artists used to
hold their ochre pigments. Although any feathers at these sites have long since
rotted away, it’s hard to imagine ancient musicians, painters, and artisans
crafting the tools of their trade from the bones of birds without also finding a
creative use for their colorful plumage.
In many cultures, the importance of featherwork has lasted into the modern
era. As recently as the 1970s, a young man on the South Pacific island of Santa
Cruz could only get married by paying a bride price composed exclusively of
feathers. And not just any plumes would do. Feather money, or tevau, consisted
of long, intricate coils crafted from the head, neck, and back feathers of the
Cardinal Myzomela, a brilliant scarlet and black honeyeater indigenous to the
Solomon Islands. Traditionally used for other large purchases as well (e.g.,
canoes, pigs, houses), each feather coil measured up to thirty feet (ten meters) in
length, required the plumage of 350 to 1,000 birds, and took more than seven
hundred hours to construct. Only a few families knew the crafts involved in
manufacturing tevau, from capturing and plucking the honeyeaters to
individually hand-gluing tens of thousands of tiny plumes onto the coils (which
were themselves composed of pigeon-feather discs woven together with bark
and fiber ropes). Good marriage prospects might fetch ten coils or more, hefty
sums paid in drawn-out installments that bound the community together in a web
of feather debts and obligations. Tevau may be the most elaborate example, but
feathers, as well as shells, served as currency throughout the Pacific, where trade
was advanced, but the atolls usually lacked any kind of metal ores, gemstones, or
other sources of durable color.
Unlike the Santa Cruz islanders, who hoarded their beautiful feather coils in
the smoky lofts of their huts to preserve them from insects, most plumed
handicrafts were made for display. In Hawaii, chiefs and royalty commissioned
elaborately plumed capes and ceremonial helmets, where the color and rarity of
the feathers helped establish their status. No color was more scarce in the islands
than yellow, and no royal object more famous than the flowing golden cloak of
King Kamehameha I. Feathers from an estimated 80,000 individuals of the now

extinct Mamo Honeycreeper went into its lush weavings. Traditional
featherwork continues in the art and adornment of many cultures, from the
Waorani and Karajá nations of the Amazon Basin to the Karo of Ethiopia to the
Akha hill people of Thailand, Laos, and Burma. But among all feather artisans in
history, perhaps none took the craft to greater heights than the empires of pre-
Columbian America.
The feather money of Santa Cruz Island was made from the scarlet plumage of
Cardinal Myzomelas. Left: a hunter’s catch. Right: finished coils.
When Hernán Cortés arrived in the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlán, in 1519, he
called the island city “the most beautiful thing in the world.” He and his men
marveled at the canals, the aqueducts, the temples, and the floating gardens. Of
Montezuma’s palace he told his own King Charles it was “impossible to describe
its excellence and grandeur … save to say that in Spain there is nothing to
compare to it.” Yet perhaps no structures in the city elicited more wonder than
the aviaries.
Fashioned like palaces only slightly less grand than Montezuma’s own, they
held dozens of courtyards, balconies, and gardens; ten artificial pools (both
saltwater and fresh); and long corridors of rooms with latticework ceilings open
to the air. Three hundred attendants looked after the flocks, including
veterinarians and dedicated keepers responsible for bringing in enough chickens,
worms, maize, and grain to keep each bird “fed with the food which it eats when

wild.” The cormorants, herons, and other piscivores alone required more than
250 pounds of fresh fish every day. Cortés described the aviaries holding “every
species of bird known in these parts,” while one of his soldiers, Bernal Díaz del
Castillo, later wrote in more detail:
I am forced to abstain from enumerating every kind of bird that was there
… for there was everything from the Royal Eagle and other smaller
eagles … down to tiny birds of many-colored plumage, also the birds
from which they take the rich plumage which they use in their green
feather work…. [T]hen there were parrots of many different colors, and
there are so many of them that I forget their names, not to mention the
beautifully marked ducks and other larger ones like them. From all these
birds they plucked the feathers when the time was right to do so, and the
feathers grew again.
But though these great flocks were carefully bred, cared for, and plucked, they
supplied only a fraction of the feathers needed for Aztec artisans. Nobles and
wealthy families maintained their own smaller aviaries, and even common
citizens kept colorful songbirds as pets. The emperor and his governors also
demanded feather tithes from conquered territories and sent feather merchants
and hunters abroad to bring back plumes from as far off as modern-day Panama
and Colombia. This trade greatly enriched the Aztec color palette, bringing the
pinks of coastal spoonbills and the brilliant hues of lowland parrots, as well as
the plumes of Keel-billed Toucans, Shining Honeycreepers, Pygmy Kingfishers,
and other bright species not found in the high country at the heart of the empire.
Ornithologists have even suggested that Aztec and other pre-Columbian bird
traffickers permanently altered the ranges of several Central American species,
introducing Great-tailed Grackles to the valley around Mexico City and the
Tufted Jay to the highlands of western Mexico.
From this wealth of avian color the Aztecs fashioned headdresses, mitres,
shields, cloaks, tapestries, and ornaments of all kinds. In folktales, the emperor
never wore the same set of clothing twice, passing on his elaborate garb as a
reward to favored nobles at court. True or not, Montezuma apparently had a
wardrobe large enough to spare the two or three “loads of cloaks of rich
featherwork” he lavished on every Spanish soldier traveling with Cortés. Among
the feather art given to, or later taken by, Cortés and his men were elaborate
images of monsters, serpents, animals, and birds “painted” with shimmering
feathers “more wonderful than anything in wax or embroidery.”

Sadly, Cortés and later governors followed a doctrine of cultural repression
and replacement, outlawing traditional practices, including featherwork, and
destroying countless artifacts. Of the great Aztec featherwork, fewer than ten
pieces are known to survive. They include a headdress of Resplendent Quetzal
tail feathers in a Spanish museum and a faded coyote shield in Vienna crafted
from the plumes of Blue Cotinga, Scarlet Macaw, Yellow Oriole, and Roseate
Spoonbill. Montezuma’s aviary was burned to the ground during the Spanish
siege of Tenochtitlán in 1521, specifically targeted by Cortés to “distress” the
enemy. Flames from the latticework and heavy timbers were reportedly visible
throughout the city and from all shores of the lake.
Aztec feather art ranged from tapestries to Montezuma’s royal raiment to the
uniforms and shields of the common soldiers shown here.
To the south, the Incas and their predecessors in Peru pursued a similar
trajectory of empire, plume trading, intricate featherwork, and rapid postcolonial
decline. They too set up a system of aviaries, with tithes paid in birds and

feathers from all corners of their domain. Scores of species were used, many
transported up and over the mountains from vassal kingdoms and trading
partners in the Amazon Basin. Inca bird handlers even learned to manipulate the
natural coloration of feathers. By rubbing the skin of captive parrots with the
secretions from poison arrow frogs, they created a whole new palette in the next
molt, transforming the birds’ normal greens and reds into deep golden yellows
and salmon pinks. When the Spanish arrived, they admired the craftsmanship of
Inca featherwork just as they had that of the Aztecs. But again they associated it
with paganism and potential resistance to colonial rule, prohibiting its
manufacture and destroying huge stores of feathered textiles and artwork.
Centuries of accumulated skills and tradition quickly disappeared, but many
examples of Peruvian featherwork managed to survive. Unlike the Aztec
situation, where anything the conquistadores missed quickly succumbed to rot,
Peru’s artwork benefited from the winning combination of elaborate funeral
rituals and an arid climate. Archaeologists continue to uncover beautiful
examples of feathered tunics, tabards, helmets, headdresses, statuary, bags, and
shields. Sealed in dark, dry tombs scattered across the coastal deserts, many of
the plumes have retained their vibrant coloration for more than a thousand years.
Parched desert burial chambers are a perfect place to keep old feathers.
Protection from light preserves their colors, while the lack of moisture prevents
bacteria and fungi from breaking them down. In fact, climate turns out to be an
excellent predictor for the survival of ancient American featherwork: quite a bit
from Inca deserts, very little from the temperate Aztec highlands, and nothing
from the Mayan rain forests. Museum curators consider a leaky roof as perhaps
the worst enemy of feather preservation. I learned this from Marian Kaminitz,
head of conservation at the Museum of the American Indian in Washington,
D.C.
We were sitting in the museum library, surrounded by plastic tarps covering
the books, shelves, carts, and tabletops. Thankfully, the leak hadn’t reached the
collections warehouse, a cavernous two-story room filled floor to ceiling with
artifacts packed into white archival cabinets. Nor had any rain dripped into the
lab, where we had just watched a technician making careful repairs to a striking
jet-black dancing skirt from Southern California. She cleaned each plume with
tiny dabs from a dry sponge and painstakingly reconnected loose barbs in the
vanes. The piece was irreplaceable—it dated from the nineteenth century, and
every feather in it came from the now critically endangered California Condor.
“We’re a living cultural museum,” Marian explained, noting how she and her

colleagues consult and interact regularly with tribes from throughout the
Americas. Although the bulk of the collection is historic, the museum still
acquires new pieces from groups whose artistic traditions, including
featherwork, continue to flourish. That living connection allows a much deeper
understanding of the artwork and why the use of a particular feather might have
been significant. Unlike paints or dyes, feathers bring more than just color to a
composition. They come imbued with all the characteristics, symbolism, and
mythologies associated with their species: the raven as trickster, the wise owl, or
hummingbirds as an incarnation of the sun. In some cases, the feather colors
themselves are explained by folklore. Reds and yellows came from bathing in
sacred blood or fire, blue from the skies and rivers or, to the Cashinahua people
of the western Amazon, from the pierced gallbladder of a mythical beast slain by
bird warriors.
Understanding such subtleties in featherwork is sometimes impossible without
a cultural guide. Marian recalled preparing a set of Yu’pik Eskimo dance fans
for an exhibition at the museum. They were quite old, and the men’s fans were
missing most of their Snowy Owl feathers. Replacing the plumes went against
her historian’s impulse to preserve artifacts “as is,” but a Yu’pik elder told her
the fans would be utterly meaningless otherwise. Minor wear and tear could be
ignored, but the owl feathers were integral to the dance itself. “He explained it to
me this way,” she said. “ ‘If you get a scratch in your car, you can still drive it.
But if it doesn’t have a carburetor, it won’t go.’”
The carburetor analogy is a good reminder that no matter how beautiful a
feathered artifact, there was a practical cultural logic to how and why it was
created and to how it was used. Birds too show a certain pragmatism in the
evolution of their plumes. Although a discussion of coloration inevitably focuses
on the showy birds, one need only glance through the nearest field guide to
realize that most species are actually quite drab. “Little Brown Jobs” outnumber
the Resplendent Quetzals of the world by a large margin, and even in fancy
birds, the females and juveniles are usually some shade of brown. Brightness
evolves for show, but when showiness isn’t needed, it’s better to blend in. The
frequency of dark and mottled feather patterns makes a good case for
camouflage as the most successful color scheme of all.
But whether a bird is brilliant or dull, its feathers have uses beyond the
intuitive categories of flight, insulation, and display. The great diversity of
feather structures leads to a great diversity of function, both in nature and in the
realms of human invention. Our exploration turns now to all new territories—

functions underwater and on top of it, in patent applications, on parchment, in
musical rain-forest trills, and inside the rotted stomach of a zebra.

Function
Cackle, cackle, Mother Goose,
Have you any feathers loose?
Truly have I, pretty fellow,
Half enough to fill a pillow.
And here are quills, take one or ten,
And make from each, pop-gun or pen.
—Mother Goose traditional rhyme

CONCLUSION
A Debt of Wonder
He sees that this great roundabout—
The world, with all its motley rout,
Church, army, physic, law,
Its customs and its businesses—
Are no concern at all of his,
And says, what says he?—Caw.
 
Thrice happy bird! I too have seen
Much of the vanities of men,
And sick of having seen ’em,
Would cheerfully these limbs resign
For such a pair of wings as thine,
And such a head between ’em.
—William Cowper, The Jackdaw (1782)
A brisk wind cut the air, raising white-capped waves in neat rows that stretched
away across the straits to Canada. As we hiked toward the point, bright sunlight
streamed down through the evergreens, urging us ahead into its warmth. Spring
had arrived early, with honeysuckle already leafing out and the first currants in
bloom, their flowers dangling in the breeze like tiny pink lanterns. Noah shifted
against my chest and slept on—he was already a veteran hiker, welcoming every
walk in the woods as a prime napping opportunity. We were visiting Eliza’s
extended family, who live on an island even smaller and more remote than our
own. Her aunt led the day’s expedition, everyone’s first chance to inspect a new
trail through the forest at the island’s northernmost tip. Just before we stopped
for lunch, she spotted an unusual feather hung up in the branches beside the path.
Plucking it down carefully, she handed it back to Eliza, who passed it on to me
with a questioning look. “Any ideas?”
The feather was large, longer than my outstretched hand, with a wide, plumy
base that narrowed to a small vane near the tip. The color scheme puzzled me:

snowy white barbs grading to cream and buff halfway up, then tinged with a
distinct reddish color. It obviously came from the breast or flanks of a large bird,
but what? A goose? A raptor? Some gigantic owl? Nothing I could think of had
quite the right color pattern. “I don’t know what it is,” I said finally, tucking it
away. “But I know how to find out.”
A small boat, two planes, and a subway ride later, I walked across the
National Mall in Washington, D.C., heading for the great dome and Corinthian
facade of the Smithsonian Institution’s Museum of Natural History. Dr. Carla
Dove met me “by the elephant,” a self-evident gathering point below the
upraised trunk of the huge pachyderm that presides over the museum foyer.
Dressed casually and with a direct, unassuming manner, Carla gave no outward
sign of being one of the world’s preeminent feather experts. Perhaps no one alive
has seen, handled, and examined a wider variety of plumes than Carla. “Come
on,” she said, her voice graced with the long vowels of Virginia. “I’ll take you
up.”
We walked behind the elephant, through a security door, and into a labyrinth
of halls and stairways that ended at the Feather Identification Lab, where Carla
presides over three full-time staff people, several fancy microscopes, a gene
sequencer, and a collection of more than 650,000 stuffed birds. “We’ve got more
than three-quarters of the world’s species,” she told me as we passed row upon
row of tall cabinets, “and it’s still growing.”
The specimens date back to collecting trips in the early nineteenth century and
include contributions from such luminaries as John James Audubon and
Theodore Roosevelt. Professional feather identification, on the other hand, got
its start in the fall of 1960, after the mysterious crash of a Lockheed Electra
turboprop airliner.
Sixty-two people died when Eastern Airlines Flight 375 veered off course and
plunged into Boston Harbor shortly after takeoff. At the time, it marked one of
the deadliest plane accidents in American history and shocked a nation still
enamored with the idea of commercial air travel. When investigators found bird
remains—known in the trade as “snarge” or simply “bird ick”—clogging the
ruined engines, the nascent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) developed a
sudden interest in the safety risks posed by bird strikes. If they could somehow
identify the species involved, they could begin designing and managing airports
and flight patterns to mitigate the danger.
Shortly thereafter, a messy package of snarge arrived at the Smithsonian,
where it quickly found its way to taxidermist Roxie Laybourne in the Division of

Birds. Using only her wits and an obscure 1916 publication on feather structure,
Roxie had developed precise methods for identifying feathers from the
microscopic details of their plumes. The snarge from Boston provided plenty of
material, and she returned a quick verdict: European Starlings. The case was
closed, the FAA was impressed, and the Feather Identification Lab was born.
“I’d never met anyone like Roxie,” Carla told me soon after we sat down in
her office to talk. “When I first got here, I just followed her around, learning
everything that I could. And my job was in collections—I wasn’t even supposed
to be doing feather work!”
That was twenty years ago, and Carla has never looked back. She wrote her
doctoral dissertation on the microscopic structure of shorebird feathers and
joined Roxie in the ID lab full-time. “Later, when Roxie couldn’t make it in to
the office, we used to work cases together on her porch,” Carla said, recalling
the time just before her mentor passed away, at age ninety-two. Since then, the
caseload at the lab has continued to grow, from three hundred identifications a
year when Carla started to more than five thousand today. She and her
colleagues still use the methods that Roxie pioneered, as well as new DNA
fingerprinting techniques to help with fine distinctions, or when the snarge lacks
any usable feather pieces. Their clients have included everyone from the FAA to
the U.S. Air Force, Navy, and Army; the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; the
National Park Service; the U.S. Bureau of Customs; the National Transportation
Safety Board; and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). “It’s like detective
work,” Carla explained. “I love this job.”
And just like a detective, Carla can never be sure where a case might lead.
“We recently had a deer strike at fifteen hundred feet. It was right after
Christmas,” she told me with a straight face. “The DNA from the snarge all
checked out—it was definitely a deer.” Only when investigators returned to the
plane did they locate a tiny plume fragment from the unlucky vulture whose last
meal led to the confusion. “We’ve gotten frogs that way, too, and snakes—
anything a raptor might have in its claws or its stomach.” Though bird (et al.)
strikes remain their most common cases, the lab deals with all kinds of feather
conundrums. When biologists in the Everglades catch an invasive African
python, Carla can tell them what rare birds it’s been feeding on. Anthropologists,
museums, and Native American tribes have all sought help identifying the
plumes on ancient artifacts, and the FBI once needed to match feathers in the
brain of a murder victim to the pillow that had been used to silence the gun. The
caseload in illegal wildlife trafficking grew so large that the Fish and Wildlife

Service finally stopped sending feathers to Carla. They instead sent agents, who
trained at the Smithsonian for months before returning to open their own feather
forensics lab.
I asked Carla if she would walk me through the identification process from
start to finish, using the strange plume I’d brought from home. “I’d be glad to,”
she agreed immediately, but then burst out laughing when she saw the feather.
“Ooh,” she said, and shook a finger at me, “you’re in trouble now!”
Uh-oh, I thought. What is this thing? But of course that was exactly the
question I’d come to answer. Carla ran the feather through her fingers in a
knowing way, and then we got down to business. First of all, it was a whole
feather, a semiplume, and obviously from a large bird. “And it has an
afterfeather,” she added. “Not all feathers do.” She showed me the place in the
calamus where we might find usable DNA, and then we made a microslide of
two downy barbs from the feather’s base. “All the useful microstructures are in
the plume barbules,” she explained. Through a microscope I could see what she
meant. The barbules glowed under magnification like wavy glassine threads,
with distinctive swellings at the nodes where their long cells came together.
Some nodes were wide, some narrow, some triangular, some bore spines. We
compared my plume to a variety of reference slides and quickly narrowed things
down. It was not a duck or a swan. It was not a game bird. It was not an owl.
Everything pointed to a particular group of large raptors.
“Now we go to the collection to confirm it,” she said, and led me back to the
endless rows of specimen cabinets. Opening doors and pulling out drawers from
memory, she plopped a stiff Bald Eagle and a Red-tailed Hawk into my arms in
rapid succession. Then she gathered a few others, and we laid them side by side
on a central table, where banks of custom lightbulbs mimicked direct sunlight.
The hawk plumes were clearly too small, the Bald Eagle’s too dark. Then we
found a perfect match, from the light downy base to the reddish tip. “I like this, I
like this,” Carla said, and held my feather up next to its twin. Apparently, I’d
been walking around with a semiplume from the left flank of a juvenile Golden
Eagle tucked into my luggage, in clear violation of several federal laws. After I
snapped a picture and took some notes, we put the specimens away and headed
back to Carla’s office. She didn’t give me the feather back.

Carla Dove examines the plume I brought to the Smithsonian Feather
Identification Lab.
As our conversation wound down, I asked Carla whether she was a bird-
watcher. “Yes, I am!” she exclaimed. “I’ve got to get out there this weekend and
see what’s around.” She was, in fact, an active local birder and had recently
helped confirm a new species (Great White Heron) for the state of Virginia.
While researching this book, I asked that same question to dozens of people—
from paleontologists and museum curators to engineers, calligraphers, and
hatmakers. Almost everyone regarded it as a curious notion. Sure, the
ornithologists said yes, and I did find a Hollywood fashion designer who
scattered corn for the doves on his patio, but to most people, bird-watching
sounded downright eccentric. In spite of a common fascination, even obsession,
with feathers, we too often forget to appreciate them in their natural setting,
gracing the wild creatures around us. Whether our amazement springs from the
plume in a hat, the warmth of a down jacket, or the uncanny physics of a
feathered wing in flight, we owe the debt of our wonder to birds.
As feather fanatics (and you now qualify, dear reader, having come this far),
we needn’t all be diehard birders, with crossreferenced life lists and binoculars

worth more than our cars. But we must at least become bird advocates, or we
risk witnessing the steady ebb and loss of the very objects of our interest and
desire. As early as the 1850s, Alfred Russel Wallace noted that birds of paradise
“were much more difficult to obtain than they were even twenty years ago” and
blamed the trend on overhunting. What would he make of today’s world, where
more than one in eight bird species is considered threatened with extinction and
his beloved Malay Archipelago has lost more than 70 percent of the primary rain
forests he came to know so well?
Widespread, visible, and with a growing network of ardent observers, birds
serve as a living barometer for many larger environmental trends. Monitoring
migratory species makes it possible to track habitat loss in their winter or
summer habitats half a world away, for example, while range shifts and changes
in nesting season give us immediate insight into the effects of global warming.
As the footprint of human activity grows, more and more birds are becoming
rare, and even common species appear to be declining. This stress on bird
populations compounds the consequences of our fascination with feathers. When
the plume boom of the nineteenth century drove Snowy Egrets and other species
to the brink of extinction, the human population stood at 1.5 billion. If demand
for wild feathers peaked again, how would birds fare now that nearly five times
as many people crowd the planet? Of course, better legal protections are now in
place and domestic feathers fill the bulk of the market demand, but a thriving
illicit trade persists just below the surface.
Every year, millions of wild birds are hunted or captured around the world to
meet both local and international appetites for bush meat, pets, feathers, fetishes,
and avian curios. In Brazil alone, the illegal wildlife trade brings in an estimated
one billion dollars annually, with bird and feather products making up a sizable
portion of the pot. In her book Animal Investigators, Laurel Neme details the
long pursuit of one importer in Florida who specialized in Brazilian Indian
featherwork. At the time of his arrest, this single individual held thousands of
artifacts and bulk feathers from rare and endangered birds, including “Harpy
Eagles, Scarlet Macaws, Hyacinth Macaws, Red and Green Macaws, Blue and
Yellow Macaws, Green Ibis, Guianan Red-Cotingas, Spangled Cotingas,
Maguari Storks, Great Egrets, Orange-winged Parrots, Mealy Parrots, Bare-
necked Fruit Crows, Laughing Falcons, Chanel-billed Toucans, Aracari
Toucans, Oropendulas, Curasows … ”—the list goes on. But one needn’t track
down a trafficker to glimpse the extent of the wild-bird feather trade. On any
given day, a simple eBay or craigslist search will net scores of questionable

offerings. I paused while writing this paragraph and quickly found feathers from
dozens of unusual wild species openly for sale online, from riflebirds to trogons,
barbets to turacos, and even a Greater Bird of Paradise. Collectors and classic
fly-tying enthusiasts sometimes pay thousands of dollars for hard-to-find feather
specimens, and even run-of-the-mill sales perpetuate an unnecessary burden on
wild populations. After all, Jodi Favazzo can custom dye chicken feathers to any
color of the rainbow, and a fish that won’t bite on Herbert Miner’s Cream
Badger rooster hackle probably isn’t worth catching.
The Smithsonian’s Feather Identification Lab provides an ideal end point for
this exploration of fluff, flight, and fancy. Carla and her colleagues live and
breathe feathers every day. Part biology, part forensics, their work occupies a
unique place at the interface of the human world and the feathered world, where
people and birds quite literally collide. When their efforts succeed, when the
snarge and feather barbs yield a positive ID, they demonstrate how the impacts
of colliding worlds can sometimes be softened. Wildlife crimes can be solved,
traffickers can be caught, and airports can be redesigned so that fewer birds are
killed and fewer people put at risk. It’s a lesson we need to take with us to all the
flash points of conflict between human and natural systems. How we choose to
resolve those problems now, from habitat loss to invasive species to climate
change, will determine exactly what measure of biodiversity our generations
leave for those that follow. Which warblers and bee eaters will survive? Which
owls, thrushes, gnatcatchers, auks, swifts, and eagles will persist in the wilds of
their habitat, and which will be found only in museums?
At the end of our meeting, Carla escorted me back out to the elephant in the
foyer, and we shook hands good-bye. The museum was in full swing, with
families, tourists, and groups of chattering schoolkids streaming into Mammal
Hall, the Hall of Human Origins, and rooms full of dinosaurs, reptiles, insects,
gems, and minerals. I paused by an exhibit of award-winning nature
photography, beautiful large-format color prints of wildlife from around the
world. Birds featured prominently in the display, and one picture in particular
seemed to catch everyone’s attention.
It covered a wall where anyone turning the corner would meet it head-on—a
vibrant four-by-six-foot shot of an Atlantic Puffin flying straight toward the
camera. The bird filled the frame at an angle, its wings and bright-orange
clown’s feet splayed out as if it too had just veered around a corner. Somehow,
the picture’s every detail stood out in sharp focus, from the black rachis and
charcoal vane of each tail feather to individual water droplets falling from the

three silver minnows clamped in the bird’s bill.
For several minutes I watched people turn the corner and encounter that giant
puffin face-to-face—a mother and daughter, a young Japanese couple, a group of
college-age women. They all reacted just as I had: a sudden intake of breath,
then the leaning in for a closer look, the narrowing of the eyes, the careful
examination. From surprise to query to wonder. Let the fascination begin.

Notes
Feathers are an enormous topic. Research for this book has spanned subjects as
diverse as ornithology, aeronautical engineering, paleontology, mythology,
penmanship, and the history of sports. I’ve read textbooks, explorers’ memoirs,
fashion magazines, and old newspapers, not to mention scientific journals
ranging from Polar Biology to the Australian Journal of Anthropology to the
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. In this section I note additional points
of interest and suggest a few key references for each chapter—books and articles
that will give the interested reader a deeper look into the subjects that make
feathers so fascinating. See the Bibliography for complete source information,
including full author name and publication information.
PREFACE
xiv As ornithologist Frank Gill observed: Frank Gill’s textbook, Ornithology
(2007), provides an excellent introduction to feathers—their evolution, biology,
and overall importance to birds. The text is clear, well written, and highly
recommended.
INTRODUCTION
8 “Each Waorani has a body and two souls”: Davis 1996, 271–272.

CHAPTER ONE
15 It was the first full specimen: Two books (at least) have been devoted to
Archaeopteryx in recent years, and both provided important background for this
chapter (see Shipman 1998 and Chambers 2002). Thomas Huxley’s original
description of Archaeopteryx also makes very worthwhile reading (1868).

CHAPTER TWO
34 With its head cocked, eyes open, and stumpy tail turned up: Winter
Wrens, Golden-crowned Kinglets, and indeed most other birds in North America
are protected under the Migratory Bird Act and other laws. Collection or
possession of any parts of these species is prohibited without permits from the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and relevant state agencies.
37 a theory put forth by Dr. Richard Prum: The definitive papers on feather
evolution are by Rick Prum and Alan Brush (see Prum 1999 and Prum and
Brush 2002).
40 “I’m not too keen on neutral evolution”: For an articulate BAND
viewpoint, read Alan Feduccia’s The Origin and Evolution of Birds (1999).
42 an exchange student had walked to the front of the room: One of a group
of talented young paleontologists, Dr. Zhonghe Zhou went on to direct China’s
Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology and has participated
in the discovery of numerous early birds and feathered dinosaurs.

CHAPTER THREE
45 where bands of ancient shales alternated with basalt: Geologists use the
term formation for a continuous series of rocks with no breaks in their
chronology. The Yixian Formation includes a variety of sedimentary rocks
interspersed with layers of basalt, reflecting long periods of deposition
interrupted by volcanic activity. It reaches a depth of more than one kilometer in
places.
45 the fine-grained Yixian rocks preserve amazing levels of detail: There are
few books on the Yixian fossils, but see Mark Norell’s Unearthing the Dragon
(2006). Scientific papers on feathered dinosaurs continue to be published at a
rapid pace, and there will undoubtedly be new discoveries before this book goes
to press. See the Xu Xing papers listed in the Bibliography, and keep an eye on
the science column in your local newspaper!
48 remnants of those feathers might have truly fossilized: When bones
fossilize, they are typically mineralized directly, a molecule-bymolecule
replacement of the original material. For soft tissues like feathers, however, it’s
usually the by-products of their anaerobic decomposition that are preserved.
54 Every dog in the world: Dogs provide another important evolutionary
lesson. If a domesticated wolf can lead to such variety in only a few thousand
years, think of the evolutionary possibilities when that time frame expands to the
160 million years that dinosaurs roamed the earth, or the even longer period
since the first feathers evolved.

CHAPTER FOUR
61 a young Thin-billed Prion: Since at least 1848, when famed naturalist and
illustrator John Gould published the Birds of Australia, the word prion has
referred to these dainty krill-feeding members of the family Procellariidae. In the
1980s, biochemist and future Nobel laureate Stanley Prusiner co-opted the term
prion to describe the malformed proteins (from “proteinaceous” and
“infectious”) responsible for mad cow disease and related maladies. This ugly
latter usage should in no way prejudice us against a beautiful group of seabirds!
62 His illustrated field guide, Seabirds: Never one to rest on his laurels, Peter
tells me he is currently “mid-way through a 7 year project painting over 5,000
images for a new Seabirds Handbook.” Its publication will be an event.
65 Muttonbirders succeed through a simple but profound understanding:
For more background on muttonbirding, take a look at A. Anderson (1996).
67 People don’t generally eat feathers: One notable exception to this rule
occurs in Latin American cockfighting, where tradition has it that chewing a
feather from your opponent’s bird will bring good luck and success to your
rooster.
70 resting for months or even a full year: An interesting exception to the
molting pattern, powderdown feathers grow continually throughout a bird’s
lifetime. Scattered throughout the plumage, their fine tips disintegrate steadily
into a “powder” of tiny keratin bits that dust the feathers and may confer
waterproofing or other qualities. See the discussion in Chapter 13 for more
details.
70 Its ultimate structure: The absolute classic book on feather growth and
structure is by Alfred Lucas and Peter Stettenheim (1972). This is the book that
led Rick Prum to his epiphany. The text is rather technical, but there are a lot of
great photos and illustrations.
73 Young birds acquire them in the nest: Birds typically host a community of
up to twelve different feather lice. Because they are passed from parents to
offspring in the nest, or among adults at communal roosts, the lice associated
with a particular bird species rarely come into contact with those from other
birds. Since Thin-billed Prions, for example, do not rub shoulders with
woodpeckers or crows, neither do their feather lice mingle and interbreed. The
lice have therefore evolved in tandem with their bird hosts, developing a

diversity that mirrors bird diversity almost exactly. (The exceptions to this rule
include falcons, skuas, and other bird predators and scavengers, who may
encounter a variety of feather lice while plucking their prey. The genetic makeup
of their parasites, not surprisingly, is more cosmopolitan.)
74 birds have developed elaborate ways to combat them: Feather parasites
are becoming a hot topic in ornithology, with studies suggesting that birds take
advantage of the antibacterial properties found in certain ant, snail, and fruit
chemicals to help preserve their plumes. Sunbathing and dusting may also
contribute to feather maintenance, and some preen oils appear to inhibit bacterial
growth. It’s possible that parasites helped lead to the evolution of molting itself,
as well as the development of feather colors, since dark, high-melanin feathers
appear more resistant to damage.

CHAPTER FIVE
86 This habit probably developed: Recent experiments confirm this theory.
When presented with a range of predators, from ferrets to falcons to owls,
captive Black-capped Chickadees made distinctly different alarm calls to reflect
the size and potential threat of each predator. Small bird-eating specialists like
the Northern Pygmy Owl merited long, drawn-out warnings, while a Rough-
legged Hawk (which eats mammals) received a short, dismissive phrase. Other
chickadees, as well as Red-breasted Nuthatches, responded accordingly to the
different calls. They based their behavior on the threat level encoded in the
warning, a fascinating demonstration of communication within and between
species at the heart of mixed winter flocks (see Templeton, Greene, and Davis
2005 and Templeton and Greene 2007).
88 a fir branch covered by a thin layer of snow: Snow and ice can provide a
fair bit of protection from the elements (think igloos). Ruffed Grouse and other
game birds of northern climes will often fly pell-mell into the powder at dusk,
burying themselves completely in snug little snow caves.
88 the incredible insulative quality of feathers: Bernd Heinrich’s Winter
World (2003b) discusses feathers and a wide range of other animal adaptations
to winter survival. Peter Marchand’s Life in the Cold (1996) is also good.
90 they manipulate the feathers to trap or release heat: Smithsonian Institute
researcher Dr. Carla Dove has documented incredible adaptive intricacies in the
barbules of down feathers. Dabbling ducks, for example, have large triangular
nodes between each cell that help trap more air and maximize each feather’s
insulative potential. Diving ducks live in the same cold water, but they can’t
afford a plumage that holds so much air—it would make them too buoyant to
dive and feed below the surface. The nodes on their barbules are distinctly
smaller, and their down is less efficient. They presumably make up the
difference with increased body fat or other metabolic changes, but that question
has yet to be studied.
90 searching tirelessly for their roost sites: Just where kinglets spend the night
remained something of a mystery until quite recently, when Bernd finally
succeeded in photographing four of them huddled together on a bushy white pine
branch. It confirms that they do indeed pass those frigid nights in the open, or
under a thin layer of snow.

90 an astonishing 140 degrees Fahrenheit (78 degrees Celsius): Kinglets
maintain a body temperature of 111 degrees F (44 degrees C), and there’s no
indication that they go into torpor, even on nights as cold as–129 degrees F (–34
degrees C).
92 Pacific Coast Feather makes and sells millions of pillows and comforters
every year: The history of the Pacific Coast Feather Company, as well as a lot
of insight into the global trade, is told in A Good Night’s Sleep (Roush and Beck
2006).
93 consumption of goose and duck meat: More than 99 percent of the world’s
feather and down comes as a by-product of the meat trade. A tiny market for
live-plucked down persists, but most processors and retailers eschew this
practice as both uneconomical and cruel to the birds.
98 a full storm suit with matching mukluks and mittens: The clothing
weighed for this example was sewn in the 1950s by a member of the Inupiaq
Eskimo community of Point Hope, Alaska. The outfit consisted of a man’s inner
parka (five pounds), outer parka (four pounds), trousers (five pounds), and knee-
length boots (four pounds). All were made from caribou skins, with wolverine
hood linings and bearded-seal boot soles. (Measurements most generously
provided by Angela Linn of the University of Alaska’s Museum of the North.)
99 a sodden mess that loses much of its insulative value: Feather mixtures,
however, take advantage of the natural water resistance in contour feathers and
perform much better wet than down alone.

CHAPTER SIX
102 Mammalian athletes also help cool themselves by sweating: Though all
mammals have sweat glands (from which the milk-producing mammary glands
evolved), many species lack enough of them for effective temperature
regulation. Primates, camels, and horses are notoriously good at sweating, while
dogs, felines, rodents, rabbits, and many other groups rely more on panting and
other adaptations.
103 birds can’t afford to heat up: Notable exceptions include ostriches, as well
as various doves, quail, sandgrouse, and other birds of hot, arid climates. These
species regularly use hyperthermia as a temperature regulation strategy. They
allow their body temperatures to increase to near-lethal levels so that they can
simply radiate excess heat rather than risk the water loss inherent in panting.
109 tracts separated by large areas of bare skin called apteria: Ornithologists
call these feather tracts pterylae (thus apteria for bare patches). Most species
have eight main tracts and dozens of subgroups arranged into distinctive
patterns. Before the advent of DNA analysis, ornithologists studied these
patterns to unravel close evolutionary relationships among birds, and
“pterylosis” remains an important tool for bird taxonomy.
109 plenty of other options for dispersing heat: Penguins generate the most
heat while swimming, using their stubby wings to “fly” gracefully below the
surface. This type of locomotion works only where the water is cold enough to
dispel the heat from pectoral muscles. Auks do it in the northern oceans and
penguins in southern, but the habit is unknown in tropical seas. Marine mammals
like whales and dolphins can swim normally throughout the tropics, but a bird’s
feathered insulation makes flapping in warm water physiologically impossible.
111 their unique respiratory system takes evaporative cooling: Avian
respiration and cooling are well described in Gill 2007.
112 a panting bird can take hundreds of breaths per minute: Some species
(particularly herons, pelicans, owls, game birds, and goatsuckers) increase heat
loss further by rapidly vibrating bones and membranes in their upper throat, a
process called “gular fluttering.”
112 breathing helps keep an active bird from overheating: Water loss is an
unavoidable side effect of evaporation, but birds appear to avoid getting
dehydrated by keeping most flight times short and by ascending to high, cool

altitudes for long migratory journeys.
113 bat bodies retain a suite of much simpler cooling options: See Reeder
and Cowles 1951 for a classic paper on bat thermoregulation and Hedenström,
Johansson, and Spedding 2009 for a technical comparison of bats and birds.

CHAPTER SEVEN
118 All three were Silver-laced Wyandottes: The later addition of two Rhode
Island Reds added a splash of color and brought our flock up to a total of five,
before a hungry Bald Eagle reduced the count to four, where things stabilized.
118 one of ornithology’s most divisive questions: Literature on the ground-up–
tree-down debate could fill a bookshelf, but it’s probably best to start with the
classic viewpoints: Ostrom 1979 and Feduccia 2002.
123 Even bats, the most nimble nonavian fliers: Nimble hardly does bats
justice. Recent studies of bat flight show novel thrust and lift mechanisms that
give them incredible maneuverability, particularly at low speeds. A bat in pursuit
of its insect prey can execute 180-degree turns in the distance of half a
wingspan.
123 feathers seem grossly overqualified for the job: A related and equally
significant problem is that the vast majority of “tree-down” examples involve
gliding, rather than the powered flapping flight that birds use. Not one of dozens
of extant gliders shows any evolutionary inclination toward flapping. As one
ornithologist I spoke to put it, “Gliding is a perfect adaptation for gliding, but it’s
a dead end for flight.”
127 help them scramble up otherwise impossible slopes: In the wild, Chukar
Partridges inhabit dry, rocky grass and shrublands, where they’re vulnerable to a
wide range of predators. They often take refuge in caves or crevices between
bouts of foraging or when threatened. Using WAIR allows even the youngest
birds to ascend cliffs and rocks to safety, an advantage with immediate impacts
on survival.
127 Ken called the technique WAIR: For more details on the wing-assisted
incline running theory, see Dial 2003 and Dial, Randall, and Dial 2006.

CHAPTER EIGHT
132 he dropped the hammer and the feather together: There is a wonderful
Web site with detailed log entries and interviews about the Apollo 15 mission
(see E. Jones 1996). It also features a link to the video showing the feather and
hammer experiment.
135 once both he and the falcon are airborne: For information on Ken
Franklin’s work with falcons, see Harpole 2005 and seek out the National
Geographic movie Terminal Velocity.

CHAPTER NINE
141 the mimicking of biological structures, behaviors, and processes: Though
it has very little to do with feathers, Robert Allen’s Bulletproof Feathers (2010)
gives a beautifully illustrated introduction to modern efforts in biomimicry.
142 it was a short leap to fletching: Although there may be an intuitive
connection between bird flight and archery, properly fletching an arrow is
anything but simple. Ishi, the last member of California’s Yahi people, emerged
from the wild in 1911 with the expert knowledge of a culture that had depended
on their archery skills for sustenance and defense. His doctor, friend, and bow-
hunting apprentice Saxton Pope observed, “Many kinds of feathers were used by
Ishi on his arrows—eagle, hawk, owl, buzzard, wild goose, heron, quail, pigeon,
flicker, turkey, bluejay… . Like the best archers he put three feathers from the
same wing on each arrow.” Ishi’s process included intricate cutting, trimming,
and notching, followed by adhesion with strips of chewed deer sinew. The size
and shape of the fletching matched specific purposes, from narrow three-inch
vanes on small hunting arrows to war shafts with feathers “the full length of a
hawk’s pinions—almost a foot.” Such precise craftsmanship made fletching one
of the earliest specialty trades, and ancient armies required hundreds or even
thousands of dedicated arrow makers. At its peak, for example, Genghis Khan’s
famous light cavalry rode into each battle equipped with more than nine million
handmade arrows.
144 a grand tale that’s been well told elsewhere: Of the many books on this
topic, James Tobin’s To Conquer the Air is particularly good.
145 When air meets the front of a bird wing, it has a choice: In spite of the
fact that every bird (or airplane) aloft relies on these principles to fly, the relative
contribution of airfoil shape, angle, air pressure, and other factors remains
contentious. Flowing air creates complex patterns of pressure, currents, and
vortices, and although engineers can calculate an airfoil’s performance precisely,
the actual process retains some degree of mystery. For an excellent explanation
of the current thinking, see D. Anderson and Eberhardt 2001.
146 notions about birds and airfoils didn’t emerge again until the late
1800s: For more on the history of human flight, I highly recommend Octave
Chanute’s classic Progress in Flying Machines (1894) as well as Lilienthal 2001
and Tobin 2003.

149 aircraft designers had essentially perfected the form: D. Anderson and
Eberhardt 2001 provides excellent explanations of the mechanics of flight.
152 rough surfaces can help reduce drag: Sharkskin behaves this way in
water, echoing Leonardo’s observations that air and water respond to the same
principles. This effect led swimwear companies to design scaly full-body suits
that reduced drag for competitive swimmers by up to 5 percent. Swimmers
wearing “sharkskin” suits broke more than 250 world records in less than two
years before the material was finally banned from competition.
154 extreme sports may offer a glimpse of this feeling: Or not. My curiosity
once got the best of reason, and I tried bungee jumping, diving from a high
bridge with nothing but an elastic rope tied around my ankles. Jumping off
bridges, it turns out, is nothing like flying. It’s like falling.
154 “I sometimes think that the desire to fly”: McFarland 1953.

CHAPTER TEN
159 other naturalists have suffered the exact opposite problem: Alfred
Russel Wallace’s Malay Archipelago (1869) is a wonderful introduction to birds
of paradise and the natural history of modern-day Indonesia. Frith and Beehler’s
The Birds of Paradise (1998) is an excellent reference, with great illustrations by
William T. Cooper.
160 Reading his description of their “dancing parties”: Wallace 1869.
163 Darwin’s second major contribution to evolutionary theory: Darwin
1871 provides the foundation for sexual selection, but see Johnsgard 1994 or
Hill and McGraw 2006b for modern interpretations of the theory.
164 evolutionary biologists now distinguish between two basic forms of
sexual 
selection: 
Though 
intra-and 
intersexual 
selection 
are 
useful
generalizations, each includes subtleties, and the barrier between them is far
from fixed. Females in many intrasexual systems can make choices based on
visual cues or a male’s performance in combat. Similarly, many highly adorned
male birds have been known to fight to the death defending breeding rights or
territories.
165 feathers and arguably birds themselves would never have become so
diverse: Many experts now lean toward display and mate choice as perhaps the
strongest factors in the early development and diversification of feathers. By the
time of the first beaked bird, Confuciusornis (another Yixian Formation find),
sexual dimorphism was well established. Whole flocks of these crow-size fliers
have been unearthed, with males sporting wildly elongated tail feathers
indistinguishable from those of various modern widowbirds, flycatchers, or birds
of paradise.
167 Wallace countered these fables with careful observation: There is an
irony in using Wallace and birds of paradise as the prime example of Darwinian
sexual selection, since Wallace himself never cottoned to the theory. He believed
that natural selection through male competition accounted for variations in
plumage and other features and thought that Darwin put too much emphasis on
female choice. Later studies favor Darwin’s interpretation.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
176 The global plume trade peaked in the years before World War I: Good
references on different aspects of the plume trade include Stein 2008, Swadling
1996, and Price 1999.
176 one fashion craze drove the entire industry: By one count, the millinery
trade in 1900 employed more than one in every three hundred American
workers. In modern terms, that would equal well over a half-million people,
more than the active memberships of the United Auto Workers, the
Longshoremen, the United Farm Workers, the Association of Flight Attendants,
and the Writers Guild of America combined.
176 feathers had epitomized high style: Feathered head wear developed
independently in numerous prehistoric cultures but formally entered Western
tradition by way of Persia, where soldiers added a “feather to their cap” to
commemorate battlefield kills. Feathers still feature prominently in military
dress uniforms around the world, from Scotland’s Black Watch (red hackle) to
Italy’s Bersaglieri (grouse) and the Swiss Guard (ostrich).
179 “Whoever wears an ostrich plume”: Hayden 1913.
183 “I am sorry I cannot give the full particulars”: From a letter to George
Aschman, August 9, 1944.
185 “During the two years I was in England”: Smith various.
186 fall from the rachis in long, extravagant waves: The rachides of ostrich
plumes divide their wide vanes into perfectly equal halves, a quality that led
ancient Egyptians to revere them as powerful symbols of truth, law, and
morality. Ostrich plumes appeared commonly in hieroglyphics, decorated the
crown of Osiris, and were the talismans of Maat, goddess of justice.
188 a conservation ethic that still resonates in the modern environmental
movement: Frank Chapman’s autobiography (1933) is a good read and provides
insight into the development of the bird-conservation movement.

CHAPTER TWELVE
198 a range of other functions also added pressure for the evolution of
color: There is a wonderful new National Geographic book on bird coloration
(Hill 2010), which describes the evolution, natural history, and physics of feather
colors in very readable prose (with excellent color photos). For the science
behind this book, see Hill and McGraw 2006a, 2006b.
198 the melanin tinting a sparrow feather: In addition to color, the presence
of melanins can toughen feathers, making them more resistant to physical wear
and rot. This explains why many birds in wet climates are darker than their
relatives elsewhere (for bacterial resistance), why birds that move through
abrasive vegetation are dark (e.g., rails, crakes), and why flight feathers exposed
to heavy wear are often dark (e.g., the wing tips of gulls and buteos). A recent
study found that the brilliant red, orange, and yellow pigments unique to parrot
feathers are also resistant to bacteria, a useful adaptation in their humid rain
forest environment. (See Burtt et al. 2010.)
201 the result is an unparalleled diversity of colors and effects: Although the
common description of birds as “living jewels” may sound trite, it’s entirely
accurate in the case of the Opal-crowned Manakin. Crystalline structures within
its feather barbs mimic those of an opal almost exactly and refract light in the
same way. For all intents and purposes, this little Amazonian songbird is flying
around with a gemstone on its head.
203 Feather money, or tevau: In the local tongue, tevau is simply a generic
word for money. The people of Santa Cruz and neighboring islands referred to
feather coils by at least eleven different names, depending on their length,
condition, age, and the quality of the feathers. But with local spellings like lrdq,
those words are usually avoided in favor of the generic term.
204 featherwork continues in the art and adornment of many cultures: To
learn more about featherwork, seek out the well-written and beautifully
illustrated volumes by Reid (2005) and Reina and Kensinger (1991).
205 “I am forced to abstain”: B. Díaz del Castillo [1570] 1956.
206 even common citizens kept colorful songbirds as pets: This tradition
persists in many parts of Latin America. Fiercely contested songbird
competitions transform the central square of Paramaribo, Suriname, every
Sunday afternoon, briefly filling the sleepy capital with the warbles and trills of

the rain forest.
206 outlawing traditional practices, including featherwork: Among few
exceptions to this rule was the Franciscan missionary and historian Bernardino
de Sahagún (1499–1590), who encouraged surviving feather artists to use their
talents for Christian themes. Several bishops’ miters, triptychs, and other
ecclesiastical pieces survive, resembling the finest Renaissance paintings but
wrought in hummingbird feathers.
207 with tithes paid in birds and feathers from all corners of their domain:
Feathers even figured in the causes and spoils of Incan warfare. The Inca
conquest of the Cuyo people stemmed in part from the Cuyos’ refusal to trade
“certain birds found in that land.” Following the Inca victory, a thousand cages
of Cuyo birds were sent to the emperor in tribute.
208 retained their vibrant coloration for more than a thousand years: The
Inca inherited a long-standing tradition of featherwork in Peru, and surviving
artifacts date to a number of earlier cultures, including the Nazca (AD 100–600),
the Huari (AD 600–1000), and the Chimú (AD 900–1500).

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
218 structure is the key to waterproofing: Several fascinating scientific
articles provided information on waterproofing (see Bormashenko et al. 2007,
Ortega-Jiminez and Alvarez-Borrego 2010, and Yang, Xu, and Zhang 2006).
219 before their preen glands have even started producing oil: Ornithologists
used to assume that the mother used her own oils to preen her chicks in
preparation for their first swim, since hatcheryreared birds would invariably get
wet and drown. Now it seems that the hatchery chicks suffered only from lack of
sanitation: amniotic residues left over from hatching made their down more
permeable. Once cleaned, the domestic chicks were perfectly able to stay dry in
water for hours without preen oils. Exactly when and how a mother Mallard
cleans her chicks (or whether they do it themselves) remains a mystery.
221 They benefit from the negative buoyancy of soaking: All diving birds
face the same buoyancy conundrum. Their waterproofing maintains a lifesaving
layer of warm, dry air against their skin and down, but that very air makes it
harder to dive and stay beneath the surface. Studies show that the structure of
down feathers in diving birds holds less air (and is therefore less insulative) than
those of dabblers (which is why the best feather beds are filled with down from
geese and not cormorants or mergansers). Diving birds presumably compensate
with increased body fat or some metabolic difference, but this has yet to be
studied.
222 a peculiar sandgrouse quirk: This adaptation raises all kinds of
evolutionary questions. As Darwin noted, differences in plumage generally
derive from sexual selection, and many sandgrouse species are known for the
male’s “breast display” posture during mating rituals. Could female sandgrouse
choose spongy breasts the same way that birds of paradise prefer bright colors,
long tails, and elaborate dances? Are the coil-barbed feathers present only in
breeding plumage? What is the cost to the male in terms of insulation or
vulnerability to rainstorms? These questions have yet to be examined—in spite
of their fascinating idiosyncrasies (and great beauty), sandgrouse have received
almost no research attention in more than forty years.
223 Fly-fishing as sport and compulsion: There are a host of great books on
fly-fishing and fly-tying, many with great illustrations of feathered flies. As a
start, look for Walton 1896, Kelson 1895, and Schmookler and Sils 1999.

223 “They fasten red (crimson red) wool around a hook”: Translation from
the Greek, as quoted in Radcliffe 1921.
226 his wealth of detailed knowledge: I asked John to focus on feathers, but
fly-tying materials don’t stop there. He rattled off a long list of things he’s used
over the years to get a particular effect, from yarn and wool to deer fur, colored
beads, and even polar-bear hair. “The big thing these days,” he said, rolling his
eyes, “is the fur off the bottom of the pads on the back feet of a snowshoe hare!”
I looked it up online when I got home—he wasn’t kidding!
229 vintage collections now command surprising sums at auction: There is a
dark side to this hobby, however. Many of the feathers used by nineteenth-
century tiers came from birds that are now rare or even endangered in the wild.
Yet some collectors and makers insist on re-creating those patterns exactly as
they first appeared, regardless of the consequences. This demand creates a
lucrative niche market for their feathers, adding to the stress on populations
already suffering from habitat loss, overhunting, and other pressures.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
236 the first definite reference to the use of a quill: One of the best books on
the history of writing is Carvalho’s Forty Centuries of Ink (1904). Finlay (1990)
is also excellent.
236 Production of quill pens peaked in the early nineteenth century: For a
good description of the quill trade, see “History of Writing Materials” 1838.
237 common scene of a schoolboy timidly addressing his writing master:
Though the articles in Household Words were unsigned, the “urchin” in this
scene is strongly reminiscent of little Oliver Twist, whose famous workhouse
request of, “Please, sir, I want some more,” first appeared in print only twelve
years earlier. 24
5 They remained a viable competitor to wooden picks: The curious history of
quill toothpicks deserves a chapter of its own. Happily, Henry Petroski has
already accomplished that task admirably in his book, The Toothpick (2007,
chap. 4).
245 featherbone powder puffs may have faded away: Patented in 1883 by
Edward K. Warren, “featherbone” transformed turkey quills discarded by the
feather-duster industry into a low-cost alternative to the whale baleen used in
corsets, bustles, bust extenders, and other fashion essentials of the day (as well
as powder puffs). Mr. Warren made a fortune.
245 engineers and entrepreneurs continue to find surprising new uses for
the plumage of birds: Information on the various industrial uses of feathers is
scattered throughout the scientific literature and patent-office databases.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
251 it’s easy to imagine natural selection favoring baldness: If you were to
run your hand over a vulture’s knobby head, you would probably find a few
bristles or short quills topped with bits of fuzz. I’ve tried this with museum
specimens, and it turns out that vultures aren’t entirely bald. Some feathers have
been lost, but others remain, either complete or reduced to simpler forms. The
degree of feather loss is related to the evolutionary trade-off between hygienic
advantage and the risk of heat loss. Bare heads stay clean, but they lack the
insulating and protective qualities that come with feathers. The balance tips in
favor of baldness only for the messiest eaters, those species that regularly feed
inside the body cavities of big animals. At our carcasses in Kenya, the griffons
and Nubian Vultures had bare heads, while the diminutive Egyptian Vulture was
almost fully feathered, its baldness limited to a yellow patch around the face.
Unable to compete directly with its larger cousins, the Egyptian Vulture focused
on cleaning up after they were through, using its small bill to glean meat and
sinew from joints and crevices too narrow for the larger birds. Its head and neck
rarely become fully soiled, and the feathers persist.
259 rubbing body parts together in what scientists call stridulation:
Stridulation is extremely uncommon in all vertebrates. Simplified forms are
known from snakes such as the saw-scaled viper, which rasps its scales together
with a sizzling sound during threat displays. Fish, too, have been known to
stridulate with gill bones or spines, but the technique is most common in insects,
whose hard exoskeletons, membranous wings, and rapid-fire musculature are
best suited to it.
259 Like crickets, grasshoppers use a pick-and-file system to stridulate: The
pick and file alone does not produce the cricket’s distinctive chirr, but it’s just at
the right frequency to cause the wing membrane to resonate and broadcast the
tone. This system inspired Kim to take her research further, and she’s now
shown that the flight-feather shafts throughout the manakin’s wing resonate with
the “ting” and that the potential to vibrate at that frequency seems inherent in all
feathers. The Club-winged Manakin’s adaptation is unique, but it takes
advantage of a sonic characteristic intrinsic in feather structure.

CONCLUSION
265 a collection of more than 650,000 stuffed birds: The third-largest bird
collection in the world, the Smithsonian’s National Collection includes skins,
nests, eggs, skeletons, and tissue samples used for a wide range of ornithology
research by resident scientists as well as visiting scholars.
266 Though bird (et al.) strikes remain their most common cases: Since
pilots record the elevation of each incident, the lab’s massive bird-strike data set
is beginning to change the way people think about flight and migration habits.
They’ve had Griffon Vulture strikes at thirty-seven thousand feet, ducks at
twenty-seven thousand feet, and shorebirds as high as twelve thousand feet.
People used to think these were rare events, but it now appears that even
songbirds regularly migrate at extreme elevations.
APPENDIX A
277 Feather Growth and Molt: This figure pictures the growth of a typical
vaned feather. For down, bristles, filoplumes, and other nonvaned types, the
process is very similar but varies in the arrangement of barbs and the presence or
absence of a rachis.

Bibliography
Aiken, Charlotte Rankin. 1918. The millinery department. New York: Ronald
Press.
Allen, Grant. 1879. Pleased with a feather. Popular Science Monthly 15: 366–
376.
Allen, Robert, ed. 2010. Bulletproof feathers: How science uses nature’s secrets
to design cutting-edge technology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Anderson, Atholl. 1996. Origins of Procellariidae hunting in the Southwest
Pacific. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 6: 403–410.
Anderson, David F., and Scott Eberhardt. 2001. Understanding flight. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Attenborough, David. 2009. Alfred Russel Wallace and the birds of paradise.
Centenary Lecture, Bristol University, September 24, 2009.
Audubon, John James. 2008. 120 Audubon bird prints. Mineola, NY: Dover
Publications.
Baier, Stephen. 1977. Trans-Saharan trade and the Sahel: Damergu, 1870–1930.
Journal of African History 18: 37–60.
Bakken, George S., Marilyn R. Banta, Clay M. Higginbotham, and Aaron J.
Lynott. 2006. It’s just ducky to be clean: The water repellency and water
penetration resistance of swimming mallard Anas platyrhynchos ducklings.
Journal of Avian Biology 37: 561–571.
Barbosa, A., S. Merino, J. J. Curevo, F. De Lope, and A. P. Moller. 2003.
Feather damage of long tails in Barn Swallows Hirundo rustica. Ardea 91: 85–
90.
Barney, Stephen A., W. J. Lewis, J. A. Beach, and Oliver Berghof, trans. 2006.
The etymologies of Isidore of Seville. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barrett, Paul M. 2000. Evolutionary consequences of dating the Yixian
Formation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 15: 99–103.
Bartholomew, George A., Robert C. Lasiewski, and Eugene C. Crawford Jr.
1968. Patterns of panting and gular flutter in cormorants, pelicans, owls, and
doves. Condor 70: 31–34.
Begbie, Harold. 1910. New thoughts on evolution: Views of Professor Alfred
Russel Wallace. Daily Chronicle (London), November 3–4, 4.
Belloc, Hilaire. 1897. More beasts for worse children. London: Duckworth.

Bewick, Thomas. 2004. Bewick’s animal woodcuts. Mineola, NY: Dover
Publications.
Boerger, Brenda H. 2009. Trees of Santa Cruz Island and their metaphors. From
“Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Symposium About Language and
Society, Austin.” Texas Linguistic Forum 53: 100–109.
Bonser, Richard H. C. 1995. Melanin and the abrasion resistance of feathers.
Condor 97: 590–591.
Bonser, Richard H. C., and C. Dawson. 1999. The structural mechanical
properties of down feathers and biomimicking natural insulation materials.
Journal of Materials Science Letters 18: 1769–1770.
Borgia, Gerald. 1985. Bower quality, number of decorations, and mating success
of male Satin Bowerbirds (Ptilonorhynchus violaceus): An experimental
analysis. Animal Behavior 33: 266–271.
Bormashenko, Edward, Yelena Bormashenko, Tamir Stein, Gene Whyman, and
Ester Bormashenko. 2007. Why do pigeon feathers repel water? Hydrophobicity
of pennae, Cassie-Baxter wetting hypothesis and Cassie-Wenzel capillarity-
induced wetting transition. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 311: 212–
216.
Bonshek, Elizabeth. 2009. A personal narrative of particular things: Tevau
(feather money) from Santa Cruz, Solomon Islands. Australian Journal of
Anthropology 20: 74–92.
Bostwick, Kimberly S. 2000. Mechanical sounds and evolutionary relationships
of the Club-winged Manakin (Machaeropterus deliciosus). Auk 117: 465–478.
Bostwick, Kimberly S., Damian O. Elias, Andrew Mason, and Fernando
Montealegre-Z. 2010. Resonating feathers produce courtship song. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B 277: 835–841.
Bostwick, Kimberly S., and Richard O. Prum. 2003. High-speed video analysis
of wing-snapping in two manakin clades (Pipridae: Aves). Journal of
Experimental Biology 206: 3693–3706.
———–. 2005. Courting bird sings with stridulating wing feathers. Science 309:
736.
Brigham, William T. 1918. Additional notes on Hawaiian featherwork: Second
supplement. Memoirs of the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, vol. 7, no. 1.
Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press.
Bryant, David M. 1983. Heat stress in tropical birds: Behavioural
thermoregulation during flight. Ibis 125: 313–323.
Burtt, Edward H., and Jann M. Ichida. 2004. Gloger’s rule, feather-degrading

bacteria, and color variation among Song Sparrows. Condor 106: 681–686.
Burtt, Edward H., Max R. Schroeder, Lauren A. Smith, Jenna E. Sroka, and
Kevin J. McGraw. 2010. Colourful parrot feathers resist bacterial degradation.
Biology Letters doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2010.0716.
Byron, Lord. 1809. English bards and Scotch reviewers. London: James
Cawthorn.
Cade, Tom J., and Gordon L. Maclean. 1967. Transport of water by adult
sandgrouse to their young. Condor 69: 323–343.
Calder, William A. 1968. Respiratory and heart rates of birds at rest. Condor 70:
358–365.
Canals, M., C. Átala, R. Olivares, F. Guajardo, D. Figueroa, P. Sabat, and M.
Rosenmann. 2005. Functional and structural optimization of the respiratory
system of the bat Tadarida brasiliensis (Chiroptera, Molossidae): Does the
airway geometry matter? Journal of Experimental Bioloygy 208: 3987–3995.
Carvalho, David N. 1904. Forty centuries of ink. New York: Banks Law.
Catry, Paulo, Ana Campos, Pedro Segurado, Monica Silva, and Ian Strange.
2003. Population census and nesting habitat selection of Thin-billed Prion
Pachyptila belcheri on New Island, Falkland Islands. Polar Biology 26: 202–
207.
Chambers, Paul. 2002. Bones of contention: The fossil that shook science.
London: John Murray.
Chanute, Octave. 1894. Progress in flying machines. New York: American
Engineer and Railroad Journal.
Chapman, Frank Michler. 1886. Birds and bonnets. Forest and Stream 26, no. 6:
84.
———–. 1908. Camps and cruises of an ornithologist. New York: D. Appleton.
———–. 1933. Autobiography of a bird-lover. New York: D. Appleton–
Century.
Chiappe, Luis M. 2007. Glorified dinosaurs: The origin and early evolution of
birds. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Chiappe, Luis M., Jesús Marugán-Lobón, Shu’an Ji, and Zhonghe Zhou. 2008.
Life history of a basal bird: Morphometrics of the Early Cretaceous
Confuciusornis. Biology Letters 4: 719–723.
Christiansen, Per, and Niels Bonde. 2004. Body plumage in Archaeopteryx : A
review, and new evidence from the Berlin specimen. Comptes Rendus Palevol 3:
99–118.
Clark, Christopher James, and Teresa J. Feo. 2008. The Anna’s Hummingbird

chirps with its tail: A new mechanism for sonation in birds. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B 275: 955–962.
Clottes, Jean, ed. 2003. Chauvet Cave: The art of earliest times. Salt Lake City:
University of Utah Press.
The commercial value of small things. 1891. Chambers’s Journal of Popular
Literature, Science, and Arts 68: 710–713.
Conard, Nicholas J., Maria Malina, and Susanne C. Müzel. 2009. New flutes
document the earliest musical tradition in southwestern Germany. Nature 460:
737–740.
Coulson, David, and Alec Campbell. 2001. African rock art. New York: Harry
N. Abrams.
Cowper, William. 1808. Poems. London: J. Johnson.
Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the origin of species by means of natural selection;
or, The preservation of favoured races in the struggle for life. London: John
Murray.
———–. 1871. The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex. London:
John Murray.
———–. 1993. The correspondence of Charles Darwin. Vol. 8, 1860.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, Wade. 1996. One river. New York: Simon and Schuster.
del Hoyo, Josep, Andrew Elliot, and Jordi Sargatal, eds. 1992. Handbook of the
birds of the world. Vol. 1, Ostrich to ducks. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions.
Dial, Kenneth P. 2003. Wing-assisted incline running and the evolution of flight.
Science 299: 402–404.
Dial, Kenneth P., Brandon G. Jackson, and Paolo Serge. 2008. A fundamental
avian wing-stroke provides a new perspective on the evolution of flight. Nature
451: 985–989.
Dial, Kenneth P., R. J. Randall, and Terry R. Dial. 2006. What use is half a wing
in the ecology and evolution of birds? BioScience 56: 437–445.
Diamond, A. W., and F. L. Filion, eds. 1987. The value of birds. ICBP Technical
Publication, no. 6. Cambridge: International Council for Bird Preservation.
Díaz del Castillo, B. [1570] 1956. The discovery and conquest of Mexico, 1517–
1521. Trans. A. Maudslay. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Cudahy.
Dickson, James G., ed. 1992. The Wild Turkey: Biology and management.
Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books.
Dove, Carla, Marcy Heacker, and Bill Adair. 2004. In memorium: Roxie Collie
Laybourne, 1910–2003. Auk 121: 1282–1285.

Drent, Rudolf Herman. 1972. Adaptive aspects of the physiology of incubation.
In Proceedings of the XVth International Ornithological Congress, ed. K. H.
Voous, 255–280. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Dyck, J. 1985. The evolution of feathers. Zoologica Scripta 14: 137–154.
Eaton, Elon Howard. 1915. Birds of New York. Albany: New York State
Museum.
Ehrlich, Paul R., David S. Dobkin, and Darryl Wheye. 1988. The birder’s
handbook: A field guide to the natural history of North American birds. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Favier, Julien, Antoine Dauptain, Davide Basso, and Allessandro Bottaro. 2009.
Passive separation control using a self-adaptive hairy coating. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics 627: 451–483.
Feduccia, Alan. 1999. The origin and evolution of birds. 2nd ed. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
———–. 2002. Birds are dinosaurs: Simple answer to a complex question. Auk
119: 1187–1201.
Feduccia, Alan, Theagarten Lingham-Soliar, and J. Richard Hinchliffe. 2005. Do
feathered dinosaurs exist? Testing the hypothesis on neontological and
paleontological evidence. Journal of Morphology 266: 125–166.
Feduccia, Alan, and Julie Nowicki. 2002. The hand of birds revealed by ostrich
embryos. Naturwissenschaften 89: 391–393.
Finlay, Michael. 1990. Western writing implements in the age of the quill pen.
Weterhal, England: Plains Books.
Ford, Horace Alfred. 1859. Archery: Its theory and practice. 2nd ed. London: J.
Buchanan.
Frith, Clifford B., and Bruce M. Beehler. 1998. The birds of paradise. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Frith, Clifford B., and William T. Cooper. 1996. Courtship display and mating of
Victoria’s Riflebird (Ptiloris ictoriae) with notes on the courtship displays of
congeneric species. Emu 96: 102–113.
Gaston, Kevin J., and Tim Blackburn. 1997. How many birds are there?
Biodiversity and Conservation 6: 615–625.
Gauthier, Jacques, and Lawrence F. Gall, eds. 2001. New perspectives on the
origin and early evolution of birds: Proceedings of the International Symposium
in Honor of John H. Ostrom. New Haven: Peabody Museum of Natural History,
Yale University.
Gee, Henry. 1999. In search of deep time. New York: Free Press.

George, Brian R., Anne Bockarie, Holly McBride, Davi Hoppy, and Alison
Scutti. 2003. Utilization of turkey feather fibers in nonwoven erosion control
fabrics. International Nonwovens Journal 12: 45–52.
Gill, Frank B. 2007. Ornithology. 3rd ed. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Gill, Frank B., and D. Donsker, eds. 2010. IOC world bird names (version 2.5).
http://www.worldbirdnames.org/. Accessed August 6, 2010.
Gleeson, Mike. 1985. Analysis of respiratory pattern during panting in fowl,
Gallus domesticus. Journal of Experimental Biology 116: 487–491.
Godwin, Malcolm. 1990. Angels, an endangered species. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Gremillet, David, Christophe Chauvin, Rory P. Wilson, Yvon Le Maho, and
Sarah Wanless. 2005. Unusual feather structure allows partial plumage
wettability in diving great cormorants Phalacrocorax carbo. Journal of Avian
Biology 36: 57–63.
Guichard, Bohoua Louis. 2008. Effect of feather meal feeding on the body
weight and feather development of broilers. European Journal of Scientific
Research 24: 404–409.
Gunderson, Alex R. 2008. Feather-degrading bacteria: A new frontier in avian
and host-parasite research? Auk 125: 972–979.
Haemig, Paul D. 1978. Aztec emperor Auitzotl and the Great-Tailed Grackle.
Biotropica 10: 11–17.
———–. 1979. The secret of the Painted Jay. Biotropica 11: 81–87.
Hansell, Michael H. 2000. Bird nests and construction behaviour. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Harpole, Tom. 2005. Falling with the falcon. Air and Space Magazine.
http://www.airspacemag.com/flight-today/falcon.html. 
Accessed 
August 
3,
2010.
Harrison, Hal H. 1979. A field guide to western bird nests. New York: Houghton
Mifflin.
Hart, Ivor B. 1963. The mechanical investigations of Leonardo da Vinci.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Harter, Jim. 1979. Animals: 1419 copyright-free illustrations of mammals, birds,
fish, insects, etc. New York: Dover Publications.
Hayden, Carl. 1913. Speech: The ostrich industry. In Congressional Record:
Proceedings and Debates of the 62nd Congress, 3rd Session 49, no. 5: 57–61.
Hecht, M. K., J. H. Ostrom, G. Viohl, and P. Wellnhofer, eds. 1985. The
beginnings of birds: Proceedings of the International “Archaeopteryx”

Conference, Eichstatt, 1984. Willibaldsburg, Germany: Freunde des Jura-
Museums Eichstatt.
Hedenström, A., L. C. Johansson, and G. R. Spedding. 2009. Bird or bat:
Comparing airframe design and flight performance. Bioinspiration and
Biomimetics 4: 1–13.
Hedenström, A., L. C. Johansson, M. Wolf, R. von Busse, Y. Winter, and G. R.
Spedding. 2007. Bat flight generates complex aerodynamic tracks. Science 316:
894–897.
Heilmann, Gerhard. 1927. The origin of birds. New York: D. Appleton.
Heinrich, Bernd. 2003a. Overnighting of Golden-crowned Kinglets during
winter. Wilson Bulletin 115: 113–114.
———–. 2003b. Winter world: The ingenuity of animal survival. New York:
Ecco.
Hill, G. E. 2010. National Geographic bird coloration. Washington, DC:
National Geographic.
Hill, G. E., and K. J. McGraw, eds. 2006a. Bird coloration. Vol. 1, Mechanisms
and measurements. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
———–. 2006b. Bird coloration. Vol. 2, Function and evolution. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Hingee, Mae, and Robert D. Magrath. 2009. Flights of fear: A mechanical wing
whistle sounds the alarm in a flocking bird. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
276: 4173–4179.
History of writing materials: The history of the quill pen. 1838. Saturday
Magazine, January 13, 14–16.
Hornaday, William T. 1913. Woman, the juggernaut of the bird world. New York
Times, February 23, X1.
Houlihan, Patrick F. 1986. The birds of ancient Egypt. Warminster, England:
Aris and Phillips.
Houston, David C. 2010a. The impact of red feather currency on the population
of the Scarlet Honeyeater on Santa Cruz. In Ethno-ornithology: Birds,
indigenous people, culture, and society, ed. Sonia Tidemann and Andrew
Gosler, 55–66. London: Earthscan.
———–. 2010b. The Maori and the Huia. In Ethno-ornithology: Birds,
indigenous people, culture, and society, ed. Sonia Tidemann and Andrew
Gosler, 49–54. London: Earthscan.
Howell, Thomas R., and George A. Bartholomew. 1962. Temperature regulation
in the Red-tailed Tropic Bird and the Red-footed Booby. Condor 64: 6–18.

How steel pens are made. 1857. United States Magazine 4, no. 1: 348–356.
Hu, Dongyu, Lianhai Hou, Lijung Zhang, and Xing Xu. 2009. A pre-
Archaeopteryx troodontid theropod from China with long feathers on the
metatarsus. Nature 461: 640–643.
Huxley, Thomas H. 1868. On the animals which are most nearly intermediate
between birds and reptiles. Popular Science Review 7: 237–247.
———–. 1870. Further evidence of the affinity between the dinosaurian reptiles
and birds. Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London 26: 12–31.
Illustrations of cheapness: The steel pen. 1850. Household Words 1, no. 24
(1850): 553–555.
Ingham, Phillip W., and Marysia Placzek. 2006. Orchestrating ontogenesis:
Variations on a theme by Sonic Hedgehog. Nature Reviews: Genetics 7: 841–
850.
Ives, Paul P. 1938. The American standard of perfection. St. Paul, MN:
American Poultry Association.
Jack, Anthony. 1953. Feathered wings: A study of the flight of birds. London:
Methuen.
Johnsgard, Paul A. 1994. Arena birds: Sexual selection and behavior.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Jones, Eric M. 1996. Hammer and feather. In Apollo 15 lunar surface journal .
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/alsj/a15/a15.clsout3.html. Accessed July 13, 2010.
Jones, Terry D., et al. 2000. Nonavian feathers in a late Triassic archosaur.
Science 288: 2202–2205.
Jovani, Roger, and David Serrano. 2001. Feather mites (Astigmata) avoid
moulting wing feathers of passerine birds. Animal Behaviour 62: 723–727.
Kelson, George M. 1895. The salmon fly: How to dress it and how to use it.
London: Wyman and Sons.
Kondamudi, Narasimharao, Jason Strull, Mano Misra, and Susanta K.
Mohapatra. 2009. A green process for producing biodiesel from feather meal.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 57: 6163–6166.
Laburn, Helen P., and D. Mitchell. 1975. Evaporative cooling as a
thermoregulatory mechanism in the fruit bat, Rousettus aegyptiacus.
Physiological Zoology 48: 195–202.
LeBaron, Geoffrey. 2009. The 109th Christmas bird count. American Birds 63:
2–9. http://www.audubon.org/bird/cbc.
Li, Quanguo, Ke-Qin Gao, Jakob Vinther, Matthew D. Shawkey, Julia A.
Clarke, Liliana D’Alba, Qingjin Meng, Derek E. G. Briggs, and Richard O.

Prum. 2010. Plumage color patterns of an extinct dinosaur. Science 327: 1369–
1372.
Lilienthal, Otto. 2001. Birdflight as the basis of aviation. 1889. Reprint,
American Hummelstown, PA: Aeronautical Archives.
Lingham-Soliar, Theagarten, Alan Feduccia, and Xiaolin Wang. 2007. A new
Chinese specimen indicates that “protofeathers” in the Early Cretaceous
theropod dinosaur Sinosauropteryx are degraded collagen fibres. Proceedings of
the Royal Society B 274: 1823–1829.
Lombardo, Michael P., Ruth M. Bosman, Christine A. Faro, Stephen G.
Houtteman, and Timothy S. Kluisza. 1995. Effect of feathers as nest insulation
on incubation behavior and reproductive performance of Tree Swallows
(Tachycineta bicolor). Auk 112: 973–981.
Long, John, and Peter Schouten. 2008. Feathered dinosaurs: The origin of birds.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Longrich, Nick. 2006. Structure and function of hindlimb feathers in
Archaeopteryx lithographica. Paleobiology 32: 417–431.
Lucas, Alfred M., and Peter R. Stettenheim. 1972. Avian anatomy—integument.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Lyver, P. O’B., and H. Moller. 1999. Modern technology and customary use of
wildlife: The harvest of Sooty Shearwaters by Rakiura Maori as a case study.
Environmental Conservation 26: 280–288.
Maderson, Paul F. A., Willem J. Hillenius, Uwe Hiller, and Carla C. Dove.
2009. Toward a comprehensive model of feather regeneration. Journal of
Morphology 270: 1166–1208.
Marchand, Peter J. 1996. Life in the cold: An introduction to winter ecology .
Hanover, NH: University Press of New England.
Martineau, Lucie, and Jacques Larochelle. 1988. The cooling power of pigeon
legs. Journal of Experimental Biology 136: 193–208.
Mather, Monica H., and Raleigh J. Robertson. 1992. Honest advertisement in
flight displays of bobolinks (Dolychonyx oryzivorus). Auk 109: 869–873.
Mayr, Gerald, Burkhard Pohl, and Stefan Peters. 2005. A well-preserved
Archaeopteryx specimen with theropod features. Science 310: 1483–1486.
McFarland, Marvin W., ed. 1953. The papers of Wilbur and Orville Wright. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
McGovern, Victoria. 2000. Recycling poultry feathers: More bang for the cluck.
Environmental Health Perspectives 108: A366–A369.
Moller, Anders Pape. 1984. On the use of feathers in birds’ nests: Predictions

and tests. Ornis Scandivacia 15: 38–42.
Morgan, Edwin. 1996. Collected poems. Manchester: Carcanet Press.
Mynott, Jeremy. 2009. Birdscapes: Birds in our imagination and experience.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Nathan, Leonard. 1998. The diary of a left-handed birdwatcher. New York:
Harcourt, Brace.
Nelson, Cherilyn N., and Norman W. Henry, eds. 2000. Performance of
protective clothing: Issues and priorities for the 21st century. Chelsea, MI:
American Society for Testing and Materials.
Neme, Laurel. 2009. Animal investigators: How the world’s first wildlife
forensics lab is solving crimes and saving endangered species. New York:
Scribner.
Nicholson, Shirley, ed. 1987. Shamanism. Wheaton, IL: Quest Books.
Nixon, Rob. 1999. Dreambirds: The strange history of the ostrich in fashion,
food, and fortune. New York: Picador USA.
Norell, Mark. 2006. Unearthing the dragon: The great feathered dinosaur
discovery. New York: Pi Press.
Ober, Frederick A. 1905. Hernando Cortés, conqueror of Mexico. New York:
Harper and Brothers.
Ortega, Francisco, Fernando Escaso, and José L. Sanz. 2010. A bizarre, humped
Carcharodontosauria (Theropoda) from the Lower Cretaceous of Spain. Nature
467: 203–206.
Ortega-Jiminez, Victor M., and Saul Alvarez-Borrego. 2010. Alcid feathers wet
on one side impede air outflow without compromising resistance to water
penetration. Condor 112: 172–176.
Ostrich “mystery”: The solution—Mr. Thornton interviewed. 1911. Cape Times,
September 27.
Ostrom, John H. 1976. Archaeopteryx and the origin of birds. Biological Journal
of the Linnean Society 8: 91–182.
———–. 1979. Bird flight: How did it begin? American Scientist 67: 46–56.
Owen, Richard. 1863. On the Archaeopteryx of von Meyer with the description
of the fossil remains of a long-tailed species, from the lithographic stone of
Solnhofen. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 153: 33–
47.
Padian, Kevin. 1983. A functional analysis of flying and walking in pterosaurs.
Paleobiology 9: 218–239.
———–. 1997. A question of emotional baggage. BioScience 47: 724.

———–. 2001. Cross-testing adaptive hypotheses: Phylogenetic analysis and the
origin of bird flight. American Zoologist 41: 598–607.
Padian, Kevin, and Kenneth P. Dial. 2005. Could the “four winged” dinosaurs
fly? Nature 438: E3.
Pagden, Anthony, ed. 2001. Hernán Cortés: Letters from Mexico. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Parfitt, Alex R., and Julian F. V. Vincent. 2005. Drag reduction in a swimming
Humboldt Penguin, Spheniscus humboldti, when the boundary layer is turbulent.
Journal of Bionics Engineering 2: 57–62.
Pearson, Gilbert T., ed. 1936. Birds of America. New York: Doubleday.
Perrichot, V., L. Marion, D. Néraudeau, R. Vullo, and P. Tafforeau. 2008. The
early evolution of feathers: Fossil evidence from Cretaceous amber of France.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B 275: 1197–1202.
Peters, Winfried S., and Dieter Stefan Peters. 2009. Life history, sexual
dimorphism, and “ornamental” feathers in the Mesozoic bird Confuciusornis
sanctus. Biology Letters 5: 817–820.
Petroski, Henry. 2007. The toothpick. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Piersma, Theunis, and Mennobart R. Van Eerden. 1988. Feather-eating in Great
Crested Grebes Podiceps cristatus: A unique solution to the problems of debris
and gastric parasites in fish-eating birds. Ibis 131: 477–486.
Pollard, John. 1977. Birds in Greek life and myth. London: Thames and Hudson.
Poole A. J., J. S. Church, and M. G. Huson. 2009. Environmentally sustainable
fibers from regenerated protein. Biomacromolecules 10: 1–8.
Poopathi, Subbiah, and S. Abidha. 2008. Biodegradation of poultry waste for the
production of mosquitocidal toxins. International Biodeterioration and
Biodegradation 62: 479–482.
Pope, Saxton. 1918. Yahi archery. University of California Publications in
American Archaeology and Ethnology 13, no. 3: 103–152. —
——–. 1925. Hunting with the bow and arrow. New York: G. P. Putnam and
Sons.
Price, Jennifer. 1999. Flight maps: Adventures with nature in modern America.
New York: Basic Books.
Prum, Richard O. 1999. Development and evolutionary origin of feathers.
Journal of Experimental Zoology 285: 291–306.
———–. 2002. Why ornithologists should care about the theropod origin of
birds. Auk 119: 1–17.
———–. 2005. Evolution of the morphological innovations of feathers. Journal

of Experimental Zoology 304B: 570–579.
———–. 2008a. Leonardo da Vinci and the science of bird flight. In Leonardo
da Vinci: Drawings from the Biblioteca Reale in Turin, ed. Jeannine A.
O’Grody, 111–117. Birmingham: Birmingham Museum of Art.
———–. 2008b. Who’s your daddy? Science 322: 1799–1800.
Prum, Richard O., and Alan H. Brush. 2002. The evolutionary origin and
diversification of feathers. Quarterly Review of Biology 77: 261–295.
———–. 2003. The origin and evolution of feathers. Scientific American .
March: 60–69.
Radcliffe, William. 1921. Fishing from the earliest times. London: John Murray.
Reeder, William G., and Raymond B. Cowles. 1951. Aspects of
thermoregulation in bats. Journal of Mammalogy 32: 389–403.
Regal, Philip J. 1975. The evolutionary origin of feathers. Quarterly Review of
Biology 50: 35–66.
Reid, James W. 1986. Textile masterpieces of ancient Peru. New York: Dover.
———–. 2005. Magic feathers: Textile art from ancient Peru. London: Textile
and Art Publications.
Reina, Ruben E., and Kenneth M. Kensinger, eds. 1991. The gift of birds:
Featherwork of native South American peoples. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.
Revis, Hannah C., and Deborah A. Waller. 2004. Bactericidal and fungicidal
activity of ant chemicals on feather parasites: An evaluation of anting behavior
as a method of self-medication in songbirds. Auk 121: 1262–1268.
Ribak, Gal, Daniel Weihs, and Zeev Arad. 2005. Water retention in the plumage
of diving great cormorants Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis . Journal of Avian
Biology 36: 89–95.
Rombauer, Irma, and Marian Rombauer Becker. 1975. The joy of cooking.
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Roth, Harald H., and Günter Merz, eds. 1997. Wildlife resources: A global
account of economic use. Berlin: Springer.
Roush, Chris, and Petyr Beck. 2006. A good night’s sleep: The Pacific Coast
Feather story. Seattle: Documentary Media.
Ruspoli, M. 1986. The cave of Lascaux: The final photographs. New York:
Harry N. Abrams.
Sahagun, Bernadino de. 1963. Florentine Codex: General history of the things of
New Spain. Bk. 11, Earthly things. Trans. C. E. Dibble and A. J. O. Anderson.
1577. Reprint, Santa Fe: University of Utah and School of American Research.

Schimmel, Annemarie. 1993. The triumphal sun: A study of the works of
Jalaloddinn Rumi. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Schmookler, Paul, and Ingrid V. Sils. 1999. Forgotten flies. Millis, MA:
Complete Sportsman.
Sellers, Robin M. 1995. Wing-spreading behavior of the cormorant
Phalacrocorax carbo. Ardea 83: 27–36.
Sereno, P. C., R. N. Martinez, J. A. Wilson, D. J. Varricchio, O. A. Alcober, et
al. 2008. Evidence for avian intrathoracic air sacs in a new predatory dinosaur
from Argentina. PLoS ONE 3, no. 9: e3303. doi:10.13 71/j ournal.pone.0003303.
Shipman, Pat. 1998. Taking wing: “Archaeopteryx” and the evolution of bird
flight. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Smit, D. van Zyl. 1984. Russel Thornton’s ostrich expedition to the Sahara,
1911–1912. Karoo Agric 3, no. 3: 19–27.
Smith, Frank C. [Various]. Private correspondence with George Aschman, editor
of Cape Times. Cataloged at CP Nel Museum, Outdshoorn, South Africa.
Stein, Sarah Abrevaya. 2008. Plumes: Ostrich feathers, Jews, and a lost world of
global commerce. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Stettenheim, Peter H. 2000. The integumentary morphology of modern birds: An
overview. American Zoologist 40: 461–477.
Strange, Ian J. 1980. The Thin-billed Prion, Pachyptila belcheri, at New Island,
Falkland Islands. Le Gerfaut 70: 411–445.
Swadling, Pamela. 1996. Plumes from paradise. Boroko: Papua New Guinea
National Museum.
Tattersall, Glenn J., Denis V. Andrade, and S. Abe Augusto. 2009. Heat
exchange from the toucan bill reveals a controllable vascular thermal radiator.
Science 325: 468–470.
Templeton, Christopher N., and Erick Greene. 2007. Nuthatches eavesdrop on
variations in heterospecific chickadee mobbing alarm calls. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 104: 5479–5482.
Templeton, Christopher N., Erick Greene, and Kate Davis. 2005. Allometry of
alarm calls: Black-Capped Chickadees encode information about predator size.
Science 308: 1934–1937.
Thaler, Ellen. 1990. Die Goldhähnchen. Wittenburg Lutherstadt, Germany: A.
Ziemsen Verlag.
Tian, Xiaodong, Jose Iriarte-Diaz, Kevin Galvao Middleton, Israeli Ricardo,
Emily Israeli, Abigail Roemer, Allyce Sullivan, Arnold Song, Sharon Swartz,
and Kenneth Breuer. 2006. Direct measurements of the kinematics and dynamics

of bat flight. Bioinspiration and Biomimetics 1: S10–S18.
Tieleman, B. Irene, and Joseph B. Williams. 1999. The role of hyperthermia in
the water economy of desert birds. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 72:
87–100.
Tobalske, Bret W. 2007. Biomechanics of bird flight. Journal of Experimental
Biology 210: 3135–3146.
Tobin, James. 2003. To conquer the air: The Wright brothers and the great race
for flight. New York: Free Press.
Torre-Bueno, Jose R. 1978. Evaporative cooling and water balance during flight
in birds. Journal of Experimental Biology 75: 231–236.
Tucker, Vance A. 1968. Respiratory exchange and evaporative water loss in the
flying Budgerigar. Journal of Experimental Biology 48: 67–87.
Turner, A. H., P. J. Makovicky, and M. A. Norell. 2007. Feather quill knobs in
the dinosaur Velociraptor. Science 317: 1721.
Vuilleumier, François. 2005. Dean of American ornithologists: The multiple
legacies of Frank M. Chapman of the American Museum of Natural History. Auk
122: 389–402.
Wallace, Alfred Russel. 1869. The Malay Archipelago. New York: Harper and
Brothers.
Walton, Izaak. 1896. The compleat angler; or, The contemplative man’s
recreation. 1676. Reprint, London: J. M. Dent.
Ward, Jennifer, Dominic J. McCafferty, David C. Houston, and Graeme D.
Ruxton. 2008. Why do vultures have bald heads? The role of postural adjustment
and bare skin areas in thermoregulation. Journal of Thermal Biology 33: 168–
173.
Ward, S., U. Möller, J. M. V. Rayner, D. M. Jackson, D. Bilo, W. Nachtigall,
and J. R. Speakman. 2001. Metabolic power, mechanical power, and efficiency
during wind tunnel flight by European starlings Sturnus vulgaris. Journal of
Experimental Biology 204: 3311–3322.
Ward, S., J. M. V. Rayner, U. Möller, D. M. Jackson, W. Nachtigall, and J. R.
Speakman. 2002. Heat transfer from starlings Sturnus vulgaris during flight.
Journal of Experimental Biology 202: 1589–1602.
Wead, E. Young, 1911. The feather industry. Hunter, Trader, Trapper 22, no. 5:
23–26.
Winkler, David W. 1993. Use and importance of feathers as nest lining in Tree
Swallows (Tachycineta bicolor). Auk 110: 29–36.
Witmer, Mark. 1996. Consequences of an alien shrub on the plumage coloration

and ecology of Cedar Waxwings. Auk 113: 735–743.
Wolf, Blair O., and Glenn E. Walsberg. 2000. The role of the plumage in heat
transfer processes of birds. American Zoologist 40: 575–584.
Xu, Xing, James M. Clark, Jinyou Mo, Jonah Choiniere, Catherine A. Forster, et
al. 2009. A Jurassic ceratosaur from China helps clarify avian digital
homologies. Nature 459: 940–944.
Xu, Xing, Z.-L. Tang, and X.-L. Wang. 1999. A therizinosaurid dinosaur with
integumentary structures from China. Nature 399: 380–384.
Xu, Xing, X.-L. Wang, and Xiaocun Wu. 1999. A dromaeosaurid dinosaur with
a filamentous integument from the Yixian Formation of China. Nature 401: 262–
265.
Xu, Xing, Xiaoting Zheng, and Hailu You. 2009. A new feather type in a
nonavian theropod. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106: 832–
834.
———–. 2010. Exceptional dinosaur fossils show ontogenetic development of
early feathers. Nature 464: 1338–1341.
Xu, Xing, Z. Zhou, and X. Wang. 2000. The smallest known nonavian theropod
dinosaur. Nature 408: 705–708.
Yang, Shu-hui, Yan-chun Xu, and Da-wei Zhang. 2006. Morphological basis for
waterproof characteristic of bird plumage. Journal of Forestry Research 17:
163–166.
Yanoviak, Stephen P., Robert Dudley, and Michael Kaspar. 2005. Directed
aerial descent in canopy ants. Nature 433: 624–626.
Zhang, Fucheng, Stuart L. Kearns, Patrick J. Orr, Michael J. Benton, Zhonghe
Zhou, Diane Johnson, Xing Xu, and Xiaolin Wang. 2010. Fossilized
melanosomes and the colour of Cretaceous dinosaurs and birds. Nature 463:
1075–1078.
Zheng, Xiao-Ting, Hai-Lu You, Xing Xu, and Zhi-Ming Dong. 2009. An Early
Cretaceous heterodontosaurid dinosaur with filamentous integumentary
structures. Nature 458: 333–336.

Image and Quotation Credits
A wide range of individuals, publishers, and institutions granted permission for
the use of images and quotations in this book. They are gratefully acknowledged
here.
xvi Vulture and Book. Painting © 1990 by Simon Thomsett. Used by
permission.
1 Introduction epigraph from The Diary of a Left-handed Birdwatcher by
Leonard Nathan (1996). Used by permission of Graywolf Press.
3 American Robins. Painting from The Birds of America by John James
Audubon (1840). Reproduction © 2008 by Dover Publications, Inc. Used
by permission.
6 Chauvet Owl. Photo by HTO, from Wikimedia Commons (public
domain).
8 In-text quotation reprinted with the permission of Simon & Schuster, Inc.,
from One River: Explorations and Discoveries in the Amazon Rain
Forest, by Wade Davis. Copyright © 1996 by Wade Davis. All rights
reserved.
9 Seraphim Mosaic. Photo by Mattana, from Wikimedia Commons (public
domain).
13 Chapter epigraph from The Archaeopteryx’s Song by Edwin Morgan
(1977). Used by permission of Carcanet Press.
18 Cartoon of Charles Darwin from the Hornet, March 22, 1871. Image
from Wikimedia Commons (public domain).
20 Archaeopteryx lithographica (cast of Berlin Specimen). Photo © 2010
by Thor Hanson.
31 Insect Scoop. Illustration by John Ostrom, from Ostrom 1979. Courtesy
of American Scientist.
35 Winter Wren, woodcut by Thomas Bewick (eighteenth century).
Reproduction © 2004 by Dover Publications, Inc. Used by permission.
37 Contour Feather. Illustration © 2010 by Nicholas Judson. Used by
permission.
40 Developmental Theory (after Prum 1999). Illustration © 2010 by
Nicholas Judson. Used by permission.
43 Chapter epigraph from Unearthing the Dragon (2005) by Mark Norell.

Used by permission.
49 Sinosauropteryx prima. Artwork © 2006 by Julius Csotonyi. Used by
permission.
50 Caudipteryx zoui. Illustration © 2008 by Peter Schouten. Used by
permission.
51 Beipiaosaurus. Illustration © by Xing Lida and Zhao Chuang. Used by
permission.
60 Common Pigeon. Artist unknown (nineteenth-century engraving).
Reproduction © 1979 by Dover Publications, Inc. Used by permission.
63 Thin-billed Prion Chick. Photo © 2005 by Petra Quillfeldt. Used by
permission.
68 Dürer’s Rhinoceros. Illustration by Albrecht Dürer, 1515. Image from
Wikimedia Commons (public domain).
76 Feather Growth and Molt (after Gill 2007). Illustration © 2010 by
Nicholas Judson. Used by permission.
77 King of Saxony Bird of Paradise, from Frith and Beehler 1998.
Illustrations by William T. Cooper, © 1998 by Oxford University Press.
Used by permission.
89 Golden-crowned Kinglet. Illustration by R. Bruce Horsfall, from
Pearson 1936 (public domain).
97 Feather Factory. Photo © 2010 by Thor Hanson.
101 Chapter epigraph reproduced from Analysis of Respiratory Pattern
During Panting in Fowl by Mike Gleeson (1985). Used by permission of
the Journal of Experimental Biology.
104 Northern Flickers. Painting from The Birds of America by John James
Audubon (1840). Reproduction © 2008 by Dover Publications, Inc. Used
by permission.
107 Girdle-tailed Lizard. Artist unknown (nineteenth century).
Reproduction © 1979 by Dover Publications, Inc. Used by permission.
108 Sooty Tern. Artist unknown, from Drent 1972. Used by permission of
Koninklijke Brill NV.
110 Leghorn Rooster Feather Tracts. Artist unknown, from Lucas and
Stettenheim 1972 (public domain).
112 Toucans. Thermal imagery © by Glenn Tattersall. Used by permission.
114 Bat and Owl. Thermal imagery © Hristov, Allen, and Kunz, Boston
University. Used by permission.
115 Flight section epigraph from Life, the Universe, and Everything by

Douglas Adams, copyright © 1982 by Serious Productions Ltd. Used by
permission of Crown Publishers, a division of Random House, Inc.
119 Silver-laced Wyandotte by A. O. Schilling, from The American
Standard of Perfection (1938 edition). Used by permission of the
American Poultry Association.
122 Proavis. Illustration from Origin of Birds by Gerhard Heilmann (1927)
(public domain).
124 Wallace’s Flying Frog by John Gerrard Keulemans, from The Malay
Archipelago by Alfred Russel Wallace (1869) (public domain).
128 Chukar and Protobird. Artwork by Robert Petty. Courtesy of the Flight
Laboratory, Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana.
133 Apollo 15 Feather. Photo courtesy of NASA.
137 Peregrine Falcons. Painted by Luis Agassiz Fuertes, from Eaton 1915
(public domain).
143 The Lament for Icarus. Artwork by Herbert James Draper (1898).
Image from Wikimedia Commons (public domain).
147 Lilienthal Glider. Photo courtesy of Otto Lilienthal Museum, Anklam,
Germany.
149 Featherfly. Model design by Ray Malmstrom. Courtesy of Impington
Village College Model Aeroplane Club and the Ray Malmstrom family.
153 Cardinal Landing. Photo © 2007 by Howard Cheek. Image from
BigStock.com.
162 Greater Birds of Paradise by T. W. Wood, from The Malay
Archipelago by Alfred Russel Wallace (1869) (public domain).
163 Birds of Paradise, from Frith and Beehler 1998. Illustrations by
William T. Cooper, © 1998 by Oxford University Press. Used by
permission.
168 Sing-sing. Photo © 1991 by Clifford B. Frith. Used by permission.
172 Las Vegas Showgirls. Used by permission of Found Image Press, LLC.
177 McCall’s Covers, from McCall’s Magazine, various issues, 1908–1911
(public domain).
181 Ostrich Expedition Map (after Smit 1984). Map © 2010 by Nicholas
Judson. Used by permission.
184 Ostrich Expedition Photos. Courtesy of Dave Glenister and the family
of Russel William Thornton.
194 Leah C. Hat. Photo © by 2010 Leah C. Couture Millinery
(Photographer: M. K. Semos; hair: Ryan B. Anthony; makeup: Jules
Waldkoetter; model: Lindsay Michelle Nader) Used by permission

Waldkoetter; model: Lindsay Michelle Nader). Used by permission.
195 Chapter epigraph from Kodachrome copyright © 1973 Paul Simon.
Used by permission of the publisher, Paul Simon Music.
199 Cedar Waxwing. Illustration by R. Bruce Horsfall, from Pearson 1936
(public domain).
202 Anchiornis huxleyi. Artwork © 2009 by Julius Csotonyi. Used by
permission.
204 Red Feather Money. Photos by William Davenport. Courtesy of the
Penn Museum, image numbers 176014 and 176008a.
207 Aztec Warriors. Illustration from The Florentine Codex, by Bernadino
de Sahagun (1574). Image from Wikimedia Commons (public domain).
218 Water Drop on Feather. Photo courtesy of Edward Bormashenko and
the Journal of Colloid and Interface Science.
229 Atlantic Salmon Flies. Artist unknown, from The Salmon Fly by
George Kelson (1895).
231 Fly Casting. Artist unknown, from The Salmon Fly by George Kelson
(1895).
235 Art of Writing. Artist unknown, from L’Encyclopédie by Denis Diderot
(1750–1765). Image courtesy of ARTFL Encyclopédie Project.
240 Sower and the Seed. Illumination by Aidan Hart with contributions
from Donald Jackson and Sally Mae Joseph, © 2002, The Saint John’s
Bible, Hill Museum & Manuscript Library, Order of Saint Benedict,
Collegeville, Minnesota, USA. Scripture quotations are from the New
Revised Standard Version of the Bible, Catholic Edition, Copyright
1993, 1989 National Council of the Churches of Christ in the United
States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
242 Quill Pens. Artist unknown, from L’Encyclopédie by Denis Diderot
(1750–1765). Image courtesy of ARTFL Encyclopédie Project.
249 White-backed Vultures. Watercolor © 1990 by Simon Thomsett. Used
by permission.
254 Club-winged Manakin. Illustration © 1998 by Kimberly Bostwick.
Used by permission.
257 Manakin Feathers. Artist unknown, from Darwin 1871 (public
domain).
268 Feather Lab Plume. Photo © 2010 by Thor Hanson.
273 Illustrated Guide to Feathers. Illustrations © 2010 by Nicholas Judson.
Used by permission.

