First published by New Left Books, 1975 
Revised edition published by Verso 1988 
Third edition published by Verso 1993 
© Paul Feyerabend 1975, 1988, 1993 
All rights reserved 
Verso 
UK: 6 Meard Street, London WIV 3HR 
USA: 29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 1001-2291 
Verso is the imprint of New Left Books 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data available 
ISBN 0-86091-481-X 
ISBN 0-86091-646-4 
US Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data available 
Typeset by Keyboard Services, Luton 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
Biddies Ltd, Guildford and King's Lynn 

Contents 
Preface 
vii 
Preface to the Third Edition 
IX 
Introduction to the Chinese Edition 
1 
Analytical Index 
5 
Introduction 
9 
Parts1-20 
14 
Postscript on Relativism 
268 
Index 
273 


Preface 
In 1970 Imre Lakatos, one of the best friends I ever had, cornered me 
at a party. 'Paul,' he said, 'you have such strange ideas. Why don't you 
write them down? I shall write a reply, we publish the whole thing and 
I promise you - we shall have lots of fun.' I liked the suggestion and 
started working. The manuscript of my part of the book was finished 
in 1972 and I sent it to London. There it disappeared under rather 
mysterious circumstances. lmre Lakatos, who loved dramatic 
gestures, notified Interpol and, indeed, Interpol found my manu­
script and returned it to me. I reread it and made some final changes. 
In February 1974, only a few weeks after I had finished my revision, I 
was informed of Imre's death. I published my part of our common 
enterprise without his response. A year later I published a second 
volume, Science in a Free Society, containing additional material and 
replies to criticism. 
This history explains the form of the book. It is not a systematic 
treatise; it is a letter to a friend and addresses his idiosyncrasies. For 
example, Imre Lakatos was a rationalist, hence rationalism plays a 
large role in the book. He also admired Popper and therefore Popper 
occurs much more frequently than his 'objective importance' would 
warrant. Imre Lakatos, somewhat jokingly, called me an anarchist 
and I had no objection to putting on the anarchist's mask. Finally, 
lmre Lakatos loved to embarrass serious opponents with jokes and 
irony and so I, too, occasionally wrote in a rather ironical vein. An 
example is the end of Chapter 1: 'anything goes' is not a 'principle' I 
hold - I do not think that 'principles' can be used and fruitfully 
discussed outside the concrete research situation they are supposed 
to affect - but the terrified exclamation of a rationalist who takes a 
closer look at history. Reading the many thorough, serious, 
longwinded and thoroughly misguided criticisms I received after 
publication of the first English edition I often recalled my exchanges 
with Imre; how we would both have laughed had we been able to read 
these effusions together. 
The new edition merges parts ofAgainstMethodwith excerpts from 
Science in a Free Society. I have omitted material no longer of interest, 

vm 
PREFACE 
added a chapter on the trial of Galileo and a chapter on the notion of 
reality that seems to be required by the fact that knowledge is part of a 
complex historical process, eliminated mistakes, shortened the 
argument wherever possible and freed it from some of its earlier 
idiosyncrasies. Again I want to make two points: first, that science can 
stand on its own feet and does not need any help from rationalists, 
secular humanists, Marxists and similar religious movements; and, 
secondly, that non-scientific cultures, procedures and assumptions 
can also stand on their own feet and should be allowed to do so, if this 
is the wish of their representatives. Science must be protected from 
ideologies; and societies, especially democratic societies, must be 
protected from science. This does not mean that scientists cannot 
profit from a philosophical education and that humanity has not and 
never will profit from the sciences. However, the profits should not 
be imposed; they should be examined and freely accepted by the 
parties of the exchange. In a democracy scientific institutions, 
research programes, and suggestions must therefore be subjected 
to public control, there must be a separation of state and science just 
as there is a separation between state and religious institutions, and 
science should be taught as one view among many and not as the one 
and only road to truth and reality. There is nothing in the nature of 
science that excludes such institutional arrangements or shows that 
they are liable to lead to disaster. 
None of the ideas that underlie my argument is new. My 
interpretation of scientific knowledge, for example, was a triviality for 
physicists like Mach, Boltzmann, Einstein and Bohr. But the ideas of 
these great thinkers were distorted beyond recognition by the rodents 
of neopositivism and the competing rodents of the church of'critical' 
rationalism. Lakatos was, after Kuhn, one of the few thinkers who 
noticed the discrepancy and tried to eliminate it by means of a 
complex and very interesting theory of rationality. I don't think he has 
succeeded in this. But the attempt was worth the effort; it has led to 
interesting results in the history of science and to new insights into 
the limits of reason. I therefore dedicate also this second, already 
much more lonely version of our common work to his memory. 
Earlier material relating to the problems in this book is now 
collected in my Philosophical Papers. 1 Farewell to Reason2 contains 
historical material, especially from the early history of rationalism in 
the West and applications to the problems of today. 
Berkeley, September 1987 
1. 2 vols, Cambridge, 1981. 
2. London, 1987. 

Preface to the Third Edition 
Many things have happened since I first published Against Method 
(AM for short). There have been dramatic political, social and 
ecological changes. Freedom has increased - but it has brought 
hunger, insecurity, nationalistic tensions, wars and straightforward 
murder. World leaders have met to deal with the deterioration of our 
resources; as is their habit, they have made speeches and signed 
agreements. The agreements are far from satisfactory; some of them 
are a sham. However, at least verbally, the environment has become a 
world-wide concern. Physicians, developmental agents, priests 
working with the poor and disadvantaged have realized that these 
people know more about their condition than a belie f in the universal 
excellence of science or organized religion had assumed and they 
have changed their actions and their ideas accordingly (liberation 
theology; primary environmental care, etc.). Many intellectuals have 
adapted what they have learned at universities and special schools to 
make their knowledge more efficient and more humane. 
On a more academic level historians (of science, of culture) have 
started approaching the past in its own terms. Already in 1933, in his 
inaugural lecture at the College de France, Lucien Febvre had 
ridiculed writers who, 'sitting at their desks, behind mountains of 
paper, having closed and covered their windows', made profound 
judgements about the life of landholders, peasants and farmhands. In 
a narrow field historians of science tried to reconstruct the distant 
and the more immediate past without distorting it by modem beliefs 
about truth (fact) and rationality. Philosophers then concluded that 
the various forms of rationalism that had offered their services had 
not only produced chimaeras but would have damaged the sciences 
had they been adopted as guides. Here Kuhn's masterpiece played a 
decisive role.1 It led to new ideas. Unfortunately it also encouraged 
lots of trash. Kuhn's main terms ('paradigm', 'revolution', 'normal 
I. The Structure ofScientific Revolutions, Chicago, 1962. 

X 
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 
science', 'prescience', 'anomaly', 'puzzle-solving', etc.) turned up in 
various forms of pseudoscience while his general approach confused 
many writers: finding that science had been freed from the fetters of a 
dogmatic logic and epistemology they tried to tie it down again, this 
time with sociological ropes. That trend lasted well into the early 
seventies. By contrast there are now historians and sociologists who 
concentrate on particulars and allow generalities only to the extent 
that they are supported by sociohistorical connections. 'Nature', says 
Bruno Latour, referring to 'science in the making' is 'the 
consequence of [a] settlement' of'controversies'.2 Or, as I wrote in 
the first edition of AM: 'Creation of a thing, and creation plus full 
understanding of a correa idea of the thing, are very often parts of one 
and the same indivisible process and cannot be separated without 
bringing the process to a stop.'3 
Examples of the new approach are Andrew Pickering, Construaing 
Qyarks, Peter Galison, How Experiments End, Martin Rudwick, The 
Great Devonian Controversy, Arthur Fine, The Shaky Game and 
others. 4 There are studies of the various traditions (religious, 
stylistic, Ratronage, etc.) that influenced scientists and shaped their 
research;5 they show the need for a far more complex account of 
scientific knowledge than that which had emerged from positivism 
and similar philosophies. On a more general level we have the older 
work of Michal Polanyi and then Putnam, van Fraassen, Cartwright, 
Marcello Pera6 and, yes, lmre Lakatos, who was sufficiently 
optimistic to believe that history herself-a lady he took very seriously 
-offered simple rules of theory evaluation. 
In sociology the attention to detail has led to a situation where the 
problem is no longer why and how 'science' changes but how it keeps 
together. Philosophers, philosophers of biology especially, suspected 
for some time that there is not one entity 'science' with clearly 
defined principles but that science contains a great variety of (high­
level theoretical, phenomenological, experimental) approaches and 
that even a particular science such as physics is but a scattered 
collection of subjects (elasticity, hydrodynamics, rheology, thermo­
dynamics, etc., etc.) each one containing contrary tendencies 
(example: Prandtl vs Helmholtz, Kelvin, Lamb, Rayleigh; Truesdell 
2. Scimce in Aaion, Milton Keynes, 1987, pp. 4 and 98f. 
3. London, 1975, p. 26, repeated on p. 17 of the present edition - original 
emphasis. 
4. All Chicago University Press. 
5. An example is Mario Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, forthcoming. 
6. Scimce and Rhetoric, forthcoming. 

PREFACE TO THE T H I R D  EDITION 
XI 
vs Prandtl; Birkhoff vs 'physical commonsense'; Kinsman illustrating 
all trends - in hydrodYQamics). For some authors this is not only a 
fact; it is also desirable. 7 Here again I contributed, in a small way, in 
Chapters 3, 4 and 1 1  of AM,8 in section 6 of my contribution to 
Lakatos and Musgrave's Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge 
(criticism of the uniformity of paradigms in Kuhn)9 and already in 
1962, in my contribution to the Delaware Studies for the Philosophy of 
Science.10 
Unity further disappears when we pay attention not only to breaks 
on the theoretical level, but to experiment and, especially, to modem 
laboratory science. As Ian Hacking has shown in his pathbreaking 
essay Representing and lnterveniny,_
11 and as emerges from Pickering's 
Science as Practice and Culture, 2 terms such as 'experiment' and 
'observation' cover complex processes containing many strands. 
'Facts' come from negotiations between different parties and the 
final product - the published report - is influenced by physical 
events, dataprocessors, compromises, exhaustion, lack of money, 
national pride and so on. Some microstudies of laboratory science 
resemble the 'New Journalism' of Jimmy Breslin, Guy Talese, Tom 
Wolfe and others; researchers no longer sit back and read the papers 
in a certain field; they are not content with silent visits to laboratories 
either - they walk right in, engage scientists in conversation and make 
things happen (Kuhn and his collaborators started the procedure in 
their interviews for the history of quantum mechanics). At any rate­
we are a long way from the old (Platonic) idea of science as a system of 
statements growing with experiment and observation and kept in 
order by lasting rational standards. 
AM is still partly proposition oriented; however, I also had my 
sane moments. My discussion of incommensurability, for example, 
does not 'reduce the difference to one of theory' as Pickering 
writes. 13 It includes art forms, perceptions (a large part of Chapter 
16 is about the transition from Greek geometric art and poetry to the 
classical period), stages of child development and asserts 'that the 
views of scientists and especially their views on basic matters are 
often as different from each other as are the ideologies of different 
7. J. Dupre, 'The Disunity ofScience',Mind, 92, I983. 
8. Present edition. Taken over unamended from first edition. 
9. I. Lakaros and A. Musgrave (eds), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, 
Cambridge, I965. 
IO. 'How to be a Good Empiricist', Delaware Studies, Vol. 2, I963. 
I I. Cambridge, I 983. 
I 2. A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Praaice and Culture, Chicago, I 992. 
13. ibid., p. I 0. 

Xtt 
PREFACE TO THE T H I R D  EDITION 
cultures'.14 In this connection I examined the practical aspects of 
logic, the way, that is, in which ideas are related to each other in 
ongoing research rather than in the finished products (if there ever 
are such products). My discussion of the many events that constitute 
what is being observed15 and especially my discussion of Galileo's 
telescopic discoveries16 agree with the requirements of the new 
laboratory sociology except that Galileo's 'laboratory' was rather 
small by comparison. This case shows, incidentally, that like the 
older philosophies of science the new microsociology is not a 
universal account but a description of prominent aspects of a special 
period. It does not matter. A universal description of science at any 
rate can at most offer a list of events.17 It was different in antiquity. 
It is clear that the new situation requires a new philosophy and, 
above all, new terms. Yet some of the foremost researchers in the 
area are still asking themselves whether a particular piece of research 
produces a 'discovery', or an invention', or to what extent a 
(temporary) result is 'objective'. The problem arose in quantum 
mechanics; it is also a problem for classical science. Shall we 
continue using outmoded terms to describe novel insight or would it 
not be better to start using a new language? And wouldn't poets and 
journalists be of great help in finding such a language? 
Secondly, the new situation again raises the question of 'science' 
vs democracy. For me this was the most important question. 'My 
main reason for writing the book', I say in the Introduction to the 
Chinese Edition, 18 'was humanitarian, not intellectual. I wanted to 
support people, not to "advance knowledge."' Now if science is no 
longer a unit, if different parts of it proceed in radically different ways 
and if connections between these ways are tied to particular research 
episodes, then scientific projects have to be taken individually. This 
is what government agencies started doing some time ago. In the late 
sixties 'the idea of a comprehensive science policy was gradually 
abandoned. It was realized that science was not one but many 
enterprises and that there could be no single policy for the support of 
all of them. 19 Government agencies no longer finance 'science', they 
finance particular projects. But then the word 'scientific' can no 
longer exclude 'unscientific' projects - we have to look at matters in 
14. AM, first edition, p. 274. 
I 5. ibid., pp. I 49ff. Reprinted in the present edition. 
I 6. Chapters 8 to I 0 of the present edition. 
I 7. Cf. my contribution to the I 992 Erasmus Symposium, 'Has the Scientific 
View of the World a Special Status Compared With Other Views?', forthcoming. 
I 8. Contained in the present edition. 
1 9. J. Ben-David, Scientific Growth, Berkeley, 199I,p. 525. 

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 
Xttt 
detail. Are the new philosophers and sociologists prepared to 
consider this consequence of their research? 
There have been many other changes. Medical researchers and 
technologists have not only invented useful instruments (such as 
those employing the principles of fibre optics which in many contexts 
replace the more dangerous methods of X-ray diagnostic) but have 
become more open towards new (or older) ideas. Only twenty years 
ago the idea that the mind affects physical well-being, though 
supported by experience, was rather unpopular - today it is 
mainstream. Malpractice suits have made physicians more careful, 
sometimes too careful for the good of their patient, but they have also 
forced them to consult alternative opinions. (In Switzerland a 
belligerent plurality of views is almost part of culture- and I used it 
when arranging public confrontations between hardheaded scientists 
and 'alternative' thinkers.2<) However, here as elsewhere, simple 
philosophies, whether of a dogmatic or a more liberal kind, have their 
limits. There are no general solutions. An increased liberalism in the 
definition of 'fact' can have grave repercussions/' while the idea 
that truth is concealed and even perverted bi the processes that are 
meant to establish it makes excellent sense. 2 I therefore again warn 
the reader that I don't have the intention of replacing 'old and 
dogmatic' principles by 'new and more libertarian ones'. For 
example, I am neither a populist for whom an appeal to 'the people' is 
the basis of all knowledge, nor a relativist for whom there are no 
'truths as such' but only truths for this or that group and/or 
individual. All I say is that non-experts often know more than experts 
and should therefore be consulted and that prophets of truth (including 
those who use arguments) more often than not are carried along by a 
vision that clashes with the very events the vision is supposed to be 
exploring. There exists ample evidence for both parts of this 
assertion. 
A case I already mentioned is development: professionals dealing 
with the ecological, social and medical parts of developmental aid 
have by now realized that the imposition of 'rational' or 'scientific' 
procedures, though occasionally beneficial (removal of some 
parasites and infectious diseases), can lead to serious material and 
20. Cf. the series edited by Christian Thomas and myself and published by the 
Verlag der F achvereine, Zurich, 1983-87. 
21. Cf. Peter W. Huber, Galileo's Revenge, New York, 1991. 
22. For a fictional account, cf. Tom Wolfe's The Bonfire of the Vaniti4, New York, 
1987. 

xiv 
PREFACE TO T HE T H I R D  EDITION 
spiritual problems. They did not abandon what they had learned in 
their universities, however; they combined this knowledge with local 
beliefs and customs and thereby established a much needed link with 
the problems of life that surround us everywhere, in the First, 
Second, and Third Worlds. 
The present edition contains major changes (Chapter 19 and part of 
Chapter 16 have been rewritten, the old Chapter 20 has been 
omitted), additions (a paragraph here, a paragraph there), stylistic 
changes ( I hope they are improvements) and corrections as well as 
additions in the references. As far as I am concerned the main ideas 
of the essay (i.e. the ideas expressed in italics in the Introduction to 
the Chinese Edition) are rather trivial and appear trivial when 
expressed in suitable terms. I prefer more paradoxical formulations, 
however, for nothing dulls the mind as thoroughly as hearing familiar 
words and slogans. It is one of the merits of deconstruction to have 
undermined philosophical commonplaces and thus to have made 
some people think. Unfortunately it affected only a small circle of 
insiders and it affected them in ways that are not always clear, not 
even to them. That's why I prefer Nestroy, who was a great, popular 
and funny deconstructeur, while Derrida, for all his good intentions, 
can't even tell a story. 
Rome,July 1992 

Introduction 
to the Chinese Edition 
This book proposes a thesis and draws consequences from it. The 
thesis is: the events, procedures and results that constitute the sciences have 
no common struaure; there are no elements that occur in every 
scientific investigation but are missing elsewhere. Concrete develop­
ments (such as the overthrow of steady state cosmologies and the 
discovery of the structure of DNA) have distinct features and we can 
often explain why and how these features led to success. But not 
every discovery can be accounted for in the same manner, and 
procedures that paid off in the past may create havoc when imposed 
on the future. Successful research does not obey general standards; it 
relies now on one trick, now on another; the moves that advance it 
and the standards that define what counts as an advance are not 
always known to the movers. Far-reaching changes of outlook, such 
as the so-called 'Copernican Revolution' or the 'Darwinian 
Revolution', affect different areas of research in different ways and 
receive different impulses from them. A theory of science that 
devises standards and structural elements for a// scientific activities 
and authorizes them by reference to 'Reason' or 'Rationality' may 
impress outsiders - but it is much too crude an instrument for the 
people on the spot, that is, for scientists facing some concrete 
research problem. 
In this book I try to support the thesis by historical examples. Such 
support does not establish it; it makes it plausible and the way in which 
it is reached indicates how future statements about 'the nature of 
science' may be undermined: given any rule, or any general 
statement about the sciences, there always exist developments which 
are praised by those who support the rule but which show that the 
rule does more damage than good. 
One consequence of the thesis is that scientific successes cannot be 
explained in a simple way. We cannot say: 'the structure of the atomic 
nucleus was found because people did A, B, C ... ' wherl! A, B and C 
ére procedures which can be understood independently of their use 
lD nuclear physics. All we can do is to give a historical account of the 
1 

2 
AGAINST METHOD 
details, including social circumstances, accidents and personal 
idiosyncrasies. 
Another consequence is that the success of'science' cannot be used as 
an argument for treating as yet unsolved problems in a standardized way. 
That could be done only if there are procedures that can be detached 
from particular research situations and whose presence guarantees 
success. The thesis says that there are no such procedures. Referring 
to the success of 'science' in order to justifY, say, quantifYing human 
behaviour is therefore an argument without substance. Quantifica­
tion works in some cases, fails in others; for example, it ran into 
difficulties in one of the apparently most quantitative of all sciences, 
celestial mechanics (special region: stability of the planetary system) 
and was replaced by qualitative (topological) considerations. 
It also follows that 'non-scientific' procedures cannot be pushed aside by 
argument. To say: 'the procedure you used is non-scientific, therefore 
we cannot trust your results and cannot give you money for research' 
assumes that 'science' is successful and that it is successful because it 
uses uniform procedures. The first part of the assertion ('science is 
always successful') is not true, if by 'science' we mean things done by 
scientists - there are lots of failures also. The second part - that 
successes are due to uniform procedures- is not true because there 
are no such procedures. Scientists are like architects who build 
buildings of different sizes and different shapes and who can be 
judged only after the event, i.e. only after they have finished their 
structure. It may stand up, it may fall down - nobody knows. 
But if scientific achievements can be judged only after the event 
and if there is no abstract way of ensuring success beforehand, then 
there exists no special way of weighing scientific promises either -
scientists are no better off than anybody else in these matters, they 
only know more details. This means that the public can participate in the 
discussion without disturbing existing roads to success (there are no such 
roads). In cases where the scientists' work affects the public it even 
should participate: first, because it is a concerned party (many 
scientific decisions affect public life); secondly, because such 
participation is the best scientific education the public can get- a full 
democratization of science (which includes the protection of 
minorities such as scientists) is not in conflict with science. It is in 
conflict with a philosophy, often called 'Rationalism', that uses a 
frozen image of science to terrorize people unfamiliar with its 
practice. 
A consequence to which I allude in Chapter 19 and which is 
closely connected with its basic thesis is that there can be many diferent 
kinds of science. People starting from different social backgrounds will 

INTRODUCTION TO THE C H I NESE EDITION 
3 
approach the world in different ways and learn different things about 
it. People survived millennia before Western science arose; to do this 
they had to know their surroundings up to and including elements of 
astronomy. 'Several thousand Cuahuila Indians never exhausted the 
natural resources of a desert region in South California, in which 
today only a handful of white families manage to subsist. They lived 
in a land of plenty, for in this apparently completely barren territory, 
they were familiar with no less than sixty kinds of edible plants and 
twenty-eight others of narcotic, stimulant or medical properties'. 1 
The knowledge that preserves the lifestyles of nomads was acquired 
and is preserved in a non-scientific way ('science' now being modem 
natural science). Chinese technology for a long time lacked any 
Western-scientific underpinning and yet it was far ahead of 
contemporary Western technology. It is true that Western science 
now reigns supreme all over the globe; however, the reason was not 
insight in its 'inherent rationality' but power play (the colonizing 
nations imposed their ways of living) and the need for weapons: 
Western science so far has created the most efficient instruments of 
death. The remark that without Western science many 'Third World 
nations' would be starving is correct but one should add that the 
troubles were created, not alleviated by earlier forms of 'develop­
ment'. It is also true that Western medicine helped eradicate 
parasites and some infectious diseases but this does not show that 
Western science is the only tradition that has good things to offer and 
that other forms of inquiry are without any merit whatsoever. First­
world science is one science among many; by claiming to be more it ceases 
to be an instrument of research and turns into a (political) pressure 
group. More on these matters can be found in my book Farewell to 
Reason.2 
My main motive in writing the book was humanitarian, not 
intellectual. I wanted to support people, not to 'advance knowledge'. 
People all over the world have developed ways of surviving in partly 
dangerous, partly agreeable surroundings. The stories they told and 
the activities they engaged in enriched their lives, protected them and 
gave them meaning. The 'progress of knowledge and civilization'- as 
the process of pushing Western ways and values into all comers of the 
globe is being called- destroyed these wonderful products of human 
ingenuity and compassion without a single glance in their direction. 
'Progress of knowledge' in many places meant killing of minds. 
Today old traditions are being revived and people try again to adapt 
I. C. Levi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, London, 1966, pp. 4f. 
2. London, 1987. 

4 
AGAINST METHOD 
their lives to the ideas of their ancestors. I have tried to show, by an 
analysis of the apparently hardest parts of science, the natural 
sciences, that science, properly understood, has no argument against 
such a procedure. There are many scientists who act accordingly. 
Physicians, anthropologists and environmentalists are starting to 
adapt their procedures to the values of the people they are supposed 
to advise. I am not against a science so understood. Such a science is 
one of the most wonderful inventions of the human mind. But I am 
against ideologies that use the name of science for cultural murder. 

Analytical Index 
Being a Sketch of the Main Argument 
Introduction 
9 
Science is an essentially anarchic enterprise: theoretical anarchism is more 
humanitarian and more likely to encourage progress than its law-and-order 
alternatives. 
1 
14 
This is shown both by an examination of histon·cal episodes and by an 
abstract analysis of the relation between idea and action. The only principle 
that does not inhibit progress is: anything goes. 
2 
20 
For example, we may use hypotheses that contradia well-confirmed theories 
and/or well-established experimental results. We may advance science by 
proceeding counterinduaively. 
3 
24 
The consistency condition which demands that new hypotheses agree with 
accepted theories is unreasonable because it preserves the older theory, and 
not the better theory. Hypotheses contradiaing well-confirmed theories give 
us evidence that cannot be obtained in atry other way. Proliferation of 
theories is beneficial for science, while uniformity impairs its critical power. 
Uniformity also endangers the free development of the individual. 
4 
33 
There is no idea, however ancient and absurd, that is not capable of 
impruving our knowledge. The whole history of thought is absorbed into 
science and is used for impruving every single theory. Nor is political 
interference rejeaed. It may be needed to uvercome the chaflVinism of science 
that resists alternatives to the status quo. 
s 
39 
No theory ever agrees with all the facts in its domain, yet it is not always the 
theory that is to blame. Facts are constituted by older ideologies, and a clash 
5 

6 
AGAINST METH O D  
between facts and theories may be proof of progress. It is also a first step in our 
attempt to find the principles implicit in familiar observational notions. 
6 
54 
As an example of such an attempt I examine the tower argument which the 
Aristotelians used to refute the motion of the earth. The argument irrvolves 
natural interpretations - ideas so closely conneaed with observations that 
it needs a special efort to realize their existence and to determine their 
content. Galileo identifies the natural interpretations which are inconsistent 
with Copernicus and replaces them by others. 
7 
65 
The new natural interpretations constitute a new and highly abstract 
observation language. They are introduced and concealed so that one foils 
to notice the change that has taken piace (method of anamnesis). They contain 
the idea of the relativity of all motion and the law of circular inertia. 
8 
77 
In adition to natural interpretations, Galileo also changes sensations that 
seem to endanger Copernicus. He admits that there are such sensations, he 
praises Copernicus for having disregarded them, he claims to have removed 
them with the help of the telescope. However, he offers no theoretical 
reasons why the telescope should be expeaed to give a true piaure of the sAy. 
9 
86 
Nor does the initial experience with the telescope provide such reasons. The 
first telescopic observations of the sAy are indistina, indeterminate, 
contradiaory and in conjlia with what everyone can see with his unaided 
eyes. And, the only theory that could have helped to separate telescopic 
illusions from veridical phenomena was refuted by simple tests. 
IO 
103 
On the other hand, there are some telescopic phenomena which are plainly 
Copernican. Galileo introduces these phenomena as independent evidence 
for Copernicus while the situation is rather that one refuted view -
Copernicanism - has a certain similarity with phenomena emerging from 
another refuted view - the idea that telescopic phenomena are faithful 
images of the sAy. 
II 
106 
Such 'irrational' methods of support are needed because of the 'uneven 
development' (Marx, Lenin) of diferent parts of science. Copernican ism and 
other essential ingredients of modern science survived only because reason 
was frequently overruled in their past. 

ANALYTICAL I N DEX 
7 
12 
123 
Galileo s method works in other fields as well. For example, it can be used to 
eliminate the existing arguments against materialism, and to put an end to 
the philosophical mind/body problem (the corresponding scientific 
problems remain untouched, however). It does not follow that it should be 
universally applied. 
13 
125 
The Church at the time ofGalileo not only kept closer to reason as defined 
then and, in part, even now: it also considered the ethical and social 
consequences ofGalileo's views. Its indictment ofGalileo was rational and 
only oportunism and a lack of perspective can demand a revision. 
14 
135 
Galileo 's inquiries formed only a small part of the so-called Copernican 
Revolution. Adding the remaining elements makes it still more dificult to 
reconcile the development with familiar principles of theory evaluation. 
15 
147 
The results obtained so far suggest abolishing the distinction between a 
context of discovery and a context of justification, norms and facts, 
observational terms and theoretical terms. None of these distinctions plays a 
role in scientific practice. Attempts to enforce them would have disastrous 
consequences. Poper's critical rationalism fails for the same reasons. 
Appendix 1 
159 
16 
164 
Finally, the kind of comparison that underlies most methodologies is possible 
only in some rather simple cases. It breaks down when we try to compare 
non-scientific views with science and when we consider the most advanced, 
most general and therefore most mythological parts of science itself. 
Appendix2 
209 
17 
214 
Neither science nor rationality are universal measures of excellence. They are 
Particular traditions, unaware of their historical grounding. 
18 
230 
Yet it is possible to evaluate standards of rationality and to improve them. 
The principles of improvement are neither above tradition nor beyond 
change and it is impossible to nail them down. 

8 
AGAINST METHO D  
1 9  
238 
Science is neither a single tradition, nor the best tradition there is, except for 
people who have become accustomed to its presence, its benefits and its 
disadvantages. In a democracy it should be separated from the state just as 
churches are now separated from the state. 
20 
252 
The point of view underlying this book is not the result of a well-planned 
train of thought but of arguments prompted by accidental encounters. Anger 
at the wanton destruction of cultural achievements from which we all could 
have learned, at the conceited assurance with which some intellectuals 
interfere with the lives of people, and contempt for the treacly phrases they 
use to embellish their misdeeds was and still is the motive force behind my 
work. 

Introduction 
Science is an essentially anarchic enterprise: theoretical anarchism is more 
humanitarian and more likely to encourage progress than its law-and-order 
alternatives. 
Ordnung ist heutzutage meistens dort, 
wo nichts ist. 
Es ist eine Mangelerscheinung. 
BRECHT 
The following essay is written in the conviction that anarchism, while 
perhaps not the most attractive political philosophy, is certainly 
excellent medicine for epistemology, and for the philosophy of science. 
The reason is not difficult to find. 
'History generally, and the history of revolution in particular, is 
always richer in content, more varied, more many-sided, more lively 
and subtle than even' the best historian and the best methodologist 
can imagine. 1 History is full of 'accidents and conjunctures and 
curious juxtapositions of events'2 and it demonstrates to us the 
'complexity of human change and the unpredictable character of the 
ultimate consequences of any given act or decision of men'. 3 Are we 
really to believe that the naive and simple-minded rules which 
methodologists take as their guide are capable of accounting for such 
a 'maze of interactions'?4 And is it not clear that successful 
l .  'History as a whole, and the history of revolutions in particular, is always richer 
in content, more varied, more multiform, more lively and ingenious than is imagined 
by even the best parties, the most conscious vanguards of the most advanced classes' 
(V.I. Lenin, 'Left-Wing Communism - An Infantile Disorder', Seleaed Works, Vol. 3, 
London, 196 7, p. 40 I). Lenin is addressing parties and revolutionary vanguards rather 
than scientists and methodologists; the lesson, however, is the same. Cf. footnote 5. 
2. Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, New York, 1965, p. 66. 
3. ibid., p. 21. 
4. ibid., p. 25, cf. Hegel, Philosophie der Geschichte, Werke, Vol. 9, ed. Edward Gans, 
Berlin, 1837, p. 9: 'But what experience and history teach us is this, that nations and 
9 

10 
AGAINST METHOD 
participation in a process of this kind is possible only for a ruthless 
opportunist who is not tied to any particular philosophy and who 
adopts whatever procedure seems to fit the occasion? 
This is indeed the conclusion that has been drawn by intelligent 
and thoughtful observers. 'Two very important practical conclusions 
follow from this [character of the historical process],' writes Lenin, 5 
continuing the passage from which I have just quoted. 'First, that in 
order to fulfil its task, the revolutionary class [i.e. the class of those 
who want to change either a part of society such as science, or society 
as a whole] must be able to master all forms or aspects of social 
activity without exception [it must be able to understand, and to 
apply, not only one particular methodology, but any methodology, 
and any variation thereof it can imagine] . . .  ; second [it] must be 
ready to pass from one to another in the quickest and most 
unexpected manner.' 'The external conditions', writes Einstein,6 
'which are set for [the scientist] by the facts of experience do not 
permit him to let himself be too much restricted, in the construction 
of his conceptual world, by the adherence to an epistemological 
system. He, therefore, must appear to the systematic epistemologist 
as a type of unscrupulous opportunist. .
. .' A complex medium 
containing surprising and unforeseen developments demands 
complex procedures and defies analysis on the basis of rules which 
governments have never learned anything from history, or acted according to rules that 
might have derived from it. Every period has such peculiar circumstances, is in such an 
individual state, that decisions will have to be made, and decisions can only be made, in 
it and out of it.' - 'Very clever'; 'shrewd and very clever'; 'NB' writes Lenin in his 
marginal notes to this passage. (Collected Works, Vol. 38, London, 1961, p. 307.) 
5. ibid. We see here very clearly how a few substitutions can turn a political lesson 
into a lesson for methodology. This is not at all surprising. Methodology and politics are 
both means for moving from one historical stage to another. We also see how an 
individual, such as Lenin, who is not intimidated by traditional boundaries and whose 
thought is not tied to the ideology of a particular profession, can give useful advice to 
everyone, philosophers of science included. In the 19th century the idea of an elastic 
and historically informed methodology was a matter of course. Thus Ernst Mach 
wrote in his book Erkenntnis und /mum, Neudruck, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell­
schaft, Darmstadt, 1980, p. 200: 'It is often said that research cannot be taught. That is 
quite correct, in a certain sense. The schemata of forma/logic and of induaive logic are 
oflittle use for the intellectual situations are never exactly the same. But the examples 
of great scientists are very suggestive.' They are not suggestive because we can abstract 
rules from them and subject future research to their jurisdiction; they are suggestive 
because they make the mind nimble and capable of inventing entirely new research 
traditions. For a more detailed account of Mach's philosophy see my essay FarerJellto 
Reason, London, 1987, Chapter 7, as well as Vol. 2, Chapters 5 and 6 of my 
Philosophical Papers, Cambridge, 1981. 
6. Albert Einstein, Albert Einstein: Philosopher Scientist, ed. P.A. Schilpp, New 
York, 1951, pp. 683f. 

INTRODU CTION 
11 
have been set up in advance and without regard to the ever-changing 
conditions of history. 
Now it is, of course, possible to simplifY the medium in which a scientist 
works by simplifYing its main actors. The history of science, after all, 
does not just consist of facts and conclusions drawn from facts. It also 
contains ideas, interpretations offacts, problems created by conflicting 
interpretations, mistakes, and so on. On closer analysis we even find 
that science knows no 'bare facts' at all but that the 'facts' that enter our 
knowledge are already viewed in a certain way and are, therefore, 
essentially ideational. This being the case, the history of science will be 
as complex, chaotic, full of mistakes, and entertaining as the ideas it 
contains, and these ideas in tum will be as complex, chaotic, full of 
mistakes, and entertaining as are the minds of those who invented 
them. Conversely, a little brainwashing will go a long way in making the 
history of science duller, simpler, more uniform, more 'objective' and 
more easily accessible to treatment by strict and unchangeable rules. 
Scientific education as we know it today has precisely this aim. It 
simplifies 'science' by simplifYing its participants: first, a domain of 
research is defined. The domain is separated from the rest of history 
(physics, for example, is separated from metaphysics and from 
theology) and given a 'logic' of its own. A thorough training in such a 
'logic' then conditions those working in the domain; it makes their 
actions more uniform and it freezes large parts of the historical process 
as well. Stable 'facts' arise and persevere despite the vicissitudes of 
history. An essential part of the training that makes such facts appear 
consists in the attempt to inhibit intuitions that might lead to a 
blurring of boundaries. A person's religion, for example, or his 
metaphysics, or his sense of humour (his natural sense of humour and 
not the inbred and always rather nasty kind of jocularity one finds in 
specialized professions) must not have the slightest connection with 
his scientific activity. His imagination is restrained, and even his 
language ceases to be his own. This is again reflected in the nature of 
scientific 'facts' which are experienced as being independent of 
opinion, belief, and cultural background. 
It is thus possible to create a tradition that is held together by strict 
rules, and that is also successful to some extent. But is it desirable to 
support such a tradition to the exclusion of everything else? Should 
we transfer to it the sole rights for dealing in knowledge, so that any 
result that has been obtained by other methods is at once ruled out of 
court? And did scientists ever remain within the boundaries of the 
Äraditions they defined in this narrow way? These are the questions I 
Intend to ask in the present essay. And to these questions my answer 
will be a firm and resounding NO. 

12 
AGAINST METHOD 
There are two reasons why such an answer seems to be 
appropriate. The first reason is that the world which we want to 
explore is a largely unknown entity. We must, therefore, keep our 
options open and we must not restrict ourselves in advance. 
Epistemological prescriptions may look splendid when compared 
with other epistemological prescriptions, or with general principles­
but who can guarantee that they are the best way to discover, not just 
a few isolated 'facts', but also some deep-lying secrets of nature? The 
second reason is that a scientific education as described above (and as 
practised in our schools) cannot be reconciled with a humanitarian 
attitude. It is in conflict 'with the cultivation of individuality which 
alone produces, or can produce, well-developed human beings';7 it 
'maims by compression, like a Chinese lady's foot, every part of 
human nature which stands out prominently, and tends to make a 
person markedly different in outline'8 from the ideals of rationality 
that happen to be fashionable in science, or in the philosophy of 
science. The attempt to increase liberty, to lead a full and rewarding 
life, and the corresponding attempt to discover the secrets of nature 
and of man, entails, therefore, the rejection of al universal standards 
and of all rigid traditions. (Naturally, it also entails the rejection of a 
large part of contemporary science.) 
It is surprising to see how rarely the stultifYing effect of 'the Laws 
of Reason' or of scientific practice is examined by professional 
anarchists. Professional anarchists oppose any kind of restriction and 
they demand that the individual be permitted to develop freely, 
unhampered by laws, duties or obligations. And yet they swallow 
without protest all the severe standards which scientists and logicians 
impose upon research and upon any kind of knowledge-creating and 
knowledge-changing activity. Occasionally, the laws of scientific 
method, or what are thought to be the laws of scientific method 
by a particular writer, are even integrated into anarchism itself. 
'Anarchism is a world concept based upon a mechanical explanation 
of all phenomena,' writes Kropotkin. 9 'Its method of investigation is 
7. John Stuan Mill, 'On Libeny', in The Philosophy o!John Stuart Mil/, ed. Marshall 
Cohen, New York, 1961, p. 258. 
8. ibid., p. 265. 
9. Peter Alexeivich Kropotkin, 'Modem Science and Anarchism', Kropotkin s 
RevolutitmQry Pamphlets, ed. R.W. Baldwin, New York, 1970, pp. 150-2. 'It is one of 
Ibsen's great distinctions that nothing was valid for him but science.' B. Shaw, Back to 
Methuselah, New York, 1921, p. xcvii. Commenting on these and similar phenomena 
Strindberg writes (Antibarbarus ): 'A generation that had the courage to get rid of God, 
to crush the state and church, and to ovenhrow society and morality, still bowed before 
Science. And in Science, where freedom ought to reign, the order of the day was 
"believe in the authorities or off with your head".' 

I NTRODUCTION 
13 
that of the exact natural sciences ... the method of induction and 
deduction.' 'It is not so clear,' writes a modem 'radical' professor at 
Columbia, 10 'that scientific research demands an absolute freedom 
of speech and debate. Rather the evidence suggests that certain kinds 
of unfreedom place no obstacle in the way of science . .. .' 
There are certainly some people to whom this is 'not so clear'. Let 
us, therefore, start with our outline of an anarchistic methodology 
and a corresponding anarchistic science. There is no need to fear 
that the diminished concern for law and order in science and society 
that characterizes an anarchism of this kind will lead to chaos. The 
human nervous system is too well organized for that. 11 There may, 
of course, come a time when it will be necessary to give reason a 
temporary advantage and when it will be wise to defend its rules to the 
exclusion of everything else. I do not think that we are living in such a 
time today.12 
10. R.P. Wolff, The Puverty of Liberalism, Boston, 1968, p. 15. For a criticism of 
Wolff see footnote 52 of my essay 'Against Method', in Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4, Minneapolis, 1970. 
I I .  Even in undetermined and ambiguous situations, uniformity of action is soon 
achieved and adhered to tenaciously. See Muzafer Sherif, The Psychology of Social 
Norms, New York, 1964. 
12. This was my opinion in 1970 when I wrote the first version of this essay. Times 
have changed. Considering some tendencies in US education ('politically correct', 
academic menus, etc.), in philosophy (postmodernism) and in the world at large I think 
that reason should now be given greater weight not because it is and always was 
fundamental but because it seems to be needed, in circumstances that occur rather 
frequently today (but may disappear tomorrow), to create a more humane approach. 

1 
This is shoam both by an examination of historical episodes and by an 
abstraa analysis of the relation between idea and aaion. The only principle 
that does not inhibit progress is: anything goes. 
The idea of a method that contains finn, unchanging, and 
absolutely binding principles for conducting the business of science 
meets considerable difficulty when confronted with the results of 
historical research. We find, then, that there is not a single rule, 
however plausible, and however firmly grounded in epistemology, 
that is not violated at some time or other. It becomes evident that 
such violations are not accidental events, they are not results of 
insufficient knowledge or of inattention which might have been 
avoided. On the contrary, we see that they are necessary for pro­
gress. Indeed, one of the most striking features of recent 
discussions in the history and philosophy of science is the 
realization that events and developments, such as the invention of 
atomism in antiquity, the Copernican Revolution, the rise of 
modem atomism (kinetic theory; dispersion theory; stereochemistry; 
quantum theory), the gradual emergence of the wave theory of 
light, occurred only because some thinkers either decided not to be 
bound by certain 'obvious' methodological rules, or because they 
unwittingly broke them. 
This liberal practice, I repeat, is not just a faa of the history of 
science. It is both reasonable and absolutely necessary for the growth of 
knowledge. More specifically, one can show the following: given any 
rule, however 'fundamental' or 'rational', there are always cir­
cumstances when it is advisable not only to ignore the rule, but to 
adopt its opposite. For example, there are circumstances when it is 
advisable to introduce, elaborate, and defend ad hoc hypotheses, or 
hypotheses which contradict well-established and generally accepted 
experimental results, or hypotheses whose content is smaller than the 
14 

ONE 
IS 
content of the existing and empirically adequate alternative, or self­
inconsistent hypotheses, and so on. 1 
There are even circumstances - and they occur rather frequently­
when argument loses its forward-looking aspect and becomes a 
hindrance to progress. Nobody would claim that the teaching of small 
children is exclusively a matter of argument (though argument may 
enter into it, and should enter into it to a larger extent than is 
customary}, and almost everyone now agrees that what looks like a 
result of reason - the mastery of a language, the existence of a richly 
articulated perceptual world, logical ability - is due partly to 
indoctrination and partly to a process of growth that proceeds with the 
force of natural law. And where arguments do seem to have an effect, 
this is more often due to their physical repetition than to their 5emantic 
content. 
Having admitted this much, we must also concede the possibility 
of non-argumentative growth in the adult as well as in (the theoretical 
parts of) institutions such as science, religion, prostitution, and so on. 
1. One of the few thinkers to understand this feature of the development of 
knowledge was Niels Bohr: ' . . .  he would never try to outline any finished picture, but 
would patiently go through all the phases of the development of a problem, starting 
from some apparent paradox, and gradually leading to its elucidation. In fact, he never 
regarded achieved results in any other light than as starting points for further 
exploration. In speculating about the prospects of some line of investigation, he would 
dismiss the usual consideration of simplicity, elegance or even consistency with the 
remark that such qualities can only be properly judged after [my italics] the event . . .  .' 
L. Rosenfeld in Niels Bohr. His Life and Work 11 seen by his Friends and Colleagues, 
S. Rosental (ed.), New York, 1 967, p. 1 17. Now science is never a completed process, 
therefore it is always 'before' the event. Hence simplicity, elegance or consistency are 
never necessary conditions of (scientific) practice. 
Considerations such as these are usually criticized by the childish remark that a 
contradiction 'entails' everything. But contradictions do not 'entail' anything unless 
people use them in certain ways. And people will use them as entailing everything only 
if they accept some rather simple-minded rules of derivation. Scientists proposing 
theories with logical faults and obtaining interesting results with their help (for 
example: the results of early forms of the calculus; of a geometry where lines consist of 
points, planes of lines and volumes of planes; the predictions of the older quantum 
theory and of early forms of the quantum theory of radiation - and so on) evidently 
proceed according to different rules. The criticism therefore falls back on its authors 
unless it can be shown that a logically decontaminated science has better results. Such 
a demonstration is impossible. Logically perfect versions (if such versions exist) 
usually arrive only long after the imperfect versions have enriched science by their 
contributions. For example, wave mechanics was not a 'logical reconstruction' of 
preceding theories; it was an attempt to preserve their achievements and to solve the 
physical problems that had arisen from their use. Both the achievements and the 
problems were produced in a way very different from the ways of those who want to 
subject everything to the tyranny of'logic'. 

16 
AGAINST METHOD 
We certainly cannot take it for granted that what is possible for a 
small child - to acquire new modes of behaviour on the slightest 
provocation, to slide into them without any noticeable effort - is 
beyond the reach of his elders. One should rather expect that 
catastrophic changes in the physical environment, 
wars, the 
breakdown of encompassing systems of morality, political revolu­
tions, will transform adult reaction patterns as well, including 
important patterns of argumentation. Such a transformation may 
again be an entirely natural process and the only function of a rational 
argument may lie in the fact that it increases the mental tension that 
preceded and caused the behavioural outburst. 
Now, if there are events, not necessarily arguments, which cause us 
to adopt new standards, including new and more complex forms of 
argumentation, is it then not up to the defenders of the status quo to 
provide, not just counter-arguments, but also contrary causes? 
('Virtue without terror is ineffective, ' says Robespierre.) And if the 
old forms of argumentation turn out to be too weak a cause, must not 
these defenders either give up or resort to stronger and more 
'irrational' means? (It is very difficult, and perhaps entirely 
impossible, to combat the effects of brainwashing by argument.) 
Even the most puritanical rationalist will then be forced to stop 
reasoning and to use propaganda and coercion, not because some of his 
reasons have ceased to be valid, but because the psychological conditions 
which make them effective, and capable of influencing others, have 
disappeared. And what is the use of an argument that leaves people 
unmoved? 
Of course, the problem never arises quite in this form. The 
teaching of standards and their defence never consists merely in 
putting them before the mind of the student and making them as clear 
as possible. The standards are supposed to have maximal causal 
eficacy as well. This makes it very difficult indeed to distinguish 
between the logical force and the material ejfea of an argument. Just as a 
well-trained pet will obey his master no matter how great the 
confusion in which he finds himself, and no matter how urgent the 
need to adopt new patterns of behaviour, so in the very same way a 
well-trained rationalist will obey the mental image of his master, he 
will conform to the standards of argumentation he has learned, he 
will adhere to these standards no matter how great the confusion in 
which he finds himself, and he will be quite incapable of realizing that 
what he regards as the 'voice of reason' is but a causal after-efea of the 
training he had received. He will be quite unable to discover that the 
appeal to reason to which he succumbs so readily is nothing but a 
political manoeuvre. 

ONE 
17 
That interests, forces, propaganda and brainwashing techniques 
play a much greater role than is commonly believed in the growth of 
our knowledge and in the growth of science, can also be seen from an 
analysis of the relation between idea and action. It is often taken for 
granted that a clear and distinct understanding of new ideas 
precedes, and should precede, their formulation and their institu­
tional expression. First, we have an idea, or a problem, then we act, i.e. 
either speak, or build, or destroy. Yet this is certainly not the way in 
which small children develop. They use words, they combine them, 
they play with them, until they grasp a meaning that has so far been 
beyond their reach. And the initial playful activity is an essential 
prerequisite of the final act of understanding. There is no reason why 
this mechanism should cease to function in the adult. We must 
expect, for example, that the idea ofliberty could be made clear only 
by means of the very same actions, which were supposed to create 
liberty. Creation of a thing, and creation plus full understanding of a 
correct idea of the thing, are very often parts of one and the same indivisible 
process and cannot be separated without bringing the process to a 
stop. The process itself is not guided by a well-defined programme, 
and cannot be guided by such a programme, for it contains the 
conditions for the realization of all possible programmes. It is guided 
rather by a vague urge, by a 'passion' (Kierkegaard). The passion 
gives rise to specific behaviour which in tum creates the cir­
cumstances and the ideas necessary for analysing and explaining the 
process, for making it 'rational'. 
The development of the Copernican point of view from Galileo to 
the 20th century is a perfect example of the situation I want to 
describe. We start with a strong belief that runs counter to 
contemporary reason and contemporary experience. The belief 
spreads and finds support in other beliefs which are equally 
unreasonable, if not more so (law of inertia; the telescope). Research 
now gets deflected in new directions, new kinds of instruments are 
built, 'evidence' is related to theories in new ways until there arises an 
ideology that is rich enough to provide independent arguments for 
any particular part of it and mobile enough to find such arguments 
whenever they seem to be required. We can say today that Galileo 
was on the right track, for his persistent pursuit of what once seemed 
to be a silly cosmology has by now created the material needed to 
defend it against all those who will accept a view only if it is told in a 
certain way and who will trust it only if it contains certain magical 
p/rases, called 'observational reports'. And this is not an exception ­
©t Is the normal case: theories become clear and 'reasonable' only after 
Incoherent parts of them have been used for a long time. Such 

18 
AGAINST METHOD 
unreasonable, nonsensical, unmethodical foreplay thus turns out 
to be an unavoidable precondition of clarity and of empirical 
success. 
Now, when we attempt to describe and to understand develop­
ments of this kind in a general way, we are, of course, obliged to 
appeal to the existing forms of speech which do not take them into 
account and which must be distorted, misused, beaten into new 
patterns in order to fit unforeseen situations (without a constant 
misuse of language there cannot be any discovery, any progress). 
'Moreover, since the traditional categories are the gospel of everyday 
thinking (including ordinary scientific thinking) and of everyday 
practice, [such an attempt at understanding] in effect presents rules 
and forms of false thinking and action - false, that is, from the 
standpoint of (scientific) common sense.'2 This is how dialeaical 
thinking arises as a form of thought that 'dissolves into nothing the 
detailed determinations of the understanding',3 formal logic 
included. 
(Incidentally, it should be pointed out that my frequent use 
of such words as 'progress', 'advance', 'improvement', etc., does 
not mean that I claim to possess special knowledge about what 
is good and what is bad in the sciences and that I want to impose 
this knowledge upon my readers. Everyone can read the terms in 
his own way and in accordance with the tradition to which he 
belongs. Thus for an empiricist, 'progress' will mean transition 
to a theory that provides direct empirical tests for most of its basic 
assumptions. Some people believe the quantum theory to be a 
theory of this kind. For others, 'progress' may mean unific"tion 
and harmony, perhaps even at the expense of empirical adequacy. 
This is how Einstein viewed the general theory of relativity. And 
nry thesis is that anarchism helps to achieve progress in any one of 
the senses one cares to choose. Even a law-and-order science will 
succeed only if anarchistic moves are occasionally allowed to take 
place.) 
It is clear, then, that the idea of a fixed method, or of a fixed theory 
of rationality, rests on too naive a view of man and his social 
surroundings. To those who look at the rich material provided by 
history, and who are not intent on impoverishing it in order to please 
their lower instincts, their craving for intellectual security in the form 
of clarity, precision, 'objectivity', 'truth', it will become clear that 
there is only one principle that can be defended under all 
2. Herben Marcuse, Reason and Revolution, London, 1941, p. 130. 
3. Hegel, Wisseruchaji der Logik, Vol. 1, Hamburg, 1965, p. 6. 

ONE 
19 
circumstances and in all stages of human development. It is the 
principle: anything goes. 
This abstract principle must now be examined and explained in 
concrete detail. 

2 
For example, we may use hypotheses that contradia well-confirmed theories 
and/or well-established experimental results. We may advance science by 
proceeding counterinduaive/y. 
Examining the principle in concrete detail means tracing the 
consequences of 'counterrules' which oppose familiar rules of the 
scientific enterprise. To see how this works, let us consider the rule 
that it is 'experience', or the 'facts', or 'experimental results' which 
measure the success of our theories, that agreement between a theory 
and the 'data' favours the theory (or leaves the situation unchanged) 
while disagreement endangers it, and perhaps even forces us to 
eliminate it. This rule is an important part of all theories of 
confirmation and corroboration. It is the essence of empiricism. The 
'counterrule' corresponding to it advises us to introduce and 
elaborate hypotheses which are inconsistent with well-established 
theories and/or well-established facts. It advises us to proceed 
counterinduaive/y. 
The counterinductive procedure gives rise to the following 
questions: Is counterinduction more reasonable than induction? Are 
there circumstances favouring its use? What are the arguments for it? 
What are the arguments against it? Is perhaps induction always 
preferable to counterinduction? And so on. 
These questions will be answered in two steps. I shall first examine 
the counterrule that urges us to develop hypotheses inconsistent with 
accepted and highly confirmed theories. Later on I shall examine the 
counterrule that urges us to develop hypotheses inconsistent with 
well-establishedfaas. The results may be summarized as follows. 
In the first case it emerges that the evidence that might refute a 
theory can often be unearthed only with the help of an incompatible 
alternative: the advice (which goes back to Newton and which is still 
very popular today) to use alternatives only when refutations have 
already discredited the orthodox theory puts the cart before the 
20 

TWO 
21 
horse. Also, some of the most important formal properties of a theory 
are found by contrast, and not by analysis. A scientist who wishes to 
maximize the empirical content of the views he holds and who wants 
to understand them as clearly as he possibly can must therefore 
introduce other views; that is, he must adopt a pluralistic methodology. 
He must compare ideas with other ideas rather than with 
'experience' and he must try to improve rather than discard the views 
that have failed in the competition. Proceeding in this way he will 
retain the theories of man and cosmos that are found in Genesis, or in 
the Pimander, he will elaborate them and use them to measure the 
success of evolution and other 'modern' views. He may then discover 
that the theory of evolution is not as good as is generally assumed and 
that it must be supplemented, or entirely replaced, by an improved 
version of Genesis. Knowledge so conceived is not a series of self­
consistent theories that converges towards an ideal view; it is not a 
gradual approach to the truth. It is rather an ever increasing ocean of 
mutually incompatible alternatives, each single theory, each fairy-tale, 
each myth that is part of the collection forcing the others into greater 
articulation and all of them contributing, via this process of 
competition, to the development of our consciousness. Nothing is 
ever settled, no view can ever be omitted from a comprehensive 
account. Plutarch or Diogenes Laertius, and not Dirac or von 
Neumann, are the models for presenting a knowledge of this kind in 
which the history of a science becomes an inseparable part of the 
science itself- it is essential for its further development as well as for 
giving content to the theories it contains at any particular moment. 
Experts and laymen, professionals and dilettanti, truth-freaks and 
liars - they all are invited to participate in the contest and to make 
their contribution to the enrichment of our culture. The task of the 
scientist, however, is no longer 'to search for the truth', or 'to praise 
god', or 'to systematize observations', or 'to improve predictions'. 
These are but side effects of an activity to which his attention 
is now mainly directed and which is 'to make the weaker case the 
stronger' as the sophists said, and thereby to sustain the motion of the 
whole. 
The second 'counterrule' which favours hypotheses inconsistent 
with obseroations, facts and experimental results, needs no special 
defence, for there is not a single interesting theory that agrees with all 
the known facts in its domain. The question is, therefore, not 
whether counterinductive theories should be admitted into science; 
the question is, rather, whether the existing discrepancies between 
theory and fact should be increased, or diminished, or what else 
should be done with them. 

22 
AGAINST METHOD 
To answer this question it suffices to remember that observational 
reports, experimental results, 'factual' statements, either contain 
theoretical assumptions or assert them by the manner in which they 
are used. (For this point cf. the discussion of natural interpretations 
in Chapters 6fT.) Thus our habit of saying 'the table is brown' when 
we view it under normal circumstances, with our senses in good 
order, but 'the table seems to be brown' when either the lighting 
conditions are poor or when we feel unsure in our capacity of 
observation expresses the belief that there are familiar cir­
cumstances when our senses are capable of seeing the world 'as it 
really is' and other, equally familiar circumstances, when they are 
deceived. It expresses the belief that some of our sensory 
impressions are veridical while others are not. We also take it for 
granted that the material medium between the object and us exerts 
no distorting influence, and that the physical entity that establishes 
the contact - light - carries a true picture. All these are abstract, 
and highly doubtful, assumptions which shape our view of the world 
without being accessible to a direct criticism. Usually, we are not 
even aware of them and we recognize their effects only when we 
encounter an entirely different cosmology: prejudices are found by 
contrast, not by analysis. The material which the scientist has at his 
disposal, his most sublime theories and his most sophisticated 
techniques included, is structured in exactly the same way. It again 
contains principles which are not known and which, if known, 
would be extremely hard to test. (As a result, a theory may clash 
with the evidence not because it is not correct, but because the 
evidence is contaminated.) 
Now-how can we possibly examine something we are using all the 
time? How can we analyse the terms in which we habitually express 
our most simple and straightforward observations, and reveal their 
presuppositions? How can we discover the kind of world we 
presuppose when proceeding as we do? 
The answer is clear: we cannot discover it from the inside. We need 
an external standard of criticism, we need a set of alternative 
assumptions or, as these assumptions will be quite general, 
constituting, as it were, an entire alternative world, we need a dream­
world in order to discuver the ftatures of the real world we think we inhabit 
(and which may actually be just another dream-world). The first step 
in our criticism of familiar concepts and procedures, the first step in 
our criticism of 'facts', must therefore be an attempt to break the 
circle. We must invent a new conceptual system that suspends, or 
clashes with, the most carefully established observational results, 
confounds the most plausible theoretical principles, and introduces 

TWO 
23 
perceptions that cannot form part of the existing perceptual world. 1 
This step is again counterinductive. Counterinduction is, therefore, 
always reasonable and it has always a chance of success. 
In the following seven chapters, this conclusion will be developed 
in greater detail and it will be elucidated with the help of historical 
examples. One might therefore get the impression that I recommend 
a new methodology which replaces induction by counterinduction 
and uses a multiplicity of theories, metaphysical views, fairy-tales 
instead of the customary pair theory/ observation. 2 This impression 
would certainly be mistaken. My intention is not to replace one set of 
general rules by another such set: my intention is, rather, to convince 
the reader that all methodologies, even the most obvious ones, have their 
limits. The best way to show this is to demonstrate the limits and even 
the irrationality of some rules which she, or he, is likely to regard as 
basic. In the case of induction (including induction by falsification) 
this means demonstrating how well the counterinductive procedure 
can be supported by argument. Always remember that the 
demonstrations and the rhetorics used do not express any 'deep 
convictions' of mine. They merely show how easy it is to lead people 
by the nose in a rational way. An anarchist is like an undercover agent 
who plays the game of Reason in order to undercut the authority of 
Reason (Truth, Honesty,Justice, and so on).3 
I .  'Clashes' or 'suspends' is meant to be more general than 'contradicts'. I shall say 
that a set ofideas or actions 'clashes' with a conceptual system ifit is either inconsistent 
with it, or makes the system appear absurd. For details cf. Chapter 16 below. 
2. This is how Professor Ernan McMullin interpreted some earlier papers of 
mine. See 'A Taxonomy of the Relations between History and Philosophy of Science', 
Minnesota Studies, Vol. 5, Minneapolis, 1971. 
3. 'Dada', says Hans Richter in Dada: Art and Anti-Art, 'not only had no 
programme, it was against all programmes.' This does not exclude the skilful defence 
of programmes to show the chimerical character of any defence, however 'rational'. (In 
.e same way an actor or a playwright could produce al the outer manifestations of 
deep love' in order to debunk the idea of'deep love' itself. Example: Pirandello.) 

3 
The consistency condition which demands that new hypotheses agree with 
accepted theories is unreasonable because it preserves the older theory, and 
not the better theory. Hypotheses contradicting well-confirmed theories give 
us evidence that cannot be obtained in any other way. Proliferation of 
theories is beneficial for science, while uniformity impairs its critical power. 
Uniformity also endangers the free development of the individual. 
In this chapter I shall present more detailed arguments for the 
'counterrule' that urges us to introduce hypotheses which are 
inconsistent with well-established theories. The arguments will be 
indirect. They will start with a criticism of the demand that new 
hypotheses must be consistent with such theories. This demand will 
be called the consistency condition. 1 
Prima facie, the case of consistency condition can be dealt with in a 
few words. It is well known (and has also been shown in detail by 
Duhem) that Newton's mechanics is inconsistent with Galileo's law 
offree fall and with Kepler's laws; that statistical thermodynamics is 
inconsistent with the second law of the phenomenological theory· 
that wave optics is inconsistent with geometrical optics; and so on.1 
Note that what is being asserted here is logical inconsistency; it may 
well be that the differences of prediction are too small to be detected 
by experiment. Note also that what is being asserted is not the 
inconsistency of, say, Newton's theory and Galileo's law, but rather the 
inconsistency of some consequences of Newton's theory in the domain 
of validity of Galileo's law, and Galileo's law. In the last case, the 
situation is especially clear. Galileo's law asserts that the acceleration 
of free fall is a constant, whereas application of Newton's theory to 
the surface of the earth gives an acceleration that is not constant but 
I. The consistency condition goes back to Aristotle at least. It plays an important 
pan in Newton's philosophy (though Newton himself constantly violated it). It is taken 
for granted by many 20th-century scientists and philosophers of science. 
2. Pierre Duhem, The Aim and Slructure of Physical Theory, New York, 1962, 
pp. 180fT. 
24 

T H R E E  
25 
decreases (although imperceptibly) with the distance from the centre 
of the earth. 
To speak more abstractly: consider a theory T' that successfully 
describes the situation inside domain D'. T' agrees with a finite 
number of observations (let their class be F) and it agrees with these 
observations inside a margin M of error. Any alternative that 
contradicts T' outside F and inside M is supported by exactly the 
same observations and is therefore acceptable if T' was acceptable (I 
shall assume that F are the only observations made). The consistency 
condition is much less tolerant. It eliminates a theory or a hypothesis 
not because it disagrees with the facts; it eliminates it because it 
disagrees with another theory, with a theory, moreover, whose 
confirming instances it shares. It thereby makes the as yet untested 
part of that theory a measure of validity. The only difference between 
such a measure and a more recent theory is age and familiarity. Had 
the younger theory been there first, then the consistency condition 
would have worked in its favour. 'The first adequate theory has the 
right of priority over equally adequate aftercomers.'3 In this respect 
the effect of the consistency condition is rather similar to the effect of 
the more traditional methods of transcendental deduction, analysis 
of essences, phenomenological analysis, linguistic analysis. It 
contributes to the preservation of the old and familiar not because of 
any inherent advantage in it but because it is old and familiar. This is 
not the only instance where on closer inspection a rather surprising 
similarity emerges between modern empiricism and some of the 
school philosophies it attacks. 
Now it seems to me that these brief considerations, although 
leading to an interesting taaical criticism of the consistency 
condition, and to some first shreds of support for counterinduction, 
do not yet go to the heart of the matter. They show that an alternative 
to the accepted point of view which shares its confirming instances 
cannot be eliminated by factual reasoning. They do not show that such 
an alternative is acceptable; and even less do they show that it should be 
used. It is bad enough, a defender of the consistency condition might 
point out, that the accepted view does not possess full empirical 
support. Adding new theories of an equally unsatisfaaory charaaer will 
not improve the situation; nor is there much sense in trying to replace 
the accepted theories by some of their possible alternatives. Such 
replacement will be no easy matter. A new formalism may have to be 
learned and familiar problems may have to be calculated in a new 
3. C. Truesdell, 'A Program Toward Rediscovering the Rational Mechanics of 
the Age of Reason', Archives for the History of Exact Sciences, Vol. 1, p. 14. 

26 
AGAINST M E T H O D  
way. Textbooks must be rewritten, university curricula readjusted, 
experimental results reinterpreted. And what will be the result of all 
the effort? Another theory which from an empirical standpoint has no 
advantage whatsoever over and above the theory it replaces. The only 
real improvement, so the defender of the consistency condition will 
continue, derives from the addition of new facts. Such new facts will 
either support the current theories, or they will force us to modify 
them by indicating precisely where they go wrong. In both cases they 
will precipitate real progress and not merely arbitrary change. The 
proper procedure must therefore consist in the confrontation of the 
accepted point of view with as many relevant facts as possible. The 
exclusion of alternatives is then simply a measure of expediency: their 
invention not only does not help, it even hinders progress by 
absorbing time and manpower that could be devoted to better things. 
The consistency condition eliminates such fruitless discussion and it 
forces the scientist to concentrate on the facts which, after all, are the 
only acceptable judges of a theory. This is how the practising scientist 
will defend his concentration on a single theory to the exclusion of 
empirically possible alternatives. 
It is worthwhile repeating the reasonable core of this argument. 
Theories should not be changed unless there are pressing reasons for 
doing so. The only pressing reason for changing a theory is 
disagreement with facts. Discussion of incompatible facts will 
therefore lead to progress. Discussion of incompatible hypotheses 
will not. Hence, it is sound procedure to increase the number of 
relevant facts. It is not sound procedure to increase the number of 
factually adequate, but incompatible, alternatives. One might wish to 
add that formal improvements such as increased elegance, simplicity, 
generality, and coherence should not be excluded. But once these 
improvements have been carried out, the collection of facts for the 
purpose of tests seems indeed to be the only thing left to the scientist. 
And so it is - provided facts exist, and are trVailable independently of 
whether or not one considers alternatives to the theory to be tested. This 
assumption, on which the validity of the foregoing argument depends 
in a most decisive manner, I shall call the assumption of the relative 
autonomy of facts, or the autonomy principle. It is not asserted by this 
principle that the discovery and description of facts is independent of 
all theorizing. But it is asserted that the facts which belong to the 
empirical content of some theory are available whether or not one 
considers alternatives to this theory. I am not aware that this very 
important assumption has ever been explicitly formulated as a 
separate postulate of the empirical method. However, it is clearly 
implied in almost all investigations which deal with questions of 

THREE 
27 
confirmation and test. All these investigations use a model in which a 
single theory is compared with a class of facts (or observation 
statements) which are assumed to be 'given ' somehow. I submit that 
this is much too simple a picture of the actual situation. Facts and 
theories are much more intimately connected than is admitted by the 
autonomy principle. Not only is the description of every single fact 
dependent on some theory (which may, of course, be very different 
from the theory to be tested), but there also exist facts which cannot 
be unearthed except with the help of alternatives to the theory to be 
tested, and which become unavailable as soon as such alternatives are 
excluded. This suggests that the methodological unit to which we 
must refer when discussing questions of test and empirical content is 
constituted by a whole set of partly uverlapping, factually adequate, but 
mutually inconsistent theories. In the present chapter only the barest 
outlines will be given of such a test model. However, before doing 
this, I want to discuss an example which shows very clearly the 
function of alternatives in the discovery of critical facts. 
It is now known that the Brownian particle is a perpetual motion 
machine of the second kind and that its existence refutes the 
phenomenological second law. Brownian motion therefore belongs 
to the domain of relevant facts for the law. Now could this relation 
between Brownian motion and the law have been discovered in a 
direa manner i.e. could it have been discovered by an examination of 
the observational consequences of the phenomenological theory that 
did not make use of an alternative theory of heat? This question is 
readily divided into two: (I) Could the relevance of the Brownian 
particle have been discovered in this manner? (2) Could it have been 
demonstrated that it actually refutes the second law? 
The answer to the first question is that we do not know. It is 
impossible to say what would have happened if the kinetic theory had 
not been introduced into the debate. It is my guess, however, that in 
that case the Brownian particle would have been regarded as an 
oddity - in much the same way as some of the late Professor 
Ehrenhaft's astounding effects were regarded as an oddity, and that it 
would not have been given the decisive position it assumed in 
contemporary theory. The answer to the second question is simply ­
No. Consider what the discovery of an inconsistency between the 
phenomenon of Brownian motion and the second law would have 
required. It would have required: (a) measurement of the exact 
motion of the particle in order to ascertain the change in its kinetic 
energy plus the energy spent on overcoming the resistance of the 
-uid; and (b) precise measurements of temperature and heat transfer 
1D the surrounding medium in order to establish that any loss 

28 
AGAINST METHOD 
occurring there was indeed compensated by the increase in the 
energy of the moving particle and the work done against the fluid. 
Such measurements are beyond experimental possibilities; 4 neither 
the heat transfer nor the path of the particle can be measured with the 
desired precision. Hence a 'direct' refutation of the second law that 
considers only the phenomenological theory and the 'facts' of the 
Brownian motion is impossible. It is impossible because of the 
structure of the world in which we live and because of the laws that 
are valid in this world. And as is well known, the actual refutation 
was brought about in a very different manner. It was brought about 
via the kinetic theory and Einstein's utilization of it in his calculation 
of the statistical properties of Brownian motion. In the course of 
this procedure, the phenomenological theory (T') was incorporated 
into the wider context of statistical physics (T) in such a manner 
that the consistency condition was violated, and it was only then that 
crucial experiments were staged (investigations of Svedberg and 
Perrin).5 
4. For details cf. R. Fiinh, Zs. Physik, Vol. 81, 1933, pp. 143fT. 
5. For these investigations (whose philosophical background derives from 
Boltzmann) cf. A. Einstein, brvesligalions on 1he Theory oflhe Brownian Molion, ed. R. 
Fiinh, New York, 1956, which contains all the relevant papers by Einstein and an ex­
haustive bibliography by R. Fiinh. For the experimental work of J. Perrin, see Die 
A lome, Leipzig, 1920. For the relation between the phenomenological theory and the 
kinetic theory of von Smoluchowski, see 'Experimentell nachweisbare, der iiblichen 
Thennodynamik widersprechende Molekularphanomene', Physikalische Zs., Vol. 8, 
1912, p. 1069, as well as the brief note by K.R. Popper, 'Irreversibility, or, Entropy 
since 1905', Brilish Journal for lhe Philosophy of Science, Vol. 8, 1957, p. 151, which 
summarizes the essential arguments. Despite Einstein's epoch-making discoveries 
and von Smoluchowski's splendid presentation of their consequences (Oeuvres de 
Marie Smoluchowski, Cracow, 1927, Vol. 2, pp. 226fT, 316fT, 462fT and 530ft), the 
present situation in thennodynamics is extremely unclear, especially in view of the 
continued presence of some very doubtful ideas of reduction. To be more specific, the 
attempt is frequently made to detennine the entropy balance of a complex slalislical 
process by reference to the (refuted) phenomenological Jaw after which fluctuations are 
inserted in an ad hoc fashion. For this cf. my note 'On the Possibility of a Perpetuum 
Mobile of the Second Kind',Mind, MallerandMelhod, Minneapolis, 1966, p. 409, and 
my paper 'In Defence of Classical Physics', S1udies in lhe His lory and Philosophy of 
Science, I, No. 2, 1970. 
It ought to be mentioned, incidentally, that in 1903, when Einstein started his work 
in thennodynamics, there existed empirical evidence suggesting that Brownian motion 
could not be a molecular phenomenon. See F.M. Exner, 'Notiz zu Browns 
Molekularbewegung',Ann. Phys., No. 2, 1900, p. 843. Exner claimed that the motion 
was of orders of magnitude beneath the value to be expected on the equipartition 
principle. Einstein (brvesligalions in lhe Theory oflhe Broumian Movemenl, pp. 63fT, esp. 
p. 6 7) gave the following theoretical explanation of the discrepancy: 'since an observer 
operating with definite means of observation in a definite manner can never perceive 
the actual path transversed in an arbitrarily small time, a certain mean velocity will 

T H R E E  
29 
It seems to me that this example is typical of the relation between 
fairly general theories, or points of view, and the 'facts'. Both the 
relevance and the refuting character of decisive facts can be 
established only with the help of other theories which, though 
factually adequate,6 are not in agreement with the view to be tested. 
This being the case, the invention and articulation of alternatives may 
have to precede the production of refuting facts. Empiricism, at least 
in some of its more sophisticated versions, demands that the 
empirical content of whatever knowledge we possess be increased as 
much as possible. Hence the invention of alternatives to the view at the 
centre of discussion constitutes an essential part of the empirical method. 
Conversely the fact that the consistency condition eliminates 
alternatives now shows it to be in disagreement not only with 
scientific practice but with empiricism as well. By excluding valuable 
tests it decreases the empirical content of the theories that are 
permitted to remain (and these, as I have indicated above, will usually 
be the theories which were there first); and it especially decreases the 
number of those facts that could show their limitations. This is how 
empiricists (such as Newton, or some proponents of what has been 
called the orthodox interpretation of quantum mechanics) who 
defend the consistency condition, being unaware of the complex 
nature of scientific knowledge (and, for that matter, of any form of 
knowledge) are voiding their favourite theories of empirical content 
and thus turning them into what they most despise, viz. metaphysical 
doctrines.7 
John Stuart Mill has given a fascinating account of the gradual 
transformation of revolutionary ideas into obstacles to thought. 
When a new view is proposed it faces a hostile audience and excellent 
reasons are needed to gain for it an even moderately fair hearing. The 
reasons are produced, but they are often disregarded or laughed out 
of court, and unhappiness is the fate of the bold inventors. But new 
generations, being interested in new things, become curious; they 
consider the reasons, pursue them further and groups of researchers 
initiate detailed studies. The studies may lead to surprising successes 
(they also raise lots of difficulties). Now nothing succeeds like 
always appear to him as an instantaneous velocity. But it is clear that the velocity 
Ǧscenained thus corresponds to no objective property of the motion under 
Investigation.' Cf. also Mary Jo Nye, Molecular Reality, London, 1972, pp. 98fT. 
6. The condition offactual adequacy will be removed in Chapter 5. 
7. The most dramatic confirmation of the onhodox view which made its empirical 
nature obvious came by way of Bell's theorem. But Bell was on the side of Einstein, not 
of Bohr, whom he regarded as an 'obscurantist'. Cf. Jeremy Bernstein, Quantum 
Profiles, Princeton, 1991, pp. 3fT (for Bell's background) and p. 84 (for 'obscurantist'). 

30 
AGAINST METHOD 
success, even if it is success surrounded by difficulties. The theory 
becomes acceptable as a topic for discussion; it is presented at 
meetings and large conferences. The diehards of the status quo feel 
an obligation to study one paper or another, to make a few grumbling 
comments, and perhaps to join in its exploration. There comes then a 
moment when the theory is no longer an esoteric discussion topic for 
advanced seminars and conferences, but enters the public domain. 
There are introductory texts, popularizations; examination questions 
start dealing with problems to be solved in its terms. Scientists from 
distant fields and philosophers, trying to show off, drop a hint here 
and there, and this often quite uninformed desire to be on the right 
side is taken as a further sign of the importance of the theory. 
Unfortunately, this increase in importance is not accompanied by 
better understanding; the very opposite is the case. Problematic 
aspects which were originally introduced with the help of carefully 
constructed arguments now become basic principles; doubtful points 
tum into slogans; debates with opponents become standardized and 
also quite unrealistic, for the opponents, having to express 
themselves in terms which presuppose what they contest, seem to 
raise quibbles, or to misuse words. Alternatives are still employed but 
they no longer contain realistic counter-proposals; they only serve as 
a background for the splendour of the new theory. Thus we do have 
success - but it is the success of a manoeuvre carried out in a void, 
overcoming difficulties that were set up in advance for easy solution. 
An empirical theory such as quantum mechanics or a pseudo­
empirical practice such as modem scientific medicine with its 
materialistic background can of course point to numerous achieve­
ments but any view and any practice that has been around for some 
time has achievements. The question is whose achievements are 
better or more important and this question cannot be answered for 
there are no realistic alternatives to provide a point of comparison. A 
wonderful invention has turned into a fossil. 
There exist numerous historical examples of the process I have 
just described and various authors have commented on it. The most 
important recent author is Professor Thomas Kuhn. In his Structure 
of Scientific Revolutions, 8 he distinguishes between science and pre­
science and, within science, between revolutions and normal science. 
Pre-science, according to him, is pluralistic throughout and 
therefore in danger of concentrating on opinions rather than on 
things (Bacon made a similar point). The two components of mature 
8. Chicago, 1962. 

T H R E E  
31 
science perfectly agree with the two stages mentioned above except 
that Kuhn doubts that science or, for that matter, any activity that 
claims to produce factual knowledge can do without a nonnal 
component. Fossils, he seems to say, are needed to give substance to 
the debates that occur in the revolutionary component - but he adds 
that the latter cannot advance without alternatives. Two earlier 
authors are Mill and Niels Bohr. Mill gives a clear and compelling 
description of the transition from the early stage of a new view to its 
orthodoxy. Debates and reasoning, he writes, are features 
belonging to periods of transition, when old notions and feelings have 
been unsettled and no new doctrines have yet succeeded to their 
ascendancy. At such times people of any mental activity, having given 
up their old beliefs, and not feeling quite sure that those they still 
retain can stand unmodified listen eagerly to new opinions. But this 
state of things is necessarily transitory: some particular body of 
doctrine in time raUies the majority round it, organizes social 
institutions and modes of action conformably to itself, education 
impresses this new creed upon the new generation without the mental 
processes that have led to it and by degrees it acquires the very same 
power of compression, so long exercised by the creeds of which it had 
taken place.9 
An account of the alternatives replaced, of the process of 
replacement, of the arguments used in its course, of the strength of 
the old views and the weaknesses of the new, not a 'systematic 
account' but a historical account of each stage of knowledge, can alleviate 
these drawbacks and increase the rationality of one's theoretical 
commitments. Bohr's presentation of new discoveries has precisely 
this pattern; it contains preliminary summaries surveying the past, 
moves on to the 'present state of knowledge' and ends up by making 
general suggestions for the future. 10 
Mill's views and Bohr's procedure are not only an expression of 
their liberal attitude; they also reflect their conviction that a pluralism 
of ideas and fonns of life is an essential part of any rational inquiry 
concerning the nature of things. Or, to speak more generally: 
Unanimity of opinion may be fitting for a rigid church, for the frightened or 
greedy viaims of some (ancient, or modern) myth, or for the weak and 
9. 'Autobiography', quoted from Essential Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. M. 
Lerner, New York, 1965, p. 1 19; my emphasis. 
10. For a more detailed account cf. my Philosophical Papers, Vol. I, Chapter 16, 
section 6. 

32 
AGAINST METHOD 
willing followers of some tyrant. Variety of opinion is necessary for objective 
knowledge. And a method that encourages variety is also the only method 
that is compatible with a humanitarian outlook. (To the extent to which 
the consistency condition delimits variety, it contains a theological 
element which lies, of course, in the worship of 'facts' so 
characteristic of nearly all empiricism. 1 1) 
I I  . .  It is interesting to see that the platitudes that directed the Protestants to the 
Bible are often almost identical with the platitudes which direct empiricists and other 
fundamentalists to their foundation, viz. experience. Thus in his Nuvum Organum 
Bacon demands that all preconceived notions (aphorism 36), opinions (aphorisms 
42ft), even words (aphorisms 59, 121 ), 'be adjured and renounced with firm and 
solemn resolution, and the understanding must be completely freed and cleared of 
them, so that the access to the kingdom of man, which is founded on the sciences, may 
resemble that to the kingdom of heaven, where no admission is conceded, except to 
children' (aphorism 68). In both cases 'disputation' (which is the consideration of 
alternatives) is criticized, in both cases we are invited to dispense with it, and in both 
cases we are promised an 'immediate perception', here, of God, and there of Nature. 
For the theoretical background of this similarity cf. my essay 'Classical Empiricism', in 
R.E. Butts (ed.), The Methodological HeritageofNwton, Oxford and Toronto, 1970. For 
the strong connections between Puritanism and modem science see R.T. Jones, 
Ancients and Moderns, California, 1965, Chapters 5-7. A thorough examination of the 
factors that influenced the rise of modem empiricism in England is found in R.K. 
Menon, Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth Century England, New York, 1970 
(book version of the 1938 article). 

4 
There is no idea, however ancient and absurd, that is not capable of 
impruving our knowledge. The whole history of thought is absorbed into 
science and is used for impruving every single theory. Nor is political 
interference rejeaed. It may be needed to uvercome the chauvinism of science 
that resists alternatives to the status quo. 
This finishes the discussion of part one of counterinduction dealing 
with the invention and elaboration of hypotheses inconsistent 
with a point of view that is highly confirmed and generally accepted. 
The result was that a thorough examination of such a point of 
view may involve incompatible alternatives so that the (Newtonian) 
advice to postpone alternatives until after the first difficulty has arisen 
means putting the cart before the horse. A scientist who is inter­
ested in maximal empirical content, and who wants to understand 
as many aspects of his theory as possible, will adopt a plural­
istic methodology, he will compare theories with other theories 
rather than with 'experience', 'data', or 'facts', and he will try to 
improve rather than discard the views that appear to lose in the 
competition.1 For the alternatives, which he needs to keep the 
contest going, may be taken from the past as well. As a matter of fact, 
they may be taken from wherever one is able to find them -
from ancient myths and modem prejudices; from the lucubrations 
of experts and from the fantasies of cranks. The whole history 
of a subject is utilized in the attempt to improve its most recent 
and most 'advanced' stage. The separation between the history 
of a science, its philosophy and the science itself dissolves into thin 
I .  It is, therefore, imponant that the alternatives be set against each other and not 
be isolated or emasculated by some form of 'demythologization'. Unlike Tillich, 
BǧItmann and their followers, we should regard the world-views of the Bible, the 
G!lgamesh epic, the Iliad, the Edda, as fully fledged alternative cosmologies which can be 
used to modifY, and even to replace, the 'scientific' cosmologies of a given period. 
33 

34 
AGAINST METHOD 
air and so does the separation between science and non-science.2 
This position, which is a natural consequence of the arguments 
presented above, is frequently attacked - not by counter-arguments, 
which would be easy to answer, but by rhetorical questions. 'If any 
metaphysics goes,' writes Dr Hesse in her review of an earlier essay 
of mine, 3 'then the question arises why we do not go back and exploit 
2. An account and a truly humanitarian defence of this position can be found inJ.S. 
Mill's On Liberty. Popper's philosophy, which some people would like to lay on us as the 
one and only humanitarian rationalism in existence today, is but a pale reflection of Mill. 
It is specialized, formalistic and elitist, and devoid of the concern for individual 
happiness that is such a characteristic feature of Mill. We can understand its 
peculiarities when we consider (a) the background oflogical positivism, which plays an 
important role in the Logic of Scientific Discovery, (b) the unrelenting puritanism of its 
author (and of most of his followers), and when we remember the influence of Harriet 
Taylor on Mill's life and on his philosophy. There is no Harriet Taylor in Popper's life. 
The foregoing arguments should also have made it clear that I regard proliferation not 
just as an 'external catalyst' of progress, as Lakatos suggests in his essays ('History of 
Science and Its Rational Reconstructions', Boston Studies, Vol. 8, p. 98; 'Popper on 
Demarcation and Induction', MS, 1970, p. 21), but as an essential part ofit. Ever since 
'Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism' (Minnesota Studies, Vol. 3, Minneapolis, 
1962), and especially in ' How to Be a Good Empiricist' (Delaware Studies, Vol. 2, 1963), I 
have argued that alternatives increase the empirical content of the views that happen to 
stand in the centre of attention and are, therefore, 'necessary parts' of the falsifYing 
process (Lakatos, 'History', fn. 27, describing his own position). In 'Reply to Criticism' 
(Boston Studies, Vol. 2, 1965) I pointed out that 'the principle of proliferation not only 
recommends invention of nw alternatives, it also prevents the elimination of older 
theories which have been refuted. The reason is that such theories contribute to the 
content of their victorious rivals' (p. 224). This agrees with Lakatos' observationofl971 
that 'alternatives are not merely catalysts, which can later be removed in the rational 
reconstruction' ('History', fn. 27), except that Lakatos attributes the psychologistic view 
to me and my actual views to himself. Considering the argument in the text, it is clear that 
the increasing separation of the history, the philosophy of science and of science itselfis a 
disadvantage and should be tenninated in the interest of all these three disciplines. 
Otherwise we shall get tons of minute, precise, but utterly barren results. 
3. Mary Hesse, Ratio, No. 9, 1967, p. 93; cf. B.F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and 
Dignity, New York, 1971, p. 5: 'No modem physicist would tum to Aristode for help.' 
This is neither true, nor would it be an advantage if it were true. Aristotelian ideas 
influenced research long after they had allegedly been removed by early modem 
astronomy and physics - any history of 17th- or 18th-century science wil show that 
(example: John Heilbronn's marvellous Elearicity in the 17th and 18th Centun·es, 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1979). They resurfaced in biology, in the thermodynamics 
of open systems and even in mathematics. Aristode's theory oflocomotion (which has 
the consequence that a moving object has no precise length and that an object having a 
precise location must be at rest) was more advanced than the Galilean view and 
showed that ideas which in our time emerged from empirical research can be obtained 
by a careful analysis of the problems of the continuum (details on this point in Chapter 
8 of my Farwell to Reason, London, 1987). Here as elsewhere the propagandists of a 
naive scientism give themselves the air of presenting arguments when all they do is 
spread unexamined and ill-conceived rumours. 

FOUR 
35 
the objective criticism of modern science available in Aristotelianism, 
or indeed in Voodoo?' - and she insinuates that a criticism of this kind 
would be altogether laughable. Her insinuation, unfortunately, 
assumes a great deal of ignorance in her readers. Progress was often 
achieved by a 'criticism from the past', of precisely the kind that is 
now dismissed by her. After Aristotle and Ptolemy, the idea that the 
earth moves - that strange, ancient, and 'entirely ridiculous','* 
Pythagorean view -was thrown on the rubbish heap of history, only 
to be revived by Copernicus and to be forged by him into a weapon for 
the defeat of its defeaters. The Hermetic writings played an 
important Qart in this revival, which is still not sufficiently 
understood, 5 and they were studied with care by the great Newton 
himself. 6 Such developments are not surprising. No idea is ever 
examined in all its ramifications and no view is ever given all the 
chances it deserves. Theories are abandoned and superseded by 
more fashionable accounts long before they have had an opportunity 
to show their virtues. Besides, ancient doctrines and 'primitive' 
myths appear strange and nonsensical only because the information 
they contain is either not known, or is distorted by philologists or 
anthropologists unfamiliar with the simplest physical, medical or 
astronomical knowledge. 7 Voodoo, Dr Hesse's piece de resistance, is a 
4. Ptolemy, Syntaxis, quoted after the translation of Manitius, Des Claudius 
Ptolemaeus Handbuch derAstrrmomie, Vol. I, Leipzig, 1963, p. 18. 
5. For a positive evaluation of the role of the hermetic writings during the 
Renaissance cf. F. Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition, London, 1963, 
and the literature given there. For a criticism of her position cf. the articles by Mary 
Hesse and Edward Rosen in Vol. 5 of the Minnesota Studies for the Philosophy of Science, 
ed. Roger Stuewer, Minnesota, 1970; R.S. Westman andj.E. McGuire, Hermeticism 
and the Scientific Revolution, Los Angeles, Clark Memorial Library, 1977, as well as 
Brian Vickers, Journal of Modern History, 51, 1979. 
6. Cf.J.M. Keynes, 'Newton the Man', in Essays and Sketches in Biography, New 
York, 1956, and, in much greater detail, McGuire and Rattansi, 'Newton and the 
"Pipes of Pan" ', Notes and Records of the Royal Society, Vol. 21, No. 2, 1966, pp. 108tT. 
For more detailed accounts cf. Frank Manuel, The Religion of Isaac NeJlJton, Oxford, 
1974, R.S. Westfall's monumental biography, Never at Rest, Cambridge, 1980, with 
literature, as well as Chapters x and xi of R. Popkin, The Third Force in 
Seventeenth-Century Thought, Leiden and New York, 1992. 
7. For the scientific content of some myths cf. C. de Santillana, The Origin of 
Scientific Thought, New York, 1961, especially the Prologue. 'We can see then', writes 
de Santillana, 'how so many myths, fantastic and arbitrary in semblance, of which the 
Greek tale of the Argonauts is a late offspring, may provide a terminology of image 
rotifs, a kind of code which is beginning to be broken. It was meant to allow those who 
new (a) to determine unequivocally the position of given planets in respect to the 
,rth, t̳ the firmament, and to one another; (b) to present what knowledge there was of 
e fabnc of the world in the form of tales about 'how the world began'. There are two 
reasons why this code was not discovered earlier. One is the firm conviction of 

36 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
case in point. Nobody knows it, everybody uses it as a paradigm of 
backwardness and confusion. And yet Voodoo has a firm though still 
not sufficiently understood material basis, and a study of its 
manifestations can be used to enrich, and perhaps even to revise, our 
knowledge of physiology. 8 
An even more interesting example is the revival of traditional 
medicine in Communist China. We start with a familiar develop­
ment:9 a great country with great traditions is subjected to Western 
domination and is exploited in the customary way. A new generation 
recognizes or thinks it recognizes the material and intellectual 
superiority of the West and traces it back to science. Science is 
imported, taught, and pushes aside all traditional elements. Scientific 
chauvinism triumphs: 'What is compatible with science should live, 
what is not compatible with science, should die' .10 'Science' in this 
context means not just a specific method, but all the results the 
method has so far produced. Things incompatible with the results 
must be eliminated. Old style doctors, for example, must either be 
historians of science that science did not start before Greece and that scientific results 
can only be obtained with the scientific method as it is practised today (and as it was 
foreshadowed by Greek scientists). The other reason is the astronomical, geological, 
etc., ignorance of most Assyriologists, Aegyptologists, Old Testament scholars, and so 
on: the apparent primitivism of many myths is just the reflection of the primitive 
astronomical, biological, etc., etc., knowledge of their collectors and translators. Since 
the discoveries of Hawkins, Marshack, Seidenberg, van der Waerden (Geometry and 
Algebra in Ancient Civilizations, New York, 1983) and others we have to admit the 
existence of an international palaeolithic astronomy that gave rise to schools, 
observatories, scientific traditions and most interesting theories. These theories, 
which were expressed in sociological, not in mathematical, terms, have left their traces 
in sagas, myths, legends and may be reconstructed in a twofold way, by goingfoTJlJard 
into the present from the material remains of Stone Age astronomy such as marked 
stones, stone observatories, etc., and by going back into the past from the literary 
remains which we find in sagas, legends, myths. An example of the first method is A. 
Marshack, The Roots of Civilization, New York, 1972. An example of the second is de 
Santillana-von Dechend, Hamlet's Mill, Boston, 1969. 
8. Cf. Chapter 9 of Levi-Strauss, Struaural Anthropology, New York, 196 7. For 
the physiological basis ofVoodoo cf. C.R. Richter, 'The Phenomenon ofUnexplained 
Sudden Death', in Gantt (ed.), The Physiological Basis of Psychiatry, as well as W.H. 
Cannon, Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage, New York, 1915, and 
' "Voodoo" Death', inAmericanAnthropologist, n.s., xliv, 1942. The detailed biological 
and meteorological observations made by so-called 'primitives' are reported in 
Levi-Strauss, The Savage Mind, London, 1966. 
9. R.C. Croizier, Traditional Medicine in Modern China, Cambridge, Mass., 1968. 
The author gives a very interesting and fair account of developments with numerous 
quotations from newspapers, books, pamphlets, but is often inhibited by his respect for 
20th-century science. 
10. Chou Shao, 1 933, as quoted in Croizier, op. cit., p. 109. Cf. also D.W.Y. 
Kwok, Scientism in Chinese Thought, New Haven, 1965. 

F O U R  
37 
removed from medical practice, or they must be re-educated. Herbal 
medicine, acupuncture, moxibustion and the underlying philosophy 
are a thing of the past, no longer to be taken seriously. This was the 
attitude up to about 1954 when the condemnation of bourgeois 
elements in the Ministry of Health started a campaign for the revival 
of traditional medicine. No doubt the campaign was politically 
inspired. It contained at least two elements, viz. (1) the identification 
ofWestem science with bourgeois science and (2) the refusal of the 
party to exempt science from political supervision 1 1  and to grant 
experts special privileges. But it provided the counterforce that was 
needed to overcome the scientific chauvinism of the time and to make 
a plurality (actually a duality) of views possible. (This is an important 
point. It often happens that parts of science become hardened and 
intolerant so that proliferation must be enforced from the outside, 
and by political means. Of course, success cannot be guaranteed -
see the Lysenko affair. But this does not remove the need for non­
scientific controls on science.) 
Now this politically enforced dualism has led to most interesting 
and puzzling discoveries both in China and in the West and to the 
realization that there are effects and means of diagnosis which 
modem medicine cannot repeat and for which it has no explanation. 
It revealed sizeable lacunae in Western medicine. Nor can one expect 
that the customary scientific approach will eventually find an answer. 
In the case of herbal medicine the approach consists of two steps. 12 
First, the herbal concoction is analysed into its chemical constituents. 
Then the specific effects of each constituent are determined and the 
total effect on a particular organ explained on their basis. This 
neglects the possibility that the herb, taken in its entirety, changes the 
state of the whole organism and that it is this new state of the whole 
organism rather than a specific part of the herbal concoction, a 'magic 
bullet', as it were, that cures the diseased organ. Here as elsewhere 
knowledge is obtained from a multiplicity of views rather than from 
the determined application of a preferred ideology. And we realize 
that proliferation may have to be enforced by non-scientific agencies 
whose power is sufficient to overcome the most powerful scientific 
institutions. Examples are the Church, the State, a political party, 
public discontent, or money: the best single entity to get a modem 
scientist away from what his 'scientific conscience' tells him to pursue 
is still the dollar (or, more recently, the Swiss franc). 
I I. For the tensions between 'red' and 'expert' cf. F. Schurmann, Ideology and 
Organization in Communist China, Berkeley, 1966. 
12. Cf. M.B. Krieg, Green Medicine, New York, 1964. 

38 
AGAINST METHOD 
Pluralism of theories and metaphysical views is not only important 
for methodology, it is also an essential part of a humanitarian outlook. 
Progressive educators have always tried to develop the individuality 
of their pupils and to bring to fruition the particular, and sometimes 
quite unique, talents and beliefs of a child. Such an education, 
however, has very often seemed to be a futile exercise in day­
dreaming. For is it not necessary to prepare the young for life as it 
actually is? Does this not mean that they must learn one particular set of 
views to the exclusion of everything else? And, if a trace of their 
imagination is still to remain, will it not find its proper application in 
the arts or in a thin domain of dreams that has but little to do with the 
world we live in? Will this procedure not finally lead to a split between 
a hated reality and welcome fantasies, science and the arts, careful 
description and unrestrained self-expression? The argument for 
proliferation shows that this need not happen. It is possible to retain 
what one might call the freedom of artistic creation and to use it to the 
full, not just as a road of escape but as a necessary means for 
discovering and perhaps even changing the features of the world we 
live in. This coincidence of the part (individual man) with the whole 
(the world we live in), of the purely subjective and arbitrary with the 
objective and lawful, is one of the most important arguments in 
favour of a pluralistic methodology. For details the reader is advised 
to consult Mill's magnificent essay On Liberty.13 
13. Cf. my account of this essay in Vol. 1, Chapter 8 and Vol. 2, Chapter 4 of my 
Philosophical Papers. Cf. also Appendix I of the present essay. 

5 
No theory ever agrees with all the facts in its domain, yet it is not always the 
theory that is to blame. Facts are constituted by older ideologies, and a clash 
between facts and theories may be proof of progress. It is also a .first step in our 
attempt to find the principles implicit in familiar obseroational notions. 
Considering now the invention, elaboration and the use of theories 
which are inconsistent, not just with other theories, but even with 
experiments, facts, observations, we may start by pointing out that no 
single theory ever agrees with all the known facts in its domain. And the 
trouble is not created by rumours, or by the result of sloppy 
procedure. It is created by experiments and measurements of the 
highest precision and reliability. 
It will be convenient, at this place, to distinguish two different 
kinds of disagreement between theory and fact: numerical disagree­
ment, and qualitative failures. 
The first case is quite familiar: a theory makes a certain numerical 
prediction and the value that is actually obtained differs from the 
prediction made by more than the margin of error. Precision 
instruments are usually involved here. Numerical disagreements 
abound in science. They give rise to an 'ocean of anomalies' that 
surrounds every single theory. 1 
Thus the Copernican view at the time of Galileo was inconsistent 
with facts so plain and obvious that Galileo had to call it 'surely 
false'. 2 'There is no limit to my astonishment,' he writes in a 
I .  For the 'ocean' and various ways of dealing with it, cf. my 'Reply to Criticism', 
Boston Studies, Vol. 2, 1965, pp. 224ff. 
2. Galileo Galilei, The Assayer, quoted in S. Drake and C.D. O'Malley (eds), The 
Contruvmyon the Comets of/618, London, 1960, p. 185. The 'surely false' refers to the 
condemnation by Church authorities. But as will be explained in the course of the book 
and especially in Chapter 13, the condemnation was based in part on the 'philosophical 
̱bsurdity' of the idea of a moving earth, i.e. on its empirical failures and its theoretical 
m̲dequacy. See also the next quotation and footnote. 'As to the system of Ptolemy', 
Writes Galileo on this point (184), 'neither Tycho, nor other astronomers, nor even 
39 

40 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
later work,3 'when I reflect that Aristarchus and Copernicus were 
able to make reason so conquer sense that, in defiance of the latter, 
the former became mistress of their belief.' Newton's theory of 
gravitation was beset, from the very beginning, by difficulties serious 
enough to provide material for refutation. 4 Even quite recently and in 
the non-relativistic domain it could be said that there 'exist numerous 
discrepancies between observation and theory'.5 Bohr's atomic 
model was introduced, and retained, in the face of precise and 
unshakeable contrary evidence.6 The special theory of relativity was 
retained despite Kaufmann's unambiguous results of 1 906, and 
despite D.C. Miller's experiment.7 The general theory of relativity, 
Copernicus could clearly refute it, inasmuch as a most important argument taken from 
the movement of Mars and Venus always stood in their way.' The 'most important 
argument' and Galileo's resolution are discussed in Chapters 9 and 10. 
3. Galileo Galilei, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, Berkeley, 
1953, p. 328. 
4. According to Newton the 'mutual actions of comets and planets upon one another' 
give rise to 'some inconsiderable irregularities . . .  which will be apt to increase, till the 
system wants a reformation', Optic/a, New York, 1952, p. 402. What Newton means is 
that gravitation disturbs the planets in a way that is likely to blow the planetary system 
apan. Babylonian data as used by Ptolemy show that the planetary system has remained 
stable for a long time. Newton concluded that it was being periodically 'reformed' by 
divine interventions: God acts as a stabilizing force in the planetary system (and in the 
world as a whole, which is constantly losing motion through processes such as inelastic 
collisions). One of the 'irregularities' considered by Newton, the great inequality of 
Jupiter and Saturn (Principia, trans!. Motte, ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1934, p. 397) was 
shown by Laplace to be a periodic disturbance with a large period. Then Poincare found 
that the series developments customary in the calculations often diverged after they had 
shown some convergence while Bruhns discovered that no quantitative methods other 
than series expansions could resolve then-body problem. This was the end of the purely 
quantitative period in celestial mechanics (details in J. Moser, Annals of Mathematical 
Studies, Vol. 77, 1973, Princeton). See also M. Ryabov ,An Elementary Survey ofCelestial 
Mechanics, New York, 1961, for a survey and quantitative results of various methods of 
calculation. The qualitative approach is briefly described on pp. 126f. Thus ittook more 
than two hundred years before one of the many difficulties of this rather successful 
theory was finally resolved. 
5. Brower-Clemence, Method of Celestial Mechanics, New York, 1 961. Also R.H. 
Dicke, 'Remarks on the Observational Basis of General Relativity', in H.Y. Chiu and 
W.F. HolTman (eds), Gravitation and Relativity, New York, 1964, pp. 1-1 6. For a more 
detailed discussion of some of the difficulties of classical celestial mechanics, cf. 
J. Chazy, La Theorie de Ia relativitiet laMechanique celeste, Vol. 1, Chapters 4 and 5, Paris, 
1 928. 
6. Cf. Max Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, New York, 
1 966, section 22. For an analysis cf. section 3c/2 of Lakatos, 'Falsification and the 
Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes', in Lakatos-Musgrave (eds), 
Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Cambridge, 1970. 
7. W. Kaufmann, 'Uber die Konstitution des Elektrons',Ann. Phys., No. 1 9, 1906, 
p. 487. Kaufmann stated his conclusion quite unambiguously, and in italics: 'The 

FIVE 
41 
though surprisingly successful in a series of occasionally rather 
dramatic tests, 8 had a rough time in areas of celestial mechanics 
different from the advance of the perihelion of Mercury.9 In the 
sixties the arguments and observations of Dicke and others seemed 
to endanger even this prediction. The problem is still unresolved.10 
results of the measurements are not compatible 11ith the fundamental assumption of Lorentz 
and Einstein.' Lorentz's reaction: ' . . .  it seems very likely that we shall have to 
relinquish this idea altogether' (Throry of Electrons, second edition, p. 2 13). Ehrenfest: 
'Kaufmann demonstrates that Lorentz's deformable electron is ruled out by the 
measurements' ('Zur Stabilitatsfrage bei den Bucherer-Langevin Elektronen', Phys. 
Zs., Vol. 7, 1906, p. 302). Poincare's reluctance to accept the 'new mechanics' of 
Lorentz can be explained, at least in part, by the outcome of Kaufmann's experiment. 
Cf. Science and Method, New York 1960, Book III, Chapter 2, section v, where 
Kaufmann's experiment is discussed, the conclusion being that the 'principle of 
relativity . . .  cannot have the fundamental importance one was inclined to ascribe to 
it'. Cf. also St Goldberg, 'Poincare's Silence and Einstein's Relativity', British Journal 
for the History of Science, Vol. 5, 1970, pp. 73ff, and the literature given there. Einstein 
alone regarded the results as 'improbable because their basic assumptions, from which 
the mass of the moving electron is deduced, are not suggested by theoretical systems 
which encompass wider complexes of phenomena' lJahrbuch der Radioaktivilit und 
Elektrizitiit, Vol. 4, 1907, p. 349). Miller's work was studied by Lorentz for many years, 
but he could not find the trouble. ltwas only in 1955, twenty-fiveyearsafter Miller had 
finished his experiments, that a satisfactory account of Miller's results was found. Cf. 
R.S. Shankland, 'Conversations with Einstein', Am. Joum. Phys., Vol. 31, 1 963, pp. 
47-57, especially p. 51, as well as footnotes 19 and 34; cf. also the inconclusive 
discussion at the 'Conference on the Michelson-Morley Experiment', Astrophysical 
Journal, Vol. 68, 1928, pp. 341 ff. 
Kaufmann's experiment was analysed by Max Planck and found to be not decisive: 
what had stopped Ehren fest, Poincare and Lorentz did not stop Planck. Why? My con­
jecture is that Planck's firm belief in an objective reality and his assumption that 
Einstein's theory was about such a reality made him a little more critical. Details in 
Chapter 6 ofEiie Zahar, Einstein's Revolution, La Salle, Ill., 1989. 
8. Such as the test of the effects of gravity upon light that was carried out in 1919 by 
Eddington and Crommelin and evaluated by Eddington. For a colourful description of 
the event and its impact, cf. C.M. Will, Was Einstein Right?, New York, 1986, pp. 75ff. 
9. Chazy, op. cit., p. 230. 
10. Repeating considerations by Newcomb (reported, for example, in Chazy, op. 
cit., pp. 20411), Dicke pointed out that an oblateness of the sun would add classical 
terms to Mercury's motion and reduce the excess (compared with Newton's theory) 
advance of its perihelion. Measurements by Dicke and Goldenberg then found a 
difference of 52 km between the equatorial and polar diameter of the sun and a 
corresponding reduction of three seconds of arc for Mercury - a sizeable deviation 
from the relativistic value. This led to a considerable controversy concerning the 
accuracy of the Dicke-Goldenberg experiment and to an increase in the number of 
non-Einsteinian theories of gravitation. Technical details in C.M. Will, Throry and 
xperiment in Gravitational Physics, Cambridge, 1981, pp. 176ff, a popular survey 
Including later developments in Was Einstein Right?, Chapter 5. Note how a new theory 
(Einstein's theory of gravitation) which is theoretically plausible and well confirmed 
can be endangered by exploiting its 'refuted' predecessor and carrying out appropriate 
experiments. Cf. also R.H. Dicke, op. cit. 

42 
AGAINST METHOD 
On the other hand there exist numerous new tests, both inside the 
planetary system and outside of it1 1  that provide confirmations of a 
precision unheard of only twenty years ago and unimagined by 
Einstein. In most of these cases we are dealing with quantitative 
problems which can be resolved by discovering a better set of numbers 
but which do not force us to make qualitative adjustments. 1 2  
I I .  Tests outside the planetary system (cosmology, black holes, pulsars) are 
needed to examine alternatives that agree with Einsteinian relativity inside the solar 
system. There now exists a considerable number of such alternatives and special steps 
have been taken to classify them and to elucidate their similarities and differences. Cf. 
the introduction to C.M. Will, op. cit. 
I 2. The situation just described shows how silly it would be to approach science 
from a naive-falsificationist perspective. Yet this is precisely what some philosophers 
have been trying to do. Thus Herbert Feigl (Minnesota Studies, Vol. 5, I 971, p. 7) and 
Karl Popper (Objective Knowledge, p. 78) have tried to tum Einstein into a naive 
falsificationist. Feigl writes: 'If Einstein relied on "beauty", "harmony", "symmetry", 
"elegance" in constructing . . .  his general theory ofrelativity, it must nevertheless be 
remembered that he also said (in a lecture in Prague in I 920 - I was present then as a 
very young student): "If the observations of the red shift in the spectra of massive stars 
don't come out quantitatively in accordance with the principles of general relativity, 
then my theory will be dust and ashes".' Popper writes: 'Einstein . . .  said that if the red 
shift effect . . .  was not observed in the case of white dwarfs, his theory of general 
relativity would be refuted.' 
Popper gives no source for his story, and he most likely has it from Feigl. But Feigl's 
story and Popper's repetition conflict with the numerous occasions where Einstein 
emphasizes the 'reason of the matter' ('die Vemunft der Sache') over and above 
'verification oflittle effects' and this not only in casual remarks during a lecture, but in 
writing. Cf. the quotation in footnote 7 above, which deals with difficulties of the 
special theory of relativity and precedes the talk at which F eigl was present. Cf. also the 
letters to M. Besso and K. Seelig as quoted in G. Holton, 'Influences on Einstein's 
Early Work', Organon, No. 3, 1966, p. 242, and K. Seelig, Alben Einstein, Zurich, 
1960, p. 271 . In 1952 Born wrote to Einstein (Born-Einstein Lettm, New York, 1971, 
p. 190, dealing with Freundlich's analysis of the bending of light near the sun and the 
red shift): 'It really looks as if your formula is not quite correct. It looks even worse in 
the case of the red shift [the crucial case referred to by Feigl and Popper); this is much 
smaller than the theoretical value towards the centre of the sun's disk, and much larger 
at the edges . . . .  Could this be a hint of non-linearity?' Einstein Oetter of1 2  May 1952, 
op. cit., p. 192) replied. 'Freundlich . . .  does not move me in the slightest. Even if the 
deflection oflight, the perihelia) movement or line shift were unknown, the gravitation 
equations would still be convincing because they avoid the inertial system (the 
phantom which affects everything but is not itself affected). It is really strange that 
human beings are normally deaf to the strongest arguments while they are alwăs inclined to 
uverestimale measuring accuracies' (my italics). How is this conflict (between Feigl's 
testimony and Einstein's writings) to be explained? It cannot be explained by a change in 
Einstein's attitude. His disrespectful attitude towards observation and experiment was 
there from the very beginning, as we have seen. It might be explained either by a 
mistake on Feigl's part, or else as another instance of Einstein's 'opportunism' - cf. 
text to footnote 6 of the Introduction. 
On the last page (p. 91) of his Ober die Spezielle und allgemeine Relativitatstheorie, 

FIVE 
43 
The second case, the case of qualitative failures, is less familiar, 
but of much greater interest. In this case a theory is inconsistent 
not with a recondite fact, that can be unearthed with the help of 
complex equipment and is known to experts only, but with 
circumstances which are easily noticed and which are familiar to 
everyone. 
The first and, to my mind, the most important example of an 
inconsistency of this kind is Parmenides' theory of the unchanging 
and homogeneous One. This theory illustrates a desire that has 
propelled the Western sciences from their inception up to the present 
time - the desire to find a unity behind the many events that surround 
us. Today the unity sought is a theory rich enough to produce all the 
accepted facts and laws; at the time of Parmenides the unity sought 
was a substance. Thales had proposed water, 13 Heraclitus fire, 
Anaximander a substance which he called the apeiron and which 
could produce all four elements without being identical with a single 
one of them. Parmenides gave what seems to be an obvious and 
rather trivial answer: the substance that underlies everything that is is 
Being. But this trivial answer had surprising consequences. For 
example, we can assert that (first principle) Being is and that (second 
principle) Not Being is not. Now consider change and assume it to be 
fundamental. Then change can only go from Being to Not Being. But 
according to the second principle Not Being is not, which means that 
there is no fundamental change. Next consider difference and 
assume it to be fundamental. Then the difference can only be 
between Being and Not Being. But (second principle) Not Being is 
not and therefore there exist no differences in Being - it is a single, 
unchanging, continuous block. Parmenides knew of course that 
people, himself included, perceive and accept change and difference; 
but as his argument had shown that the perceived processes could 
not be fundamental he had to regard them as merely apparent, or 
deceptive. This is indeed what he said - thus anticipating al those 
scientists who contrasted the 'real' world of science with the everyday 
world of qualities and emotions, declared the latter to be 'mere 
appearance' and tried to base their arguments on 'objective' 
experiments and mathematics exclusively. He also anticipated a 
Brunswick, 1922, Einstein writes: 'If the red shift of the spectral lines caused by the 
gravitational potential did not exist, then the general theory of relativity would be 
untenable.' Does this conflict with Einstein's cavalier attitude towards observation as 
described above? It does not. The passage speaks of the red shift not of observatiom of it. 
13. The following account is highly speculative. Details in Vols I and 2 ofW.K.C. 
Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, Cambridge, 1962 and 1 965, as well as in 
Chapters 1, 2 and 3 of my Farewell to Reason. 

44 
AGAI NST M E T H O D  
popular interpretation of the theory of relativity which sees all events 
and transitions as already prearranged in a four-dimensional 
continuum, the only change beinf the (deceptive) journey of 
consciousness along its world line.1 Be that as it may, he was the 
first to propose a conservation law (Being is), to draw a boundary line 
between reality and appearance (and thus to create what later 
thinkers called a 'theory of knowledge') and to give a more 
satisfactory foundation for continuity than did 19th- and 20th­
century mathematicians who had to invoke 'intuition'. Using 
Parmenides' arguments Aristotle constructed a theory of space and 
motion that anticipated some very deep-lying properties of quantum 
mechanics and evaded the difficulties of the more customary (and 
less sophisticated) interpretation of a continuum as consisting of 
indivisible elements.15 Parmenides' theory clashes with most 
modem methodological principles-but this is no reason to disregard 
it. 
A more specific example of a theory with qualitative defects is 
Newton's theory of colours. According to this theory, light consists of 
rays of different refrangibility which can be separated, reunited, 
refracted, but which are never changed in their internal constitution, 
and which have a very small lateral extension in space. Considering 
that the surface of mirrors is much rougher than the lateral extension 
of the rays, the ray theory is found to be inconsistent with the 
existence of mirror images (as is admitted by Newton himselO: if light 
consists of rays, then a mirror should behave like a rough surface, i.e. 
it should look to us like a wall. Newton retained his theory, 
eliminating the difficulty with the help of an ad hoc hypothesis: 'the 
reflection of a ray is effected, not by a single point of the reflecting 
body, but by some power of the body which is evenly diffused all over 
its surface'. 16 
I 4. A vivid description of the Parmenidean flavour of the theory of relativity is 
given by H. Weyl, Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science, Princeton, I 949, p. 
I 1 6. Einstein himself wrote: 'For us who are convinced physicists the distinction 
between past, present and future has no other meaning than that of an illusion, though 
a tenacious one.' Correspondence avec Michele Beso, Paris, I 979, p. 3 I 2. Cf. also p. 292. 
In a word: the events of a human life are 'illusions, though tenacious ones'. 
I 5. For Aristode cf. the essay quoted in Chapter 4, footnote 3. Modem attempts to 
get continuity out of collections of indivisible elements are reponed in A. Gruenbaum, 
'A Consistent Conception of the Extended Linear Continuum as an Aggregate of 
Unextended Elements', Philosophy of Science, No. I 9, I 952, pp. 283fT. Cf. also W. 
Salmon (ed.), Zeno 's Paradoxes, New York, I 970. 
1 6. Sir Isaac Newton, Optics, Book 2, pan 3, proposition 8, New York, 1 952, p. 
266. For a discussion of this aspect of Newton's method cf. my essay, 'Classical 
Empiricism', Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2, Chapter 2. 

FIVE 
45 
In Newton's case the qualitative discrepancy between theory and 
fact was removed by an ad hoc hypothesis. In other cases not even this 
very flimsy manoeuvre is used: one retains the theory and tries to forget 
its shortcomings. An example is the attitude towards Kepler's rule 
according to which an object viewed through a lens is perceived at the 
point at which the rays travelling from the lens towards the eye 
intersect. 1 7  
... 
_ ... 
sen object 
- -
.. - "feat 
The rule implies that an object situated at the focus will be seen 
infinitely far away. 
'But on the contrary,' writes Barrow, Newton's teacher and 
predecessor at Cambridge, commenting on this prediction, 18 'we 
are assured by experience that [a point situated close to the focus] 
appears variously distant, according to the different situations of the 
eye . . . .  And it does almost never seem further off than it would be if 
it were beheld with the naked eye; but, on the contrary, it does 
sometimes appear much nearer . . . .  All which does seem repugnant 
to our principles.' 'But for me,' Barrow continues, 'neither this nor 
any other difficulty shall have so great an influence on me, as to make 
me renounce that which I know to be manifestly agreeable to reason.' 
seen object 
in infinity 
real 
object 
at focus 
17. Johannes Kepler, Ad Vitellionem Para/ipomena, Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte 
Werke, Vol. 2, Munich, 1939, p. 72. For a detailed discussion of Kepler's rule and its 
influence see Vasco Ronchi, Optics: The Science of Vision, New York, 1957, Chapters 
43fT. Cf. also Chapters 9-1 1 below. 
18. Lectiones XVI// Cantabrigiae in Scholio publicis habitae in quibus Opticorum 
Phenomenon genuinae Rationes irrvestigantur ac exponentur, London, 1669, p. 1 25. The 
passage is used by Berkeley in his attack on the traditional, 'objectivistic' optics (An Essay 
Towards aNew Theory ofVision, Works, Vol. I, ed. Frazer, London, 1901, pp. 137ft). 

46 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
Barrow mentions the qualitative difficulties, adding that he will not 
abandon the theory. This is not the usual procedure. The usual 
procedure is to forget the difficulties, never to talk about them, and to 
proceed as if the theory were without fault. This attitude is very 
common today. 
Thus the classical electrodynamics of Maxwell and Lorentz 
implies that the motion of a free particle is self-accelerated. 
Considering the self-energy of the electron one obtains divergent 
expressions for point-charges while charges of finite extension can be 
made to agree with relativity onl+ by adding untestable stresses and 
pressures inside the electron. 1 
The problem reappears in the 
quantum theory, though it is here partially covered up by 
'renormalization'. This procedure consists in crossing out the results 
of certain calculations and replacing them by a description of what is 
actually observed. Thus one admits, implicitly, that the theory is in 
trouble while formulating it in a manner suggesting that a new 
principle has been discovered. 20 Small wonder when philosophic­
ally unsophisticated authors get the impression that 'all evidence 
points with merciless definiteness in the . . .  direction . . .  [that] all 
the processes involving . . . unknown interactions conform to the 
fundamental quantum law.'21 
A striking example of qualitative failure is the status of classical 
mechanics and electrodynamics after Boltzmann's equipartition 
theorem. According to this theorem energy is equally distributed 
over all degrees of freedom of a (mechanical or electrodynamic) 
system. Both atoms (which had to be elastic to rebound from the walls 
of a container and from each other) and the electromagnetic field had 
infinitely many degrees of freedom which meant that solids and the 
19. Cf. W. Heitler, The Quanlum Theory ofRadialion, Oxford, 1954, p. 3 1 .  
20. Renormalization has in the meantime become the basis of quantum field 
theory and has led to predictions of surprising accuracy (report with literature in A. 
Pais, Inward Bound, Oxford, 1986). This shows that a point of view which, looked at 
from afar, appears to be hopelessly wrong may contain excellent ingredients and that 
its excellence may remain unrevealed to those guided by strict methodological rules. 
Always remember that my examples do not criticize science; they criticize those who 
want to subject it to their simpleminded rules by showing the disasters such rules 
would create. Each of the examples of footnotes 3-17 can be used as a basis for case 
studies of the kind to be carried out in Chapters 6--12 (Galileo and the Copernican 
Revolution). This shows that the case ofGalileo is not 'an exception characterizing the 
beginning of the so-called scientific revolution' (G. Radnitzky, 'Theorienpluralismus 
Theorienmonismus', in Diemer Meisenheim (ed.), Der Melhodm- und Theorien­
pluralismus in dm Wissenschaflen, 1971, p. 164) but is typical of scientific change at all 
times. 
21. Rosenfeld in Observalion and lnlerprelalion, London, 1957, p. 44. 

FIVE 
47 
electromagnetic fields should have acted as insatiable sinks of energy. 
Yet '[a]s so often in the history of science, the conflict between simple 
and generally known facts and current theoretical ideas was 
recognized only slowly'. 22 
Another example of modem physics is quite instructive, for it 
might have led to an entirely different development of our knowledge 
concerning the microcosm. Ehrenfest proved a theorem according to 
which the classical electron theory of Lorentz taken in conjunction 
with the equipartition theorem excludes induced magnetism. 23 The 
reasoning is exceedingly simple; according to the equipartition 
theorem, the probability of a given motion is proportional to exp 
(- U/Rn, where Uis the energy of the motion. Now the rate of work 
of an electron moving in a constant magnetic field B is, according to 
Lorentz, W= Q(E + VxB). V, where Q is the charge of the moving 
particle, V its velocity and E the electric field. This magnitude 
reduces to QEV, which means that the energy and, therefore, the 
probability remains unaffected by a magnetic field. (Given the proper 
context, this result strongly supports the ideas and experimental 
findings of the late Felix Ehrenhaft.) 
Occasionally it is impossible to survey all the interesting 
consequences, and thus to discover the absurd results of a theory. 
This may be due to a deficiency in the existing mathematical 
methods; it may also be due to the ignorance of those who defend the 
theory. Under such circumstances, the most common procedure is to 
use an older theory up to a certain point (which is often quite 
arbitrary) and to add the new theory for calculating refinements. 
Seen from a methodological point of view the procedure is a veritable 
nightmare. Let us explain it using the relativistic calculation of the 
path of Mercury as an example. 
The perihelion of Mercury moves along at a rate of about 5600'' 
per century. Of this value, 5026" are geometric, having to do with the 
movement of the reference system, while 531" are dynamical, due to 
perturbations in the solar system. Of these perturbations al but the 
22. K. Gottfried, V.F. Weisskopf, Concepts ofParticle Physics, Vol. I ,  Oxford and 
New York, 1984, p. 6. 
23. The difficulty was realized by Bohr in his doctoral thesis, cf. Niels Bohr, 
Colleaed Works, Vol. I, Amsterdam, 1 972, pp. 1 58, 381. He pointed out that the 
velocity changes due to the changes in the external field would equalize after the field 
was established, so that no magnetic effects could arise. Cf. also Heilbron and T.S. 
Kuhn, 'The Genesis of the Bohr Atom', Historical Studies in tire Physical Sciences, No. I ,  
1969, p. 221. The argument i n  the text is taken from Tire Feynman Leaures, Vol. 2, 
California and London, 1 965, Chapter 34.6. For a somewhat clearer account cf. R. 
Becker, Theorie der Elektrizitiit, Leipzig, 1949, p. 132. 

48 
AGAINST METHOD 
famous 43" are accounted for by classical mechanics. This is how the 
situation is usually explained. 
The explanation shows that the premise from which we derive the 
43" is not the general theory of relativity plus suitable initial 
conditions. The premise contains classical physics in addition to 
whatever relativistic assumptions are being made. Furthermore, the 
relativistic calculation, the so-called 'Schwarzschild solution', does 
not deal with the planetary system as it exists in the real world (i.e. our 
own asymmetric galaxy); it deals with the entirely fictional case of a 
central symmetrical universe containing a singularity in the middle 
and nothing else. What are the reasons for employing such an odd 
conjunction of premises? 
The reason, according to the customary reply, is that we are 
dealing with approximations. The formulae of classical physics do 
not appear because relativity is incomplete. Nor is the centrally 
symmetric case used because relativity does not offer anything better. 
Both schemata flow from the general theory under the special 
circumstances realized in our planetary system pruvided we omit 
magnitudes too small to be considered. Hence, we are using the 
theory of relativity throughout, and we are using it in an adequate 
manner. 
Now in the present case, making the required approximations 
would mean calculating the full n-body problem relativistically 
(including long-term resonances between different planetary orbits), 
omitting magnitudes smaller than the precision of observation 
reached, and showing that the theory thus curtailed coincides with 
classical celestial mechanics as corrected by Schwarzschild. This 
procedure has not been used by anyone simply because the 
relativistic n-body problem has as yet withstood solution. When the 
argument started, there were not even approximate solutions for 
important problems such as, for example, the problem of stability 
(one of the first great stumbling blocks for Newton's theory). The 
classical part of the explanans, therefore, did not occur just for 
convenience, it was absolutely necessary. And the approximations made 
were not a result of relativistic calculations, they were introduced in 
order to make relativity fit the case. One may properly call them ad hoc 
approximations. 24 
24. Today the so-called parametrized post-Newtonian formalism satisfies most of 
the desiderata outlined in the text (details in C.M. Will, Theory). My point is that this 
was a later achievement whose absence did not prevent scientists from arguing, and 
arguing well, about the new ideas. Theories are not only used as premises for 
derivations; they are even more frequently used as a general background for novel 

FIVE 
49 
Ad hoc approximations abound in modem mathematical physics. 
They play a very important part in the quantum theory of fields and 
they are an essential ingredient of the correspondence principle. At 
the moment we are not concerned with the reasons for this fact, we 
are only concerned with its consequences: ad hoc approximations 
conceal, and even eliminate, qualitative difficulties. They create a 
false impression of the excellence of our science. It follows that a 
philosopher who wants to study the adequacy of science as a picture 
of the world, or who wants to build up a realistic scientific 
methodology, must look at modem science with special care. In most 
cases modem science is more opaque, and more deceptive, than its 
1 6th- and 1 7th-century ancestors have ever been. 
As a final example of qualitative difficulties I mention again the 
heliocentric theory at the time of Galileo. I shall soon have occasion 
to show that this theory was inadequate both qualitatively and 
quantitatively, and that it was also philosophically absurd. 
To sum up this brief and very incomplete list: wherever we look, 
whenever we have a little patience and select our evidence in an 
unprejudiced manner, we find that theories fail adequately to 
reproduce certain quantitative results, and that they are qualitatively 
incompetent to a surprising degree. Science gives us theories of great 
beauty and sophistication. Modem science has developed mathe­
matical structures which exceed anything that has existed so far in 
coherence generality and empirical success. But in order to achieve 
this miracle all the existing troubles had to be pushed into the relation 
between theory and fact, 25 and had to be concealed, by ad hoc 
hypotheses, ad hoc approximations and other procedures. 
guesses whose formal relation to the basic assumptions is difficult to ascertain. 'I must 
. . .  confess', writes Descanes in his Discourse on Method (Library of Liberal Arts, 1965, 
p. 52), 'that the power of nature is so ample and so vast, and these principles [the 
theoretical principles he had developed for his mechanical universe) so simple and so 
general, that I almost never notice any particular effect such that I do not see right away 
that it can [be made to conform to these principles) in many different ways; and my 
greatest difficulty is usually to discover in which of these ways the effect is derived.' 
Modem theoretical physicists find themselves in exacdy the same situation. 
25. Von Neumann's work in quantum mechanics is an especially instructive 
example of this procedure. In order to arrive at a satisfactory proof of the expansion 
theorem in Hilben Space, von Neumann replaced the quasi-intuitive notions ofDirac 
(and Bohr) by more complex notions of his own. The theoretical relations between the 
new notions are accessible to a more rigorous treatment than the theoretical relations 
between the notions that preceded them ('more rigorous' from the point of view of von 
Neumann and his followers). It is different with their relation to experimental 
procedures. No measuring instruments can be specified for the great majority of 
observables (Wigner, American Journal of Physics, Vol. 31, 1963, p. 14), and where 
specification is possible it becomes necessary to modify well-known and unrefuted 

so 
AGAINST METHOD 
This being the case, what shall we make of the methodological 
demand that a theory must be judged by experience and must be 
rejected if it contradicts accepted basic statements? What attitude 
shall we adopt towards the various theories of confirmation and 
corroboration, which all rest on the assumption that theories can be 
made to agree with the known facts, and which use the amount of 
agreement reached as a principle of evaluation? This demand, these 
theories, are now all seen to be quite useless. They are as useless as a 
medicine that heals a patient only if he is bacteria-free. In practice 
they are never obeyed by anyone. Methodologists may point to the 
importance of falsifications - but they blithely use falsified theories, 
they may sermonize how important it is to consider all the relevant 
evidence, and never mention those big and drastic facts which show 
that the theories they admire and accept may be as badly off as the 
older theories which they reject. In praaice they slavishly repeat the 
most recent pronouncements of the top dogs in physics, though 
in doing so they must violate some very basic rules of their trade. 
Is it J'ossible to proceed in a more reasonable manner? Let us 
see!2 
According to Hume, theories cannot be derived from facts. The 
demand to admit only those theories which follow from facts leaves 
us without any theory. Hence, science as we know it can exist only if 
we drop the demand and revise our methodology. 
According to our present results, hardly any theory is consistent with 
the facts. The demand to admit only those theories which are 
consistent with the available and accepted facts again leaves us 
without any theory. (I repeat: without any theory, for there is not a 
single theory that is not in some trouble or other.) Hence, a science as 
we know it can exist only if we drop this demand also and again revise 
our methodology, now admitting counterinduction in addition to 
admitting unsupported hypotheses. The right method must not contain 
laws in an arbitrary way or else to admit that some quite ordinary problems of quantum 
mechanics, such as the scattering problem, do not have a solution (J .M. Cook, Journal 
of Mathematical Physics, Vol. 36, 1957). Thus the theory becomes a veritable monster of 
rigour and precision while its relation to experience is more obscure than ever. It is 
interesting to see that similar developments occur in 'primitive thought'. 'The most 
striking features of Nupe sand divining', writes S.F. Nader in Nupe Religion, 1954, 
p. 63, 'is the contrast between its pretentious theoretical framework and its primitive 
and slipshod application in practice.' It does not need a science to produce 
Neumannian nightmares. 
26. The existence of qualitative difficulties, or 'pockets of resistance' (St 
Augustine, Contra Julianum, V, xiv, 51 - Migne, Vol. 44), was used by the Church 
fathers to defuse objections which the science of their time had raised against parts of 
the Christian faith, such as the doctrine of the corporeal resurrection. 

FIVE 
51 
any rules that make us choose between theories on the basis of 
falsification. Rather, its rules must enable us to choose between 
theories which we have already tested and which are falsified. 
To proceed further. Not only are facts and theories in constant 
disharmony, they are never as nearly separated as everyone makes 
them out to be. Methodological rules speak of 'theories', 'observa­
tions' and 'experimental results' as if these were well-defined objects 
whose properties are easy to evaluate and which are understood in 
the same way by all scientists. 
However, the material which a scientist actually has at his disposal, 
his laws, his experimental results, his mathematical techniques, his 
epistemological prejudices, his attitude towards the absurd con­
sequences of the theories which he accepts, is indetenninate in many 
ways, ambiguous, and never fully separated from the historical back­
ground. It is contaminated by principles which he does not know 
and which, if known, would be extremely hard to test. Questionable 
views on cognition, such as the view that our senses, used in normal 
circumstances, give reliable information about the world, may invade 
the observation language itself, constituting the observational terms 
as well as the distinction between veridical and illusory appearance. 
As a result, observation languages may become tied to older layers of 
speculation which affect, in this roundabout fashion, even the most 
progressive methodology. (Example: the absolute space-time frame 
of classical physics which was codified and consecrated by Kant.) 
The sensory impression, however simple, contains a component that 
expresses the physiological reaction of the perceiving organism and 
has no objective correlate. This 'subjective' component often merges 
with the rest, and forms an unstructured whole which must be 
subdivided from the outside with the help of counterinductive 
procedures. (An example is the appearance of a fixed star to the 
naked eye, which contains the effects of irradiation diffraction, 
diffusion, restricted by the lateral inhibition of adjacent elements of 
the retina and is further modified in the brain.) Finally, there are the 
auxiliary premises which are needed for the derivation of testable 
conclusions, and which occasionally form entire auxiliary sciences. 
Consider the case of the Copernican hypothesis, whose invention, 
defence, and partial vindication runs counter to almost every 
methodological rule one might care to think of today. The auxiliary 
Þciences here contained laws describing the properties and the 
mfluence of the terrestrial atmosphere (meteorology); optical laws 
dealing with the structure of the eye and of telescopes, and with the 
behaviour of light; and dynamical laws describing motion in moving 
systems. Most importantly, however, the auxiliary sciences contained 

52 
AGAINST METHOD 
a theory of cognition that postulated a certain simple relation 
between perceptions and physical objects. Not all auxiliary dis­
ciplines were available in explicit form. Many of them merged with 
the observation language, and led to the situation described at the 
beginning of the preceding paragraph. 
Consideration of all these circumstances, of observation terms, 
sensory core, auxiliary sciences, background speculation, suggest 
that a theory may be inconsistent with the evidence, not because it is 
incorrect, but because the evidence is contaminated. The theory is 
threatened because the evidence either contains unanalysed sensa­
tions which only partly correspond to external processes, or because 
it is presented in terms of antiquated views, or because it is evaluated 
with the help of backward auxiliary subjects. The Copernican theory 
was in trouble for all these reasons. 
It is this historico-physiological character of the evidence, the fact that it 
does not merely describe some objective state of affairs but also 
expresses subjeaive, mythical, and long-forgotten views concerning this 
state of affairs, that forces us to take a fresh look at methodology. It 
shows that it would be extremely imprudent to let the evidence judge 
our theories directly and without any further ado. A straightforward 
and unqualified judgement of theories by 'facts' is bound to eliminate 
ideas simply because they tin not fit into the framework of some older 
cosmology. Taking experimental results and observations for granted 
and putting the burden of proof on the theory means taking the 
observational ideology for granted without having ever examined it. 
(Note that the experimental results are supposed to have been 
obtained with the greatest possible care. Hence 'taking observations, 
etc., for granted' means 'taking them for granted after the most 
careful examination of their reliability': for even the most careful 
examination of an observation statement does not interfere with the 
concepts in which it is expressed, or with the structure of the sensory 
image.) 
Now - how can we possibly examine something we use all the time 
and presuppose in every statement? How can we criticize the terms in 
which we habitually express our observations? Let us see! 
The first step in our criticism of commonly-used concepts is to 
create a measure of criticism, something with which these concepts 
can be compared. Of course, we shall later want to know a little more 
about the measuring-stick itself; for example, we shall want to know 
whether it is better than, or perhaps not as good as, the material 
examined. But in order for this examination to start there must be a 
measuring-stick in the first place. Therefore, the first step in our 
criticism of customary concepts and customary reactions is to step 

FIVE 
53 
outside the circle and either to invent a new conceptual system, for 
example a new theory, that clashes with the 
most carefully 
established observational results and confounds the most plausible 
theoretical principles, or to import such a system from outside 
science, from religion, from mythology, from the ideas of incom­
petents, 27 or the ramblings of madmen. This step is, again, 
counterinductive. Counterinduction is thus both a fact - science 
could not exist without it - and a legitimate and much needed muve in 
the game of science. 
27. It is interesting to see that Philolaos, who disregarded the evidence of the 
senses and set the earth in motion, was 'an unmathematical confusionist. It was the 
confusionist who found the courage lacking in many great observers and 
mathematically well-informed scientists to disregard the immediate evidence of the 
seïses in order to remain in agreement with principles he firmly believed.' K. von 
Fntz, Grundprobleme der Geschichte der an liken Wissenschaji, Berlin-New York, 1971, p. 
165. 'It is therefore not surprising that the next step on this path was due to a man 
wose writings, as far as we know them, show him as a talented stylist and popularizer 
Wl
_
th occasionally interesting ideas of his own rather than as a profound thinker or exact 
;;c•entist,' ibid., p. 184. Confusionists and superficial intellectuals muve ahead while the 
d
ðeep' thinkers descend into the darker regions of the status quo or, to express it in a 
lfferent way, they remain stuck in the mud. 

6 
As an example of such an attempt I examine the tower argument which the 
Aristotelians used to refute the motion of the earth. The argument involves 
natural interpretations - ideas so closely connected with obseroations that 
it needs a special efort to realize their existence and to determine their 
content. Galileo identifies the natural interpretations which are inconsistent 
with Copernicus and replaces them by others. 
It seems to me that [Galileo) suffers greatly from continual 
digressions, and that he does not stop to explain all that is relevant at 
each point; which shows that he has not examined them in order, and 
that he has merely sought reasons for particular effects, without 
having considered . . .  first causes . . .  ; and thus that he has built 
without a foundation. 
DESCARTES 
I am (indeed) unwilling to compress philosophical doctrines into the 
most narrow kind of space and to adopt that stiff, concise and 
graceless manner, that manner bare of any adornment which pure 
geomenicians call their own, not uttering a single word that has not 
been given to them by strict necessity . . .  I do not regard it as a fault to 
talk about many diverse things, even in those treatises which have only 
a single topic . . .  for I believe that what gives grandeur, nobility, and 
excellence to our deeds and inventions does not lie in what is 
necessary - though the absence of it would be a great mistake - but in 
what is not . . . .  
GAL! LEO 
But where common sense believes that rationalizing sophists have the 
intention of shaking the very fundament of the commonweal, then it 
would seem to be not only reasonable, but permissible, and even 
54 

s r x  
praiseworthy to aid the good cause with sham reasons rather than 
leaving the advantage to the . . .  opponent. 
KANT1 
55 
As a concrete illustration and as a basis for further discussion, I shall 
now briefly describe the manner in which Galileo defused an 
important argument against the idea of the motion of the earth. 
I say 'defused', and not 'refuted', because we are dealing with a 
changing conceptual system as well as with certain attempts at 
concealment. 
According to the argument which convinced Tycho, and which is 
used against the motion of the earth in Galileo's own Trattato della 
sfera, observation shows that 'heavy bodies . . .  falling down from on 
high, go by a straight and vertical line to the surface of the earth. This 
is considered an irrefutable argument for the earth being motionless. 
For, ifit made the diurnal rotation, a tower from whose top a rock was 
let fall, being carried by the whirling of the earth, would travel many 
hundreds of yards to the east in the time the rock would consume in 
its fall, and the rock ought to strike the earth that distance away from 
the base of the tower. '2 
I .  The three quotations are: Descartes, letter to Mersenne of 1 1  October 1638, 
Oeuvres, I I , p. 380. Galileo, letter to Leopold of Toscana of 1640, usually quoted 
under the title Sui Candor Lunare, Opere, Favoro, VIU, p. 491 .  For a detailed discussion 
of Galileo's style and its connection with his natural philosophy cf. L. Olschki, Galileo 
und seine Zeit: Geschichte der neusprachlichen wissenschafilichen Literatur, Vol. HI, Halle, 
1927, reprinted Vaduz, 1965. The letter to Leopold is quoted and discussed on 
pp. 455fT. 
Descartes' letter is discussed by Salmon as an example of the issue between 
rationalism and empiricism in 'The Foundations of Scientific Inference', Mind and 
Cosmos, ed. Colodny, Pittsburgh, 1966, p. 136. It should rather be regarded as an 
example of the issue between dogmatic methodologies and opportunistic methodolo­
gies, bearing in mind that empiricism can be as strict and unyielding as the most 
rigorous types of rationalism. 
The Kant quotation is from the Critique of Pure Reason, 8777, 8fT (the quotation was 
brought to my attention by Professor Stanley Rosen's work on Plato's Symposium). 
Kant continues: 'However, I would think that there is nothing that goes less well 
together with the intention of asserting a good cause than subterfuge, conceit, and 
deception. If one could take only this much for granted, then the banle of speculative 
reason . . .  would have been concluded long ago, or would soon come to an end. Thus 
the purity of a cause often stands in the inverse proportion to its truth . . .  .' One should 
als? note that Kant explains the rise of civilization on the basis of disingenuous moves 
Ùhtch 'have the function to raise mankind above its crude past', ibid., 776, 14f. Similar 
tdeas occur in his account of world history. 
2. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 1 26. 

56 
AGAINST METHOD 
In considering the argument, Galileo at once admits the 
correctness of the sensory content of the observation made, viz. that 
'heavy bodies . . .  falling from a height, go perpendicularly to the 
surface of the earth'.3 Considering an author (Chiaramonti) who 
sets out to convert Copernicus by repeatedly mentioning this fact, he 
says: 'I wish that this author would not put himself to such trouble 
trying to have us understand from our senses that this motion of 
falling bodies is simple straight motion and no other kind, nor get 
angry and complain because such a clear, obvious, and manifest thing 
should be called into question. For in this way he hints at believing 
that to those who say such motion is not straight at all, but rather 
circular, it seems they see the stone move visibly in an arc, since he 
calls upon their senses rather than their reason to clarifY the effect. 
This is not the case, Simplicio; for just as I . . .  have never seen nor 
ever expect to see, the rock fall any way but perpendicularly, just so 
do I believe that it appears to the eyes of everyone else. It is, therefore, 
better to put aside the appearance, on which we all agree, and to use 
the power of reason either to confirm its reality or to reveal its 
fallacy. '4 The correctness of the observation is not in question. What 
is in question is its 'reality' or 'fallacy'. What is meant by this 
expression? 
The question is answered by an example that occurs in Galileo's 
next paragraph, 'from which . . .  one may learn how easily anyone 
may be deceived by simple appearance, or let us say by the 
impressions of one's senses. This event is the appearance to those 
who travel along a street by night of being followed by the moon, with 
steps equal to theirs, when they see it go gliding along the eaves of the 
roofs. There it looks to them just as would a cat really running along 
the tiles and putting them behind it; an appearance which, if reason 
did not intervene, would only too obviously deceive the senses.' 
In this example, we are asked to start with a sensory impression and 
to consider a statement that is forcefully suggested by it. (The 
suggestion is so strong that it has led to entire systems ofbelief and to 
rituals, as becomes clear from a closer study of the lunar aspects of 
witchcraft and of other cosmological hypotheses.) Now 'reason 
intervenes'; the statement suggested by the impression is examined, 
and one considers other statements in its place. The nature of the 
impression is not changed a bit by this activity. (This is only 
approximately true; but we can omit for our present purpose the 
complications arising from an interaction of impression and 
3. ibid., p. 125. 
4. ibid., p. 256. 

S I X  
57 
proposition.) But it enters new observation statements and plays new, 
better or worse, parts in our knowledge. What are the reasons and the 
methods which regulate such an exchange? 
To start with, we must become clear about the nature of the total 
phenomenon: appearance plus statement. There are not two acts -
one, noticing a phenomenon; the other, expressing it with the help of 
the appropriate statement - but only one, viz. saying in a certain 
observational situation, 'the moon is following me', or, 'the stone is 
falling straight down'. We may, of course, abstractly subdivide this 
process into parts, and we may also try to create a situation where 
statement and phenomenon seem to be psychologically apart and 
waiting to be related. (This is rather difficult to achieve and is 
perhaps entirely impossible.) But under normal circumstances such a 
division does not occur; describing a familiar situation is, for the 
speaker, an event in which statement and phenomenon are firmly 
glued together. 
This unity is the result of a process ofleaming that starts in one's 
childhood. From our very early days we learn to react to situations 
with the appropriate responses, linguistic or otherwise. The teaching 
procedures both shape the 'appearance', or 'phenomenon', and 
establish a firm conneaion with words, so that finally the phenomena 
seem to speak for themselves without outside help or extraneous 
knowledge. They are what the associated statements assert them to 
be. The language they 'speak' is, of course, influenced by the beliefs 
of earlier generations which have been held for so long that they no 
longer appear as separate principles, but enter the terms of everyday 
discourse, and, after the prescribed training, seem to emerge from 
the things themselves. 
At this point we may want to compare, in our imagination and quite 
abstractly, the results of the teaching of different languages 
incorporating different ideologies. We may even want consciously to 
change some of these ideologies and adapt them to more 'modem' 
points of view. It is very difficult to say how this will alter our situation, 
unless we make the further assumption that the quality and structure 
of sensations (perceptions), or at least the quality and structure of 
those sensations which enter the body of science, is independent of 
their linguistic expression. I am very doubtful about even the 
approximate validity of this assumption, which can be refuted by 
simple examples, and I am sure that we are depriving ourselves of 
new and surprising discoveries as long as we remain within the limits 
defined by it. Yet, I shall for the moment, remain within these limits . 
. *aking the additional simplifying assumption, we can now 
d1snnguish between sensations and those 'mental operations which 

58 
AGAINST METHOD 
follow so closely upon the senses',5 and which are so firmly 
connected with their reactions that a separation is difficult to achieve. 
Considering the origin and the effect of such operations, I shall call 
them natural interpretations. 
In the history of thought, natural interpretations have been 
regarded either as a priori presuppositions of science, or else as 
prejudices which must be removed before any serious examination can 
begin. The first view is that of Kant, and, in a very different manner 
and on the basis of very different talents, that of some contemporary 
linguistic philosophers. The second view is due to Bacon (who had 
predecessors, however, such as the Greek sceptics). 
Galileo is one of those rare thinkers who wants neither forever to 
retain natural interpretations nor altogether to eliminate them. 
Wholesale judgements of this kind are quite alien to his way of 
thinking. He insists upon a critical discussion to decide which natural 
interpretations can be kept and which must be replaced. This is not 
always clear from his writings. Quite the contrary. The methods of 
reminiscence, to which he appeals so freely, are designed to create 
the impression that nothing has changed and that we continue 
expressing our observations in old and familiar ways. Yet his attitude 
is relatively easy to ascertain: natural interpretations are necessary. 
The senses alone, without the help of reason, cannot give us a true 
account of nature. What is needed for arriving at such a true account 
are 'the . . .  senses, accompanied by reasonini.6 Moreover, in the 
arguments dealing with the motion of the earth, it is this reasoning, it 
is the connotation of the observation terms and not the message of the 
senses or the appearance that causes trouble. 'It is, therefore, better 
to put aside the appearance, on which we all agree, and to use the 
power of reason either to confirm its reality or to reveal its fallacy.'7 
Confirming the reality or revealing the fallacy of appearances means, 
however, examining the validity of those natural interpretations 
which are so intimately connected with the appearances that we no 
longer regard them as separate assumptions. I now tum to the first 
natural interpretation implicit in the argument from falling stones. 
According to the Copernican view as presupposed in the tower 
argument the motion of a falling stone should be 'mixed straight­
and-circular'. 8 By the 'motion of the stone' is meant not its motion 
relative to some visible mark in the visual field of the observer, or its 
5. Francis Bacon, Nuvum Organum, Introduction. 
6. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 255, my italics. 
7. ibid., p. 256. 
8. ibid., p. 248. 

S I X  
59 
observed motion, but rather its motion in the solar system or in 
(absolute) space, i.e. its real motion. The familiar facts appealed to in 
the argument present a different kind of motion, a simple vertical 
motion. This refutes the Copernican hypothesis only if the concept 
of motion that occurs in the observation statement is the same as the 
concept of motion that occurs in the Copernican prediction. The 
observation statement 'the stone is falling straight down' must, 
therefore, refer to a movement in (absolute) space. It must refer to a 
real motion. 
Now, the force of an 'argument from observation' derives from the 
fact that the observation statements involved are firmly connected 
with appearances. There is no use appealing to observation if one 
does not know how to describe what one sees, or if one can offer one's 
description with hesitation only, as if one had just learned the 
language in which it is formulated. Producing an observation 
statement, then, consists of two very different psychological events: 
(1) a clear and unambiguous sensation and (2) a clear and 
unambiguous connection between this sensation and parts of a 
language. This is the way in which the sensation is made to speak. Do 
the sensations in the above argument speak the language of real 
motion? 
They speak the language of real motion in the context of 17th­
century everyday thought. At least, this is what Galileo tells us. He 
tells us that the everyday thinking of the time assumes the 'operative' 
character of all motion, or, to use well-known philosophical terms, it 
assumes a naive realism with respect to motion: except for occasional 
and unavoidable illusions, apparent motion is identical with real 
(absolute) motion. Of course, this distinction is not explicitly drawn. 
One does not first distinguish the apparent motion from the real 
motion and then connect the two by a correspondence rule. One 
rather describes, perceives, acts towards motion as if it were already 
the real thing. Nor does one proceed in this manner under all 
circumstances. It is admitted that objects may move which are not 
seen to move; and it is also admitted that certain motions are illusory 
(cf. the example of the moon mentioned earlier in this chapter). 
Apparent motion and real motion are not always identified. However, 
)ere are paradigmatic cases in which it is psychologically very difficult, 
tf not plainly impossible, to admit deception. It is from these 
paradigmatic cases, and not from the exceptions, that naive realism 
with respect to motion derives its strength. These are also the 
situations in which we first learn our kinematic vocabulary. From our 
very childhood we learn to react to them with concepts which have 
naive realism built right into them, and which inextricably connect 

60 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
movement and the appearance of movement. The motion of the 
stone in the tower argument, or the alleged motion of the earth, is 
such a paradigmatic case. How could one possibly be unaware of the 
swift motion of a large bulk of matter such as the earth is supposed to 
be! How could one possibly be unaware of the fact that the falling 
stone traces a vastly extended trajectory through space! From the 
point of view of 17th-century thought and language, the argument is, 
therefore, impeccable and quite forceful. However, notice how 
theories ('operative character' of all motion; essential correctness of 
sense reports) which are not formulated explicitly, enter the debate in 
the guise of observable events. We realize again that such events are 
Trojan horses which must be watched most carefully. How is one 
supposed to proceed in such a sticky situation? 
The argument from falling stones seems to refute the Copernican 
view. This may be due to an inherent disadvantage ofCopemicanism; 
but it may also be due to the presence of natural interpretations which 
are in need of improvement. The first task, then, is to discuver and to 
isolate these unexamined obstacles to progress. 
It was Bacon's belief that natural interpretations could be 
discovered by a method of analysis that peels them off, one after 
another, until the sensory core of every observation is laid bare. This 
method has serious drawbacks. First, natural interpretations of the 
kind considered by Bacon are not just added to a previously existing 
field of sensations. They are instrumental in constituting the field, as 
Bacon says himself. Eliminate all natural interpretations, and you 
also eliminate the ability to think and to perceive. Second, 
disregarding this fundamental function of natural interpretations, it 
should be clear that a person who faces a perceptual field without a 
single natural interpretation at his disposal would be completely 
disoriented, he could not even start the business of science. The fact 
that we do start, even after some Baconian analysis, therefore shows 
that the analysis has stopped prematurely. It has stopped at precisely 
those natural interpretations of which we are not aware and without 
which we cannot proceed. It follows that the intention to start from 
scratch, after a complete removal of all natural interpretations, is self­
defeating. 
Furthermore, it is not possible even partly to unravel the cluster of 
natural interpretations. At first sight the task would seem to be simple 
enough. One takes observation statements, one after the other, and 
analyses their content. However, concepts that are hidden in 
observation statements are not likely to reveal themselves in the more 
abstract parts of language. If they do, it will still be difficult to nail 
them down; concepts, just like percepts, are ambiguous and 

SIX 
61 
dependent on background. Moreover, the content of a concept is 
determined also by the way in which it is related to perception. Yet, 
how can this way be discovered without circularity? Perceptions must 
be identified, and the identifYing mechanism will contain some of the 
very same elements which govern the use of the concept to be 
investigated. We never penetrate this concept completely, for we 
always use part of it in the attempt to find its constituents. There is 
only one way to get out of this circle, and it consists in using an 
external measure of comparison, including new ways of relating concepts 
and percepts. Removed from the domain of natural discourse and 
from all those principles, habits, and attitudes which constitute its 
form oflife, such an external measure will look strange indeed. This, 
however, is not an argument against its use. On the contrary, such an 
impression of strangeness reveals that natural interpretations are at 
work, and is a first step towards their discovery. Let us explain this 
situation with the help of the tower example. 
The example is intended to show that the Copernican view is not in 
accordance with 'the facts'. Seen from the point of view of these 
'facts', the idea of the motion of the earth is outlandish, absurd, and 
obviously false, to mention only some of the expressions which were 
frequently used at the time, and which are still heard whenever 
professional squares confront a new and counter-factual theory. 
This makes us suspect that the Copernican view is an external 
measuring rod of precisely the kind described above. 
Let us therefore tum the argument around and use it as a detecting 
device that helps us to discover the natural interpretations which 
exclude the motion of the earth. Turning the argument around, we 
first assert the motion of the earth and then inquire what changes will 
remove the contradiction. Such an inquiry may take considerable 
time, and there is a good sense in which it is not finished even today. 
The contradiction may stay with us for decades or even centuries. 
Still, it must be upheld until we have finished our examination or else 
the examination, the attempt to discover the antediluvian com­
ponents of our knowledge, cannot even start. This, we have seen, is 
one of the reasons one can give for retaining, and, perhaps, even for 
nnventing, theories which are inconsistent with the facts. Ideological 
mgredients of our knowledge and, more especially, of our 
observations are discovered with the help of theories which are 
refuted by them. They are disc(!Vered counterinductive/y. 
Let me repeat what has been asserted so far. Theories are tested, 
and possibly refuted, by facts. Facts contain ideological components, 
older views which have vanished from sight or were perhaps never 
fonnulated in an explicit manner. Such components are highly 

62 
AGAINST METHOD 
suspicious. First, because of their age and obscure origin: we do not 
know why and how they were introduced; secondly, because their 
very nature protects them, and always has protected them, from 
critical examination. In the event of a contradiction between a new 
and interesting theory and a collection of firmly established facts, the 
best procedure, therefore, is not to abandon the theory but to use it to 
discover the hidden principles responsible for the contradiction. 
Counterinduction is an essential part of such a process of discovery. 
(Excellent historical example: the arguments against motion and 
atomicity of Parmenides and Zeno. Diogenes of Sinope, the Cynic, 
took the simple course that would be taken by many contemporary 
scientists and all contemporary philosophers: he refuted the 
arguments by rising and walking up and down. The opposite course, 
recommended here, has led to much more interesting results, as is 
witnessed by the history of the case. One should not be too hard on 
Diogenes, however, for it is also reported that he beat up a pupil who 
was content with his refutation, exclaiming that he had given reasons 
which the pupil should not accept without additional reasons of his 
own.'1 
Having discuvered a particular natural interpretation, how can we 
examine it and test it? Obviously, we cannot proceed in the usual way, 
i.e. derive predictions and compare them with 'results of observa­
tion'. These results are no longer available. The idea that the senses, 
employed under normal circumstances, produce correct reports of 
real events, for example reports of the real motion of physical bodies, 
has been removed from all observational statements. (Remember 
that this notion was found to be an essential part of the anti­
Copernican argument.) But without it our sensory reactions cease to 
be relevant for tests. This conclusion was generalized by some older 
rationalists, who decided to build their science on reason only and 
ascribed to observation a quite insignificant auxiliary function. 
Galileo does not adopt this procedure. 
If one natural interpretation causes trouble for an attractive view, 
and if its elimination removes the view from the domain of 
observation, then the only acceptable procedure is to use other 
interpretations and to see what happens. The interpretation which 
Galileo uses restores the senses to their position as instruments of 
exploration, but only with respea to the reality of relative motion. Motion 
'among things which share it in common' is 'non-operative', that is, 
'it remains insensible, imperceptible, and without any effect 
9. Hegel, Vorlesungen Uber die Geschichte der Philosophic, l, ed. C.L. Michele!, 
Berlin, 1840, p. 289. 

S I X  
63 
whatever' .10 Galileo's first step, in his joint examination of the 
Copernican doctrine and of a familiar but hidden natural interpreta­
tion, consists therefore in replacing the latter by a diferent interpretation. 
In other words, he introduces a new observation language. 
This is, of course, an entirely legitimate move. In general, the 
observation language which enters an argument has been in use for a 
long time and is quite familiar. Considering the structure of common 
idioms on the one hand, and of the Aristotelian philosophy on the 
other, neither this use nor this familiarity can be regarded as a test of 
the underlying principles. These principles, these natural interpreta­
tions, occur in every description. Extraordinary cases which might 
create difficulties are defused with the help of 'adjustor words', 1 1  
such as 'like' or 'analogous', which divert them so that the basic 
ontology remains unchallenged. A test is, however, urgently needed. 
It is especially needed in those cases where the principles seem to 
threaten a new theory. It is then quite reasonable to introduce 
alternative observation languages and to compare them both with the 
original idiom and with the theory under examination. Proceeding in 
10. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 171. Galileo's kinematic relativism is not consistent. In the 
passage quoted, he proposes the view ( 1) that shared motion has no efict ll1hatsoever. 
'Motion,' he says, 'in so far as it is and acts as motion, to that extent exists relatively to 
things that lack it; and among things which all share equally in any motion, it does not 
act and is as ifit did not exist' (p. 1 16); 'Whatever motion comes to be attributed to the 
earth must necessarily remain imperceptible . . .  so long as we look only at terrestrial 
objects' (p. 1 14); ' . . .  motion that is common to many moving things is idle and 
inconsequential to the relation of those movables among themselves . . .' (p. 1 16). On 
the other hand, (2) he also suggests that 'nothing . . .  maves in a straight line by nature. 
The motion of all celestial objects is in a circle; ships, coaches, horses, birds, all move 
in a circle around the earth; the motions of the parts of animals are all circular; in sum­
we are forced to assume that only gravia deorsum and levia sursum move apparendy in a 
straight line; but even that is not certain as long as it has not been proven that the earth 
is at rest' (p. 19). Now, if (2) is adopted, then the loose parts of systems moving in a 
straight line will tend to describe circular paths, thus contradicting (1). It is this 
inconsistency which has prompted me to split Galileo's argument into two steps, one 
dealing with the relativity of motion (only relative motion is noticed), the other dealing 
with inertial laws (and only inertial motion leaves the relation betllJeen the parts of a system 
unafocted- assuming, of course, that neighbouring inertial motions are approximately 
parallel). For the two steps of the argument, see the next chapter. One must also realize 
that accepting relativity of motion for inertial paths means giving up the impetus theory, 
Ùhie provides an (inner) cause for motions and therefore assumes an absolute space 
m which this cause becomes manifest. This Galileo seems to have done by now, for his 
argument for the existence of'boundless' or 'perpetual' motions which he oudines on 
pp. 1 47fT of the Dialogue appeals to motions which are neutral, i.e. neither natural nor 
forced, and which may therefore (?) be assumed to go on for ever. 
 1 .  J.L. Austin, Sense and Sensibilia, New York, 1964, p. 74. Adjustor words play 
an Important role in the Aristotelian philosophy. 

64 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
this way, we must make sure that the comparison is fair. That is, we 
must not criticize an idiom that is supposed to function as an 
observation language because it is not yet well known and is, 
therefore, less strongly connected with our sensory reactions and less 
plausible than is another, more 'common' idiom. Superficial 
criticisms of this kind, which have been elevated into an entire 
'philosophy', abound in discussions of the mind-body problem. 
Philosophers who want to introduce and to test new views thus find 
themselves faced not with arguments, which they could most likely 
answer, but with an impenetrable stone wall of well-entrenched 
reactions. This is not at all different from the attitude of people 
ignorant of foreign languages, who feel that a certain colour is 
much better described by 'red' than by 'rosso'. As opposed to such 
attempts at conversion by appeal to familiarity ('I know what pains 
are, and I also know, from introspection, that they have nothing 
whatever to do with material processes!'), we must emphasize that a 
comparative judgement of observation languages, e.g. materialistic 
observation languages, phenomenalistic observation languages, 
objective-idealistic observation languages, theological observation 
languages, etc., can start only when all of them are spoken equally 
fluently. 
Let us now continue with our analysis ofGalileo's reasoning. 

7 
The new natural interpretations constitute a new and highly abstract 
observation language. They are introduced and concealed so that one foils to 
notice the change that has taken place (method of anamnesis). They contain 
the idea of the relativity of all motion and the law of circular inertia. 
Galileo replaces one natural interpretation by a very different and as 
yet (1630) at least partly unnatural interpretation. How does he 
proceed? How does he manage to introduce absurd and counter­
inductive assertions such as the assertion that the earth moves, and yet 
get them a just and attentive hearing? One anticipates that arguments 
will not suffice - an interesting and highly important limitation of 
rationalism - and Galileo's utterances are indeed arguments in 
appearance only. For Galileo uses propaganda. He uses psychological 
tricks in addition to whatever intellectual reasons he has to offer. 
These tricks are very successful: they lead him to victory. But they 
obscure the new attitude towards experience that is in the making, 
and postpone for centuries the possibility of a reasonable philosophy. 
They obscure the fact that the experience on which Galileo wants to 
base the Copernican view is nothing but the result of his own fertile 
imagination, that it has been invented. They obscure this fact by 
insinuating that the new results which emerge are known and 
conceded by all, and need only be called to our attention to appear as 
the most obvious expression of the truth. 
Galileo 'reminds' us that there are situations in which the non­
operative character of shared motion is just as evident and as firmly 
believed as the idea of the operative character of all motion is in other 
òircumstances. (This latter idea is, therefore, not the only natural 
Interpretation of motion.) The situations are: events in a boat, in a 
smoothly moving carriage, and in other systems that contain an 
observer and permit him to carry out some simple operations. 
Sagredo: There has just occurred to me a certain fantasy which 
passed through my imagination one day while I was sailing to Aleppo, 
65 

66 
AGAINST METHOD 
where I was going as consul for our country . . . .  If the point of a pen 
had been on the ship during my whole voyage from Venice to 
Alexandretta and had had the property of leaving visible marks 
of its whole trip, what trace - what mark - what line would it have 
left? 
Simplicio: It would have left a line extending from Venice to there; 
not perfectly straight - or rather, not lying in the perfect arc of a circle 
- but more or less fluctuating according as the vessel would now and 
again have rocked. But this bending in some places a yard or two to the 
right or left, up or down, in length of many hundreds of miles, would 
have made little alteration in the whole extent of the line. These would 
scarcely be sensible, and, without an error of any moment, it could be 
called part of a perfect arc. 
Sagredo: So that if the fluctuation of the waves were taken away and 
the motion of the vessel were calm and tranquil, the true and precise 
motion of that pen would have been an arc of a perfect circle. Now if I 
had had that same pen continually in my hand, and had moved it only a 
little sometimes this way or that, what alterations should I have 
brought into the main extent of this line? 
Simplicio: Less than that which would be given to a straight line a 
thousand yards long which deviated from absolute straightness here 
and there by a flea's eye. 
Sagredo: Then if an artist had begun drawing with that pen on a 
sheet of paper when he left the port and had continued doing so all the 
way to Alexandrena, he would have been able to derive from the pen's 
motion a whole narrative of many figures, completely traced and 
sketched in thousands of directions, with landscapes, buildings, 
animals, and other things. Yet the actual real essential movement 
marked by the pen point would have been only a line; long, indeed, 
but very simple. But as to the artist's own actions, these would 
have been conducted exactly the same as if the ship had been 
standing still. The reason that of the pen's long motion no trace would 
remain except the marks drawn upon the paper is that the gross 
motion from Venice to Alexandrena was common to the paper, the 
pen, and everything else in the ship. But the small motions back and 
forth, to right and left, communicated by the artist's fingers to the pen 
but not to the paper, and belonging to the former alone, could thereby 
leave a trace on the paper which remained stationary to those 
motions.1 
I .  Dialogue, op. cit., pp. I 7 I fT. 

Or 
S EVEN 
Salviati: . . . Imagine yourself in a boat with your eyes fixed on a 
point of the sail yard. Do you think that because the boat is moving 
along briskly, you will have to move your eyes in order to keep your 
vision always on that point of the sail and follow its motion? 
Simplicio: I am sure that I should not need to make any change at all; 
not just as to my vision, but ifl had aimed a musket I should never have 
to move it a hairsbreadth to keep it aimed, no matter how the boat 
moved. 
Salviati: And this comes about because the motion which the ship 
confers upon the sail yard, it confers also upon you and upon your 
eyes, so that you need not move them a bit in order to gaze at the top of 
the sail yard, which consequently appears motionless to you. (And the 
rays of vision go from the eye to the sail yard just as if a cord were tied 
between the two ends of the boat. Now a hundred cords are tied at 
different fixed points, each of which keeps its place whether the ship 
moves or remains stilli 
67 
It is clear that these situations lead to a non-operative concept of 
motion even within common sense. 
On the other hand, common sense, and I mean 1 7th-century 
Italian-artisan common sense, also contains the idea of the operative 
character of all motion. This latter idea arises when a limited object 
that does not contain too many parts moves in vast and stable 
surroundings; for example, when a camel trots through the desert, or 
when a stone descends from a tower. 
Now Galileo urges us to 'remember' the conditions in which we 
assert the non-operative character of shared motion in this case also, 
and to subsume the second case under the first. 
Thus, the first of the two paradigms of non-operative motion 
mentioned above is followed by the assertion that - 'It is likewise true 
that the earth being moved, the motion of the stone in descending is 
actually a long stretch of many hundred yards, or even many 
thousand; and had it been able to mark its course in motionless air or 
upon some other surface, it would have left a very long slanting line. 
But that part of all this motion which is common to the rock, the 
2. ibid., pp. 249ff. That phenomena of seen motion depend on relative motion has 
been asserted by Euclid in his Optics, Theon red. par. 49ff. An old scholion of par. 50 
uses the example of a boat leaving the harbour: Heiberg, vii, 283. The example is 
repeated by Copernicus in Book 1 ,  Chapter viii, of De Revol. It was a commonplace in 
mediaeval optics. Cf. Witelo, Perspeaiva, iv par 1 38 (Basel, 1 572, p. 1 80). 

68 
AGAINST METHOD 
tower, and ourselves remains insensible and as if it did not exist. 
There remains observable only that part in which neither the tower 
nor we are participants; in a word, that with which the stone, in 
falling, measures the tower.'3 
And the second paradigm precedes the exhortation to 'transfer this 
argument to the whirling of the earth and to the rock placed on top of 
the tower, whose motion you cannot discern because, in common 
with the rock, you possess from the earth that motion which is 
required for following the tower; you do not need to move your eyes. 
Next, if you add to the rock a downward motion which is peculiar to it 
and not shared by you, and which is mixed with this circular motion, 
the circular portion of the motion which is common to the stone and 
the eye continues to be imperceptible. The straight motion alone is 
sensible, for to follow that you must move your eyes downwards.'4 
This is strong persuasion indeed. 
Yielding to this persuasion, we now quite automatically start 
confounding the conditions of the two cases and become relativists. 
This is the essence of Galileo's trickery! As a result, the clash 
between Copernicus and 'the conditions affecting ourselves and 
those in the air above us'5 dissolves into thin air, and we finally 
realize 'that all terrestrial events from which it is ordinarily held that 
the earth stands still and the sun and the fixed stars are moving would 
necessarily appear just the same to us if the earth moved and the 
other stood still'. 6 
3. ibid., pp. 1 72fT. 
4. ibid., p. 250. 
5. Ptolemy, Syntaxis, i, 1, p. 7. 
6. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 416: cf. the Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences, transl. 
Henry Crew and Alfonso de Salvio, New York, 1958, p. 164: 'The same experiment 
which at first glance seemed to show one thing, when more carefully examined, assures 
us of the contrary.' Professor McMullin, in a critique of this way of seeing things, 
wants more 'logical and biographical justification' for my assertion that Galileo not 
only argued, but also cheated ['A Taxonomy of the Relation between History and 
Philosophy of Science', Minnesota Studies, Vol. 5, Minneapolis, 1971, p. 39], and he 
objects to the way in which I let Galileo introduce dynamical relativism. According to 
him 'what Galileo argues is that since his opponent already interprets observations 
made in such a context [movements on boats] in a "relativistic" way, how can he 
consistendy do otherwise in the case of observations made on the earth's surface?' 
(ibid., p. 40). This is indeed how Galileo argues. But he argues so against an opponent 
who, according to him, 'feels a great repugnance towards recognizing this non­
operative quality of motion among the things which share it in common' (Dialogue, op. 
cit., p. 171 ), who is convinced that a boat, apan from having relative motions, htJS 
absolute positions and motions tJS well (cf. Aristode, Physics, 208b8fl), and who at any rate 
has developed the an of using different notions on different occasions without running 
into a contradiction. Now if this is the position to be attacked, then showing that an 

S EVEN 
69 
Let us now look at the situation from a more abstract point of view. 
We start with two conceptual sub-systems of 'ordinary' thought (see 
the following table). One of them regards motion as an absolute 
process which always has effects, effects on our senses included. The 
description of this conceptual system given here may be somewhat 
idealized; but the arguments of Copernicus' opponents, which are 
quoted b( Galileo himself and, according to him, are 'very 
plausible', show that there was a widespread tendency to think in its 
terms, and that this tendency was a serious obstacle to the discussion 
of alternative ideas. Occasionally, one finds even more primitive ways 
of thinking, where concepts such as 'up' and 'down' are used 
absolutely. Examples are: the assertion 'that the earth is too hea,1 to 
climb up over the sun and then fall headlong back down again', or 
the assertion that 'after a short time the mountains, sinking 
downward with the rotation of the terrestrial globe, would get into 
such a position that whereas a little earlier one would have had to 
climb steeply to their peaks, a few hours later one would have to stoop 
and descend in order to get there'.9 Galileo, in his marginal notes, 
calls these 'utterly childish reasons which] sufficed to keep imbeciles 
believing in the fixity of the earth'1 and he thinks it unnecessary 'to 
bother about such men as those, whose name is legion, or to take notice 
of their fooleries'. 1 1  Yet it is clear that the absolute idea of motion 
was 'well-entrenched', and that the attempt to replace it was bound to 
encounter strong resistance. 1 2  
opponent has a relative idea of motion, or frequently uses the relative idea in his 
everyday affairs, is not at all 'proof of inconsistency in his own "paradigm" '  
(McMullin, op. cit., p. 40). I t  just reveals one part of that paradigm without touching 
the other. The argument turns into the desired proof only if the absolute notion is 
either suppressed or spirited away, or else identified with the relativistic notion - and 
this is what Galileo actually does, though surreptitiously, as I have tried to show. 
7. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 328. 
8. ibid., p. 327. 
9. ibid., p. 330. 
10. ibid., p. 327. 
I I. ibid., p. 327, italics added. 
12. The idea that there is an absolute direction in the universe has a very 
interesting history. It rests on the structure of the gravitational field on the surface of 
the earth, or of that part of the earth which the observer knows, and generalizes the 
experiences made there. The generalization is only rarely regarded as a separate 
hypothesis, it rather enters the 'grammar' of common sense and gives the terrns 'up' 
and 'down' an absolute meaning. (This is a 'natural interpretation', in precisely the 
sense that was explained in the text above.) Lactantius, a Church father of the fourth 
century, appeals to this meaning when he asks (Divinae lnstitutiones, I l l, De Falsa 
Sapientia): 'Is one really going to be so confused as to assume the existence of humans 
whose feet are above their heads? Where trees and fruit grow not upwards, but 

70 
AGAINST METHOD 
The second conceptual system is built around the relativity of 
motion, and is also well-entrenched in its own domain of application. 
Galileo aims at replacing the first system by the second in all cases, 
terrestrial as well as celestial. Naive realism with respect to motion is 
to be completely eliminated. 
Now, we have seen that this naive realism is on occasions an 
essential part of our observational vocabulary. On these occasions 
(Paradigm 1), the observation language contains the idea of the 
efficacy of all motion. Or, to express it in the material mode of 
speech, our experience in these situations is an experience of objects 
Paradigm/: Motion of compact 
objects in stable surroundings of 
great spatial extension -
deer observed by the hunter. 
Natural interpretation: 
All motion is operative. 
Falling stone 
pruves 
! 
Earth at rest 
Motion of earth 
predicts 
! 
Oblique motion 
of stone 
Paradigm II: Motion of objects in 
boats, coaches and other 
moving systems. 
Natural interpretation: 
Only relative motion is operative. 
Falling stone 
pruves 
! 
No relative 
motion between 
starting point 
and earth 
Motion of earth 
predicts 
! 
No relative 
motion between 
starting point 
and stone 
downwards?' The same use of language is presupposed by that 'mass of untutored 
men' who raise the question why the antipodeans are not falling off the earth (Pliny, 
Natural History, II, pp. I 61--6, cf. also Ptolemy, Syntaxis, I, 7). The attempts ofThales, 
Anaximenes and Xenophanes to find suppon for the earth which prevents it from 
falling 'down' (Aristode, De Coelo, 294al211) shows that almost all early philosophers, 
with the sole exception of Anaximander, shared in this way of thinking. (For the 
Atomists, who assume that the atoms originally fall 'down,' cf. Jammer, Concepts of 
Space, Cambridge, Mass., I 953, p. l I.) Even Galileo, who thoroughly ridicules the 
idea of the falling antipodes (Dialogue, op. cit., p. 33 I), occasionally speaks of the 
'upper half of the moon', meaning that pan of the moon 'which is invisible to us'. And 
let us not forget that some linguistic philosophers of today 'who are too stupid to 
recognize their own limitations' (Galileo, op. cit., p. 327) want to revive the absolute 
meaning of 'up-down' at least locally. Thus the power over the minds of his 
contemporaries of a primitive conceptual frame, assuming an anisotropic world, which 
Galileo had also to fight, must not be underestimated. For an examination of some 
aspects of British common sense at the time of Galileo, including astronomical 
common sense, see E.M.W. Tillyard, The Elizabethan World Picture, London, 1963. 
The agreement between popular opinion and the centrally symmetric universe is 
frequently assened by Aristode, e.g. in De Coelo, p. 308a23f. 

S EVEN 
71 
which move absolutely. Taking this into consideration, it is apparent 
that Galileo's proposal amounts to a partial revision of our 
observation language or of our experience. An experience which 
partly contradicts the idea of the motion of the earth is turned into an 
experience that confinns it, at least as far as 'terrestrial things' are 
concerned.13 This is what actually happens. But Galileo wants to 
persuade us that no change has taken place, that the second 
conceptual system is already universally knorvn, even though it is not 
universally used. Salviati, his representative in the Dialogue, his 
opponent Simplicio and Sagredo the intelligent layman all connect 
Galileo's method of argumentation with Plato's theory of anamnesis­
a clever tactical move, typically Galilean one is inclined to say. Yet we 
must not allow ourselves to be deceived about the revolutionary 
development that is actually taking place. 
The resistance against the assumption that shared motion is non­
operative was equated with the resistance which forgotten ideas 
exhibit towards the attempt to make them known. Let us accept this 
interpretation of the resistance! But let us not forget its existence. We 
must then admit that it restricts the use of the relativistic ideas, 
confining them to part of our everyday experience. Outside this part, 
i.e. in interplanetary space, they are 'forgotten' and therefore not 
active. But outside this part there is not complete chaos. Other 
concepts are used, among them whose very same absolutistic 
concepts which derive from the first paradigm. We not only use them, 
we must also admit that they are entirely adequate. No difficulties 
arise as long as one remains within the limits of the first paradigm. 
'Experience', i.e. the totality of all facts from all domains, cannot 
force us to carry out the change which Galileo wants to introduce. 
The motive for a change must come from a different source. 
It comes, first, from the desire to see 'the whole [correspond] to its 
parts with wonderful simplicity', 14 as Copernicus had already 
13. Dialogue, op. cit., pp. 132 and 416. 
14. ibid., p. 341 . Galileo quotes here from Copernicus' address to Pope Paul III in 
De Revo/utionibus; cf. also Chapter I 0 and the Narratio Prima (quoted from E. Rosen, 
Three Copernican Treatises, New York, 1959, p. 165): 'For all these phenomena appear 
to be linked most nobly together, as by a golden chain; and each of the planets, by its 
position, and order, and every inequality of its motion, bears witness that the earth 
moves and that we who dwell upon the globe of the earth, instead of accepting its 
changes of position, believe that the planets wander in all sorts of motions of their 
own.' Note that empirical reasons are absent from the argument and have to be, for 
Copernicus himself admits (Commentario/us, op. cit., p. 57) that the Ptolemaic theory is 
'consistent with the numerical data'. 

72 
AGAINST METHOD 
expressed himself. It comes from the 'typically metaphysical urge' 
for unity of understanding and conceptual presentation. And the 
motive for a change is connected, secondly, with the intention to 
make room from the motion of the earth, which Galileo accepts and is 
not prepared to give up. The idea of the motion of the earth is closer 
to the first paradigm than to the second, or at least it was at the time of 
Galileo. This gave strength to the Aristotelian arguments, and made 
them plausible. To eliminate the plausibility, it was necessary to 
subsume the first paradigm under the second, and to extend the 
relative notions to all phenomena. The idea of anamnesis functions 
here as a psychological crutch, as a lever which smooths the process 
of subsumption by concealing its existence. As a result we are now 
ready to apply the relative notions not only to boats, coaches, birds, 
but to the 'solid and well-established earth' as a whole. And we have 
the impression that this readiness was in us all the time, although it 
took some effort to make it conscious. This impression is most 
certainly erroneous: it is the result of Galileo's propagandistic 
machinations. We would do better to describe the situation in a 
different way, as a change of our conceptual system. Or, because we 
are dealing with concepts which belong to natural interpretations, 
and which are therefore connected with sensations in a very direct 
way, we should describe it as a change of experience that allows us to 
accommodate the Copernican doctrine. It is this change which 
underlies the transition from the Aristotelian point of view to the 
epistemology of modem science. 
For experience now ceases to be the unchangeable fundament 
which it is both in common sense and in the Aristotelian philosophy. 
The attempt to support Copernicus makes experience 'fluid' in the 
very same manner in which it makes the heavens fluid, 'so that each 
star roves around in it by itself. 15 An empiricist who starts from 
experience, and builds on it without ever looking back, now loses the 
very ground on which he stands. Neither the earth, 'the solid, well­
established earth', nor the facts on which he usually relies can be 
trusted any longer. It is clear that a philosophy that uses such a fluid 
and changing experience needs new methodological principles 
which do not insist on an asymmetric judgement of theories by 
experience. Classical physics intuitively adopts such principles; at least 
its great and independent thinkers, such as Newton, Faraday, 
Boltzmann proceed in this way. But its official doctrine still clings to 
the idea of a stable and unchanging basis. The clash between this 
IS. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 120. 

S EVEN 
73 
doctrine and the actual procedure is concealed by a tendentious 
presentation of the results of research that hides their revolutionary 
origin and suggests that they arose from a stable and unchanging 
source. These methods of concealment start with Galileo's attempt 
to introduce new ideas under the cover of anamnesis, and they 
culminate in Newton.16 They must be exposed if we want to arrive at 
a better account of the progressive elements in science. 
My discussion of the anti-Copernican argument is not yet 
complete. So far, I have tried to discover what assumption will make a 
stone that muves alongside a muving to11Jer appear to fall 'straight down', 
instead of being seen to move in an arc. The assumption, which I 
shall call the relativity principle, that our senses notice only relative 
motion and are insensitive to a motion which objects have in common 
was seen to do the trick. What remains to be explained is 11Jhy the stone 
stays 11Jith the to11Jer and is not left behind. In order to save the 
Copernican view, one must explain not only why a motion that 
preserves the relation among visible objects remains unnoticed, but 
also, why a common motion of various objects does not affect their 
relation. That is, one must explain why such a motion is not a causal 
agent. Turning the question around in the manner explained in the 
text to footnote 10, page 63 of the last chapter, it is now apparent 
that the anti-Copernican argument described there rests on t11Jo 
natural interpretations: viz, the epistemological assumption that 
absolute motion is always noticed, and the dynamical principle that 
objects (such as the falling stone) which are not interfered with 
assume their natural motion. For Aristotelians the natural motion of 
an object not interfered with is rest, i.e. constancy of qualities and 
of position. 17 This corresponds to our own experience where things 
have to be pushed around to move. The discovery of seeds, bacteria, 
viruses would have been impossible without a firm belief in the 
qualitative part of the law - and it confirmed it in a most impressive 
way. Using this law scientists inferred that a stone dropped from a 
tower situated on a moving earth would be left behind. Thus the 
relativity principle must be combined with a new law of inertia in such 
a fashion that the motion of the earth can still be asserted. One sees at 
once that the following law, the principle of circular inertia as I shall call 
it, provides the required solution: an object that moves with a given 
angular velocity on a frictionless sphere around the centre of the 
earth will continue moving with the same angular velocity for ever. 
16. 'Classical Empiricism', op. cit . 
. 17. This is the general account of motion. In the cosmological account we have 
Circular motion above and up-and-down motions on earth. 

74 
AGAINST M E T H O D  
Combining the appearance of the falling stone with the relativity 
principle, the principle of circular inertia and some simple 
assumptions concerning the composition of velocities, 18 we obtain an 
argument which no longer endangers Copernicus' view, but can be 
used to give it partial support. 
The relativity principle was defended in two ways. The first was by 
showing how it helps Copernicus: this defence is ad hoc but not 
objectionable, because necessary for revealing natural interpreta­
tions. The second was by pointing to its function in common sense, 
and by surreptitiously generalizing that function (see above). No 
independent argument was given for its validity. Galileo's support for 
the principle of circular inertia is of exactly the same kind. He 
introduces the principle, again not by reference to experiment or to 
independent observation, but by reference to what everyone is 
already supposed to know. 
Simplicia: So you have not made a hundred tests, or even one? And 
yet you so freely declare it to be certain? . . .  
Salviati: Without experiment, I am sure that the effect will happen 
as I tell you, because it must happen that way; and I might add that you 
yourself also know that it cannot happen otherwise, no matter how you 
may pretend not to know it . . . .  But I am so handy at picking people's 
brains that I shall make you confess this in spite of yourself. 19 
Step by step, Simplicia is forced to admit that a body that moves, 
without friction, on a sphere concentric with the centre of the earth 
18. These assumptions were not at all a matter of course, but conflicted with some 
very basic ideas of Aristotelian physics. The principle of circular inertia is related to the 
impetus theory, but not identical with it. The impetus theory retains the idea that it 
needs a force to bring about change, but it puts the force inside the changing object. 
Once pushed, an object continues moving in the same way in which a heated object 
stays warm-both contain the cause of their new state. Galileo modifies this idea in two 
ways. First, the circular motion is supposed to go on forever while an object kept 
moving by impetus will gradually slow down, just as a heated object, its analogue, 
gradually becomes colder. The argument for this modification is given in the text 
below; it is purely rhetorical. Secondly, the eternal circular motions must proceed 
without a cause: if relative motions are not operative, then introducing a motion with 
the same centre and the same angular velocity as a circular motion upheld by impetus 
cannot eliminate forces: we are on the way from impetus to momentum (cf. A. Maier, 
Die Vorliiufer Galileis im 14. Jahrhundert, Rome, 1949). All these changes are 
overlooked by those who assume that the transition was the simple result of a new and 
better dynamics and that the dynamics was already available, but had not yet been 
applied in a detennined way. 
19. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 145. 

SEVEN 
75 
will carry out a 'boundless', a 'perpetual' motion. We know, of 
course, especially after the analysis we have just completed of the 
non-operative character of shared motion, that what Simplicio 
accepts is based neither on experiment nor on corroborated theory. It 
is a daring new suggestion involving a tremendous leap of the 
imagination. 20 A little more analysis then shows that this suggestion 
is connected with experiments, such as the 'experiments' of the 
Discorsi21 by ad hoc hypotheses. (The amount of friction to be 
eliminated follows not from independent investigations - such 
investigations commence only much later, in the 1 8th century - but 
from the result to be achieved, viz. the circular law of inertia.) 
Viewing natural phenomena in this way leads to a re-evaluation of all 
experience, as we have seen. We can now add that it leads to the 
invention of a nw kind of experience that is not only more sophisticated 
but also far more speculative than the experience of Aristotle or of 
20. For a Copernican the only leap involved was the identification of the earth as a 
celestial object. According to Aristotle celestial objects move in circles and 'a body that 
moves in a circle has neither heaviness nor lighmess for it cannot change its distance 
from the centre, neither in a natural nor in a forced way'. De Coelo, 269b34f. 
21. Incidentally, many of the 'experiences' or 'experiments' used in the arguments 
about the motion of the earth are entirely fictitious. Thus Galileo, in his Trattato della 
Sfera (Opere, Vol. II, pp. 21 Iff), which 'follows the opinion of Aristotle and of Ptolemy' 
(p. 223), uses this argument against a rotation of the earth: ' . . .  objects which one lets 
fall from high places to the ground such as a stone from the top of a tower would not fall 
towards the foot of that tower; for during the time which the stone coming rectilinearly 
towards the ground, spends in the air, the earth, escaping it, and moving towards the 
east would receive it in a part far removed from the foot of the tower in exactly the same 
manner in 11Jhich a stone that is droped from the mast of a rapidly muving ship IIJi/1 not fall 
towards its foot, but more tollJards the stern' (p. 224). The italicized reference to the 
behaviour of stones on ships is again used in the Dialogue (p. 126), when the Ptolemaic 
arguments are discussed, but it is no longer accepted as correct. 'It seems to be an 
appropriate time,' says Salviati (ibid., p. 180), 'to take notice of a certain generosity on 
the part of the Copernicans towards their adversaries when, with perhaps too much 
liberality, they concede as true and correct a number of experiments which their 
opponents have never made. Such for example is that of the body falling from the mast 
of a ship while it is in motion . . . .  ' Earlier, p. 154, it is implied rather than observed, that 
the stone will fall to the foot of the mast, even if the ship should be in motion while a 
possible experiment is discussed on p. 186. Bruno (La Cena dele Ceneri, Opere Italiane, 
I, ed. Giovanni Gentile, Bari, 1907, p. 83) takes it for granted that the stone wil arrive 
at the foot of the mast. It should be noted that the problem did not readily lend itself to 
an experimental solution. Experiments were made, but their results were far from 
conclusive. Cf. A. Armitage, 'The Deviation of Falling Bodies',Annals of Science, 5, 
1941-7, pp. 342ff, and A. Koyre,MetllfJhysics and Measurement, Cambridge, 1968, pp. 
89ff. The tower argument can be found in Aristotle, De Coelo, 296b22, and Ptolemy, 
Syntaxis, i, 8. Copernicus discusses it in the same chapter of De Revol, but tries to 
defuse it in the next chapter. Its role in the Middle Ages is described in M. Clagett, The 
Science of Mechanics in theMiddleAges, Madison, 1959, Chapter 10. 

76 
AGAINST METHOD 
common sense. Speaking paradoxically, but not incorrectly, one may 
say that Galileo itTVents an experience that has metaphysical ingredients. It 
is by means of such an experience that the transition from a geostatic 
cosmolo' to the point of view of Copernicus and Kepler is 
achieved. 2 
22. Alan Chalmers, in an interesting and well-argued paper ('The Galileo That 
Feyerabend Missed: An Improved Case Against Method' inJ.A. Schuster and R.R. 
Yeo (eds), The Politics and Rhetoric of Scientific Method, Dordrecht, 1986, pp. I 11), 
distinguishes 'between Galileo's contributions to a new science, on the one hand, and 
the question of the social conditions in which that science is developed and practised, 
on the other', admits that 'propaganda' (though much less than I suggest) may have 
been part of his attempt to change the latter, but emphasizes that it does not affect the 
former. 'The main source for Galileo's contribution to science itself, says Chalmers, 
'is his TJZJO Nw Sciences'. This is the work I should have studied to explore Galileo's 
procedure. But the TwoNw Sciences do not deal with the topic I was discussing, viz. the 
transition to Copernicus. Here Galileo used procedures rather different from those of 
his later work. Lynn Thorndike, who shares Chalmers' evaluation of the Dialogue, 
wished that Galileo had written a systematic textbook on that subject (I History of 
Magic and Experimental Science, Vol. 6, New York, 1941, pp. 7 and 62: 'Galileo might 
have done better to write a systematic textbook than his provocative dialogues'). Now 
for such a textbook to have substance it would have to be as general as its Aristotelian 
rival and it would have to show how and why Aristotelian concepts needed to be 
replaced at the most elementary level. Aristotelian concepts, though abstract, were 
closely related to common sense. Hence it was necessary to replace some common 
notions by others (I am now speaking about what Chalmers calls 'perceptual relativity' 
-p. 7). Two questions arise: how big were the changes? and was propaganda (rhetoric, 
were 'irrational moves') needed to carry them out? My answer to the latter question is 
that discourse attempting to bring about major conceptual changes is a normal part of 
science, common sense, and cultural exchange (for the latter cf. Chapter 16 and 
Chapter 17, item vi, 'open exchange'), and that it differs from the discourse carried out 
IPithin a more or less stable framework. Personally, I am quite prepared to make it part 
of rationality. But there exist philosophical schools that oppose it or call it incoherent 
(cf. Chapter 1 0  of Farwell to Reason which discusses some of Hilary Putnam's views). 
Using the terminology of these schools I speak ofGalileo's 'trickery', etc. And I add that 
science contains ingredients that occasionally need such 'trickery' to become 
acceptable. The difference between the Sciences and the Dialogue, therefore, is not 
between science and sociology but between technical changes in a narrow field and 
basic changes, realistically interpreted. My answer to the first question is that 
perceptual relativity, though acknowledged by many scholars (and by Aristotle 
himself), was not a common possession (Galileo points out that even some ofhis fellow 
scientists stumbled at this point) and thus had to be argued for. This is not at all 
surprising, as my discussion of qualitative difficulties in Chapter 5 shows. Besides, is it 
really true that a traveller on a boat sees the harbour as receding as if it were removed 
by some strange force? I conclude that Galileo's 'trickery' was necessary for a proper 
understanding of the new cosmology, that it is 'trickery' only for philosophies that set 
narrow conditions on conceptual change and that it should be extended to areas still 
restricted by such conditions (in Chapter 1 2 1  argue that the mind-body problem is one 
such area). 

8 
In tuidition to natural interpretations, Galileo also changes sensations that 
seem to endanger Copernicus. He admits that there are such sensations, he 
praises Copernicus for having disregarded them, he claims to have remooed 
them with the help of the telescope. However, he offers no theoretical 
reasons why the telescope should be expected to give a true picture of the sky. 
I repeat and summarize. An argument is proposed that refutes 
Copernicus by observation. The argument is inverted in order to 
discover the natural interpretations which are responsible for the 
contradiction. The offensive interpretations are replaced by others, 
propaganda and appeal to distant, and highly theoretical, parts of 
common sense are used to defuse old habits and to enthrone new 
ones. The new natural interpretations, which are also formulated 
explicitly, as auxiliary hypotheses, are established partly by the 
support they give to Copernicus and partly by plausibility considera­
tions and ad hoc hypotheses. An entirely new 'experience' arises in 
this way. There is as yet no independent evidence, but this is no 
drawback; it takes time to assemble facts that favour a new 
cosmology. For what is needed is a new dynamics that explains both 
celestial and terrestrial motions, a theory of solid objects, aero­
dynamics, and all these sciences are still hidden in the future. 1 But 
their task is now well-defined, for Galileo's assumptions, his ad hoc 
hypotheses included, are sufficiently clear and simple to prescribe 
the direction of future research. 
Let it be noted, incidentally, that Galileo's procedure drastically 
reduces the content of dynamics. Aristotelian dynamics was a general 
I. Galileo's circular law is not the right dynamics. It fits neither the epicycles 
which still occur in Copernicus, nor Kepler's eUipses. In fact, it is refuted by both. Still, 
Galileo regards it as an essential ingredient of the Copernican point of view and tries to 
Ǥemove bodies, such as comets, whose motion quite obviously is not circular, from 
Interplanetary space. In hisAssǥer'Galileo talked about comets [and interpreted them 
as iUusions, similar to rainbows) in order to protect the Copernican system from 
possible falsifications.' P. Redondi, Galileo Heretic, Princeton, 1987, pp. 145, 3 1 .  
77 

78 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
theory of change, comprising locomotion, qualitative change, 
generation and corruption, and it could also be applied to mental 
processes. Galileo's dynamics and its successors deal with locomotion 
only, and here again just with the locomotion of matter. Other 
kinds of motion are pushed aside with the promissory note (due to 
Democritos) that locomotion will eventually be capable of explaining 
all motion. Thus a comprehensive empirical theory is replaced by a 
narrow theory plus a metaphysics of motion/ just as an 'empirical' 
experience is replaced by an experience that contains speculative 
elements. Counterinduaion, however, is now seen to play an important 
role both vis-a-vis theories and vis-a-vis facts. It clearly aids the 
advancement of science. This concludes the considerations begun in 
Chapter 6. I now tum to another part of Galileo's propaganda 
campaign, dealing not with natural interpretations but with the 
sensory core of our observational statements. 
Replying to an interlocutor who expressed his astonishment at the 
2. The so-called scientific revolution led to astounding discoveries and 
considerably extended our knowledge of physics, physiology, and astronomy. This was 
achieved by pushing aside and regarding as irrelevant, and often as non-existent, those 
facts which had supponed the older philosophy. Thus the evidence for witchcraft, 
demonic possession, the existence of the devil, etc., was disregarded together with the 
'superstitions' it once confirmed. The result was that 'towards the close of the Middle 
Ages science was forced away from human psychology, so that even the great 
endeavour of Erasmus and his friend Vives, as the best representatives of humanism, 
did not suffice to bring about a reapproachment, and psychopathology had to trail 
centuries behind the developmental trend of general medicine and surgery. As a 
matter of fact . . .  the divorcement of medical science from psychopathology was so 
definite that the latter was always totally relegated to the domain of theology and 
ecclesiastic and civil law - two fields which naturally became funher and funher 
removed from medicine . . .  .' G. Zilboorg, MD, The Medical Man and the Witch, 
Baltimore, 1935, pp. 3fT and 70fT. Astronomy advanced, but the knowledge of the 
human mind slipped back into an earlier and more primitive stage. Another example is 
astrology. 'In the early stages of the human mind,' writes A. Comte (Cours de 
Philosophie Positive, Vol. III, pp. 273-80, ed. Littre, Paris, 1836), 'these connecting 
links between astronomy and biology were studied from a very different point of view, 
but at/east they were studied and not left out of sight, as is the common tendency in our 
own time, under the restricting influence of a nascent and incomplete positivism. 
Beneath the chimerical belief of the old philosophy in the physiological influence of 
the stars, there lay a strong, though confused recognition of the truth that the facts of 
life were in some way dependent on the solar system. Like all primitive inspirations of 
man's intelligence this feeling needed rectification by positive science, but not 
destruction; though unhappily in science, as in politics, it is often hard to reorganize 
without some brief period of ovenhrow.' A third area is mathematics. Aristotle had 
developed a highly sophisticated theory of the continuum that overcame the 
difficulties raised by Zeno and anticipated quantum theoretical ideas on motion (see 
footnote I 5 and text of Chapter 5). Most physicists returned to the idea of a continuum 
consisting of indivisible elements - if they considered such recondite matters, that is. 

EIGHT 
79 
small number of Copemicans, Salviati, who 'act[s] the part of 
Copernicus', 3 gives the following explanation: 'You wonder that 
there are so few followers of the Pythagorean opinion [that the earth 
moves] while I am astonished that there have been any up to this day 
who have embraced and followed it. Nor can I ever sufficiently 
admire the outstanding acumen of those who have taken hold of this 
opinion and accepted it as true: they have, through sheer force of 
intellect, done such violence to their own senses as to prefer what 
reason told them over that which sensible experience plainly showed 
them to be the contrary. For the arguments against the whirling [the 
rotation] of the earth we have already examined [the dynamical 
arguments discussed above] are very plausible, as we have seen; and 
the fact that the Ptolemaics and the Aristotelians and all their 
disciples took them to be conclusive is indeed a strong argument of 
their effectiveness. But the experiences which overtly contradict 
the annual movement [the movement of the earth around the sun] are 
indeed so much greater in their apparent force that, I repeat, 
there is no limit to my astonishment when I reflect that Aristarchus 
and Copernicus were able to make reason so conquer sense that 
in defiance of the latter, the former became mistress of their belief.';; 
A little later Galileo notes that 'they e Copernicans] were 
confident of what their reason told them!' And he concludes his 
brief account of the origins of Copernicanism by saying that 'with 
reason as his guide he [Copernicus] resolutely continued to affirm 
what sensible experience seemed to contradict'. 'I cannot get over 
my amazement', Galileo repeats, 'that he was constantly willing to 
persist in saying that Venus might go around the sun and might 
be more than six times as far from us at one time as at another, 
and still look always equal, when it should have appeared forty times 
larger.'6 
The 'experiences which overtly contradict the annual movement', 
and which 'are much greater in their apparent force' than even the 
dynamical arguments above, consist in the fact that 'Mars, when it is 
close to us . . .  would have to look sixty times as large as when it is most 
distant. Yet no such difference is to be seen. Rather, when it is in 
opposition to the sun and close to us it shows itself only four or five 
3. Dialogue, op. cit., pp. 131 and 256. 
4. ibid., p. 328. At other times Galileo speaks much more belligerently and 
dogmatically, and apparently without any awareness of the difficulties mentioned here. 
Cf. his preparatory notes for the letter to Grand Duchess Christina, Opere, V, pp. 
367ff. 
5. ibid., p. 335. 
6. ibid., p. 339. 

80 
AGAINST METHOD 
times as large as when, at conjunction, it becomes hidden behind the 
rays of the sun.'7 
'Another and greater difficulty is made for us by Venus which, if it 
circulates around the sun, as Copernicus says, would now be beyond 
it and now on this side of it, receding from and approaching towards 
us by as much as the diameter of the circle it describes. Then, when it 
is beneath the sun and very close to us, its disc ought to appear to us a 
little less than forty times as large as when it is beyond the sun and 
near conjunction. Yet the difference is almost imperceptible.' 
In an earlier essay, The Assayer, Galileo expressed himself still 
more bluntly. Replying to an adversary who had raised the issue of 
Copernicanism he remarks that 'neither Tycho, nor other astronomers 
nor even Copernicus could clearly refute [Ptolemy] inasmuch as a most 
important argument taken from the movement of Mars and Venus 
stood always in their way'. (This 'argument' is mentioned again in the 
Dialogue, and has just been quoted.) He concludes that 'the two 
systems' (the Copernican and the Ptolemaic) are 'surely false'.8 
We see that Galileo's view of the origin of Copernicanism differs 
markedly from the more familiar historical accounts. He neither 
points to new facts which offer inductive support to the idea of the 
moving earth, nor does he mention any observations that would refute 
the geocentric point of view but be accounted for by Copernicanism. 
On the contrary, he emphasizes that not only Ptolemy, but 
Copernicus as well, is refuted by the facts, 9 and he praises 
Aristarchus and Copernicus for not having given up in the face of 
7. ibid., p. 334. 
8. The Assăer. quoted from The Controversy on the Comets of 1918, op. cit., p. 185. 
9. This refers to the period before the end of the 16th century; cf. Derek). de S. Price, 
'Contra-Copernicus: A Critical Re-Estimation of the Mathematical Planetary Theory 
ofPtolemy, Copernicus and Kepler', in M. Clagett (ed.), Critical Problems in the History of 
Science, Madison, 1959, pp. 197-218. Price deals only with the kinematic and the optical 
difficulties of the new views. (A consideration of the dynamical difficulties would further 
strengthen his case.) He points out that 'under the best conditions a geostatic or 
heliostatic system using eccentric circles (or their equivalents) with central epicycles can 
account for all angular motions of the planets to an accuracy better than 6' . . .  excepting 
only the special theory needed to account for . . .  Mercury and excepting also the planet 
Mars which shows deviations up to 30' from a theory. [This is) certainly better than the 
accuracy ofl 0' which Copernicus himself stated as a satisfactory goal for his own theory' 
which was difficult to test, especially in view of the fact that refraction (almost I o on the 
horizon) was not taken into account at the time of Copernicus, and that the observational 
basis of the predictions was less than satisfactory. 
Carl Schumacher (Untersuchungen iiber die ptolemiische Theon·e der unteren Planeten, 
Miinster, 1917) has found that the predictions concerning Mercury and Venus made 
by Ptolemy differ at most by an amount of 30' from those of Copernicus. The 
deviations found between modem predictions and those of Ptolemy (and Copernicus), 

E I G H T  
81 
such tremendous difficulties. He praises them for having proceeded 
counterinduaive/y. 
This, however, is not yet the whole story. 
For while it might be conceded that Copernicus acted simply on 
faith, it may also be said that Galileo found himself in an entirely 
different position. Galileo, after all, invented a new dynamics. And he 
invented the telescope. The new dynamics, one might want to point 
out, removes the inconsistency between the motion of the earth and 
the 'conditions affecting ourselves and those in the air above us'. 10 And 
the telescope removes the 'even more glaring' clash between the 
changes in the apparent brightness of Mars and Venus as predicted on 
the basis of the Copernican scheme and as seen with the naked eye. 
This, incidentally, is also Galileo's own view. He admits that 'were it 
not for the existence of a superior and better sense than natural and 
common sense to join forces with reason' he would have been 'much 
more recalcitrant towards the Copernican system' Y The 'superior 
and better sense' is, of course, the telescope, and one is inclined to 
remark that the apparently counterinductive procedure was as a 
matter of fact induction (or conjecture plus refutation plus new 
conjecture), but one based on a better experience, containing not only 
better natural interpretations but also a better sensory core than was 
available to Galileo's Aristotelian predecessors.12 This matter must 
now be examined in some detail. 
The telescope is a 'superior and better sense' that gives new and 
more reliable evidence for judging astronomical matters. How is this 
hypothesis examined, and what arguments are presented in its favour? 
In the Sidereus Nuncius, 13 the publication which contains his first 
which in the case of Mercury may be as large as 7", are due mainly to wrong constants 
and initial conditions, including an incorrect value of the constant of precession. For 
the versatility of the Ptolemaic scheme cf. N.R. llanson, lsis, No. 51, 1960, pp. 150-8. 
10. Ptolemy, Syntaxis, i, 7. 
I I .  Dialogue, op. cit., p. 328. 
12. For this view cf. Ludovico Geymonat, Galileo Galilei, transl. Stillman Drake, 
New York, 1965 (first Italian edition 1957), p. 184. For the story ofGalileo's invention 
and use of the telescope cf. R.S. Westfall, 'Science and Patronage', Isis, Vol. 76 1985, 
pp. I I  ff. According to Westfall, Galileo 'saw the telescope more as an instrument of 
patronage than as an instrument of astronomy' (p. 26) and had to be pushed into some 
astronomical applications by his pupil (and staunch Copernican) Castelli. Galileo's 
telescopes were better than others in circulation at the time and were much in demand. 
But he first satisfied the demands of potential patrons. Kepler, who complained about 
the quality of telescopes (cf. next chapter, footnote 21 and text) and who would have 
loved to possess a better instrument, had to wait. 
13. The Sidereal Messenger of Galileo Galilel, transl. E. St Carlos, London, 1880, 
reissued by Dawsons of Pall Mall, 1960, p. I 0. 

82 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
telescopic observations, and which was also the first important 
contribution to his fame, Galileo writes that he 'succeeded (in 
building the telescope) through a deep study of the theory of 
refraction'. This suggests that he had theoretical reasons for preferring 
the results of telescopic observations to observations with the naked 
eye. But the particular reason he gives - his insight into the theory of 
refraction - is not co"ect and is not sufficient either. 
The reason is not correct, for there exist serious doubts as to 
Galileo's knowledge of those parts of contemporary physical optics 
which were relevant for the understanding of telescopic phenomena. 
In a letter to Giuliano de Medici of 1 October 161 0, H more than 
half a year after publication of the Sidereus Nuncius, he asks for a copy 
of Kepler's Optics of 1604,15 pointing out that he had not yet been 
able to obtain it in ltaly.Jean Tarde, who in 1614 asked Galileo about 
the construction of telescopes of pre-assigned magnification, reports 
in his diary that Galileo regarded the matter as a difficult one that he 
had found Kepler's Optics of 161 1 16 so obscure 'that perhaps its own 
author had not understood it' P In a letter to Liceti, written two 
years before his death, Galileo remarks that as far as he was 
concerned the nature of light was still in darkness. 18 Even if we 
consider such utterances with the care that is needed in the case of a 
whimsical author like Galileo, we must yet admit that his knowledge 
of optics was inferior by far to that of Kepler. 19 This is also the 
14. Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 441 .  
IS. Ad Vitellionem Paralipomena quibusAstronomiae Pan Optica Traditur, Frankfun, 
1604, to be quoted from Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke, Vol. II, Munich, 1939, ed. 
Franz Hammer. This particular work will be referred to as the 'optics of 1604'. 1t was 
the only useful optics that existed at the time. The reason for Galileo's curiosity was most 
likely the many references to this work in Kepler's reply to the Sidereus Nuncius. For 
the history of this reply as well as a translation cf. Kepler's CotrVmation with Galileu's 
Sidereal Messenger, transl. E. Rosen, New York, 1965. The many references to earlier 
work contained in the Corrvmation were interpreted by some ofGalileo's enemies as a 
sign that 'his mask had been tom from his face' (G. Fugger to Kepler, 28 May 1610, 
Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 361) and that he (Kepler) 'had well plucked him', Maestlin to 
Kepler, 7 August (Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 428). Galileo must have received Kepler's 
CotrVmation before 7 May (Opere, X, p. 349) and he acknowledges receipt of the 
printed Corrvmation in a letter to Kepler of 19 August (Opere, X, p. 421). 
16. Dioptrice, Augsburg, 161 1, Werke, Vol. IV, Munich, 1941. This work was 
written after Galileo's discoveries. Kepler's reference to them in the preface has been 
translated by E. St Carlos, op. cit., pp. 37, 79fT. The problem referred to by Tarde is 
treated in Kepler's Dioptrice. 
17. Geymonat, op. cit., p. 37. 
18. Letter to Liceti of 23 June 1640. Opere, VIII, p. 208. 
19. Kepler, the most knowledgeable and most lovable of Galileo's contem­
poraries, gives a clear account of the reasons why, despite his superior knowledge of 

EIGHT 
83 
conclusion of Professor E. Hoppe, who sums up the situation as 
follows: 
Galileo's assertion that having heard of the Dutch telescope he 
reconstructed the apparatus by mathematical calculation must of 
course be understood with a grain of salt; for in his writings we do not 
find any calculations and the report, by letter, which he gives of his 
first effort says that no better lenses had been available; six days later 
we find him on the way to Venice with a better piece to hand it as a gift 
to the Doge Leonardi Donati. This does not look like calculation; it 
rather looks like trial and error. The calculation may well have been of 
a different kind, and here it succeeded, for on 25 August 1609 his 
salary was increased by a factor of three. 
20 
Trial and error- this means that 'in the case of the telescope it was 
experience and not mathematics that led Galileo to a serene faith in the 
reliability of his device'. 21 This second hypothesis on the origin of 
the telescope is also supported by Galileo's testimony, in which he 
writes that he had tested the telescope 'a hundred thousand times on 
a hundred thousand stars and other objects'. 22 Such tests produced 
great and surprising successes. The contemporary literature -
letters, books, gossip columns - testifies to the extraordinary 
impression which the telescope made as a means of improving 
terestrial vision. 
optical matters, he 'refrained from attempting to construct the device'. 'You, however,' 
he addresses Galileo, 'deserve my praise. Putting aside all misgivings you turned 
direcdy to visual experimentation' ( Corrvmation, op. cit., p. 18). It remains to add that 
Galileo, due to his lack of knowledge in optics, had no 'misgivings' to overcome: 
'Galileo . . .  was totally ignorant of the science of optics, and it is not too bold to assume 
that this was a most happy accident both for him and for humanity at large', Ronchi, 
Scientific Change, ed. Crombie, London, 1963, p. 550. 
20. Die Geschichte der Optik, Leipzig, 1926, p. 32. Hoppe's judgement concerning 
the invention of the telescope is shared by Wolf, Zinner and others. Huyghens points 
out that superhuman intelligence would have been needed to invent the telescope on 
the basis of the available physics and geometry. After all, says he, we still do not 
understand the workings of the telescope. ('Dioptrica', Hugenii Opuscula Postuma, 
Ludg. Bat., 1903, 163, paraphrased after A.G. Kastner, Geschichte der Mathematik, 
Vol. IV, Gottingen, 1800, p. 60.) 
21. Geymonat, op. cit., p. 39. 
22. Letter to Carioso, 24 May 1616, Opere, X, p. 357: letter to P. Dini, 12 May 
161 1, Opere, IX, p. I 06: 'Nor can it be doubted that I, over a period of two years now, 
have tested my instrument (or rather dozens of my instruments) on hundreds and 
thousands of objects near and far, large and small, bright and dark; hence I do not see 
how it can enter the mind of anyone that I have simple-mindedly remained deceived in 
my observations.' The hundreds and thousands of experiments remind one of 
Hooke, and are most likely equally spurious. Cf. footnote 9 of Chapter 9. 

84 
AGAINST METHOD 
Julius Caesar Lagalla, Professor of Philosophy in Rome, describes 
a meeting of 16 April 161 1 ,  at which Galileo demonstrated his 
device: 'We were on top of the Janiculum, near the city gate named 
after the Holy Ghost, where once is said to have stood the villa 
of the poet Martial, now the property of the Most Reverend Malvasia. 
By means of this instrument, we saw the palace of the most illus­
trious Duke Altemps on the Tuscan Hills so distinctly that we 
readily counted its each and every window, even the smallest; 
and the distance is sixteen Italian miles. From the same place 
we read the letters on the gallery, which Sixtus erected in the Lateran 
for the benedictions, so clearly, that we distinguished even the 
periods carved between the letters, at a distance of at least two 
miles.'23 
Other reports confirm this and similar events. Galileo himself 
points to the 'number and importance of the benefits which the 
instrument may be expected to confer, when used by land or sea'.24 
23. Legalla, De phaenommis in oroe lu11Je nuvi telescopii usa a D. Galileo Galilei nunc 
iterum suscitatis physica disputatio (Venice, I 612), p. 8; quoted from E. Rosen, The 
Naming of the Telescope, New York, I 947, pl. 54. The regular reports (;fvviSJ) of the 
Duchy of Urbino on events and gossip in Rome contain the following notice of the 
event: 'Galileo Galilei the mathematician, arrived here from Florence before Easter. 
Formerly a Professor at Padua, he is at present retained by the Grand Duke of 
Tuscany at a salary of I ,00 scudi. He has observed the motion of the stars with the 
ocia/i, which he invented or rather improved. Against the opinion of all ancient 
philosophers, he declares that there are four more stars or planets, which are satellites 
of Jupiter and which he calls the Medicean bodies, as well as two companions of 
Saturn. He has here discussed this opinion of his with Father Clavius, the Jesuit. 
Thursday evening, at Monsignor Malavasia's estate outside the St Pancratius gate, a 
high and open place, a banquet was given for him by Frederick Cesi, the marquis of 
Monticelli and nephew of Cardinal Cesi, who was accompanied by his kinsman, Paul 
Monaldesco. In the gathering there were Galileo; a Fleming named Terrentius; 
Persio, of Cardinal Cesi's retinue, [La) Galla, Professor at the University here; the 
Greek, who is Cardinal Gonzaga's mathematician; Piffari, Professor at Siena, and as 
many as eight others. Some of them went out expressly to perform this observation, 
and even though they stayed until one o'clock in the morning, they still did not reach an 
agreement in their views' (quoted from Rosen, op. cit., p. 3 1). 
24. Sidereal Messenger, op. cit., p. ii. According to Berellus (De Vero Telescopii 
lrrvmtore, Hague, 1655, p. 4), Prince Moritz immediately realized the military value of 
the telescope and ordered that its invention - which Berellus attributes to Zacharias 
Jansen - be kept a secret. Thus the telescope seems to have commenced as a secret 
weapon and was turned to astronomical use only later. There are many anticipations of 
the telescope to be found in the literature, but they mosdy belong to the domain of 
natural magic and are used accordingly. An example is Agrippa von Nettesheim, who, 
in his book on occult philosophy (written 1509, Book II, chapter 23), writes 'et ego novi 
ex illis miranda conficere, et specula in qui bus quis videre poterit quaecunque voluerit 
a longissima distantia'. 'So may the toy of one age come to be the precious treasure of 
another', Henry Morley, The Life of Cornelius Agrippa von Nenesheim, Vol. II, p. 166. 

EIGHT 
85 
The terrestrial success of the telescope was, therefore, assured. 
Its application to the stars, however, was an entirely different 
matter. 

9 
Nor does the initial experience with the telescope provide such reasons. The 
first telescopic observations of the sky are indistina, indeterminate, 
contradiaory and in conflia with what everyone can see with his unaided 
eyes. And the only theory that could have helped to separate telescopic 
illusions from veridical phenomena was refuted by simple tests. 
To start with, there is the problem of telescopic vision. This problem 
is different for celestial and terrestrial objects; and it was also thought 
to be different in the two cases. 1 
It was thought to be different because of the contemporary idea 
that celestial objects and terrestrial objects are formed from dif­
ferent materials and obey different laws. This idea entails that 
the result of an interaction of light (which connects both domains 
and has special properties) with terrestrial objects cannot, without 
further discussion, be extended to the sky. To this physical idea 
one added, entirely in accordance with the Aristotelian theory 
of knowledge (and also with present views about the matter), the 
idea that the senses are acquainted with the close appearance of 
terrestrial objects and are, therefore, able to perceive them distinctly, 
even if the telescopic image should be vastly distorted, or disfigured 
by coloured fringes. The stars are not known from close by. 2 Hence 
we cannot in their case use our memory for separating the 
contributions of the telescope and those which come from the object 
I. This is hardly ever realized by those who argue (with Kastner, op. cit., p. 133) 
that 'one does not see how a telescope can be good and useful on the earth and yet 
deceive in the sky'. Kastner's comment is directed against Horky. See below, text to 
footnotes 9-16 of the present chapter. 
2. That the senses are acquainted with our everyday surroundings, but are liable 
to give misleading reports about objects outside this domain, is proved at once by 
the appearance of the moon. On the earth large but distant objects in familiar surround­
ings, such as mountains, are seen as being large, and far away. The appearance 
of the moon, however, gives us an entirely false idea of its distance and its 
size. 
86 

NINE 
87 
itself.3 Moreover, all the familiar cues (such as background, overlap, 
knowledge of nearby size, etc.), which constitute and aid our vision 
on the surface of the earth, are absent when we are dealing with the 
sky, so that new and surprising phenomena are bound to occur. 4 Only 
a new theory of vision, containing both hypotheses concerning the 
behaviour of light within the telescope and hypotheses concerning 
the reaction of the eye under exceptional circumstances, could have 
bridged the gulf between the heavens and the earth that was, and still 
is, such an obvious fact of physics and of astronomical observation. 5 
We shall soon have occasion to comment on the theories that were 
available at the time and we shall see that they were unfit for the task 
and were refuted by plain and obvious facts. For the moment, I want 
to stay with the observations themselves and I want to comment on 
the contradictions and difficulties which arise when one tries to take 
the celestial results of the telescope at their face value, as indicating 
stable, objective properties of the things seen. 
Some of these difficulties already announce themselves in a report 
of the contemporary Avvisl' which ends with the remark that 'even 
though they (the participants in the gathering described) went out 
expressly to perform this observation (of"four more stars or planets, 
which are satellites of Jupiter . . .  as well as of two companions of 
Saturn"7), and even though they stayed until one in the morning, 
they still did not reach an agreement in their views.' 
3. It is not too difficult to separate the letters of a familiar alphabet from a 
background of unfamiliar lines, even if they should happen to have been written with 
an almost illegible hand. No such separation is possible with letters which belong to an 
unfamiliar alphabet. The parts of such letters do not hang together to form distinct 
patterns which stand out from the background of general (optical) noise (in the manner 
described by K. Koflka, Psycho/. Bull., 19, 1922, pp. 55 liT, partly reprinted in M.D. 
Vernon (ed.), Experiments in Visual Perception, London, 1966; cf. also the article by 
Gottschaldt in the same volume). 
4. For the importance of cues such as diaphragms, crossed wires, background, 
etc., in the localization and shape of the telescope image and the strange situations 
arising when no cues are present cf. Chapter IV of Ron chi, Optics, op. cit., especially 
pp. l S I ,  174, 189, 191, etc. Cf. also R.L. Gregory, Eye and Brain, New York, 1966, 
Passim and p. 99 (on the autokinetic phenomenon). F.P. Kilpatrick (ed.), Explorations in 
Transactional Psychology, New York, 1961, contains ample material on what happens in 
the absence of familiar cues. 
5. It is for this reason that the 'deep study of the theory of refraction' which Galileo 
pretended to have carried out (text to footnote 13 of Chapter 8) would have been quite 
msufficient for establishing the usefulness of the telescope; cf. also footnote 16 of thl 
present chapter. 
6. Details in Chapter 8, footnote 23. 
7. This is how the ring of Saturn was seen at the time. Cf. also R.L. Gregory, The 
Intelligent Eye, p. 1 19. 

88 
AGAINST METHOD 
Another meeting that became notorious all over Europe makes the 
situation even clearer. About a year earlier, on 24 and 25 April 1610, 
Galileo had taken his telescope to the house of his opponent, Magini, 
in Bologna to demonstrate it to twenty-four professors of all faculties. 
Horky, Kepler's overly-excited pupil, wrote on this occasion;8 'I never 
slept on the 24th or 25th April, da& or night, but I tested the instrument 
of Galileo's in a thousand ways, both on things here below and on 
those above. Below it works wonderfully; in the heavens it deceives one, 
as some fixed stars [Spica Virginis, for example, is mentioned, as well 
as a terrestrial flame] are seen double. 10 I have as witnesses most 
excellent men and noble doctors . . . and all have admitted the 
instrument to deceive . . . .  This silenced Galileo and on the 26th he 
sadly left quite early in the morning . . .  not even thanking Magini for 
his splendid meal. . .  .' Magini wrote to Kepler on 26 May: 'He has 
achieved nothing, for more than twenty learned men were present; yet 
nobody has seen the new planets distinctly (nemo perfecte vidit); he 
will hardly be able to keep them.' 1 1  A few months later (in a letter 
signed by Ruffini) he repeats: 'Only some with sharp vision were 
convinced to some extent.' 1 2  After these and other negative reports 
had reached Kepler from all sides, like a paper avalanche, he asked 
Galileo for witnesses: 13 'I do not want to hide it from you that quite a 
few Italians have sent letters to Prague asserting that they could not see 
those stars [the moons ofjupiter] with your own telescope. I ask myself 
how it can be that so many deny the phenomenon, including those who 
use a telescope. Now, ifl consider what occasionally happens to me, 
then I do not at all regard it as impossible that a single person may see 
what thousands are unable to see . . . . 14 Yet I regret that the 
8. Galileo, Opere, Vol. X, p. 342 (my italics, referring to the difference commented 
upon above, between celestial and terrestrial observations). 
9. The 'hundreds' and 'thousands' of observations, trials, etc., which we find here 
again are hardly more than a rhetorical flourish (corresponding to our 'I have told you a 
thousand times'). They cannot be used to infer a life ofincessant observation. 
I 0. Here again we have a case where external clues are missing. Cf. Ronchi, 
Optics, op. cit., as regards the appearance of flames, small lights, etc. 
I I. Letter of26 May, Opere, Ill. 
12. ibid., p. 196. 
13. Letter of9 August 1610, quoted from Caspar-Dyck,Johannes Kepler in Seinen 
Briefen, Vol. I, Munich, 1930, p. 349. 
14. Kepler, who suffered from Polyopia ('instead of a single small object at a great 
distance, two or three are seen by those who suffer from this defect. Hence, instead of 
a single moon ten or more present themselves to me', Com;ersation, op. cit., footnote 
94; cf. also the remainder of the footnote for further quotations), and who was familiar 
with Platter's anatomical investigations (cf. S.L. Polyak, The Retina, Chicago, 1942, 
pp. 134fT for details and literature), was well aware of the need for a physiological 
criticism of astronomical observations. 

N I N E  
89 
confirmation by others should take so long in turning up . . . .  
Therefore, I beseech you, Galileo, give me witnesses as soon as 
possible . . . .  ' Galileo, in his reply of 19 August, refers to himself, to 
the Duke ofToscana, and Giuliano de Medici 'as weU as many others 
in Pisa, Florence, Bologna, Venice and Padua, who, however, remain 
silent and hesitate. Most of them are entirely unable to distinguish 
Jupiter, or Mars, or even the Moon as a planet . . .  .'15 - not a very 
reassuring state of affairs, to say the least. 
Today we understand a little better why the direct appeal to 
telescopic vision was bound to lead to disappointment, especially in 
the initial stages. The main reason, one already foreseen by Aristotle, 
was that the senses applied under abnormal conditions are liable to 
give an abnormal response. Some of the older historians had an 
inkling of the situation, but they speak negatively, they try to explain 
the absence of satisfactory observational reports, the puverty of what is 
seen in the telescope. 16 They are unaware of the possibility that the 
observers might have been disturbed by strong positive ilusions also. 
The extent of such illusions was not realized until quite recently, 
mainly as the result of the work of Ronchi and his school. 1 7 Here 
sizeable variations are reported in the placement of the telescopic 
image and, correspondingly, in the observed magnification. Some 
observers put the image right inside the telescope making it change 
15. Caspar-Dyck, op. cit., p. 352. 
16. Thus Emil Wohlwill, Galileo und sein Kampf for die Kopemikanische Lehre, Vol. 
I, Hamburg, 1909, p. 288, writes: 'No doubt the unpleasant results were due to the 
lack of training in telescopic observation, and the restricted field of vision of the 
Galilean telescope as well as to the absence of any possibility for changing the distance 
of the glasses in order to make them fit the peculiarities of the eyes of the learned 
men . . . . ' A similar judgement, though more dramatically expressed, is found in Arthur 
Koesder'sSieepwalkm, p. 369. 
17. Cf. Ronchi, Optics, op. cit.: Histoire de Ia Lumiere, Paris, 1956; Storia del 
Cannochiale, Vatican City, 1964; Critica dei Fondamenti dell' Acustica e dei'OIIica, Rome, 
1964; cf. also E. Cantore's summary in Archives d'histoire des sciences, December 1966, 
pp. 333fT. I would like to acknowledge at this place that Professor Ronchi's 
investigations have greatly influenced my thinking on scientific method. For a brief 
historical account of Galileo's work cf. Ronchi's article in A.C. Crombie (ed.), 
Scientific Change, London, 1963, pp. 542-61. How little this field is explored becomes 
clear from S. Tolansky's book Optical Illusions, London, 1964. Tolansky is a physicist 
who in his microscopic research (on crystals and metals) was distracted by one optical 
illusion after another. He writes: 'This turned our interest to the analysis of other 
situations, with the ultimate unexpected discovery that optical illusions can, and do, 
play a very real part in affecting many daily scientific observations. This warned me to 
be on the lookout and as a result I met more illusions than I had bargained for.' The 
'illusions of direct vision', whose role in scientific research is slowly being rediscovered 
were well known to mediaeval writers on optics, who treated them in special chapters 
of their textboks. Moreover, they treated lens-images as psychological phenomena, as 

90 
AGAINST METHOD 
its lateral position with the lateral position of the eye, exactly as would 
be the case with an after image, or a reflex inside the telescope - an 
excellent proof that one must be dealing with an 'illusion'. 18 Others 
place the image in a manner that leads to no magnification at all, 
although a linear magnification of over thirty may have been 
promised. 19 Even a doubling of images can be explained as the 
result of a lack of proper focusing. 20 Adding the many imperfections 
of the contemporary telescopes to these psychological difficulties, 21 
one can well understand the scarcity of satisfactory reports and one is 
rather astonished at the speed with which the reality of the new 
phenomena was accepted, and, as was the custom, publicly 
acknowledged. 22 This development becomes even more puzzling 
results of a misapprehension, for an image 'is merely the appearance of an object 
outside its place' as we read in John Pecham (cf. David Lindberg, 'The "Perspectiva 
Communis" of John Pecham', Archives I ntemationa/es d 'histoire des sciences, 1965, p. 51, 
as weU as the last paragraph of Proposition iVl 9  of Pecham's Perspeaiva Communis, 
which is to be found in John Pecham and the Science of Optics, D. Lindberg (ed.), 
Madison, 1970, p. 171). 
18. Ronchi, Optics, op. cit., p. 189. This may explain the frequendy uttered desire 
to look inside the telescope. No such problems arise in the case of terestrial objects 
whose images are regularly placed 'in the plane of the object' (ibid., p. 182). 
19. For the magnification ofGalileo's telescope cf. The Sidereal Messenger, op. cit., 
p. I I ,  cf. also A. Sonnefeld, 'Die Optischen Daten der Himmelsfemrohre von Galileo 
Galilie',Jenaer Rundschau, Vol. 7, 1962, pp. 207fT. The old rule 'that the size, position 
and arrangement according to which a thing is seen depends on the size of the angle 
through which it is seen' (R. Grosseteste, De /ride, quoted from Crombie, Robert 
Grosseteste, Oxford, 1953, p. 120), which goes back to Euclid, is almost alrPa,Ys 111V1g. l 
stiU remember my disappointment when, having built a reflector with an aUeged linear 
magnification of about ISO, l found that the moon was only about five times enlarged, 
and situated quite close to the ocular (1937). 
20. The image remains sharp and unchanged over a considerable interval - the , 
lack of focusing may show itself in a doubling, however. 
21. The first usable telescope which Kepler received from Elector Ernst of Koln 
(who in tum had received it from Galileo), and on which he based his Narratio de 
observatis a se qiUirtuor Juvis satellibus, Frankfurt, 161 1, showed the stars as sqiUires and 
intensely coloured (Ges. Werke, IV, p. 461). Ernst von Koln himself was unable to see 
anything with the telescope and he asked Clavius to send him a better instrument 
0rchivio della Pontifica Universita Gregoriana, 530, f l 82r). Francesco Fontana, who 
from 1643 onwards observed the phases of Venus, notes an unevenness of the 
boundary (and infers mountains), cf. R. Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie, Munich, 1877, 
p. 398. For the idiosyncrasies of contemporary telescopes and descriptive literature cf. 
Ernst Zinner, Deutsche und Niederlindische Astronomische lnstrumente des /1 bis 18. 
Jahrhunderts, Munich, 1956, pp. 216-21. Refer also to the author catalogue in the 
second pan of the book. 
22. Father Clavi us (letter of l 7  December 1610, Opere, X, p. 485), the astronomer 
of the powerful Jesuit Collegium Romanum, praises Galileo as the first to have 
observed the moons of jupiter and he recognizes their reality. Magini, Grienberger, 
and others soon followed suit. It is clear that, in doing so, they did not proceed 

N I N E  
91 
when we consider that many reports of even the best observers were 
either plainly fohe, and capable of being shown as such at the time, or 
else se/f-contradiaory. 
Thus Galileo reports unevenness, 'vast protuberances, deep 
chasms, and sinuosities'23 at the inner boundary of the lighted part 
of the moon while the outer boundary 'appear[s] not uneven, rugged, 
and irregular, but perfectly round and circular, as sharply defined as 
if marked out with a pair of compasses, and without the indentations 
of any protuberances and cavities'. 24 The moon, then, seemed to be 
according to the methods prescribed by their own philosophy, or else they were very 
lax in the investigation of the matter. Professor McMullin (op. cit., footnote 32) makes 
much of this quick acceptance of Galileo's telescopic observations: 'The regular 
periods observed for the satellites and for the phases of Venus strongly indicated that 
they were not artefacts of physiology or optics. There was surely no need for "auxiliary 
sciences" . . .  ' 'There was no need for auxiliary sciences,' writes McMullin, while using 
himself the unexamined auxiliary hypothesis that astronomical events are distin­
guished from physiological events by their regularity and their intersubjectivity. But 
this hypothesis is false, as is shown by the moon illusion, the phenomenon of fata 
morgana, the rainbow, haloes, by the many microscopic illusions which are so vividly 
described by Tolansky, by the phenomena of witchcraft which survive in our textbooks 
of psychology and psychiatry, though under a different name, and by numerous other 
phenomena. The hypothesis was also known to be false by Pecham, Witelo, and other 
mediaeval scholars who had studied the regular and intersubjective 'illusions' created 
by lenses, mirrors, and other optical contrivances. In antiquity the falsehood of 
McMullin's hypothesis was commonplace. Galileo explicidy discusses and repudiates it 
in his book on comets. Thus a new theory of vision was needed, not just to acept the 
Galilean observations, but also to provide arguments for their astronomical reality. Of 
course, Clavi us may not have been aware of this need. This is hardly surprising. After 
all, some of his sophisticated 20th-century successors, such as Professor McMullin, 
are not aware ofit either. In addition we must point out that the 'regular periods' of the 
moons of Jupiter were not as well known as McMullin insinuates. For his whole life 
Galileo tried to determine these periods in order to find better ways of determining 
longitude at sea. He did not succeed. Later on the same problem returned in a 
different form when the attempt to determine the velocity of light with more than one 
moon led to conflicting results. This was found by Cassini shortly after Roemer's 
discovery -cf. I. B. Cohen, 'Roemer and the first determination of the velocity oflight 
(1676)', Isis, Vol. 31 (1940), pp. 347fT. For the attitude ofCiavius and the scientists of 
the Collegium Romanum cf. the very interesting book Gali/eo in China by Pasquale M. 
d'Elia, S.J ., Cambridge, Mass., 1960. The early observations of the astronomers of the 
Collegium are contained in their own 'Nuncius Sidereus', Opere, III/I, pp. 291-8. 
23. The Sidereal Messenger, op. cit., p. 8. 
24. op. cit., p. 24. - cf. the drawing on page 97 which is taken from Galileo's 
publication. Kepler in his Optics of 1604 writes (on the basis of observations with the 
unaided eye): 'It seemed as though something was missing in the circularity of the 
ounnost periphery' (Werke, Vol. II, p. 219). He returns to this assertion in his 
onvmation (op. cit., pp. 2811), criticizing Galileo's telescopic results by what he 
himself had seen with the unaided eye: 'You ask why the moon's outermost circle does 
not .also appear irregular. I do not know how carefully you have thought about this 
subJect or whether your query, as is more likely, is based on popular impression. For in 

92 
AGAINST METHOD 
full of mountains at the inside but perfectly smooth at the periphery, 
and this despite the fact that the peri:Rhery changed as the result of the 
slight libration of the lunar body. 
The moon and some of the 
planets, such as for example Jupiter, were enlarged while the 
apparent diameter of the fixed stars decreased: the former were 
brought nearer whereas the latter were pushed away. 'The stars,' 
writes Galileo, 'fixed as well as erratic, when seen with the telescope, 
by no· means appear to be increased in magnitude in the same 
proportion as other objects, and the Moon itself, gain increase of size; 
but in the case of the stars such increase appears much less, so that 
you may consider that a telescope, which (for the sake of illustration) 
is powerful enough to magnify other objects a hundred times, will 
scarcely render the stars magnified four or five times.'26 
my book [the Optics of 1604) I state that there was surely some imperfection in that 
outennost circle during full moon. Study the matter, and once again tell us, how it 
looks to you . . . .  ' Here the results of naked eye observation are quoted against Galileo's 
telescopic reports - and with perfectly good reason, as we shall see below. The reader 
who remembers Kepler's polyopia (cf. footnote 14 to this chapter) may wonder how he 
could trust his senses to such an extent. The reply is contained in the following 
quotation (Weri-e, II, pp. 194fl): 'When eclipses of the moon begin, I, who suffer from 
this defect, become aware of the eclipse before all the other observers. Long before the 
eclipse starts, I even detect the direction from which the shadow is approaching, while 
the others, who have very acute vision, are still in doubt . . . .  The afore-mentioned 
waviness of the moon [cf. the previous quotation) stops for me when the moon 
approaches the shadow, and the strongest part of the sun's rays is cut off . . .  .' Galileo 
has two explanations for the contradictory appearance of the moon. The one involves a 
lunar atmosphere (Messenger, op. cit., pp. 26fl). The other explanation (ibid., pp. 25fl), 
which involves the tangential appearance of series of mountains lying behind each 
other, is not really very plausible as the distribution of mountains near the visible side 
of the lunar globe does not show the arrangement that would be needed (this is now 
even better established by the publication of the Russian moon photograph of 7 
October 1959; cf. Zdenek Kopal, An Introduction to the Study of the Moon, North 
Holland, 1966, p. 242). 
25. The librations were noticed by Galileo. C. G. Righini, 'New Light on Galileo's 
Lunar Observations', in M.L Righini-Bonelli and R. Shea (eds), Reason, Experiena 
and Mysticism in the Scientific Revolution, New York, 1975, pp. 59fT. Thus it was not 
sloppiness of observations but the phenomena themselves that misguided Galileo. 
In two letters to the journal Science (2 May and 10 October 1980) T.H. Whitaker 
accused me of giving a misleading account of Galileo's observational skill- I called him 
a por observer when his lunar observations were in fact rather impressive. The 
accusation is refuted by the text to footnotes 29 and 30 and by footnote 46 of the 
present chapter. Whitaker obviously thought my quotations from Wolf (text to 
footnote 28) reflected my own opinion. He also points out that the copperplates of 
Galileo's observations are much better, from a modem point of view, than the 
woodcuts which accompanied the Nuncius. This is true but does not invalidate my 
description of the debate which was based on the published account. 
26. Messenger, op. cit., p. 38; cf. also the more detailed account in Dialogue, op. cit., 
pp. 336fT. 'The telescope, as it were, removes the heavens from us,' writes A. Chwalina 

N I N E  
93 
The strangest features of the early history of the telescope emerge, 
however, when we take a closer look at Galileo's piaures of the moon. 
It needs only a brieflook at Galileo's drawings, and a photograph 
of similar phases, to convince the reader that 'none of the features 
recorded . . .  can be safely identified with any known markings of the 
lunar landscape'P Looking at such evidence it is very easy to think 
that 'Galileo was not a great astronomical observer; or else that the 
excitement of so many telescopic discoveries made bº him at that 
time had temporarily blurred his skill or critical sense'. 8 
Now this assertion may well be true (though I rather doubt it in 
view of the quite extraordina» observational skill which Galileo 
exhibits on other occasions). 
But it is poor in content and, 
in his edition of Kleomedes, Die Kreisbewegung tier Gestirne (Leipzig, 1927, p. 90), 
commenting on the decrease of the apparent diameter of all stars with the sole 
exception of the sun and the moon. Later on, the different magnification of planets (or 
comets) and fixed stars was used as a means of distinguishing them. 'From experience, 
I know', writes Herschel in the paper reporting his first observation of Uranus (Phil 
Trans., 71, 1781, pp. 493ft- the planet is here identified as a comet), 'that the diameters 
of the fixed stars are not proportionally magnified with higher powers, as the planets 
are; therefore, I now put on the powers of 460 and 932, and found the diameter of the 
comet increased in proportion to the power, as it ought to be . . .  .' It is noteworthy that 
the rule did not invariably apply to the telescopes in use at Galileo's time. Thus, 
commenting on a comet ofNovember 1618, Horatio Grassi ('On the Three Comets of 
1618', in The Controversy of the Comets of/618, op. cit., p. 17) points out 'that when the 
comet was observed through a telescope it suffered scarcely any enlargement', and he 
infers, perfectly in accordance with Herschel's 'experience', that 'it wil have to be said 
that it is more remote from us than the moon . . .  .' In his Astronomical Balance (ibid., p. 
80) he repeats that, according to the common experience of 'illustrious astronomers' 
from 'many parts of Europe' the comet observed with a very extended telescope 
received scarcely any increment. . . . Galileo (ibid., p. 177) accepts this as a fact, 
criticizing only the conclusions which Grassi wants to draw from it. All these 
phenomena refute Galileo's assertion (Assayer, op. cit., p. 204) that the telescope 
'works always in the same way'. They also undermine his theory of irradiation (cf. 
footnote 56 to this chapter). 
27. Kopal, op. cit., p. 207. 
28. R. Wolf (Geschichte tier Astronomie, p. 396) remarks on the poor quality of 
Galileo's drawings of the moon (' . . .  seine Abbildung des Mondes kann man . . .  kaum 
· · · eine Karte nennen'), while Zinner (GeschichtetierSternleuntk, Berlin, 1931, p. 473) 
calls Galileo's observations of the moon and Venus 'typical for the observations of a 
beginner'. His picture of the moon, according to Zinner, 'has no similarity with the 
̰oon' (ibid., p. 472). Zinner also mentions the much better quality of the almost 
Simultaneous observations made by the Jesuits (ibid., p. 473), and he finally asks 
whether Galileo's observations of the moon and Venus were not the result of a fertile 
ain, rather than of a careful eye ('sollte dabei . . .  der Wunsch der Vater der 
eobachtung gewesen sein?') - a pertinent question, especially in view of the 
phenomena briefly described in footnote 34 to this chapter. 
29. The discovery and identification of the moons of jupiter were no mean achieve­
ments, especially as a useful stable support for the telescope had not yet been developed. 

94 
AGAINST METHOD 
I submit, not very interesting. No new suggestions emerge for 
additional research, and the possibility of a test is rather remote.30 
There are, however, other hypotheses which do lead to new 
suggestions and which show us how complex the situation was at 
the time of Galileo. Let us consider the following two. 
Hypothesis I. Galileo recorded faithfully what he saw and in 
this way left us evidence of the shortcomings of the first tele­
scopes as well as of the peculiarities of contemporary telescopic 
vision. Interpreted in this way Galileo's drawings are reports 
of exacdy the same kind as are the reports emerpng from 
the experiments of Stratton, Ehrismann, and Kohler3 
- except 
that the characteristics of the physical apparatus and the un­
familiarity of the objects seen must be taken into account too. 32 
We must also remember the many conflicting views which were 
held about the surface of the moon, even at Galileo's tirne,33 
and which may have influenced what observers saw.34 What would 
be needed in order to shed more light on the matter is an em­
pirical collection of all the early telescopic results, preferably 
in parallel columns, including whatever pictorial representations 
30. The reason, among other things, is the great variation of telescopic vision from 
one observer to the next, cf. Ronchi, Optics, op. cit., Chapter IV. 
31. For a survey and some introductory literature cf. Gregory, op. cit., Chapter I I .  
For a more detailed discussion and literature cf. K.W. Smith and W.M. Smith, 
Perception and Motion, Philadelphia, 1962, reprinted in part in M.D. Vernon, op. cit. 
The reader should also consult Ames' article 'Aniseikonic Glasses', Explorations in 
Transactional Psychology, which deals with the change of nomwl vision caused by only 
slighdy abnormal optical conditions. A comprehensive account is given by I. Rock, The 
NatureofPerceptutJIAdaptation, New York, 1966. 
32. Many of the old instruments, and excellent descriptions of them, are still 
available. Cf. Zinner, Deutsche und NiederJondische astronomische /nstrumente. 
33. For interesting information the reader should consult the relevant passages of 
Kepler's Corrvmation as well as of his Somnium (the latter is now available in a new 
translation by E. Rosen, who has added a considerable amount of background 
material: Kepler's Somnium, ed. Rosen, Madison, 1967). The standard work for the 
beliefs of the time is still Plutarch's Face on the Moon (it will be quoted from H. 
Chemiss' translation of Mora/iaX/1, London, 1967). 
34. 'One describes the moon after objects one thinks one can perceive on its 
surface' (Kastner, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 167, commenting on Fontana's observational 
reports of 1 646). 'Maesdin even saw rain on the moon' (Kepler, Corrvmation, op. cit., 
pp. 29f, presenting Maesdin's own observational report); cf. also da Vinci, notebooks, 
quoted from J.P. Richter, The Notebooks of Leonardo diJ Vinci, Vol. II, New York, 1970, 
p. 16 7: 'If you keep the details of the spots of the moon under observation you will often 
find great variation in them, and this I myself have proved by drawing them. And this is 
caused by the clouds that rise from the waters in the moon . . . .  ' For the instability of the 
images of unknown objects and their dependence on belief (or 'knowledge') cf. 
Ronchi, Optics, op. cit., Chapter IV. 

NINE 
95 
have survived. 35 Subtracting instrumental peculiarities, such a 
collection adds fascinating material to a yet-to-be-written history of 
perception (and of science).36 This is the content of Hypothesis I. 
Hypothesis II is more specific than Hypothesis I, and develops it in 
a certain direction. I have been considering it, with varying degrees of 
enthusiasm, for the last two or three years and my interest in it has 
been revived by a letter from Professor Stephen Toulmin, to whom I 
am grateful for his clear and simple presentation of the view. It seems 
to me, however, that the hypothesis is confronted by many difficulties 
and must, perhaps, be given up. 
Hypothesis II, just like Hypothesis I, approaches telescopic 
reports from the point of view of the theory of perception; but it adds 
that the practice of telescopic observation and acquaintance with the 
new telescopic reports changed not only what was seen through the 
telescope, but also what was seen with the naked rye. It is obviously of 
importance for our evaluation of the contemporary attitude towards 
Galileo's reports. 
That the appearance of the stars, and of the moon, may at some 
time have been much more indefinite than it is today was originally 
suggested to me by the existence of various theories about the moon 
which are incompatible with what everyone can plainly see with his 
own eyes. Anaximander's theory of partial stoppage (which aimed to 
explain the phases of the moon), Xenophanes' belief in the existence 
of different suns and different moons for different zones of the earth, 
Heraclitus' assumption that eclipses and phases are caused by the 
tumin:fi of the basins, which for him represented the sun and the 
moon - all these views run counter to the existence of a stable and 
plainly visible surface, a 'face' such as we 'know' the moon to possess. 
The same is true of the theory of Berossos which occurs as late as 
Lucretius38 and, even later, in Alhazen. 
35. Chapter 15 of Kopal, op. cit., contains an interesting collection of exactly this 
kind. Wider scope has W. Schulz, Die Anschauung vom MonJe und seinen Gestalten in 
Mythos und Kunst der Volker, Berlin, 1912. 
36. One must, of course, also investigate the dependence of what is seen on the 
current methods of pictorial representation. Outside astronomy this was done by E. 
Gomhrich,Art and Illusion, London, 1960, and L. Choulant,A History and Bibliography 
of Anatomical Ilustration, New York, 1945 (translated, with additions, by Singer and 
others), who deals with anatomy. Astronomy has the advantage that one side of the 
puzzle, viz. the stars, is fairly simple in structure (much simpler than the uterus, for 
example) and relatively well known; cf. also Chapter 16 below. 
37. For these theories and further literature cf. J.L.D. Dreyer, A History of 
Astronomy from Thales to Kepler, New York, 1953. 
?B. For Berossos, cf. Toulmin's article in Isis, No. 38, 1967, p. 65. Lucretius 
Writes (On the NatureofThings, trans!. Leonard, New York, 1957, p. 216): 'Again, she 

96 
AGAINST METHOD 
Now such disregard for phenomena which for us are quite obvious 
may be due either to a certain indifference towards the existing 
evidence, which was, however, as clear and as detailed as it is today, or 
else to a diference in the evidence itself. It is not easy to choose between 
these alternatives. Having been influenced by Wittgenstein, Hanson, 
and others, I was for some time inclined towards the second version, 
but it now seems to me that it is ruled out both by physiology 
(psychology)39 and by historical information. We need only 
remember how Copernicus disregarded the difficulties arising from 
the variations in the brightness of Mars and Venus, which were well 
known at the time. 40 And as regards the face of the moon, we see 
that Aristotle refers to it quite clearly when observing that 'the stars 
do not roll. For rolling involves rotation: but the "face", as it is called, 
of the moon is always seen.'41 We may infer, then, that the 
occasional disregard for the stability of the face was due not to a lack 
of clear impressions, but to some widely held views about the 
unreliability of the senses. The inference is supported by Plutarch's 
discussion of the matter which plainly deals not with what is seen 
(except as evidence for or against certain views) but with certain 
explanations of phenomena otherwise assumed to be well known:42 'To 
begin with,' he says, 'it is absurd to call the figure seen in the moon an 
affection of vision . . .  a condition which we call bedazzlement (glare). 
Anyone who asserts this does not observe that this phenomenon 
should rather have occurred in relation to the sun, since the sun lights 
upon us keen and violent, and moreover does not explain why dull 
and weak eyes discern no distinction of shape in the moon but her orb 
for them has an even and full light whereas those of keen and robust 
may revolve upon herself I like to a ball's sphere - if perchance to be-I one half of her 
dyed o'er with glowing light I and by the revolution of that sphere I she may beget for 
us her varying shapes I until she turns that fiery part of her I full to the sight and open 
eyes ofmen . . .  .' 
39. Cf. text to footnotes 50ff of my 'Reply to Criticism', op. cit., p. 246. 
40. In antiquity the differences in the magnitudes of Venus and Mars were 
regarded as being 'obvious to our eyes', Simplicius, De Coelo, II, 12, Heiberg, p. 504. 
Polemarchus here considers the difficulties of Eudoxos' theory of homocentric 
spheres, viz. that Venus and Mars 'appear in the midst of the retrograde movement 
many times brighter, so that [Venus) on moonless nights causes bodies to throw 
shadows' (objection of Autolycus) and he may well be appealing to the possibility of a 
deception of the senses (which was frequendy discussed by ancient schools). Aristode, 
who must have been familiar with all these facts, does not mention them anywhere in 
De Coelo or in the Metaphysics, though he gives an account of Eudoxos' system and of 
the improvements of Polemarchus and Kalippus. Cf. footnote 7 of Chapter 8. 
41. De Coelo, 290a25ff. 
42. op. cit., p. 37, cf. also S. Sambursky, The Physical World oflhe Greeks, New 
York, 1962, pp. 244fT. 

NINE 
FIGURE I.
-
The shape of a lunar mountain and a walled plain, from Galileo 
Siderew Nuncius, Venice, 1610 (cf. p. I l l). 
97 

98 
AGAINST METHOD 
vision make out more precisely and distinctly the pattern of facial 
features and more clearly perceive the variations.' 'The unevenness 
also entirely refutes the hypothesis,' Plutarch continues,43 'for the 
shadow that one sees is not continuous and confused, but is not badly 
depictured by the words of Agesianax: "She gleams with fire 
encircled, but within I Bluer than lapis show a maiden's eye I And 
dainty brow, a visage manifest." In truth, the dark patches submerge 
beneath the bright ones which they encompass . . . and they are 
thoroughly entwined with each other so as to make the delineation of 
the figure resemble a painting.' Later on the stability of the face is 
used as an argument against theories which regard the moon as being 
made of fire, or air, for 'air is tenuous and without configuration, and 
so it naturally slips and does not stay in place'. 44 The appearance of 
the 
moon, 
then, 
seemed 
to be a well-known and distinct 
phenomenon. What was in question was the relevance of the 
phenomenon for astronomical theory. 
We can safely assume that the same was true at the time of 
Galileo.45 
But then we must admit that Galileo 's observations could be checked with 
the naked eye and could in this way be exposed as illusory. 
Thus the circular monster below the centre of the disk of the 
moon 46 is well above the threshold of naked eye observation (its 
43. ibid., cf. however, footnote 1 7  to this chapter, Pliny's remark (Hist. Nat., II, 43, 
46) that the moon is 'now spotted and then suddenly shining clear', as weD as da Vinci's 
report, referred to in footnote 34 to this chapter. 
44. ibid., p. 50. 
45. A strong argument in favour of this contention is Kepler's description of the 
moon in his Optics of 1604: he comments on the broken character of the boundary 
between light and shadow (Werke, II, p. 218) and describes the dark part of the moon 
during an eclipse as looking like tom flesh or broken wood (ibid., p. 219). He returns to 
these passages in the C01roenation (op. cit., p. 27), where he tells Galileo that 'these 
very acute observations of yours do not lack the support of even my own testimony. For 
[in my] Optics you have the halfmoon divided by a wavy line. From this fact I deduced 
peaks and depressions in the body of the moon. [Later on) I describe the moon during 
an eclipse as looking like tom flesh or broken wood, with bright streaks penetrating into 
the region of the shadow.' Remember also that Kepler criticizes Galileo's telescopic 
reports on the basis of his own naked eye observations; cf. footnote 24 of this chapter. 
46. 'There is one other point which I must on no account forget, which I have 
noticed and rather wondered at it. It is this: The middle of the Moon, as it seems, is 
occupied by a certain cavity larger than all the rest, and in shape perfectly round. I have 
looked at this depression near both the first and the third quarters, and I have 
represented it as well as I can in the second illustration already given. It produces the 
same appearance as to effects oflight and shade as a tract like Bohemia would produce 
on the Earth, if it were shut in on all sides by very lofty mountains arranged on the 
circumference of a perfect circle; for the tract in the moon is walled in with peaks of 
such enormous height that the furthest side adjacent to the dark portion of the moon is 

NINE 
99 
diameter is larger than 31/z minutes of arc), while a single glance 
convinces us that the face of the moon is not anywhere disfigured by a 
blemish of this kind. It would be interestin.p to see what 
contemporary observers had to say on the matter4 or, if they were 
artists, what they had to draw on the matter. 
I summarize what has emerged so far. 
Galileo was only slightly acquainted with contemporary optical 
theory.48 His telescope gave surprising results on the earth, and 
these results were duly praised. Trouble was to be expected in the 
sky, as we know now. Trouble promptly arose: the telescope 
produced spurious and contradictory phenomena and some of its 
results could be refuted by a simple look with the unaided eye. Only a 
new theory of telescopic vision could bring order into the chaos 
(which may have been still larger, due to the different phenomena 
seen at the time even with the naked eye) and could separate 
appearance from reality. Such a theory was developed by Kepler, first 
in 1 604 and then again in 1 6 1 1.49 
According to Kepler, the place of the image of a punctiform object 
is found by first tracing the path of the rays emerging from the object 
according to the laws of (reflection and) refraction until they reach 
the eye, and by then using the principle (still taught today) that 'the 
image will be seen in the point determined by the backward 
seen bathed in sunlight before the boundary between light and shade reaches half way 
across the circular space . . .  ' (Messenger, op. cit., pp. 21 fl). This description, I think, 
definitely refutes Kopal's conjecture of obseiVational laxity. It is interesting to note the 
difference between the woodcuts in the Nuncius (p. 131, Figure I) and Galileo's 
original drawing. The woodcut corresponds quite closely to the description while the 
original drawing with its impressionistic features ('Kaum eine Karte,' says Wolf) is 
vague enough to escape the accusation of gross obseiVational error. 
4 7. 'I cannot help wondering about the meaning of that large circular cavity in 
what I usually call the left comer of the mouth,' writes Kepler ( Cotromation, op. cit., p. 
28), and then proceeds to make conjectures as to its origin (conscious efforts by 
intelligent beings included). 
48. Contemporary academic optics went beyond simple geometrical constructions 
(which Galileo may have known) and included an account of what is seen when looking at 
a mirror, or through a lens, or a combination oflenses. Excepting irradiation Galileo 
nowhere considers the properties of telescopic vision. Aristotelians writing after 
Galileo's telescopic obseiVations did. Cf. Redondi, op. cit., pp.l 69ff. 
49. I have here disregarded the work of della Porta (De Refractione) and of 
Maurolycus who both anticipated Kepler in certain respects (and are duly mentioned 
by him). Maurolycus makes the important step [Photismi de Lumine, transl. Henry 
Crew, New York, 1940, p. 45 (on mirrors) and p. 74 (on lenses)) of considering only 
the cusp of the caustic; but a connection with what is seen on direa vision is still not 
established. For the difficulties which were removed by Kepler's simple and ingenious 
hypothesis cf. Ronchi, Histoire de /Q Lumiere, Chapter III. 

100 
AGAI NST METHOD 
intersection of the rays of vision from both eyes'50 or, in the case of 
monocular vision, from the two sides of the pupil. 5 1  This rule, which 
proceeds from the assumption that 'the image is the work of the act of 
vision', is partly empirical and partly %eometrical. It bases the position 
of the image on a 'metrical triangle' 2 or a 'telemetric triangle'53 as 
Ronchi calls it, 54 that is constructed out of the rays which finally 
arrive at the eye and is used by the eye and the mind to place the image 
at the proper distance. Whatever the optical system, whatever the 
total path of the rays from the object to the observer, the rule says that 
the mind of the observer utilizes its very last part only and bases its 
visual judgement, the perception, on it. 
The rule considerably simplified the science of optics. However, it 
needs only a second to show that it is false: take a magnifYing glass, 
determine its focus, and look at an object close to it. The telemetric 
triangle now reaches beyond the object to infinity. A slight change of 
distance brings the Keplerian image from infinity to close by and 
back to infinity. No such phenomenon is ever observed. We see the 
image, slightly enlarged, in a distance that is most of the time 
identical with the actual distance between the object and the lens. 
The visual distance of the image remains constant, however much we 
may vary the distance between lens and object and even when the 
image becomes distorted and, finally, diffuse. 55 
50. Werke, II, p. 72. The Optics of 1 604 has been partly translated into German by 
F. Plehn,J. Kep/ers Grundlagen der geometrischen Optik, Leipzig, 1922. The relevant 
passages occur in section 2 of Chapter 3, pp. 38--48. 
51. ibid., p. 67. 
52. 'Cum imago sit visus opus', ibid., p. 64. 'In visione tenet sensus communis 
oculorum suorum distantiam ex assuefactione, angulos vero ad illam distantiam notat 
ex sensu contortionis oculorum', ibid., p. 66. 
53. 'Triangulum distantiae mensorium', ibid., p. 67. 
54. Optics, op. cit., p. 44. One should also consult the second chapter of this bok 
for the history of pre-Keplerian optics. 
55. ibid., pp. 182, 202. This phenomenon was known to everyone who had used a 
magnifying glass only once, Kepler included. Which shows that disregard of familiar 
phenomena does not entail that the phenomena were seen differently (cf. text to 
foomote 44 to this chapter). Isaac Barrow's account of the difficulty of Kepler's rule 
was mentioned above (text to footnote I8 to Chapter 5). According to Berkeley (op. 
cit., p. 14 I) 'this phenomenon . . .  entirely subverts the opinion of those who wil have 
us judge of distances by lines and angles . . . .  ' Berkeley replaces this opinion by his own 
theory according to which the mind judges distances from the clarity or confusion of 
the primary impressions. Kepler's idea of the telemetric triangle was adopted at once 
by almost all thinkers in the field. It was given a fundamental position by Descanes 
according to whom 'Distantiam . . .  discimus, per mutuam quandam conspirationem 
oculorum' (Dioptrice, quoted from Rmati Descartes Specima Phi/osophiae, Amsterdam, 
I 657, p. 87). 'But,' says Barrow, 'neither this nor any other difficulty shall . . .  make me 
renounce that which I know to be manifestly agreeable to reason.' It is this attitude 

N I N E  
101 
This, then, was the actual situation in 1610 when Galileo 
published his telescopic findings. How did Galileo react to it? The 
answer has already been given: he raised the telescope to the state 
of a 'superior and better sense'. 56 What were his reasons for doing 
which was responsible for the slow advance of a scientific theory of eye glasses and of 
visual optics in general. 'The reason for this peculiar phenomenon,' writes Moritz von 
Rohr (Das Brilleng/as als optisches lrutrument, Berlin, 1934, p. 1), 'is to be sought in the 
close connection between the eye glas and the eye and it is impossible to give an 
acceptable theory of eye glasses without understanding what happens in the process of 
vision itself . . .  .' The telemetric triangle omits precisely this process, or rather gives a 
simplistic and false account of it. The state of optics at the beginning of the 20th 
century is well described in A. Gullstrand's 'Appendices to Part I' of Helmholtz's 
Treatise 01 Physiological Optics, transl. Southall, New York, 1 962, pp. 26l ff. We read 
here how a return to the psycho-physiological process of vision enabled physicists to 
arrive at a more reasonable account even of the physics of optical imagery: 'The reason 
why the laws of actual optical imagery have been, so to speak, summoned to life by the 
requirements of physiological optics is due partly to the fact that by means of 
trigonometrical calculations, tedious to be sure, but easy to perform, it has been 
possible for the optical engineer to get closer to the realities of his problem. Thus, 
thanks to the labours of such men as Abbe and his school, technical optics has attained 
its present splendid development; whereas, with the scientific means available, a 
comprehensive grasp of the intricate relations in the case of the imagery in the eye has 
been actually impossible.' 
56. '0 Nicholas Copernicus, what a pleasure it would have been for you to see this 
part of your system confirmed by so clear an experiment!' writes Galileo, implying that 
the new telescopic phenomena are additional support for Copernicus (Dialogue, op. 
cit., p. 339). The difference in the appearance of planets and fixed stars (cf. foomote 26 
to this chapter) he explains by the hypothesis that 'the very instrument of seeing [the 
eye] introduces a hindrance of its own' (ibid., p. 335), and that the telescope removes 
this hindrance, viz. i"adiation, permitting the eye to see the stars and the planets as 
they really are. (Mario Giuducci, a follower of Galileo, ascribed irradiation to 
refraction by moisture on the surface of the eye, Discourse 01 the Comets of 1618, op. cit., 
p. 47.) This explanation, plausible as it may seem (especiaiiy in view of Galileo's 
attempt to show how irradiation can be removed by means other than the telescope) is 
not as straightforward as one might wish. Gullstrand (op. cit., p. 426) says that 'owing 
to the properties of the wave surface of the bundle of rays refracted in the eye . . .  it is a 
mathematical impossibility for any cross section to cut the caustic surface in a smooth 
curve in the form of a circle concentric with the pupil'. Other authors point to 
'inhomogeneities in the various humours, and above all in the crystalline lens' (Ronchi, 
Optics, op. cit., p. I 04). Kepler gives this account (Convmati01, op. cit., pp. 33ft): 
'Point sources of light transmit their cones to the crystalline lens. There refraction 
takes place, and behind the lens the cones again contract to a point. But this point does 
not reach as far as the retina. Therefore, the light is dispersed once more, and spreads 
over a small area of retina, whereas it should impinge on a point. Hence the telescope, 
by introducing another refraction, makes this point coincide with the retina . . .  .' 
PñIyak, in his classical work The Retina, attributes irradiation partly to 'defects of the 
dJoptrical media and to the imperfect accommodation' but 'chiefly' to the 'peculiar 
Structural constitution of the retina itself (p. 1 76), adding that it may be a function of 
!he brain also (p. 429). None of these hypotheses covers all the facts known about 
Irradiation. Gullstrand, Ronchi, and Polyak (if we omit his reference to the brain 

102 
AGAINST METHOD 
so? This question brings me back to the problems raised by the 
evidence (against Copernicus) that was reported and discussed in 
Chapter 8. 
which can be made to explain anything we want) cannot explain the disappearance of 
irradiation in the telescope. Kepler, Gullstrand and Ronchi also fail to give an account 
of the fact, emphasized by Ronchi, that large objects show no irradiation at their edges 
('Anyone undertaking to account for the phenomenon of irradiation must admit that 
when he looks at an electric bulb from afar so that it seems like a point, he sees it 
surrounded by an immense crown of rays whereas from nearby he sees nothing at all 
around it,' Optics, op. cit., p. I 05). We know now that large objects are made definite by 
the lateral inhibitory interaction of retinal elements (which is further increased by 
brain function), cf. Ratliff, Mach Bands, p. 146, but the variation of the phenomenon 
with the diameter of the object and under the conditions of telescopic vision remains 
unexplored. Galileo's hypothesis received support mainly from its agreement with the 
Copernican point of view and was, therefore, largely ad hoc. 

1 0  
On the other hand, there are some telescopic phenomena which are plainly 
Copernican. Galileo introduces these phenomena as independent evidence 
for Copernicus while the situation is rather that one refuted view -
Copernicanism - has a certain similarity to phenomena emerging from 
another refuted view - the idea that telescopic phenomena are foithful 
images of the sky. 
According to the Copernican theory, Mars and Venus approach and 
recede from the earth by a factor of I :6 or I :8, respectively. (These 
are approximate numbers.) Their change of brightness should be 
I :40 and I :60, respectively (these are Galileo's values). Yet Mars 
changes very little and the variation in the brightness of Venus 'is 
almost imperceptible' .1 These experiences 'overtly contradict the 
annual movement [of the earth]'.2 The telescope, on the other hand, 
produces new and strange phenomena, some of them exposable as 
illusory by observation with the naked eye, some contradictory, some 
having even the appearance of being illusory, while the only theory 
that could have brought order into this chaos, Kepler's theory of 
\'ision, is refuted by evidence of the plainest kind possible. But - and 
with this I come to what I think is a central feature of Galileo's 
procedure - there are telescopic phenomena, namely the telescopic 
variation of the brightness of the planets, which agree more closely with 
Copernicus than do the results of naked-eye obseroation. Seen through the 
telescope, Mars does indeed change as it should according to the 
Copernican view. Compared with the total performance of the 
telescope this change is still quite puzzling. It is just as puzzling as is 
the Copernican theory when compared with the pre-telescopic 
evidence. But the change is in harmony with the predictions of 
Copernicus. It is this harmony iather than any deep understanding of 
I .  The actual variations of Mars and Venus are four magnitudes and one 
magnitude respectively. 
2. Dialogue, op. cit., p. 328. 
103 

104 
AGAINST METHOD 
cosmology and of optics which for Galileo pruves Copernicus and the 
veracity of the telescope in terrestrial as well as celestial matters. And it is 
this harmony on which he builds an entirely new view of the universe. 
'Galileo,' writes Ludovico Geymonat, 3 referring to this aspect of the 
situation, 'was not the first to tum the telescope upon the heavens, 
but . . .  he was the first to grasp the enormous interest of the things 
thus seen. And he understood at once that these things fitted in 
perfectly with the Copernican theory whereas they contradicted the 
old astronomy. Galileo had believed for years in the truth of 
Copemicanism, but he had never been able to demonstrate it despite 
his exceedingly optimistic statements to friends and colleagues [he 
had not even been able to remove the refuting instances, as we have 
seen, and as he says himself]. Should direct proof [should even mere 
agreement with the evidence] be at last sought here? The more this 
conviction took root in his mind, the clearer to him became the 
importance of the new instrument. In Galileo's own mind faith in the 
reliability of the telescope and recognition of its importance were not 
two separate acts, rather, they were two aspeas of the same process.' Can 
the absence of independent evidence be expressed more clearly? 
'The Nuncius', writes Franz Hammer in the most concise account I 
have read of the matter,4 'contains two unknowns, the one being 
solved with the help of the other.' This is entirely correct, except that 
the 'unknowns'"Were not so much unknown as known to be false, as 
Galileo on occasions says himself. It is this rather peculiar situation, 
this harmony between two interesting but refuted ideas, which 
Galileo exploits in order to prevent the elimination of either. 
Exactly the same procedure is used to preserve his new dynamics. 
We have seen that this science, too, was endangered by observable 
events. To eliminate the danger Galileo introduces friction and other 
disturbances with the help of ad hoc hypotheses, treating them as 
tendencies defined by the obvious discrepancy between fact and 
theory rather than as physical events explained by a theory of friction 
for which new and independent evidence might some day become 
3. op. cit., pp. 38fT (my italics). 
4. Johannes Kepler, Gesammelte Werke, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 447. Kepler (Corrversation, 
op. cit., p. 14) speaks of 'mutually self-supporting evidence'. Remember, however, 
that what is 'mutually self-supporting' are two refuted hypotheses and not two 
hypotheses which have independent support in the domain of basic statements. In a letter 
to Herwarth of 26 March 1598, Kepler speaks of the 'many reasons' he wants to 
adduce for the motion of the earth, adding that 'each of these reasons, taken for itself, 
would find only scant belief (Caspar-Dyck,Johannes Kepler in seinen Briefen, Vol. I, 
Munich, 1 930, p. 68). 

TEN 
lOS 
available (such a theory arose only much later, in the 1 8th century). 
Yet the agreement between the new dynamics and the idea of the 
motion of the earth, which Galileo increases with the help of his 
method of anamnesis, makes both seem more reasonable. 
The reader will realize that a more detailed study of historical 
phenomena such as these creates considerable difficulties for the 
view that the transition from the pre-Copernican cosmology to that of 
the 17th century consisted in the replacement of refuted theories by 
more general conjectures which explained the refuting instances, 
made new predictions, and were corroborated by observations 
carried out to test these new predictions. And he will perhaps see the 
merits of a different view which asserts that, while the pre­
Copernican astronomy was in trouble (was confronted by a series of 
refuting instances and implausibilities), the Copernican theory was in 
even greater trouble (was confronted by even more drastic refuting 
instances and implausibilities); but that being in harmony with still 
further inadequate theories it gained strength, and was retained, the 
refutations being made ineffective by ad hoc hypotheses and clever 
techniques of persuasion. This would seem to be a much more 
adequate description of the developments at the time of Galileo than 
is offered by almost all alternative accounts. 
I shall now interrupt the historical narrative to show that the 
description is not only factually adequate, but that it is also perftaly 
reasonable, and that any attempt to enforce some of the more familiar 
methodologies of the 20th century would have had disastrous 
consequences. 

1 1  
Such 'irrational' methods of support are needed because of the 'uneven 
development' (Man-, Lenin) of diferent parts ofscience. Copernican ism and 
other essential ingredients of modem science suroived only because reason 
was frequently uverruled in their past. 
A prevalent tendency in philosophical discussions is to approach 
problems of knowledge sub specie aeternitatis, as it were. Statements 
are compared with each other without regard to their history and 
without considering that they might belong to different historical 
strata. For example, one asks: given background knowledge, initial 
conditions, basic principles, accepted observations - what conclu­
sions can we draw about a newly suggested hypothesis? The answers 
vary considerably. Some say that it is possible to determine degrees of 
confirmation and that the hypothesis can be evaluated with their help. 
Others reject any logic of confirmation and judge hypotheses by their 
content, and by the falsifications that have actually occurred. But 
almost everyone takes it for granted that precise observations, clear 
principles and well-confirmed theories are already decisive; that they 
can and must be used here and now to either eliminate the suggested 
hypothesis, or to make it acceptable, or perhaps even to prove it. 
Such a procedure makes sense only if we can assume that the 
elements of our knowledge - the theories, the observations, the 
principles of our arguments - are timeless entities which share the 
same degree of perfection, are all equally accessible, and are related 
to each other in a way that is independent of the events that produced 
them. This is, of course, an extremely common assumption. It is 
taken for granted by most logicians; it underlies the familiar 
distinction between a context of discovery and a context of 
justification; and it is often expressed by saying that science deals 
with propositions and not with statements or sentences. However, 
the procedure overlooks that science is a complex and heterogeneous 
historical process which contains vague and incoherent anticipations of 
future ideologies side by side with highly sophisticated theoretical 
106 

ELEVEN 
107 
systems and ancient and petrified forms of thought. Some of its 
elements are available in the form of neatly written statements while 
others are submerged and become known only by contrast, by 
comparison with new and unusual views. (This is the way in which 
the inverted tower argument helped Galileo to discover the natural 
interpretations hostile to Copernicus. And this is also the way in 
which Einstein discovered certain deep-lying assumptions of 
classical mechanics, such as the assumption of the existence of 
infinitely fast signals. For general considerations, cf. the last 
paragraph of Chapter 5.) Many of the conflicts and contradictions 
which occur in science are due to this heterogeneity of the material, 
to this 'unevenness' of the historical development, as a Marxist would 
say, and they have no immediate theoretical significance.1 They 
have much in common with the problems which arise when a power 
1. According to Marx, 'secondary' parts of the social process, such as demand, 
artistic production or legal relations, may get ahead of material production and drag it 
along: cf. The Puverty of Philosophy but especially the lntroduaion to the Critique of 
Political Economy, Chicago, 1918, p. 309: 'The unequal relation between the 
development of material production and an, for instance. In general, the conception of 
progress is not to be taken in the sense of the usual abstraction. In the case of an, etc., it 
is not so imponant and difficult to understand this disproportion as in that of practical 
social relations, e.g. the relation between education in the U.S. and Europe. The really 
difficult point, however, that is to be discussed here is that of the unequal development 
of relations of production as legal relations.' Trotsky describes the same situation: 
'The gist of the matter lies in this, that the different aspects of the historical progress ­
economics, politics, the state, the growth of the working class - do not develop 
simultaneously along parallel lines' ('The School of Revolutionary Strategy', speech 
delivered at the general pany membership meeting of the Moscow Organization of 
July 192 I, published in The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol. II, New 
York, 1953, p. 5). See also Lenin, Left-Wing Communism - an Infantile Disorder (op. 
cit., p. 59), concerning the fact that multiple causes of an event may be out of phase and 
have an effect only when they occur together. In a different form, the thesis of'uneven 
development' deals with the fact that capitalism has reached different stages in 
different countries, and even in different parts of the same country. This second type 
of uneven development may lead to inverse relations between the accompanying 
ideologies, so that efficiency in production and radical political ideas develop in inverse 
proportions. 'In civilized Europe, with its highly developed machine industry, its rich, 
multiform culture and its constitutions, a point of history has been reached when the 
commanding bourgeoisie, fearing the growth and increasing strength of the 
proletariat, comes out in suppon of everything backward, moribund, and medieval. . . .  
But all young Asia grows a mighty democratic movement, spreading and gaining in 
strength' (Lenin, 'Backward Europe and Advanced Asia', Colleaed Works, Vol. 19, op. 
cit., pp. 99fl). For this very interesting situation, which deserves to be exploited for the 
philosophy of science, cf. A. C. Meyer, Leninism, Cambridge, 1957, Chapter 1 2  and L. 
Althusser, For Mar.r, London and New York, 1970, Chapters 3 and 6. The 
Philosophical background is splendidly explained in Mao Tse-tung's essay On 
Contradiaion (Seleaed Readings, Peking, I 970, p. 70, especially section IV). 

108 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
station is needed right next to a Gothic cathedral. Occasionally, such 
features are taken into account; for example, when it is asserted that 
physical laws (statements) and biological laws (statements) belong to 
different conceptual domains and cannot be directly compared. But 
in most cases, and especially in the case observation vs theory, our 
methodologies project the various elements of science and the 
different historical strata they occupy on to one and the same plane, 
and proceed at once to render comparative judgements. This is like 
arranging a fight between an infant and a grown man, and announcing 
triumphantly, what is obvious anyway, that the man is going to win (the 
history of science is full of inane criticisms of this kind and so is the 
history of psychoanalysis and of Marxism). In our examination of new 
hypotheses we must obviously take the historical situation into 
account. Let us see how this is going to affect our judgement! 
The geocentric hypothesis and Aristotle's theory of knowledge 
and perception are well adapted to each other. Perception supports 
the theory of locomotion that entails the unmoved earth and it is in 
tum a special case of a comprehensive view of motion that includes 
locomotion, increase and decrease, qualitative alteration, generation 
and corruption. This comprehensive view defines motion as the 
transition of a form from an agent to a patient which terminates when 
the patient possesses exactly the same form that characterized the 
agent at the beginning of the interaction. Perception, accordingly, is a 
process in which the form of the object perceived enters the 
percipient as precisely the same form that characterized the object so 
that the percipient, in a sense, assumes the properties of the object. 
A theory of perception of this kind (which one might regard as a 
sophisticated version of naive realism) does not permit any major 
discrepancy between observations and the things observed. 'That 
there should be things in the world which are inaccessible to man not 
only now, and for the time being, but in principle, and because ofhis 
natural endowment, and which would therefore never be seen by him 
- this was quite inconceivable for later antiquity as well as for the 
Middle Ages.'2 Nor does the theory encourage the use of 
2. F. Blumenberg, Ga/ileo Ga/ilei, Sidereus Nuncius, NachrichtvonneumSternen, Vol. 
I, Frankfurt, 1965, p. 13. Aristotle himself was more open-minded: 'The evidence 
(concerning celestial phenomena) is furnished but scantily by sensations, whereas 
respecting perishable plants and animals we have abundant information, living as we do 
in their midst . . . ',De Part.Anim., 644b26ff. In what follows, a highly idealized account is 
given oflater Aristotelianism. Unless otherwise stated, the word ' Aristotle' refers to this 
idealization. For the difficulties in forming a coherent picture of Aristotle himself cf. 
Diiring,Aristoteles, Heidelberg, 1966. For some differences between Aristotle and his 
mediaeval followers cf. Wolfgang Wieland, Die Aristote/ische Physik, Gottingen, 1970. 

ELEVEN 
/09 
instruments, for they interfere with the processes in the medium. 
These processes carry a true picture only as long as they are left 
undisturbed. Disturbances create forms which are no longer 
identical with the shape of the objects perceived - they create 
illusions. Such illusions can be readily demonstrated by examining 
the images produced by curved mirrors, 3 or by crude lenses (and 
remember that the lenses used by Galileo were far from the level of 
perfection achieved today): they are distorted, the lens-images have 
coloured fringes, they may appear at a place different from the place 
of the object and so on. Astronomy, physics, psychology, epistemol­
ogy- all these disciplines collaborate with the Aristotelian philosophy 
to create a system that is coherent, rational and in agreement with the 
results of observation as can be seen from an examination of 
Aristotelian philosophy in the form in which it was developed by 
some mediaeval philosophers. Such an analysis shows the inherent 
power of the Aristotelian system. 
The role of observation in Aristotle is quite interesting. Aristotle is 
an empiricist. His injunctions against an overly-theoretical approach 
are as militant as those of the 'scientific' empiricists of the 17th and 
18th centuries. But while the latter take both the truth and the 
content of empiricism for granted, Aristotle explains the nature of 
experience and why it is important. Experience is what a normal 
observer (an observer whose senses are in good order and who is not 
drunk or sleepy, etc.) perceives under normal circumstances (broad 
daylight; no interference with the medium) and describes in an idiom 
that fits the facts and can be understood by all. Experience is 
important for knowledge because, given normal circumstances, the 
perceptions of the observer contain identically the same forms that 
reside in the object. Nor are these explanations ad hoc. They are a 
direct consequence of Aristotle's general theory of motion, taken in 
conjunction with the physiological idea that sensations obey the same 
physical laws as does the rest of the universe. And they are confirmed 
by the evidence that confirms either of these two views (the existence 
of distorted lens-images being part of the evidence). We understand 
today a little better why a theory of motion and perception which is 
now regarded as false could be so successful (evolutionary 
explanation of the adaptation of organisms; movement in media). 
3. Already a plain mirror gives rise to an interesting illusion. To notice it, first 
look at yourself in a plain mirror. You will see your face at its 'normal' size. 
Then let some steam condense on the surface of the mirror and draw the out­
line of your face in the steam. The outline will look about half the size of your 
face. 

110 
AGAINST METHOD 
The fact remains that no decisive empirical argument could be raised 
against it (though it was not free from difficulties). 
This harmony between human perception and the Aristotelian 
cosmology is regarded as illusory by the supporters of the motion of 
the earth. In the view of the Copemicans there exist large-scale 
processes which involve vast cosmic masses and yet leave no trace in 
our experience. The existent observations therefore count no longer 
as tests of the new basic laws that are being proposed. They are not 
directly attached to these laws, and they may be entirely discon­
nected. Today, after the success of modem science led to the belief 
that the relation between man and the universe is not as simple as is 
assumed by naive realism, we can say that this was a correct guess, 
that the observer is indeed separated from the laws of the world by 
the special physical conditions of his observation platform, the 
moving earth (gravitational effects; law of inertia; Coriolis forces; 
influence of the atmosphere upon optical observations; aberration; 
stellar parallax; and so on . . .  ), by the idiosyncrasies of his basic 
instrument of observation, the human eye (irradiation; after-images; 
mutual inhibition of adjacent retinal elements; and so on . . .  ) as well 
as by older views which have invaded the observation language and 
made it speak the language of naive realism (natural interpretations). 
Observations may contain a contribution from the thing observed, 
but this contribution merges with other effects (some of which we 
have just mentioned), and it may be completely obliterated by them. 
Just consider the image of a fixed star as viewed through a telescope. 
This image is displaced by the effects of refraction, aberration and, 
possibly, of gravitation. It contains the spectrum of the star not as it is 
now, but as it was some time ago (in the case of extra-galactic 
supernovae the difference may be millions of years), and distorted by 
Doppler effect, intervening galactic matter, etc. Moreover, the 
extension and the internal structure of the image is entirely 
determined by the telescope and the eyes of the observer: it is the 
telescope that decides how large the diffraction disks are going to be, 
and it is the human eye that decides how much of the structure of 
these disks is going to be seen. It needs considerable skill and much 
theory to isolate the contribution of the original cause, the star, and to 
use it for a test, but this means that non-Aristotelian cosmologies can 
be tested only after we have separated observations and laws with the 
help of auxiliary sciences describing the complex processes that 
occur between the eye and the object, and the even more complex 
processes between the cornea and the brain. We must subdivide what 
we perceive to find a core that mirrors the stimulus and nothing else. 
In the case of Copernicus we need a new meteorology (in the good old 

E L EVEN 
Ill 
FIGURE 2. Moon, age seven days (first quaner). 

112 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
sense of the word, as dealing with things below the moon), a new 
science of physiological optics that deals with the subjective (mind) and 
the objective (light, medium, lenses, structure of the eye) aspects of 
vision as well as a new dynamics stating the manner in which the 
motion of the earth might influence the physical processes at its 
surface. Observations become relevant only after the processes 
described by these new subjects have been inserted between the 
world and the eye. The language in which we express our 
observations may have to be revised as well so that the new cosmology 
receives a fair chance and is not endangered by an unnoticed 
collaboration of sensations and older ideas. In sum: what is needed for 
a test of Copernicus is an entirely new world-view containing a new view of 
man and of his capacities of knowing. 4 
4. Bacon realized that scientific change involves a reformation not only of a few 
ideas, but of an entire world-view and, perhaps, of the very nature of humans. 'For the 
senses are weak and erring', he writes in Nuvum Organum, Aphorism 50. 'For man's 
sense is falsely assened to be the standard of things; on the contrary, all the 
perceptions, both of the senses and of the mind bear reference to man and not to the 
universe, and the human mind resembles those uneven mirrors which impan their 
own properties to different objects from which rays are emitted and diston and 
disfigure them' (Aphorism 41). Bacon repeatedly comments on the 'dullness, 
incompetency and errors of the senses' (50) and permits them only to 'judge . . .  the 
experiment' while it is the experiment that functions as a judge 'of nature and the thing 
itself (50). Thus when Bacon speaks of the 'unprejudiced senses' he does not mean 
sense-data, or immediate impressions, but reactions of a sense organ that has been 
rebuilt in order to mirror nature in the right way. Research demands that the entire 
human being be rebuilt. This idea of a physical and mental reform of humanity has 
religious features. A 'demolishing branch' (1 15), an 'expiatory process', a 'purification 
of the mind' (69) must precede the accumulation of knowledge. 'Our only hope of 
salvation is to begin the whole labour of the mind again' (Preface) but only 'after having 
cleansed, polished, and levelled its surface' (I I 5). Preconceived notions (36), opinions 
(42fl), even the most common words (59, 121) 'must be abjured and renounced with 
firm and solemn resolution . . .  so that the access to the kingdom of man, which is 
founded on the sciences, may resemble that to the kingdom of heaven, where no 
admission is conceded except to children' (68). 
A reform of man is necessary for a correct science - but it is not sufficient. Science, 
according to Bacon, not only orders events, it is also supposed to give physical reasons. 
Thus Ptolemy and Copernicus give us 'the number, situation, motion, and periods of 
the stars, as a beautiful outside of the heavens, whilst the flesh and the entrails are 
wanting; that is, a well fabricated system, or the physical reasons and foundations for a 
just theory, that should not only solve phenomena, as almost any ingenious theory may 
do, but show the substance, motions and influences of the heavenly bodies as they 
really are.' Advancement of Learning, Chapter 4, quoted from Wiley Boks, New York, 
1944, p. 85. Cf. also the Nuvum Organum, op. cit., p. 371: 'For let no one hope to 
determine the question whether the eanh or heaven revolve in the diurnal motion, 
unless he have first comprehended the nature of spontaneous motion': the new man 
needs a new physics in order to give substance to his astronomy. Galileo did not 
succeed in providing such a physics. 

ELEVEN 
113 
It is obvious that such a new world-view will take a long time 
appearing, and that we may never succeed to formulate it in its 
entirety. It is extremely unlikely that the idea of the motion of the 
earth will at once be followed by the arrival, in full formal splendour, 
of all the sciences that are now said to constitute the body of'classical 
physics'. Or, to be a little more realistic, such a sequence of events is 
not only extremely unlikely, it is impossible in principle, given the 
nature of humans and the complexities of the world they inhabit. 
Today Copernicus, tomorrow Helmholtz - this is but a Utopian 
dream. Yet it is only after these sciences have arrived that a test can be 
said to make sense. 
This need to wait, and to ignore large masses of critical 
observations and measurements, is hardly ever discussed in our 
methodologies. Disregarding the possibility that a new physics or a 
new astronomy might have to be judged by a new theory of knowledge 
and might require entirely new tests, empirically inclined scientists at 
once confront it with the status quo and announce triumphandy that 'it 
is not in agreement with facts and received principles'. They are of 
course right, and even trivially so, but not in the sense intended by 
them. For at an early stage of development the contradiction only 
indicates that the old and the new are diferent and out ofphase. lt does 
not show which view is the better one. A judgement of this kind 
presupposes that the competitors confront each other on equal 
terms. How shall we proceed in order to bring about such a fair 
comparison? 
The first step is clear: we must retain the new cosmology until it has 
been supplemented by the necessary auxiliary sciences. We must 
retain it in the face of plain and unambiguous refuting facts. We may, 
of course, try to explain our action by saying that the critical 
observations are either not relevant or that they are illusory, but we 
cannot support such an explanation by a single objective reason. 
Whatever explanation we give is nothing but a verbal gesture, a geode 
invitation to participate in the development of the new philosophy. 
Nor can we reasonably remove the received theory of perception 
which says that the observations are relevant, gives reasons for this 
assertion, and is confirmed by independent evidence. Thus the new 
view is arbitrarily separated from data that supported its predecessor 
Science-loving philosophers, including those who call themselves 'critical', are 
quick to criticize thinkers who do not share their pet ideas. Bacon was often criticized 
for not at once falling for Copernicus. He was criticized for this unspeakable crime by 
philosophers whose own 'rationalism' would never have aUowed Copernicus to live. 
An example is K.R. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Vol. 2, p. 16. 

114 
AGAINST METHOD 
and is made more 'metaphysical': a new period in the history of 
science commences with a backward muvement that returns us to an 
earlier stage where theories were more vague and had smaller 
empirical content. This backward movement is not just an accident; 
it has a definite function; it is essential if we want to overtake the status 
quo, for it gives us the time and the freedom that are needed for 
developing the main view in detail, and for finding the necessary 
auxiliary sciences. 5 
This backward movement is indeed essential - but how can we 
persuade people to follow our lead? How can we lure them away from 
a well-defined, sophisticated and empirically successful system and 
make them transfer their allegiance to an unfinished and absurd 
hypothesis? To a hypothesis, moreover, that is contradicted by one 
observation after another if we only take the trouble to compare it 
with what is plainly shown to be the case by our senses? How can we 
convince them that the success of the status quo is only apparent and is 
bound to be shown as such in 500 years or more, when there is not a 
single argument on our side (and remember that the illustrations I 
used two paragraphs earlier derive their force from the successes of 
classical physics and were not available to the Copemicans).6 It is 
clear that allegiance to the new ideas wil have to be brought about by 
means other than arguments. It will have to be brought about by 
irrational means such as propaganda, emotion, ad hoc hypotheses, and 
appeal to prejudices of all kinds. We need these 'irrational means' in 
order to uphold what is nothing but a blind faith until we have found 
the auxiliary sciences, the facts, the arguments that tum the faith into 
sound 'knowledge'. 
It is in this context that the rise of a new secular class with a new 
outlook and considerable contempt for the science of the schools, its 
methods, its results, even for its language, becomes so important. 
The barbaric Latin spoken by the scholars, the intellectual squalor of 
academic science, its other-worldliness which is soon interpreted as 
uselessness, its connection with the Church - all these elements are 
5. An example of a backward movement of this kind is Galileo's return to the 
kinematics of the Commentariolus and his disregard for the machinery of epicycles as 
developed in the De Revol. For an admirable rational account of this step cf. Imre 
Lakatos and Eli Zahar, 'Why Did Copernicus' Research Programme Supersede 
Ptolemy's?', in Imre Lakatos, Philosophical Papen Vol. I, Cambridge 1978. 
6. They were available to the sceptics, especially to Aenesidemus, who points out, 
foUowing Philo, that no object appears as it is but is modified by being combined with 
air, light, humidity, heat, etc.; cf. Diogenes Laertius, IX, 84. However, it seems that the 
sceptical view had only little influence on the development of modem astronomy, and 
understandably so: one does not start a movement by being reasonable. 

ELEVEN 
115 
now lmuĮed together with the Aristotelian cosmology and the 
contempt one feels for them is transferred to every single Aristotelian 
argument.7 This guilt-by-association does not make the arguments 
less rational, or less conclusive, but it reduces their influence on the 
minds of those who are willing to follow Copernicus. For Copernicus 
now stands for progress in other areas as well, he is a symbol for the 
ideals of a new class that looks back to the classical times of Plato and 
Cicero and forward to a free and pluralistic society. The association 
of astronomical ideas and historical and class tendencies does not 
produce new arguments either. But it engenders a firm commitment 
to the heliocentric view - and this is all that is needed at this stage, as 
we have seen. We have also seen how masterfully Galileo exploits the 
situation and how he amplifies it by tricks, jokes, and non-sequiturs of 
his own.8 
We are here dealing with a situation that must be analysed and 
understood if we want to adopt a more reasonable attitude towards 
the issue between 'reason' and 'irrationality'. Reason grants that the 
ideas which we introduce in order to expand and to improve our 
7. For these social pressures cf. Olschki's magnificent Geschichte der neusprach­
lichen wissenschaftlichen Literatur. For the role of Puritanism cf. R.F. Jones, op. cit., 
Chapters V and VI. 
8. In a remarkable book, Galileo Heretic, Princeton, 1987 (first published, in 
Italian, in 1982), Pietro Redondi has described the groups both inside the Church (and 
including the Pope himself) and outside of it who looked favourably upon new 
scientific developments, the views on perception, continuity, matter and motion that 
had been explained by Galileo in hisAssăer among them. Being in direct conflict with 
the traditional account of the Eucharist, the most important sacrament, these views 
were considerably more dangerous than Copemicanism and could be tolerated only as 
long as the groups and the Pope himself had the upper hand in the complex political 
developments of the time (Thirty Years' War; French and Spanish politics; the French 
alliance with the Pope). The political reversal of the Pope's fortunes, the accusations of 
leniency towards heretics that were raised against him on political grooods cast a 
shadow on his attitude towards scientific matters as well (here, too, he seemed to 
support heresy) and made protective measures necessary. Redondi tries to show (a) 
that the physics of the time was connected with theological doctrines such as the 
doctrine of the Eucharist and that a history of science that neglects the connection 
becomes incomprehensible and (b) that the attitude towards scientific problems 
caused by the connection and thus the attitude towards innovation changed with the 
political climate. The second part of (b) may well be true but there is only weak 
evidence to support the rest: what Galileo says about atomism in the Assăer is much 
too brief and indefinite to conflict with transsubstantiation (it is an aside almost, not an 
elaborate statement) and with the exception of a rather problematic document no such 
conflict was perceived. (Cf. R.S. Westfall, Essăs on the Trial of Galileo, Vatican 
Observatory Publications, 1989, pp. 84fT.) What is valuable in Redondi's account is 
that he widens the domain of possible influences and thus undermines the 
anachronistic) belief that then as now scientific rationality was restricted to the 
Internal problem situation of a scientific discipline. 

116 
AGAINST M ET H O D  
knowledge may arise in a very disorderly way and that the origin of a 
particular point of view may depend on class prejudice, passion, 
personal idiosyncrasies, questions of style, and even on error, pure 
and simple. But it also demands that in judging such ideas we follow 
certain well-defined rules: our evaluation of ideas must not be 
invaded by irrational elements. Now, what our historical examples 
seem to show is this: there are situations when our most liberal 
judgements and our most liberal rules would have eliminated a point 
of view which we regard today as essential for science, and would not 
have permitted it to prevail - and such situations occur quite 
frequently. The ideas survived and they now are said to be in 
agreement with reason. They survived because prejudice, passion, 
conceit, errors, sheer pigheadedness, in short because all the 
elements that characterize the context of discovery, oposed the 
dictates of reason and because these i"ational elements were pennitted to 
have their way. To express it differently: Copernicanism and other 
'rational' views exist today only because reason was overruled at some time 
in their past. (The opposite is also true: witchcraft and other 
'irrational' views have ceased to be influential only because reason was 
overruled at some time in their past.)9 
Now, assuming that Copernicanism is a Good Thing, we must also 
admit that its survival is a Good Thing. And, considering the 
conditions of its survival, we must further admit that it was a Good 
Thing that reason was overruled in the 16th, 1 7th and even the 1 8th 
centuries. Moreover, the cosmologists of the 1 6th and 1 7th centuries 
did not have the knowledge we have today, they did not know that 
Copernicanism was capable of giving rise to a scientific system that is 
acceptable from the point of view of'scientific method'. They did not 
know which of the many views that existed at their time would lead to 
future reason when defended in an 'irrational' way. Being without 
such guidance they had to make a guess and in making this guess they 
could only follow their inclinations, as we have seen. Hence it is 
advisable to let one's inclinations go against reason in any circumstances, 
for it makes life less constrained and science may profit from it. 
9. These considerations refute J. Dorling, who, in British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science, Vol. 23, 1972. 189f, presents my 'irrationalism' as a presupposition of my 
research, not as a result. He continues: ' . . .  one would have thought that the 
philosopher of science would be most interested in picking out and analysing in detail 
those scientific arguments which did seem to be rationally reconstructible.' One would 
have thought that the philosopher of science would be most interested in picking out 
and analysing in detail those moves which are necessary for the advancement of science. 
Such moves, I have oied to show, often resist rational reconstruction. 

ELEVEN 
117 
It is clear that this argument, that advises us not to let reason 
overrule our inclinations and occasionally to suspend reason 
altogether, does not depend on the historical material which I have 
presented. If my account of Galileo is historically correct, then the 
argument stands as formulated. If it turns out to be a fairy-tale, then 
this fairy-tale tells us that a conflict between reason and the 
preconditions of progress is possible, it indicates how it might arise, 
and it forces us to conclude that our chances to progress may be 
obstructed by our desire to be rational. And note that progress is here 
defined as a rationalistic lover of science would define it, i.e. as 
entailing that Copernicus is better than Aristotle and Einstein better 
than Newton. Of course, there is no need to accept this definition, 
which is certainly quite narrow. I use it only to show that an idea of 
reason accepted by the majority of rationalists may prevent progress 
as defined by the very same majority. I now resume the discussion of 
some details of the transition from Aristotle to Copernicus. 
The first step on the way to a new cosmology, I have said, is a step 
back: apparently relevant evidence is pushed aside, new data are 
brought in by ad hoc connections, the empirical content of science is 
drastically reduced. Now the cosmology that happens to be at the 
centre of attention and whose adoption causes us to carry out the 
changes just described differs from other views in one respect only: it 
has features which at the time in question seem attractive to some 
people. But there is hardly any idea that is totally without merit and 
that might not also become the starting point of concentrated effort. 
No invention is ever made in isolation, and no idea is, therefore, 
completely without (abstract or empirical) support. Now if partial 
support and partial plausibility suffice to start a new trend - and I 
have suggested that they do - if starting a new trend means taking a 
step back from the evidence, if any idea can become plausible and can 
receive partial support, then the step back is in fact a step forward, 
and away from the tyranny of tightly-knit, highly corroborated, and 
gracelessly presented theoretical systems. 'Another different error', 
writes Bacon on precisely this point, 10 'is the . . . peremptory 
reduction of knowledge into arts and methods, from which time the 
sciences are seldom improved; for as young men rarely grow in 
stature after their shape and limbs are fully formed, so knowledge, 
whilst it lies in aphorisms and observations, remains in a growing 
10. Advancement of Learning (1605 edition), New York, 1944, p. 21. Cf. also the 
Novum Organum, Aphorisms 79, 86, as well asJ.W.N. Watkins' splendid little book 
Hobbes' System of/dea.s, London, 1965, p. 169. 

118 
AGAINST METHOD 
state; but when once fashioned into methods, though it may be 
further polished, illustrated and fitted for use, is no longer increased 
in bulk and substance.' 
The similarity with the arts which has often been asserted arises at 
exactly this point. Once it has been realized that a close empirical fit is 
no virtue and that it must be relaxed in times of change, then style, 
elegance of expression, simplicity of presentation, tension of plot and 
narrative, and seductiveness of content become important features of 
our knowledge. They give life to what is said and help us to overcome 
the resistance of the observational material.1 1  They create and 
maintain interest in a theory that has been partly removed from the 
observational plane and would be inferior to its rivals when judged by 
the customary standards. It is in this context that much of Galileo's 
work should be seen. This work has often been likened to 
propaganda12 - and propaganda it certainly is. But propaganda of this 
kind is not a marginal affair that surrounds allegedly more substantial 
means of defence, and that should perhaps be avoided by the 
'professionally honest scientist'. In the circumstances we are 
considering now, propaganda is of the essence. It is of the essence 
because interest must be created at a time when the usual 
methodological prescriptions have no point of attack; and because 
this interest must be maintained, perhaps for centuries, until new 
reasons arrive. It is also clear that such reasons, i.e. the appropriate 
auxiliary sciences, need not at once tum up in full formal splendour. 
They may at first be quite inarticulate, and may even conflict with the 
existing evidence. Agreement, or partial agreement, with the 
cosmology is all that is needed in the beginning. The agreement 
shows that they are at least relevant and that they may some day 
produce full-fledged positive evidence. Thus the idea that the 
telescope shows the world as it really is leads to many difficulties. But 
the support it lends to, and receives from, Copernicus is a hint that we 
might be moving in the right direction. 
We have here an extremely interesting relation between a general 
view and the particular hypotheses which constitute its evidence. It is 
often assumed that general views do not mean much unless the 
relevant evidence can be fully specified. Camap, for example, asserts 
that 'there is no independent interpretation for [the language in 
terms of which a certain theory or world-view is formulated]. The 
system T[the axioms of the theory and the rules of derivation] is itself 
1 1 .  'What restitutes to scientific phenomenon its life, is an' (The Diary of Anais 
Nin, Vol !, p. 277). 
12. Cf. A. Koyre, Eludes Ga/iliennes, Vol. Ill, Paris, 1939, pp. 53fT. 

E LEVEN 
119 
an uninterpreted postulate system. [Its] terms obtain only an indirect 
and incomplete interpretation by the fact that some of them are 
connected by correspondence rules with observational terms.' 13 
'There is no independent interpretation,' says Carnap and yet an idea 
such as the idea of the motion of the earth, which was inconsistent 
with the contemporary evidence, which was upheld by declaring this 
evidence to be irrelevant and which was therefore cut from the most 
important facts of contemporary astronomy, managed to become a 
nucleus, a crystallization point for the aggregation of other 
inadequate views which gradually increased in articulation and finally 
fused into a new cosmology including new kinds of evidence. There 
is no better account of this process than the description which John 
Stuart Mill has left us of the vicissitudes of his education. Referring 
to the explanations which his father gave him on logical matters he 
writes: 'The explanations did not make the matter at all clear to me at 
the time; but they were not therefore useless; they remained as a 
nucleus for my observations and reflections to crystallize upon; the 
import of his general remarks being interpreted to me, by the 
particular instances which came under my notice aftertiJarrls.14 In 
exactly the same manner the Copernican view, though devoid of 
cognitive content from the point of view of a strict empiricism or else 
refuted, was needed in the construction of the supplementary 
sciences even before it became testable with their help and even 
before it, in turn, provided them with supporting evidence of the 
most forceful kind. 
There is a further element in this tapestry of moves, influences, 
beliefs which is rather interesting and which received attention only 
recently - the role of patronage. Today most researchers gain a 
reputation, a salary and a pension by being associated with a 
university and/or a research laboratory. This involves certain 
conditions such as an ability to work in teams, a willingness to 
subordinate one's ideas to those of a team leader, a harmony between 
one's ways of doing science and those of the rest of the profession, a 
certain style, a way of presenting the evidence - and so on. Not 
everyone fits conditions such as these; able people remain 
unemployed because they fail to satisfy some of them. Conversely the 
reputation of a university or a research laboratory rises with the 
. 13. 'The Methodological Character of Theoretical Concepts', Minnesota Studies 
In the Philosophy of Science, Vol. I, Minneapolis, p. 47. 
14. Autobiography, quoted from Essential Works of John Stuart Mill, ed. Lerner, 
New York, 1965, p. 21. 

120 
AGAINST METHOD 
reputation of its members. In Galileo's time patronage played a 
similar role. There were certain ways of gaining a patron and of 
keeping him. The patron in tum rose in estimation only if he 
succeeded to attract and to keep individuals of outstanding 
achievement. According to Westfall, 1 5  the Church permitted the 
publication of Galileo's Dialogue in the full knowledge of the 
controversial matters contained in it '[n]ot least because a Pope 
[Urban VIII] who gloried in his reputation as a Maecenas, was 
unwilling to place it in jeopardy by saying no to the light of his times', 
and Galileo fell because he violated his side of the rules of 
patronage.16 
Considering all these elements, the 'Rise of the Copernican 
World-View' becomes a complicated matter indeed. Accepted 
methodological rules are put aside because of social requirements 
(patrons need to be persuaded by means more effective than 
argument), instruments are used to redefine experience instead of 
being tested by it, local results are extrapolated into space despite 
reasons to the contrary, analogies abound - and yet all this turns out, 
in retrospect, to have been the correct way of circumventing the 
restrictions implied by the human condition. This is the material that 
should be used to get better insight into the complex process of 
knowledge acquisition and improvement. 
To sum up the content of the last five chapters: 
When the 'Pythagorean idea' of the motion of the earth was revived 
by Copernicus it met with difficulties which exceeded the difficulties 
encountered by contemporary Ptolemaic astronomy. Strictly speak­
ing, one had to regard it as refuted. Galileo, who was convinced of the 
truth of the Copernican view and who did not share the quite 
common, though by no means universal, beliefin a stable experience, 
looked for new kinds of fact which might support Copernicus and 
still be acceptable to all. Such facts he obtained in two different ways. 
First, by the invention of his telescope, which changed the sensory core 
of everyday experience and replaced it by puzzling and unexplained 
phenomena; and by his principle of relativity and his dynamics, which 
changed its conceptual components. Neither the telescopic phenomena 
IS. op. cit., p. 73. 
16. Funher details on these matters in Chapter 8, footnote 12 of the present essay, 
Westfall, op. cit., and M. Biagioli, Gali/eo Courtier. M. Finocchiaro, Gali/eo and the Art 
of Reasoning, Dordrecht, 1 980, has commented on Galileo's use of rhetoric, while M. 
Pera and W.R. Shea (eds), Persuading Science- The Art of Scientific Rhetoric, 1991, and 
especially Marcello Pera, Science and Rhetoric, fonhcoming, comment on scientific 
rhetoric in general. 

ELEVEN 
121 
nor the new ideas of motion were acceptable to common sense (or to 
the Aristotelians). Besides, the associated theories could be easily 
shown to be false. Yet these false theories, these unacceptable 
phenomena, were transformed by Galileo and converted into strong 
support of Copernicus. The whole rich reservoir of the everyday 
experience and of the intuition of his readers is utilized in the 
argument, but the facts which they are invited to recall are arranged 
in a new way, approximations are made, known effects are omitted, 
different conceptual lines are drawn, so that a new kind of experience 
arises, manufactured almost out of thin air. This new experience is 
then solidified by insinuating that the reader has been familiar with it 
all the time. It is solidified and soon accepted as gospel truth, despite 
the fact that its conceptual components are vastly more speculative 
than are the conceptual components of common sense. Following 
positivistic usage we may therefore say that Galileo's science rests on 
an illustrated metaphysics. The distortion permits Galileo to advance, 
but it prevents almost everyone else from making his effort the basis 
of a critical philosophy (for a long time emphasis was put either on his 
mathematics, or on his alleged experiments, or on his frequent appeal 
to the 'truth', and his propagandistic moves were altogether 
neglected). I suggest that what Galileo did was to let refuted theories 
support each other, that he built in this way a new world-view which 
was only loosely (if at all!) connected with the preceding cosmology 
(everyday experience included), that he established fake connections 
with the perceptual elements of this cosmology which are only now 
being replaced by genuine theories (physiological optics, theory of 
continua), and that whenever possible he replaced old facts by a new 
type of experience which he simply invented for the purpose of 
supporting Copernicus. Remember, incidentally, that Galileo's 
procedure drastically reduces the content of dynamics: Aristotelian 
dynamics was a general theory of change comprising locomotion, 
qualitative change, generation and corruption. Galileo's dynamics 
and its successors deal with locomotion only, other kinds of motion 
being pushed aside with the promissory note (due to Democritos) 
that locomotion will eventually be capable of comprehending all 
motion. Thus, a comprehensive empirical theory of motion is 
replaced by a much narrower theory plus a metaphysics of motion, 
iust as an 'empirical' experience is replaced by an experience that 
contains speculative elements. This, I suggest, was the actual 
procedure followed by Galileo. Proceeding in this way he exhibited a 
style, a sense ofhumour, an elasticity and elegance, and an awareness 
of the valuable weaknesses of human thinking, which has never been 
equalled in the history of science. Here is an almost inexhaustible 

122 
AGAINST METHOD 
source of material for methodological speculation and, much more 
importantly, for the recovery of those features of knowledge which 
not only inform, but which also delight us. 17 
17. A few years ago Martin Gardner, the pitbull of scientism, published an article 
with the title 'Anti-Science, the Strange Case of Paul Feyerabend' Critical Inquiry, 
Winter 1982/83. The valiant lighter seems to have overlooked these and other 
passages. I am not against science. I praise its foremost practitioners and (next chapter) 
suggest that their procedures be adopted by philosophers. What I object to is narrow­
minded philosophical interference and a narrow-minded extension of the latest 
scientific fashions to all areas of human endeavour - in short what I object to is a 
rationalistic interpretation and defence of science. 

1 2  
Galileo 's method works in other fields as well. For example, it can be used to 
eliminate the existing arguments against materialism and to put an end to 
the philosophical mind/body problem. (The corresponding scientific 
problems remain untouched, howroer.) It does not follow that it should be 
universally applied. 
Galileo made progress by changing familiar connections between 
words and words (he introduced new concepts), words and 
impressions (he introduced new natural interpretations), by using 
new and unfamiliar principles such as his law of inertia and his 
principle of universal relativity, and by altering the sensory core of his 
observation statements. His motive was the wish to accommodate the 
Copernican point of view. Copemicanism clashes with some obvious 
facts, it is inconsistent with plausible, and apparently well­
established, principles, and it does not fit in with the 'grammar' of a 
commonly spoken idiom. It does not fit in with the 'form oflife' that 
contains these facts, principles, and grammatical rules. But neither 
the rules, nor the principles, nor even the facts are sacrosanct. The 
fault may lie with them and not with the idea that the earth moves. We 
may therefore change them, create new facts and new grammatical 
rules, and see what happens once these rules are available and have 
become familiar. Such an attempt may take considerable time, and in 
a sense the Galilean venture is not finished even today. But we can 
already see that the changes were wise ones to make and that it would 
have been foolish to stick with the Aristotelian form of life to the 
exclusion of everything else. 
With the mind/body problem, the situation is exactly the same. We 
have again observations, concepts, general principles, and gram­
matical rules which, taken together, constitute a 'form of life' that 
apparently supports some views, such as dualism, and excludes 
others, such as materialism. (I say 'apparently' for the situation is 
much less clear here than it was in the astronomical case.) And we 
may again proceed in the Galilean manner, look for new natural 
123 

124 
AGAINST METHOD 
interpretations, new facts, new grammatical rules, new principles 
which can accommodate materialism and then compare the total 
systems - materialism and the new facts, rules, natural interpreta­
tions, and principles on the one side; dualism and the old 'forms of 
life' on the other. Thus there is no need to try, like Smart, to show 
that materialism is compatible with the ideology of common sense. 
Nor is the suggested procedure as 'desperate' (Armstrong) as it must 
appear to those who are unfamiliar with conceptual change. The 
procedure was commonplace in antiquity and it occurs wherever 
imaginative researchers strike out in new directions (Einstein and 
Bohr are recent examples).1 
So far the argument was purely intellectual. I tried to show that 
neither logic nor experience can limit speculation and that 
outstanding researchers often transgressed widely accepted limits. 
But concepts have not only a logical content; they also have 
associations, they give rise to emotions, they are connected with 
images. These associations, emotions and images are essential for 
the way in which we relate to our fellow human beings. Removing 
them or changing them in a fundamental way may perhaps make our 
concepts more 'objective', but it often violates important social 
constraints. It was for this reason that Aristotle refused to abandon an 
intuitive view of human beings simply because a more physiological 
approach showed successes in a limited domain. For him a person 
was a social entity and defined by his or her function in the city no 
matter what atomists or physicians involved in theory might say. 
Similarly the Roman Church, being interested in souls and not only 
in astronomical tricks, forbade Galileo to present his badly founded 
guesses as truths and punished him when he violated the prohibition. 
The trial of Galileo raises important questions about the role 
products of specialists, such as abstract knowledge, are supposed to 
play in society. It is for this reason that I shall now give a brief account 
of this event. 
I .  For a more detailed discussion the reader is referred to my Philosophical Papm, 
Vol. I ,  Chapters 9 and 10. 

1 3  
The Church at the time ofGalileo not only kept closer to reason as defined 
then and, in part, even now; it also considered the ethical and social 
consequences of Cali/ eo s views. Its indictment of Gali/eo was rational and 
only opportunism and a lack of perspective can demand a revision. 
There were many trials in the 17th century. The proceedings started 
either with accusations made by private parties, with an official act by 
a public officer, or with an inquiry based on sometimes rather vague 
suspicions. Depending on the location, the distribution of jurisdic­
tion and the balance of power at a particular time, crimes might be 
examined by secular courts such as the courts of kings or of free 
cities, by Church courts, such as the spiritual courts attached to every 
episcopate, or by the special courts of the Inquisition. After the 
middle of the 12th century the episcopal courts were greatly aided by 
the study of Roman law. Lawyers became so influential that, even if 
wholly untrained in canon law and theology, they had a much better 
chance of high preferment than a theologian.' The inquisitorial 
process removed safeguards provided by Roman law and led to some 
well-publicized excesses. What has not been publicized to the same 
extent is that the excesses of royal or secular courts often matched 
those of the Inquisition. It was a harsh and cruel age. 2 By 1600 the 
I .  For this complaint (made by Roger Bacon) cf. H. Ch. Lea, A History of the 
Inquisition of the Middle Ages, Vol. I, p. 309. Chapters ixff explain the details of the 
inquisitorial procedure, the ways in which they differed from other procedures and the 
reasons for the difference. Cf. also G.G. Coulton, Inquisition and Liberty, Boston, 
1959, Chapters XI-XV. 
2. Charles Henry Lea, the great liberal historian, writes: 'On the whole we may 
conclude that the secret prisons of the Inquisition were less intolerable places of abode 
than the episcopal and public gaols. The general policy respecting them was more 
humane and enlightened than that of other jurisdictions, whether in Spain or 
elsewhere, although negligent supervision allowed of abuses and there were ample 
resources of rigor in reserve, when the obstinacy of the impenitent was to be broken 
down.' History of the Inquisition in Spain, Vol. 2, New York, 1906, p. 534. Prisoners 
accused before secular couns occasionally committed crimes under the jurisdiction of 
1 25 

126 
AGAINST METHOD 
Inquisition had lost much of its power and aggressiveness. This was 
true especially in Italy and more particularly in Venice.3 
The courts of the Inquisition also examined and punished crimes 
concerning the production and the use of knowledge. This can be 
explained by their origin: they were supposed to exterminate heresy, 
i.e. complexes consisting of actions, assumptions and talk making 
people inclined towards certain beliefs. The surprised reader who 
asks what knowledge has to do with the law should remember the 
many legal, social and financial obstacles knowledge-claims face 
today. Galileowanted his ideas to replace the existing cosmology, but 
he was forbidden to work towards that aim. Today the much more 
modest wish of creationists to have their views taught in schools side 
by side with other and competinf views runs into laws setting up a 
separation of Church and State. Increasing amounts of theoretical 
and engineering information are kept secret for military reasons and 
are thereby cut off from international exchange. 5 Commercial 
interests have the same restrictive tendency. Thus the discovery of 
superconductivity in ceramics at (relatively) high temperatures, 
which was the result of international collaboration, soon led to 
protective measures by the American government.6 Financial 
arrangements can make or break a research programe and an entire 
profession. There are many ways to silence people apart from 
forbidding them to speak - and all of them are being used today. The 
process of knowledge production and knowledge distribution was 
the Church so that they might be handed over to the Inquisition: Henry Kamen, Die 
Spanische Inquisition, Munich, I 980, p. I 7. 
3. In 1356 the secular officials ofVenice forbade the Inquisitor ofTreviso to try his 
prisoners, seized his informants and tortured them on the charge of pilfering the 
property of the accused. Lea, Inquisition in the Midle Ages, Vol. ii, p. 273. 
4. A comprehensive report of one of the trials that resulted from the conflict has 
been published in Science, Vol. 215, 1982, pp. 934fT. Many other trials foUowed. 
5. It seems that the need for secrecy in nuclear matters was first raised by the 
scientists themselves. Cf. the report and the documents in Spencer R. Weart and 
Gertrude Weiss-Szilard (eds), Leo Szilard, His Venion of the Facts, Cambridge, Mass., 
1978, esp. Chapters 2fT. Cf. also the material on the Oppenheimer case. The inventor 
of the telescope was forced to secrecy as the military importance of the contrivance was 
soon realized. Cf. Chapter 8, footnote 24. 
Research teams become very secretive when approaching what they think is a Big 
Discovery. After all, what is.at stake are patents, consultancies in industry, money and, 
perhaps, the honour of a Nobel Prize. For a special case cf. R.M. Haze, 
SuperCIJtlluaors, London, 1988. The manipulation of knowledge by the courts is 
discussed, with many examples, by Peter W. Huber, Galileo's Revenge, New York, 
1991. 
6. Science, Vol. 237, 1987, pp. 476fT and 593f. An important step towards 
exclusiveness consisted in asigning part of the research to the military. 

T H I RTEEN 
127 
never the free, 'objective', and purely intellectual exchange 
rationalists make it out to be. 
The trial of Galileo was one of many trials. It had no special 
features except perhaps that Galileo was treated rather mildly, 
despite his lies and attempts at deception. 7 But a small clique of 
intellectuals aided by scandal-hungry writers succeeded in blowing it 
up to enormous dimensions so that what was basically an altercation 
between an expert and an institution defending a wider view of things 
now looks almost like a battle between heaven and hell. This is 
childish and also very unfair towards the many other victims of 1 7th­
century justice. It is especially unfair towards Giordano Bruno, who 
was burned but whom scientifically minded intellectuals prefer to 
forget. It is not a concern for humanity but rather party interests 
which play a major role in the Galileo hagiography. Let us therefore 
take a closer look at the matter. 8 
The so-called trial of Galileo consisted of two separate 
proceedings, or trials. The first occurred in 1616. The Copernican 
doctrine was examined and criticized. Galileo received an order, but 
he was not punished. The second trial took place in 1632/33. Here 
the Copernican doctrine was no longer the point at issue. Rather, 
what was considered was the question of whether Galileo had obeyed 
the order given him in the first trial, or whether he had deceived the 
inquisitors into believing that the order had never been issued. The 
proceedings of both trials were published by Antonio Favaro in Vol. 
19 of the National Edition of Galilean material. The suggestion, 
rather popular in the 19th century, that the proceedings contained 
7. An example is Galileo's reply to the inquiries of 12 April 1633: Maurice A. 
Finocchiaro, The GalileoAffair, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1989, p. 262, the first two 
lines. The reaction of an admirer is characteristic: 'This absurd pretence . . .  ' 
Geymonat, op. cit., p. 149. 
8. It cannot be denied that pressure groups, personal grievances, envy, the fact that 
Galileo, 'being too infatuated with his own genius' was 'unsufferable' (Westfall, op. 
cit., pp. 52, 38) and the rules of patronage played an important role as they, or similar 
circumstances, do at every trial. However, the tensions between various groups of the 
Church on the one side and the demands for scientific autonomy on the other were 
real enough; after all, their modem successors (should the sciences be given the run of 
our educational institutions and of society as a whole or should they be treated like any 
other special interest group?) are still with us. Here the Church did the right thing: the 
sciences do not have the last word in humane matters, knowledge included. 
The main documents pertaining to the trial were assembled and translated with 
comments and an introduction by Finocchiaro, op. cit. I shall use his translations. 
Accounts of the trials and their problems are found in G. de Santillana, The Crime of 
Gali/eo, Chicago, 1954, Geyrnonat, op. cit., Redondi, op. cit., and, most recendy, in 
Westfall. 

128 
AGAINST METHOD 
falsified documents and that the second trial was therefore a farce, 
seems no longer acceptable.9 
The first trial was preceded by denunciations and rumours, in 
which greed and envy played a part, as in many other trials. The 
Inquisition started to examine the matter. Experts (qualificatores) 
were ordered to give an opinion about two statements which 
contained a more or less correct account of the Copernican 
doctrine.10 Their decision 11 concerned two points: what would 
today be called the scientific content of the doctrine and its ethical 
(social) implications. 
On the first point the experts declared the doctrine to be 'foolish 
and absurd in philosophy' or, to use modem terms, they declared it to 
be unscientific. This judgement was made without reference to the 
faith, or to Church doctrine, but was based exclusively on the 
scientific situation of the time. It was shared by many outstanding 
scientists (Tycho Brahe having been one of them) - and it was 
co"ea12 when based on the facts, the theories and the standards of 
9. One of the authors of the suggestion was the Galileo scholar Emil Wohlwill. His 
reasons, rather impressive at the time, are given in his Der lnquisitionsprozess des Galileo 
Galilei, Berlin, 1870. According to Wohlwill two documents of the proceedings, dated 
25 Feb. 1616 and 26 Feb. 1616 (Finocchiaro, op. cit., pp. l 47f) are mutually 
contradictory. The first advises Galileo to treat Copernicus as a mathematical model; 
should he reject the advice, then he is forbidden to mention Copernicus in any form 
whatsoever. In the second document Galileo is advised as above and immediately 
forbidden (i.e. without waiting for his reaction) to mention Copernicus. Wohlwill 
thought the second document to be a forgery. This seems now refuted. Cf. de 
Santillana, Chapter 13. Stillman Drake (appendix to Geymonat) devised a very 
inhiguing hypothesis to explain the discrepancy. 
10. Some critics used idiosyncrasies in the formulation as proof of a lack of com­
prehension on the pan of the expens. But there was no need for the inquisitors to stick 
closely to the language of the authors they examined. Their account ofCopemicanism 
was clear enough without such textual puritanism. 
I I .  Finocchiaro, op. cit., p. 146. 
12. Note that in rendering my judgements I rely on standards subscribed to by 
many modem scientists and philosophers of science. Returned to the early 17th 
century, these champions of rationality would have judged Galileo as the Aristotelians 
judged him then. Michelson, for example, would have been aghast at Galileo's attempt 
to get knowledge out of an instrument as little understood as the telescope and 
Rutherford, who was never too happy about the theory of relativity, would have 
produced one of his characteristic rude remarks. Salvador Luria, an outstanding 
microbiologist who favours theories decidable by 'clear-cut experimental step[s)', 
would have relegated the debate to 'outfields of science' like 'sociology' and would 
have stayed away from it (A Slot Machine, a Broken Test Tube, New York, 1985, pp. 1 15, 
1 19). For what Galileo suggested was no less than to regard as true a theory which had 
only analogies in its favour and which suffered from numerous difficulties. And he 
made this suggestion in public while even today it is a deadly sin for a scientist to 
address the public before having consulted his peers (example in A. Pickering, 

T H I RTEEN 
129 
the time. Compared with those facts, theories and standards the idea 
of the motion of the earth was as absurd as were Velikovsky's ideas 
when compared with the facts, theories and standards of the fifties. A 
modern scientist really has no choice in this matter. He cannot cling 
to his own very strict standards and at the same time praise Galileo 
for defending Copernicus. He must either agree with the first part of 
the judgement of the Church experts, or admit that standards, facts 
and laws never decide a case and that an unfounded, opaque and 
incoherent doctrine can be presented as a fundamental truth. Only 
few admirers of Galileo have an inkling of this rather complex 
situation. 
The situation becomes even more complex when we consider that 
the Copernicans changed not only views, but also standards for 
judging views. Aristotelians, in this respect not at all unlike modern 
epidemiologists, molecular biologists and 'empirical' sociologists 
who insist either on the examination oflarge statistical samples or on 
'clearcut experimental steps' in Luria's sense, demanded strong 
empirical support while the Galileans were content with far­
reaching, unsupported and partially refuted theories.13 I do not 
criticize them for that; on the contrary, I favour Niels Bohr's 'this is 
not crazy enough'. I merely want to reveal the contradiction in the 
actions of those who praise Galileo and condemn the Church, but 
become as strict as the Church was at Galileo's time when turning to 
the work of their contemporaries. 
-
On the second point, the social (ethical) implications, the experts 
declared the Copernican doctrine to be 'formally heretical'. This 
means it contradicted Holy Scripture as interpreted by the Church, 
and it did so in full awareness of the situation, not inadvertently (that 
would be 'material' heresy). 
'Constraints on Controversy: the Case of the Magnetic Monopole', Social Studies of 
Science, Vol. 1 1, 1981, pp. 63fl). All this is realized neither by 'progressive' (i.e. 
scientifically inclined) princes of the Church nor by scientists, so the discussion of the 
'trial of Galileo' occurs in a dream world with only little relation to the real world we 
and Galileo inhabit. Further arguments on that point are found in Chapter 9 of 
Farewell to Reason and Chapter 19 below. 
l3. As indicated in Chapter 8, footnote 1 ,  Galileo's law of inertia was in conflict 
with the Copernican as well as the Keplerian treatment of planetary motion. Galileo 
hoped for future accommodations. That was a sensible thing to do but not in 
agreement with some standards ofhis time and of today. Today a similar clash between 
theoreticians and empiricists occurs in the field of epidemiology. There are theoretical 
reasons to expect that X-rays and other forms of particulate radiation constitute a 
c.:ncer-risk down to the smallest dose. Many epidemiologists demand empirical proof, 
however, though it is clear that events, when occurring below a certain threshold of 
frequency, cannot be detected in that way. 

130 
AGAINST METHOD 
The second point rests on a series of assumptions, among them the 
assumption that Scripture is an important boundary condition of 
human existence and, therefore, of research. The assumption was 
shared by all great scientists, Copernicus, Kepler and Newton among 
them. According to Newton knowledge flows from two sources - the 
word of God - the Bible - and the works of God - Nature; and he 
postulated divine interventions in the planetary system, as we have 
seen.14 
The Roman Church in addition claimed to possess the exclusive 
rights of exploring, interpreting and applying Holy Scripture. Lay 
people, according to the teaching of the Church, had neither the 
knowledge nor the authority to tamper with Scripture and they were 
forbidden to do so. This comment, whose rigidity was a result of the 
new Tridentine Spirit, 15 should not surprise anyone familiar with 
the habits of powerful institutions. The attitude of the American 
Medical Association towards lay practitioners is as rigid as the 
attitude of the Church was towards lay interpreters - and it has the 
blessing of the law. Experts, or ignoramuses having acquired the 
formal insignia of expertise, always tried and often succeeded in 
securing for themselves exclusive rights in special domains. Any 
criticism of the rigidity of the Roman Church applies also to its 
modem scientific and science-connected successors. 
Turning now from the form and the administrative backing of the 
objection to its content we notice that it deals with a subject that is 
gaining increasing importance in our own times - the quality of 
human existence. Heresy, defined in a wide sense, meant a deviation 
from actions, attitudes and ideas that guarantee a well-rounded and 
sanctified life. Such a deviation might be, and occasionally was, 
encouraged by scientific research. Hence, it became necessary to 
examine the heretical implications of scientific developments. 
Two ideas are contained in this attitude. First, it is assumed that 
the quality oflife can be defined independently of science, that it may 
clash with demands which scientists regard as natural ingredients of 
their activity, and that science must be changed accordingly. 
Secondly, it is assumed that Holy Scripture as interpreted by the 
Holy Roman Church adumbrates a correct account of a well­
rounded and sanctified life. 
14. Chapter 5, footnote 4. See also the literature in footnote 6 to Chapter 4. 
According to Galileo (letter to Grand Duchess Christina) the idea of the rwo sources 
goes back to Tertullian adv. Marciones (E. Evans, ed.), I ,  1 8. 
15. For the exact wording see Denzinger-Schoenmetzer, Enchiridion Symbolorum, 
36th edition, Freiburg, 1976, pp. 365f. 

T H IRTEEN 
131 
The second assumption can be rejected without denying that the 
Bible is vastly richer in lessons for humanity than anything that might 
ever come out of the sciences. Scientific results and the scientific 
ethos (if there is such a thing) are simply too thin a foundation for a 
life worth living. Many scientists agree with this judgement. 16 
They agree that the quality of life can be defined independently of 
science - which is the first part of the first assumption. At the time of 
Galileo there existed an institution - the Roman Church - watching 
over this quality in its own particular way. We must conclude that the 
second point - Copernicus being 'formally heretical' - was 
connected with ideas that are urgently needed today. The Church 
was on the right track. 
But was it perhaps mistaken in rejecting scientific opinions 
inconsistent with its idea of a Good Life? In Chapter 3 I argued that 
knowledge needs a plurality of ideas, that well-established theories 
16. Thus Konrad Lorenz in his interesting if somewhat superficial book Die Acht 
Todsiinden tier Zivilisierten Menschheit, Munich, 1984 (first published in 1973), p. 70 
writes: 'The erroneous belief that only what can be rationally grasped or even what can 
be proved in a scientific way constitutes the solid knowledge of mankind has disastrous 
consequences. It prompts the "scientifically enlightened" younger generation to 
discard the immense treasures of knowledge and wisdom that are contained in the 
traditions of every ancient culture and in the teachings of the great world religions. 
Whoever thinks that all this is without significance naturally succumbs to another, 
equally pernicious mistake, living in the conviction that science is able, as a matter of 
course, to create from nothing, and in a rational way, an entire culture with all its 
ingredients.' In a similar vein J. Needham, initiator and part-author of a great history 
of Chinese science and technology, speaks of 'scientific opium', meaning by it 'a 
blindness to the suffering of others'. Time, the Refreshing River, Nottingham, 1986. 
'Rationalism', writes Peter Medawar (Advice to a Young Scientist, New York, 1979, p. 
l 0 I), 'falls short of answering the many simple and childlike questions people like to 
ask; questions about origins and purposes such as are often contemptuously dismissed 
as non-questions, or pseudo-questions, although people understand them clearly 
enough and long to have an answer. These are intellectual pains that rationalists - like 
bad physicians confronted by ailments they cannot diagnose or cure - are apt to 
dismiss as "imagination".' 
The clearest and most perceptive statement is found in Jacques Monod, Chance and 
Necessity, New York, 1972, p. 170 (text in brackets from p. 169): 'Cold and austere,' 
writes Monod, 'proposing no explanation but imposing an ascetic renunciation of all 
other spiritual fare, [the idea that objective knowledge is the only authentic source of 
truth ) was not of a kind to allay anxiety but aggravated it instead. By a single stroke it 
claimed to sweep away the traditions of hundreds of thousands of years, which had 
become one with human nature itself. It wrote an end to the ancient animist convenant 
between man and nature, leaving nothing in place of that precious bond but an anxious 
quest in a frozen universe of solitude. With nothing to recommend it but a certain 
puritan arrogance, how could such an idea win acceptance? It did not; it still has not. It 
has however commanded recognition; but that it did only because of its prodigious 
power of performance.' 

132 
AGAINST METHOD 
are never strong enough to terminate the existence of alternative 
approaches, and that a defence of such alternatives, being almost the 
only way of discovering the errors of highly respected and 
comprehensive points of view, is required even by a narrow 
philosophy such as empiricism. Now ifit should tum out that it is also 
required on ethical grounds, then we have two reasons instead of one 
rather than a conflict with 'science'. 
Besides, the Church, and by this I mean its most outstanding 
spokesmen, was much more modest than that. It did not say: what 
contradicts the Bible as interpreted by us must go, no matter how 
strong the scientific reasons in its favour. A truth supported by 
scientific reasoning was not pushed aside. It was used to revise the 
interpretation of Bible passages apparently inconsistent with it. 
There are many Bible passages which seem to suggest a flat earth. 
Yet Church doctrine accepted the spherical earth as a matter of 
course. On the other hand the Church was not ready to change just 
because somebody had produced some vague guesses. It wanted 
proof - scientific proof in scientific matters. Here it acted no 
differently from modem scientific institutions: universities, schools 
and even research institutes in various countries usually wait a long 
time before they incorporate new ideas into their curricula. 
(Professor Stanley Goldberg has described the situation in the case 
of the special theory of relativity.) But there was as yet no convincing 
proof of the Copernican doctrine. Hence Galileo was advised to 
teach Copernicus as a hypothesis; he was forbidden to teach it as a 
truth. 
This distinction has survived until today. But while the Church 
was prepared to admit that some theories might be true and even that 
Copernicus' might be true, given sufficient evidence, 17 there are 
1 7. In a widely discussed letter which Cardinal Roberto Bellarrnino, master of 
controversial questions at the Collegio Romano, wrote on 12 April 1615 to Paolo 
Antonio Foscarini, a Carmelite monk from Naples who had inquired about the reality 
of the Copernican system, we find the following passage (Finocchiaro, op. cit., p. 68): 
' . . .  if there were a true demonstration that the sun is at the center of the world and the 
earth in the third heaven, and that the sun does not circle the earth but the earth circles 
the sun, then one would have to proceed with great care in explaining the Scriptures 
that appear contrary, and sċ rather that we do not understand them than that what is 
demonstrated is false. But I will not believe that there is such a demonstration, until it is 
shown me. Nor is it the same to demonstrate that by supposing the sun to be at the 
center and the earth in heaven one can save the appearances, and to demonstrate that 
in truth the sun is at the center and the earth in heaven; for I believe the first 
demonstration may be available, but I have very great doubts about the second, and in 
case of doubt we must not abandon the Holy Scripture as interpreted by the Holy 
Fathers.' In his Considerations on the Copernican Opinion, Finocchiaro, op. cit., pp. 70ff, 

T H I RTEEN 
133 
now many scientists, especially in high energy physics, who view all 
theories as instruments of prediction and reject truth-talk as being 
metaphysical and speculative. Their reason is that the devices they 
use are so obviously designed for calculating purposes and that 
theoretical approaches so clearly depend on considerations of 
elegance and easy applicability that the generalization seems to make 
good sense. Besides, the formal properties of'approximations' often 
differ from those of the basic principles, many theories are first steps 
towards a new point of view which at some future time may yield them 
as approximations and a direct inference from theory to reality is 
therefore rather naive!8 All this was known to 16th- and 1 7th­
century scientists. Only a few astronomers thought of deferents and 
epicycles as real roads in the sky; most regarded them as roads on 
paper which might aid calculation but which had no counterpart in 
reality. The Copernican point of view was widely interpreted in the 
same way - as an interesting, novel and rather efficient model. The 
Church requested, both for scientific and for ethical reasons, that 
Galileo accept this interpretation. Considering the difficulties the 
model faced when regarded as a description of reality, we must admit 
that '[l]ogic was on the side of . . .  Bellarmine and not on the side of 
Galileo,' as the historian of science and physical chemist Pierre 
Duhem wrote in an interesting essay. 19 
To sum up: the judgement of the Church experts was scientifically 
correct and had the right social intention, viz. to protect people from 
the machinations of specialists. It wanted to protect people from 
being corrupted by a narrow ideology that might work in restricted 
domains but was incapable of sustaining a harmonious life. A revision 
of the judgement might win the Church some friends among 
scientists but would severely impair its function as a preserver of 
important human and superhuman values. 20 
esp. pp. 85f, Galileo addresses precisely these points. He agrees that if the Copernican 
astronomers are 'not more than ninety percent right, they may be dismissed' but adds 
that 'if all that is produced by philosophers and astronomers on the opposite side is 
shown to be mostly false and wholly inconsequential, then the other side should not be 
disparaged, nor deemed paradoxical, so as to think that it could never be clearly 
proved': research should be permitted even if demonstrations are not yet available. 
This does not conflict with Bellarmino's suggestions; it did conflict and to a certain 
extent still does conflict with the attitude of many modem research institutions. 
18. More on this point in Nancy Canwright, How the Laws ofPhysia Lie, Oxford, 
1983. 
19. To Save the Phenomena, Chicago, 1963, p. 78. 
20. After some apparent willingness to consider the matter (cf. the address of Pope 
John Paul II on the centenary of Einstein's birth, published as an Epilogue in Paul 
Cardinal Poupard (ed.), Galilev Ga/ilei: ToJZJards a Resolution of 350 Yean of Debate, 

134 
AGAINST METHOD 
Pittsburgh, 1987) Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who holds a position similar to that once 
held by Bellarmine, formulated the problem in a way that would make a revision of the 
judgement anachronistic and poindess. Cf. his talk in Parma of 15 March 1990, pardy 
reponed in II Sabato, 3 1  March 1990, pp. SOfT. As witnesses the Cardinal quoted 
Ernst Bloch (being merely a matter of convenience the scientific choice between 
geocentrism and heliocentrism cannot overrule the practical and religious centricity of 
the eanh), C. F. von Weizsacker (Galileo leads direcdy to the atom bomb) and myself 
(the chapter heading of the present chapter). I commented on the speech in two 
interviews, II Sabato, 1 2  May 1990, pp. 54fT and La Repubblica, 14 July 1990, p. 20. 

14 
Galileo 's inquiries formed only a small part of the so-called Copernican 
Revolution. Adding the remaining elements makes it still more dificult to 
reconcile the development with familiar principles of theory evaluation. 
Galileo was not the only scientist involved in the reform of physics, 
astronomy and cosmology. Neither did he deal with the whole area of 
astronomy. For example, he never studied the motion of the planets 
in as much detail as did Copernicus and Kepler and he probably 
never read the more technical parts of Copernicus' great work. That 
was not unusual. Then as now knowledge was subdivided into 
specialities; an expert in one field rarely was also an expert in another 
and distant field. And then as now scientists with widely diverg­
ing philosophies could and did comment on new suggestions 
and developments. Tycho Brahe was an outstanding astronomer; 
his observations contributed to the downfall of generally accepted 
views. He noticed the importance of Copernicus' cosmology -
yet he retained the unmoved earth, on physical as well as on 
theological grounds. Copernicus was a faithful Christian and a good 
Aristotelian; he tried to restore centred circular motion to the 
prominence it once had, postulated a moving earth, rearranged the 
planetary orbits and gave absolute values for their diameters. The 
astronomers surrounding Melanchthon and his educational reform 
accepted and praised the first part of his achievement, but (with a 
single exception - Rheticus) either disregarded, or criticized, or 
reinterpreted (Osiander!) the second. And they often tried to transfer 
Copernicus' mathematical models to the Ptolemaic system. 1 
Maestlin, Kepler's teacher, regarded comets as solid bodies and tried 
calculating the orbit of one of them. His (incorrect) result made him 
accept the Copernican arrangement of the planetary orbits (it still 
I .  Details and literarure in R.S. Westman, 'The Melanchthon Circle, Rheticus, 
and the Wittenberg Interpretation of the Copernican Theory', Isis, Vol. 66, 1975, 
pp. 165ff. 
135 

136 
AGAINST METHOD 
influenced Kepler). Maestlin respected Aristotle but regarded 
mathematical correctness and harmony as signs of physical truth. 
Galileo's approach had its own idiosyncrasies, it was more complex, 
more conjectural, partly adapted to the greater role theological 
considerations played in Italy, partly determined by the laws of 
rhetoric or patronage. Many different personalities, professions and 
groups guided by different beliefs and subjected to different 
constraints contributed to the process that is now being described, 
somewhat summarily, as the 'Copernican Revolution'. 
As I said at the beginning this process was not a simple thing 
but consisted of developments in a variety of subjects, among 
them the following: cosmology; physics; astronomy; the calculation 
of astronomical tables; optics; epistemology; and theology. 
I draw these distinctions not 'in order to be precise' but because 
they reflect actually existing subdivisions of research. Physics, for 
example, was a general theory of motion that described change 
without reference to the circumstances under which it occurred. It 
comprised locomotion, the growth of plants and animals as well as 
the transition of knowledge from a wise teacher to an ignorant pupil. 
Aristotle's Physics and the many mediaeval commentaries on it give us 
an idea of the problems treated and the solutions proposed. 
Cosmology described the structure of the universe and the special 
motions that are found in it. A basic law of physics in the sense just 
explained was that a motion without motor comes to a standstill - the 
'natural' situation of a body is rest (this includes lack of qualitative 
change). The 'natural' motions of cosmology were those that occurred 
without noticeable interference; examples are the upward motion of 
fire and the downward motion of stones. Aristotle's On the Heavens 
and the many mediaeval commentaries on it give us an idea of the 
problems and the view discussed in this domain. 
The books I just mentioned were for advanced studies only. 
Introductory texts omitted problems and alternative suggestions and 
concentrated on the bare bones of the ideas then held. One of the 
most popular introductory texts of cosmology, Sacrobosco's de spera, 
contained a sketch of the world, and described the main SQheres 
without giving the details of their motions - the rest is silence. 2 Still, 
2. Cf. Lynn Thorndyke (ed.), The Sphere of Sacrobosco and Its Commmtators, 
Chicago, 1949. The elements and their motions are briefly mentioned in the first 
chapter together with a simple argument in favour of the unmoved eanh: the eanh is 
situated in the centre (this is shown earlier by optical arguments, including the fact that 
the constellations have the same size, no matter where the daily rotation puts them) 
and 'quicquid a medio movetur versus circumferentiam ascendit. Terra a medio 
movetur, ergo ascendit, quod pro impossibile relinquitur' (p. 85). Equant, deferent 

FOURTEEN 
137 
it was used as a basis for rather advanced critical comments down to 
Galileo's own time. 
Physics and cosmology claimed to make true statements. Theology 
which also claimed to make true statements was regarded as a 
boundary condition for research in these fields though the strength of 
this requirement and ofits institutional backing varied in time and with 
the location. It was never a necessary boundary condition for 
astronomy which dealt with the motions of the stars, but without 
claiming truth for its models. Astronomers were interested in models 
that might correspond to the actual arrangement of the planets, but 
they were not restricted to them. Handbooks of astronomy such as 
Ptolemy's handbook and the various popularizations based on it 
contained detailed astronomical models preceded by sketchy 
cosmological introductions. As far as these introductions were 
concerned, there existed only one cosmology-Aristotle's. Some of the 
handbooks also contained tables. Tables were a further step away from 
'reality'. They not only used 'hypotheses', i.e. models that might not 
reflect the structure of reality, they also used approximations. But an 
astronomer's approximations did not always correspond to the 
excellence of his models. 'Advanced' (from our standpoint) models 
might be combined with crude approximations and thus give worse 
tables than their older counterparts.3 
The separation between physics and cosmology on the one side 
and astronomy on the other was not only a practical fact; it also had a 
firm philosophical backing. According to Aristotle 4 mathematics 
does not deal with real things but contains abstractions. There exists 
therefore an essential difference between physical subjects such as 
physics, cosmology, biology and psychology and mathematical 
subjects such as optics and astronomy. In the encyclopaedias of the 
early Middle Ages the separation was a matter of course. 
Optical textbooks only rarely dealt with astronomical matters. 5 
Astronomy used basic optical laws such as the law of linear 
propagation, but the more complicated parts of optical theory were 
and epicycle are mentioned in the fourth chapter together with the miraculous nature 
of the solar eclipse accompanying Christ's death. 
3. The example of Ptolemy-Copernicus is treated by Stanley E. Babb Jr. in Isis, 
Vol. 68, September 1977, especially p. 432. 
4. Met., Book xiii, Chapter 2; Physics, Book ii, Chapter 2. For an account and 
defence of Aristotle's theory of mathematics cf. Chapter 8 of my FarelJellto Reason. 
5. As an example I mention John Pecham's optics (quoted from David Lindberg 
(ed.), John Pecham and the Science of Optics, Madison, 1970): astronomical matters 
occur here on pages 153 (moon illusion and the northward displacement of the sun 
and the fixed stars, explained by vapours near the horizon), 209 (scintillation of the 

138 
AGAINST METHOD 
not well known. The same is true of epistemology. Galileo's 
arguments (and the arguments of Copernicus on which they are 
based) brought epistemology back into science (the same happened 
many years later, in connection with the quantum theory). 
Now is it to be expected that a collection of relatively independent 
subjects, research strategies, arguments and opinions such as the one 
just mentioned will develop in a uniform way? Can we really assume 
that all the physicists, cosmologists, theologians and philosophers 
who reacted to the Copernican doctrine were guided by the same 
motives and reasons and that these reasons were not only accepted by 
them, but were also regarded as being binding for any scientist 
entering the scene? The ideas of an individual scientist such as 
Einstein may show a certain coherence6 and this coherence may be 
reflected in his standards and his theorizing. Coherence is to be 
expected in totalitarian surroundings that guide research either by 
laws, by peer pressure or by financial machinations. But the 
astronomers at the time of Copernicus and after did not live in such 
surroundings; they lived at a time of dissension, wars and general 
upheaval, at a time when one city (Venice, for example, and the cities 
under its jurisdiction) would be safe for a progressive scientist while 
another (such as Rome, or Florence) offered considerable dangers, 
and when the ideas of a single individual often faced groups of 
scientists not in agreement with his monomania. To show this, let us 
look at two astronomers who participated in the development: 
Copernicus himself and Maestlin, Kepler's teacher. 
Copernicus wanted to reform astronomy. He explained his 
misgivings and the ways in which he tried to overcome them. He 
wrote:7 
stars explained by unevennesses of their rotating surfaces which reflect the sunlight), 
218 (impossibility to determine the size of the stars from their appearances), 233 
(stars appear to be smaller than they actually are), 225 (they are displaced towards 
the north at the horizon, and the more so, the greater their distance from the 
meridian). 
6. The case of Einstein shows that even this modest assumption goes much too far. 
Einstein recommended a loose opportunism as the best research strategy (cf. the 
quotation in the text to footnote 6 of the Introduction) and he warned that a good joke 
(such as the considerations leading to the special theory of relativity) should not be 
repeated too often: Philipp Frank, Einslein, His Life and Times, London, 1946, p. 261 . 
7. Commenlariolus, ed. E. Rosen, Three Copernican Trealises, 3rd edition, New 
York, 1971, translation panly changed in accordance with F. Krafft, 'Copernicus 
Retroversus 1', CoJJoquia Copernicana Ill and IV, Proceedings of the Joint Symposium 
of the !AU and the IUHPS, Torun, 1973, p. 1 19. In what follows I shall also use 
Krafft, 'Copernicus Retroversus II', Joe. cit. 

FOURTEEN 
139 
The planetary theories of Ptolemaics and most other astronomers . . .  
seemed . . .  to present no small difficulty. For these theories were not 
adequate unless certain equants were also conceived; it then appeared 
that a planet moved with uniform velocity neither along its own 
deferent nor relative to an actual centre . . . .  Having become aware of 
these defects I often considered whether there could perhaps be 
found a more reasonable arrangement of circles from which every 
apparent inequality could be derived and in which everything would 
move uniformly about its proper centre as the rule of accomplished 
motion requires . . . .  
v 
The critique of Copernicus concerns the following model that was 
used for calculating the longitudes ofMars,Jupiter and Saturn. The 
planet P moves on a small circle, the epicycle, whose centre is located 
on a larger circle, the deferent. The centre of the epicycle proceeds 
with constant angular velocity with respect to E, the equant point. 
The planet is observed from the earth T. E and T are on opposite 
sides of the centre of the deferent, having the same distance from it. 
Copernicus does not question the empirical adequacy of the 
model. On the contrary, he admits that the planetary theories of the 
Ptolemaeans and others are 'consistent with the numerical data'.8 
Nor does he believe that these data are in need of correction. Instead 
of introducing new observations he emphasizes that 
8. Rosen, op. cit., p. 59. 

140 
AGAINST METHOD 
we must follow in their [the ancient Greeks'] footsteps and hold fast to 
their observations bequeathed to us like an inheritance. And if anyone 
on the contrary thinks that the ancients are untrustworthy in this 
regard, surely the gates of this art are closed to him. 9 
Neither new observations nor the inability of Ptolemy to take care of 
what was known to him are the reason for Copernicus' discomfort. 
The difficulty he perceives lies elsewhere. 
In his account Copernicus distinguishes between absolute 
motions and apparent motions. The second inequality of planetary 
motion, i.e. the fact that a planet may run ahead in its path and then 
reverse its direction, is 'apparent' - it must be reduced to other 
motions. According to Copernicus these other motions are motions 
on centred circles with a constant angular velocity around the centre. 
Ptolemy violates the condition; he uses equants. Equants explain 
apparent motions not by true motions but again by apparent motions 
where the planet 'moves with uniform velocity neither along its own 
deferent, nor relative to an actual centre . . .  .' For Copernicus (and for 
many other astronomers) real motion is a circular motion around a 
centre with constant angular velocity.10 
Copernicus removes excentre and equant and replaces them by 
epicycles. 1 1 In the Ptolemaic scheme each planet has now three 
epicycles: the old epicycle and two further epicycles for replacing the 
ecentric and the equant. 
In order to avoid this accumulation of epicycles (which occasion­
ally pushed the planets far out into space) Copernicus looks for 
a different explanation of the second inequality. He is helped by the 
fact that the second inequality agrees with the position of the sun.12 
It can therefore be interpreted as an apparent motion created by a 
real (and, of course, circular) motion on part of the earth. 
The argument as reconstructed so far (after Krafft) contains two 
9. Letter Against Werner, in Rosen, op. cit., p. 99. 
10. Erasmus Reinhold wrote on the tide page of his personal copy of Je 
Revolutionibus: Axioma Astronomicum: Motus coelestis aequalis est et circuklris vel ex 
aequalibus et circuklribus compositus. Quoted from Westman, 'The Melanchthon 
Circle', op. cit., p. 176. 
l l. This is true of the Commmtariolus. In his main work he again uses excentric 
deferents. Only the equant is replaced by an epicycle. This 'liberation from the equant' 
(Erasmus Reinhold), also in lunar theory, gready impressed some of Copernicus' 
admirers who paid no attention to his new cosmology and the motion of the earth. 
Westman, 'The Melanchthon Circle, op. cit., pp. 175, 177. 
12. The mean sun in Copernicus. Kepler effects a reduction to the true sun and 
thereby strengthens the Copernican arrangement. 

FOURTEEN 
141 
elements; a purely formal element and a reality assertion. Formally it 
is requested that any periodic motion be reduced to centred circular 
motions. The request is connected with the assumption that 
inequalities are apparent while circular motions alone are real. Let us 
call this the first reality assumption. But Copernicus also discovered 
that his procedure allowed him to incorporate every planetary path 
into a system, containing the 'large circle', the circle of the earth, as 
an absolute measure. 'All these phenomena', Copernicus writes in 
his main work, 13 'are connected with one another in a most noble 
way, as if by a golden chain, and each planet with its position and 
order is a witness that the earth moves while we, who live on the 
terrestrial globe, failing to recognize its motion, ascribe all sorts of 
motions to the planets.' It is this inner connectedness of all parts of 
the planetary system that convinced Copernicus of the reality of the 
motion of the earth. I call this the second reality assumption. 
The first reality assumption was part of the Platonic tradition; 
Aristotle gave it a physical basis. The second reality assumption 
conflicted with Aristotelian physics and cosmology. Aristotle had 
already criticized an earlier (Pythagorean) version ofit: mathematical 
harmonies, which are abstractions, reflect truth only if they agree 
with well-confirmed physical principles. This is a reasonable 
request; it was used in our own century to reject Schroedinger's 
interpretation of wave mechanics. It is reasonable especially for those 
thinkers who regard mathematics as an auxiliary science that may 
describe but cannot constitute physical processes. It is unreasonable 
for a Platonist or a Pythagorean. The resulting clash between two 
interpretations of the nature of mathematical statements played an 
important role in the 'Copernican Revolution'. 
Copernicus strengthened the second reality assumption by 
referring to traditions such as the Hermetic tradition and the idea of 
the exceptional role of the sun14 and by showing how it could be 
reconciled with the phenomena. He made two assumptions. First, 
that the motion of a body is appropriate to its shape. The earth is 
spherical, hence its motion must be circular. Secondly, objects such 
as stone stay with the hody (the earth) from which they were 
13. De Revol., Preface to Pope Paul. Krafft assumes that Copernicus discovered 
this harmony in the course of his attempts to remove the equant and only later turned it 
into a fundamental argument in favour of a real motion of the earth. 
14. The phrase 'and in the middle stands the sun' was not new. In the older 
astronomy the sun was indeed in the middle of the planets, with Mars, Jupiter and 
Saturn standing above it, and Venus, Mercury and the moon below. It also 'ruled' the 
planets in the sense that its motion was mirrored in the motions of all planets (the moon 
excepted). Cf. e.g. Macrobius, Somnium Scipionis. 

142 
AGAINST METHOD 
separated - hence the falling stone stays close to the tower. 
According to Aristotle the natural motion of objects, i.e. the upward 
motion of fire and the downward motion of stones, was determined 
by the structure of space (central symmetry). According to Coper­
nicus it is determined by the distribution of matter.Copernicus 
'saves phenomena' such as the free fall of heavy bodies but provides 
neither independent arguments nor strict laws that could lead to a 
detailed comparison. His procedure is ad hoc. This does not mean 
that it is bad; it only means that it cannot be reconciled with the 
leading methodologies of today. 
My second example is Michael Maestlin, Kepler's teacher. Maestlin 
was an expert astronomer and his judgement was generally 
respected. He 'only reluctantly abandoned' the Ptolemaic distribu­
tion of the spheres - but he was forced to do so by circumstances 
beyond his contro1.15 As far as we can see, the circumstances were, 
first, the nova of 1572. Maestlin observed it, measured its parallax 
and put it beyond the sphere of the moon into the sphere of the fixed 
stars. The first part (beyond the moon) followed for Maestlin from 
the missing parallax, the second part (fixed stars) from the absence of 
any proper motion. According to Copernicus, whose ideas Maestlin 
used at this point, a planet moves more slowly the greater its distance 
from the sun. Observing the changes of colour and brightness 
Maestlin (and Tycho who saw the new star on the way to his 
alchemical laboratory) inferred that the region above the moon 
cannot be without change, as Aristotle had assumed. However, it 
would be rash to conclude that Maestlin (and Tycho) regarded the 
nova as a 'blow against the peripatetic philosophy'.16 Many Church 
people, Theodore Beza among them, regarded the phenomenon as a 
return of the star of Bethlehem, i.e. as a supernatural event. 17 Tycho 
thought this comparison too modest; here, he said, is the greatest 
miracle since the beginning of the world, comparable at least to 
Joshua's stopping of the sun.18 This means that as far as Tycho was 
concerned miracles refuted the idea of the autonomy of the laws of 
I 5. In what follows I am using the dissenation by R.A.Jarrell, The Life and Scientific 
Work of the Tuebingen Astronomer Michael Maestlin, Toronto, 1972, as well as R.S. 
Westman, 'Michael Maestlin's Adoption of the Copernican Theory', Colloquia 
Copernicana IV, Ossilineum, I 975, p. 53fT. 
I 6. Jarrell, op. cit., p. 108. 
I 7. Cf. the literature in P.H. Kocher, Science and Religion in Elizabethan England, 
New York, 1969, pp. 174f, footnotes 12 and 13. Cf. also Vol. vi, Chapter xxii ofLynn 
Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, New York, 1941. 
18. Progymnasmala, p. 548. 

FOURTEEN 
143 
nature (which was an Aristotelian idea), they did not refute specific 
laws. Maestlin, on the other hand, being perhaps more sceptical 
about miracles, may indeed have regarded the case as a 'blow against' 
Aristotle. 
The next question is how serious a blow it was for him. The idea of 
a permanent heaven was part of cosmology and contained the special 
hypothesis of a fifth element. The falsehood of this hypothesis 
impaired neither the remaining laws of motion nor the tower 
argument. Both Clavius and Tycho accepted a changing heaven19 
but still used the tower argument to exclude the motion of the earth. 
If Maestlin's doubts reached further then this was due either to an 
idiosyncratic interpretation of the Aristotelian doctrines, or to 
personal inclinations towards a non-Aristotelian world-view. It 
seems that we must assume the latter. 
The next decisive event on Maestlin's journey towards Copernicus 
was the comet of 1577. Again Maestlin, prompted by 'numerous 
observations', puts the comet into the superlunar region. 20 The idea 
that this region is free from change has now definitely been dropped. 
Maestlin also tried to determine the trajectory of the comet. He 
found it to be moving in the path of Venus as described in Book 6, 
Chapter 12 of de Revo/utionibus. Somewhat hesitatingly he now 
accepts the Copernican ordering of the spheres.21 But, so he adds, 
he was forced to do so 'by extreme necessity'. 22 
This 'extreme necessity' arises only when geometrical considera­
tions are given the force of cosmological arguments. Many years later 
Galileo cautioned against this way of reasoning: rainbows, he said, 
cannot be caught by triangulation. Maestlin had no such doubts. He 
accepted the traditional distinction between physics and astronomy 
and identified astronomy with mathematics: 'Copernicus wrote his 
entire book not as a physicist, but as an astronomer' is his comment 
on the margin of his copy of de Revolutionibus.23 He then interpreted 
the results of mathematical arguments by using the second reality 
assumption. This means that he did not uvercome an Aristotelian 
resistance against such an interpretation, he acted as if such a 
resistance did not exist. 'This argument', he wrote in his marginal 
notes, 24 'is wholly in accord with reason. Such is the arrangement of 
19. For Clavius cf. his commentary on Sacrobosco's sphere, 1 593 edition, pp. 
210£. Cf. also Westfall, op. cit., p. 44. 
20. Jarrell, op. cit., p. 1 12. 
21. Ibid., p. 1 1 7. 
22. Ibid., p. 120. 
23. Westman, op. cit., p. 59. 
24. Ibid. 

144 
AGAINST METHOD 
this entire, immense machina that it permits surer demonstrations, 
indeed, the entire universe revolves in such a way that nothing can be 
transposed without confusion of its [parts] and, hence, by means of 
these [surer demonstrations] all the phenomena of motion can be 
demonstrated most exactly, for nothing unfitting occurs in the course 
of their orbits.' Kepler too became a Copernican because of this 
harmony and because of the comet, the interesting fact being that 
Maestlin's calculations of the path of the comet contain serious 
mistakes; it did not move in the orbit ofVenus. 
Now let us compare these events and the situations in which they 
occur with some once popular philosophies of science. We notice at 
once that none of these philosophies considers all the disciplines that 
contributed to the debate. Astronomy is in the centre. A rational 
reconstruction of the developments in this area is thought to be a 
rational reconstruction of the Copernican Revolution itself. The role 
of physics (the tower argument), the fact that theology occasionally 
formed a strong boundary condition (cf. Tycho's reaction to his nova 
and to the idea of the motion of the earth) and the role of different 
mathematical philosophies shows that this cannot possibly be true. 
This fatal incompleteness is the first and most fundamental objection 
against all reconstructions that have been offered. They still depend 
on the (positivistic) prejudice that observations alone decide a case 
and that they can judge a theory all by themselves, without any help 
(or hindrance) from alternatives, metaphysical alternatives included. 
Moreover, they even fail in the narrow domain they have chosen for 
reconstruction, viz. astronomy. To show this, let us consider the 
following accounts: 
1. Naive empiricism: the Middle Ages read the Bible and never 
looked at the sky. Then people suddenly looked upwards and found 
that the world was different from the opinion of the schools. 
This account has disappeared from astronomy - but its analogue 
survives in other areas (for example, in some parts of the history of 
medicine). The main argument against it is that Aristotle was an arch 
empiricist and that Ptolemy used carefully collected data. 25 
2. Sophisticated empiricism: new observations forced astronomers 
to modify an already empirical doctrine. 
25. 'Carefully' has been contested by R.R. Newton, Tire Crime of Claudius Ptolemy, 
Baltimore, 1977. Newton shows that many of Ptolemy's 'data' were manufactured to fit 
his model. For his optics this has been known for a long time. 

FOURTEEN 
145 
This certainly is not true for Copernicus and his followers in the 
16th century. As we have seen, Copernicus thought the Ptolemaic 
system to be empirically adequate - he criticized it for theoretical 
reasons. And his 'observations' are essentially those of Ptolemy, as he 
says himself. 
Modem comparisons of Copernican and Ptolemaic predictions 
'with the facts', i.e. with 19th- and 20th-century calculations, show, 
furthermore, that empirical predictions were not improved and 
actually become worse when the competing systems are restricted to 
the same number of parameters. 26 
The only new observations made were those ofTycho Brahe - but 
they already led beyond Copernicus to Kepler. Galileo's observa­
tions belong to cosmology, not to astronomy. They lend plausibility to 
some of Copernicus' analogies. A compelling proof of the motion of the 
earth did not emerge, however, for the Galilean observations could 
also be accommodated by the Tychonian system. 
3. Falsificationism: new observations refuted important assump­
tions of the old astronomy and led to the invention of a new one. This 
is not correct for Copernicus and the domain of astronomy (see 
above, comments on 2). The 'refutation' of the immutability of the 
heavens was neither compelling nor decisive for the problem of the 
motion of the earth. Besides, the idea of the motion of the earth was 
in big trouble or, if you will, 'refuted'. lt could survive only if it was 
treated with kindness. But if it could be treated with kindness, then so 
could the older system. 
We see here very clearly how misguided it is to try reducing the 
process 'Copernican Revolution' to a single principle, such as the 
principle of falsification. Falsifications played a role just as new 
observations played a role. But both were imbedded in a complex 
pattern of events which contained tendencies, attitudes, and 
considerations of an entirely different nature. 
4. CoTTVentionalism: the old astronomy became more and more 
complicated - so it was in the end replaced by a simpler theory. lt is 
this assumption that led to the mocking remark of the 'epicyclical 
26. Stanley E. Babb, 'Accuracy of Planetary Theories, Particularly for Mars', Isis, 
Sep. 1977, pp. 426fT. Cf. also the earlier article of Derek de Solla Price, 'Contra 
Copernicus', in M. Clagett (ed.), Critical Problems of the History of Science, Madison, 
1959, pp. 197fT; N.R. Hanson,/sis, No. 5 1 ,  1960, pp. 150fT as well as Owen Gingerich, 
'Crisis vs Aesthetics in the Copernican Revolution', in Beer (ed.), Vistas in Astronomy, 
Vol. 17, 1974. Gingerich compares the tables of Stoeffier, Stadius, Maesdin, Magini 
and Origanus and finds al of them beset by errors of roughly the same magnitude 
(though not of the same distribution along the ecliptic). 

146 
AGAINST METHOD 
degeneration'. The theory overlooks the fact that the Copernican 
scheme has about as many circles as the Ptolemaic oneP 
5. The theory of crises: astronomy was in a crisis. The crisis led to a 
revolution which brought about the triumph of the Copernican 
system. 
The answer here is the same as under 2: empirically there was no 
crisis and no crisis was resolved. A crisis did occur in cosmology, but 
only after the idea of the motion of the earth received a serious 
hearing. The many complaints about the inexactness of astronomical 
predictions that preceded Copernicus (Regiomontanus, for example) 
criticized the lack of precise initial conditions and accurate tables, not 
basic theory, and such a criticism would have been quite unjust, as 
the later examination of these theories shows. 28 
27. The reader should consult the very instructive diagrams in de Santillana's 
edition of Galileo's Dialogue, Chicago, 1964. 
28. Cf. footnote 26 above. 

1 5  
The results obtained so far suggest abolishing the distinction between a 
context of discuvery and a context of justification, norms and faas, 
obseroational terms and theoretical terms. None of these distinctions plays a 
role in scientific praaice. Anempts to enforce them would have disastrous 
consequences. Poper's 'critical' rationalism fails for the same reasons. 
Let us now use the material of the preceding sections to throw light 
on the following features of contemporary empiricism: (1) the 
distinctions between a context of discovery and a context of 
justification - norms and facts, observational terms and theoretical 
terms; (2) Popper's 'critical' rationalism; (3) the problem of 
incommensurability. The last problem will lead us back to the 
problem of rationality and order vs anarchism, which is the main 
topic of this essay. 
One of the objections which may be raised against my attempt to 
draw methodological conclusions from historical examples is that it 
confounds two contexts which are essentially distinct, viz. a context of 
discovery, and a context of justification. Discuvery may be irrational 
and need not follow any recognized method. Justification, on the 
other hand, or- to use the Holy Word of a different school-cn'ticism, 
starts only after the discoveries have been made, and it proceeds á an 
orderly way. 'It is one thing,' writes Herbert Feigl, 'to retrace the 
historical origins, the psychological genesis and development, the 
socio-political-economic conditions for the acceptance or rejection 
of scientific theories; and it is quite another thing to provide a logical 
reconstruction of the conceptual structure and of the testing of 
scientific theories.'1 These are indeed two different things, especially 
as they are done by two different disciplines (history of science, 
philosophy of science), which are quite jealous of their indepen­
dence. But the question is not what distinctions a fertile mind can 
I. 'The Orthodox View of Theories, in Radner-Winokur (eds), Analyses of 
Theories and Methods of Physics and Psychology, Minneapolis, 1 970, p. 4. 
147 

148 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
dream up when confronted with a complex process, or how some 
homogeneous material may be subdivided; the question is to what 
extent the distinction drawn reflects a real difference and whether 
science can advance without a strong interaction between the 
separated domains. (A river may be subdivided by national 
boundaries but this does not make it a discontinuous entity.) Now 
there is, of course, a very noticeable difference between the rules of 
testing as 'reconstructed' by philosophers of science and the 
procedures which scientists use in actual research. This difference is 
apparent to the most superficial examination. On the other hand, a 
most superficial examination also shows that a determined applica­
tion of the methods of criticism and proof which are said to belong to 
the context of justification would wipe out science as we know it -
and would never have permitted it to arise.2 Conversely, the fact 
that science exists proves that these methods were frequently over­
ruled. They were overruled by procedures which belong to the 
context of discovery. Thus the attempt 'to retrace the historical 
origins, the psychological genesis and development, the socio­
political-economic conditions for the acceptance or rejection of 
scientific theories', far from being irrelevant for the standards of test, 
actually leads to a criticism of these standards - pr(fl)ided the two 
domains, historical research and discussion of test procedures, are 
not kept apart by fiat. 
In another paper Feigl repeats his arguments and adds some 
further points. He is 'astonished that . . .  scholars such as N.R. 
Hanson, Thomas Kuhn, Michael Polanyi, Paul Feyerabend, 
Sigmund Koch et al., consider the distinction as invalid or at least 
misleading'. 3 And he points out that neither the psychology of 
invention nor any similarity, however great, between the sciences and 
the arts can show that it does not exist. In this he is certainly right. 
Even the most surprising stories about the manner in which scientists 
arrive at their theories cannot exclude the possibility that they 
proceed in an entirely different way once they have found them. But 
this possibility is never realized. Inventing theories and contemplating 
them in a relaxed and 'artistic' fashion, scientists often make moves 
that are forbidden by methodological rules. For example, they 
interpret the evidence so that it fits their fanciful ideas, eliminate 
difficulties by ad hoc procedures, push them aside, or simply refuse to 
take them seriously. The activities which according to Feigl belong to 
2. Cf. the examples in Chapter 5. 
3. 'Empiricism at Bay', MS, 1972, p. 2. 

F I FTEEN 
149 
the context of discovery are, therefore, not just diferent from what 
philosophers say about justification, they are in conjlia with it. 
Scientific practice does not contain two contexts moving side by side, it 
is a complicated mixture of procedures and we are faced by the 
question if this mixture should be left as it is, or if it should be 
replaced by a more 'orderly' arrangement. This is part one of the 
argument. Now we have seen that science as we know it today could 
not exist without a frequent overruling of the context of justification. 
This is part two of the argument. The conclusion is clear. Part one 
shows that we do not have a difference, but a mixture. Part two shows 
that replacing the mixture by an order that contains discovery on one 
side and justification on the other would have ruined science: we are 
dealing with a uniform practice all of whose ingredients are equally 
important for the growth of science. This disposes of the distinction. 
A similar argument applies to the ritual distinction between 
methodological prescriptions and historical descriptions. Methodology, 
it is said, deals with what should be done and cannot be criticized by 
reference to what is. But we must of course make sure that our 
prescriptions have a point of attack in the historical material, and we 
must also make sure that their determined application leads to 
desirable results. We make sure by considering (historical, socio­
logical, physical, psychological, etc.) tendencies and laws which tell us 
what is possible and what is not possible under the given circum­
stances and thus separate feasible prescriptions from those which are 
going to lead into dead ends. Again, progress can be made only if the 
distinction between the ought and the is is regarded as a temporary 
device rather than as a fundamental boundary line. 
A distinction which once may have had a point but which has now 
definitely lost it is the distinction between observational terms and 
theoretical terms. It is now generally admitted that this distinction is 
not as sharp as it was thought to be only a few decades ago. It is also 
admitted, in complete agreement with Neurath's original views, that 
both theories and observations can be abandoned: theories may be 
removed because of conflicting observations, observations may be 
removed for theoretical reasons. Finally, we have discovered that 
learning does not go from observation to theory but always involves 
both elements. Experience arises together with theoretical assump­
tions not before them, and an experience without theory is just as 
incomprehensible as is (allegedly) a theory without experience: 
eliminate part of the theoretical knowledge of a sensing subject and 
you have a person who is completely disoriented and incapable of 
carrying out the simplest action. Eliminate further knowledge and his 
sensory world (his 'observation language') wil start disintegrating, 

150 
AGAINST METHOD 
colours and other simple sensations will disappear until he is in a 
stage even more primitive than a small child. A small child, on the 
other hand, does not possess a stable perceptual world which he uses 
for making sense of the theories put before him. Quite the contrary ­
he passes through various perceptual stages which are only loosely 
connected with each other (earlier stages disappear when new stages 
take over - see Chapter 16) and which embody all the theoretical 
knowledge available at the time. Moreover, the whole process starts 
only because the child reacts correctly towards signals, interprets them 
correctly, because he possesses means of interpretation even before he 
has experienced his first clear sensation. 
All these discoveries cry out for a new terminology that no longer 
separates what is so intimately connected in the development both of 
the individual and of science at large. Yet thl distinction between 
observation and theory is still upheld. But what is its point? Nobody 
will deny that the sentences of science can be classified into long 
sentences and short sentences, or that its statements can be classified 
into those which are intuitively obvious and others which are not. 
Nobody wil deny that such distinctions can be made. But nobody will 
put great weight on them, or will even mention them, for they do not 
now play a'V' decisive role in the business of science. (This was not always 
so. Intuitive plausibility, for example, was once thought to be a most 
important guide to the truth; it disappeared from methodology the 
very moment intuition was replaced by experience, and by formal 
considerations.) Does experience play such a role? It does not, as we 
have seen. Yet the inference that the distinction between theory and 
observation has now ceased to be relevant, is either not drawn or is 
explicitly rejected! Let us take a step forward and let us abandon 
this last trace of dogmatism in science! 
Incommensurability, which I shall discuss next, is closely 
connected with the question of the rationality of science. Indeed one 
of the most general objections not merely to the use of incommen­
surable theories but even to the idea that there are such theories to be 
found in the history of science is the fear that they would severely 
restrict the efficacy of traditional, non-dialectical argument. Let us, 
therefore, look a little more closely at the critical standards which, 
according to some, constitute the content of a 'rational' argument. 
More especially, let us look at the standards of the Popperian school, 
4. 'Neurath fails to give . . .  rules [which distinguish empirical statements from 
others) and thus unwittingly throws empiricism overboard', K.R. Popper, The Logic of 
Scientific Dis«JVery, New York and London, 1959, p. 97. 

FIFTEEN 
151 
which are still being taken seriously in the more backward regions of 
knowledge. This will prepare us for the final step in our discussion of 
the issue between law-and-order methodologies and anarchism in 
science. 
Some readers of my arguments in the above text have pointed out 
that Popper's 'critical' rationalism is sufficiently liberal to accom­
modate the developments I have described. Now critical rationalism 
is either a meaningful idea or it is a collection of slogans that can be 
adapted to any situation. 
In the first case it must be possible to produce rules, standards, 
restrictions which permit us to separate critical behaviour (thinking, 
singing, writing of plays) from other types ofbehaviour so that we can 
discuver irrational actions and coTTea them with the help of concrete 
suggestions. It is not difficult to produce the standards of rationality 
defended by the Popperian school. 
These standards are standards of criticism: rational discussion 
consists in the attempt to criticize, and not in the attempt to prove or 
to make probable. Every step that protects a view from criticism, that 
makes it safe or 'well-founded', is a step away from rationality. 
Every step that makes it more vulnerable is welcome. In addition, 
it is recommended to abandon ideas which have been found want­
ing and it is forbidden to retain them in the face of strong and 
successful criticism unless one can present suitable counter­
arguments. Develop your ideas so that they can be criticized; 
attack them relentlessly; do not try to protect them, but exhibit 
their weak spots; eliminate them as soon as such weak spots have 
become manifest - these are some of the rules put forth by our 
critical rationalists. 
These rules become more definite and more detailed when we 
turn to the philosophy of science and, especially, to the philosophy of 
the natural sciences. 
Within the natural sciences, criticism is connected with experi­
ment and observations. The content of a theory consists in the sum 
total of those basic statements which contradict it; it is the class of its 
potential falsifiers. Increased content means increased vulnerability, 
hence theories oflarge content are to be preferred to theories of small 
content. Increase of content is welcome, decrease of content is to be 
avoided. A theory that contradicts an accepted basic statement must 
be given up. Ad hoc hypotheses are forbidden - and so on. A science, 
however, that accepts the rules of a critical empiricism of this kind 
will develop in the following manner . 
. 
We start with a problem, such as the problem of the planets at the 
tune of Plato. This problem (which I shall discuss in a somewhat 

152 
AGAINST METHOD 
idealized form) is not merely the result of curiosity, it is a theoretical 
result. It is due to the fact that certain expectations have been 
disappointed: on the one hand it seems to be clear that the stars must 
be divine, hence one expects them to behave in an orderly and lawful 
manner. On the other hand, one cannot find any easily discernible 
regularity. The planets, to all intents and purposes, move in a quite 
chaotic fashion. How can this fact be reconciled with the expectation 
and with the principles that underlie the expectation? Does it show 
that the expectation is mistaken? Or have we failed in our analysis of 
the facts? This is the problem. 
It is important to see that the elements of the problem are not 
simply given. The 'fact' of irregularity, for example, is not accessible 
without further ado. It cannot be discovered by just anyone who has 
healthy eyes and a good mind. It is only through a certain expectation 
that it becomes an object of our attention. Or, to be more accurate, 
this fact of irregularity exists because there is an expectation of 
regularity and because there are ideas which define what it means to 
be 'regular'. After al, the term 'irregularity' makes sense only if we 
have a rule. In our case the rule that defines regularity asserts circular 
motion with constant angular velocity. The fixed stars agree with this 
rule and so does the sun, if we trace its path relative to the fixed stars. 
The planets do not obey the rule, neither directly, with respect to the 
earth, nor indirectly, with respect to the fixed stars. 
(In the problem we are examining now the rule is formulated 
explicitly and it can be discussed. This is not always the case. 
Recognizing a colour as red is made possible by deep-lying 
patterns concerning the structure of our surroundings and recog­
nition does not occur when these patterns cease to exist.) 
To sum up this part of the Popperian doctrine: research starts with 
a problem. The problem is the result of a conflict between an 
expectation and an observation which is constituted by the 
expectation. It is clear that this doctrine differs from the doctrine of 
inductivism where objective facts enter a passive mind and leave their 
traces there. It was prepared by Kant, Mach, Poincare, Dingler, and 
by Mil (On Liberty). 
Having formulated a problem, one tries to solve it. Solving a 
problem means inventing a theory that is relevant, falsifiable (to a 
degree larger than any alternative), but not yet falsified. In the case 
mentioned above (planets at the time of Plato), the problem is: to find 
circular motions of constant angular velocity for the purpose of saving 
the planetary phenomena. A first solution was provided by Eudoxos 
and then by Heracleides ofPontos. 
Next comes the criticism of the theory that has been put forth in the 

FIFTEEN 
new 
theory 
additional 
predictions 
successes 
of the old 
theory 
(part of 
the truth 
content 
of the new 
theory) 
failures of the 
old theory (part 
of the falsity 
content of the 
new theory) 
153 
attempt to solve the problem. Successful criticism removes the 
theory once and for all and creates a new problem, viz. to explain (a) 
why the theory was successful so far; (b) why it failed. Trying to solve 
this problem we need a new theory that reproduces the successful 
consequences of the older theory, denies its mistakes and makes 
additional predictions not made before. These are some of the formal 
conditions which a suitable successor of a refuted theory must satisfY. 
Adopting the conditions, one proceeds by conjecture and refutation 
from less general theories to more general theories and expands the 
content of human knowledge. 
More and more facts are discovered (or constructed with the help of 
expectations) and are then explained by theories. There is no 
guarantee that scientists will solve every problem and replace every 
theory that has been refuted with a successor satisfYing the formal 
conditions. The invention of theories depends on our talents and 
other fortuitous circumstances such as a satisfactory sex life. But as 
long as these talents hold out, the enclosed scheme is a correct 
account of the growth of a knowledge that satisfies the rules of critical 
rationalism. 
Now at this point, one may raise two questions. 
1. Is it desirable to live in accordance with the rules of a critical 
rationalism? 
2. Is it possible to have both a science as we know it and these rules? 
As far as I am concerned, the first question is far more important 
than the second. True, science and related institutions play an 
important part in our culture, and they occupy the centre of interest 
for many philosophers (most philosophers are opportunists). Thus 

154 
AGAINST METHOD 
the ideas of the Popperian school were obtained by generalizing 
solutions for methodological and epistemological problems. Critical 
rationalism arose from the attempt to understand the Einsteinian 
revolution, and it was then extended to politics and even to the 
conduct of one's private life. Such a procedure may satisfY a school 
philosopher, who looks at life through the spectacles of his own 
technical problems and recognizes hatred, love, happiness, only to 
the extent to which they occur in these problems. But if we consider 
human interests and, above all, the question of human freedom 
(freedom from hunger, despair, from the tyranny of constipated 
systems of thought and not the academic 'freedom of the will'), then 
we are proceeding in the worst possible fashion. 
For is it not possible that science as we know it today, or a 
'search for the truth' in the style of traditional philosophy, will 
create a monster? Is it not possible that an objective approach that 
frowns upon personal connections between the entities examined 
will harm people, tum them into miserable, unfriendly, self­
righteous mechanisms without charm and humour? 'Is it not 
possible,' asks Kierkegaard, 'that my activity as an objective [or a 
critico-rationalJ observer of nature will weaken my strength as a 
human being?' I suspect the answer to many of these questions is 
affirmative and I believe that a reform of the sciences that makes 
them more anarchic and more subjective (in Kierkegaard's sense) is 
urgently needed. 
But these are not the problems I want to discuss now. In the 
present essay I shall restrict myself to the second question and I shall 
ask: is it possible to have both a science as we know it and the rules of 
a critical rationalism as just described? And to this question the 
answer seems to be a finn and resounding NO. 
To start with we have seen, though rather briefly, that the actual 
development of institutions, ideas, practices, and so on, often does not 
start from a problem but rather from some extraneous activity, such as 
playing, which, as a side effect, leads to developments which later on 
can be interpreted as solutions to unrealized problems.6 Are such 
developments to be excluded? And, if we do exclude them, wil this 
not considerably reduce the number of our aoaptive reactions and the 
quality of our learning process? 
5. Papirer, ed. Heiberg, VII, Pt. I, sec. A, No. 182. Mil tries to show how scientific 
method can be understood as part of a theory of man and thus gives a positive answer to 
the question raised by Kierkegaard; cf. footnote 2 to Chapter 4. 
6. Cf. the brief comments on the relation between idea and action in Chapter I. 
For details cf. footnotes 31fT of'Against Method',Minnesota Studies, Vol. 4, 1970. 

F I FTEEN 
155 
Secondly, we have seen, in Chapters 8-14, that a strict pn"nciple of 
falsification, or a 'naive falsificationism' as Lakatos calls it, 7 would 
wipe out science as we know it and would never have permitted it to 
start. 
The demand for increased content is not satisfied either. Theories 
which effect the overthrow of a comprehensive and well-entrenched 
point of view, and take over after its demise, are initially restricted to a 
fairly narrow domain of facts, to a series of paradigmatic phenomena 
which lend them support, and they are only slowly extended to other 
areas. This can be seen from historical examples (footnote 12 of 
Chapter 8), and it is also plausible on general grounds: trying to 
develop a new theory, we must first take a step back from the evidence 
and reconsider the problem of observation (this was discussed in 
Chapter 1 1). Later on, of course, the theory is extended to other 
domains; but the mode of extension is only rarely determined by the 
elements that constitute the content of its predecessors. The slowly 
emerging conceptual apparatus of the theory soon starts ckfining its 
own problems, and earlier problems, facts, and observations are either 
forgotten or pushed aside as irrelevant. This is an entirely natural 
development, and quite unobjectionable. For why should an ideology 
be constrained by older problems which, at any rate, make sense only 
in the abandoned context and which look silly and unnatural now? 
Why should it even consider the 'facts' that gave rise to problems of 
this kind or played a role in their solutions? Why should it not rather 
proceed in its own way, devising its own tasks and assembling its own 
domain of 'facts'? A comprehensive theory, after all, is supposed to 
contain also an ontology that determines what exists and thus delimits 
the domain of possible facts and possible questions. The develop­
ment of science agrees with these considerations. New views soon 
strike out in new directions and frown upon the older problems (what 
is the base upon which the earth rests? what is the specific weight of 
phlogiston? what is the absolute velocity of the earth?) and the older 
/acts (most of the facts described in the Malleus Maleficarum- Chapter 
8, footnote 2 - the facts of Voodoo - Chapter 4, footnote 8 - the 
properties of phlogiston or those of the ether) which so much 
exercised the minds of earlier thinkers. And where they do pay 
attention to preceding theories, they try to accommodate their factual 
core in the manner already described, with the help of ad hoc 
hypotheses, ad hoc approximations, redefinition of terms, or by simply 
7. 'Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes', in 
Lakatos-Musgrave (eds), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Cambridge, 1970, 
pp. 93fT. ('Naive falsificationism' is here also called 'dogmatic'.) 

156 
AGAINST METHOD 
asserting, without any more detailed study of the matter, that the core 
'follows from' the new basic principles.8 They are 'grafted on to 
older programmes with which they [are] blatantly inconsistent'.9 
The result of all these procedures is an interesting epistemological 
illusion: the imagined content of the earlier theories (which is the 
intersection of the remembered consequences of these theories with 
the newly recognized domain of problems and facts) shrinks and may 
decrease to such an extent that it becomes smaller than the imagined 
content of the new ideologies (which are the actual consequences of 
these ideologies plus all those 'facts', laws, principles which are tied to 
them by ad hoc hypotheses, ad hoc approximations or by the say-so of 
some influential physicist or philosopher of science - and which 
properly belong to the predecessor). Comparing the old and the new 
it thus appears that the relation of empirical contents is like this 
new 
or, perhaps, like this 
while in actual fact it is much more like this 
8. 'Einstein's theory is better than . . .  Newton's theory anno 1916 . . .  because it 
explained everything that Newton's theory had successfully explained . .  .', Lakatos, 
op. cit., p. 214. 
9. Lakatos, discussing Copernicus and Bohr, ibid., p. 143. 

F I FTEEN 
157 
domain D representing the problems and facts of the old theory 
which are still remembered and which have been distorted so as to fit 
into the new framework. It is this illusion which is responsible for the 
persistent survival of the demand for increased content.10 
Finally, we have by now seen quite distinctly the need for ad hoc 
hypotheses: ad hoc hypotheses and ad hoc approximations create a 
tentative area of contact between 'facts' and those parts of a new view 
which seem capable of explaining them, at some time in the future 
and after addition of much further material. They specify possible 
explananda and explanatia, and thus detennine the direction of 
future research. They may have to be retained forever if the new 
framework is partly unfinished (this happened in the case of the 
quantum theory, which needs the classical concepts to tum it into a 
complete theory). Or they are incorporated into the new theory as 
theorems, leading to a redefinition of the basic terms of the 
proceeding ideology (this happened in the cases of Galileo and of the 
theory of relativity). The demand that the truth-content of the earlier 
theory as conceived JlJhile the earlier theory reigned supreme be included 
in the truth-content of the successor is violated in either case. 
To sum up: wherever we look, whatever examples we consider, we 
see that the principles of critical rationalism (take falsifications 
seriously; increase content; avoid ad hoc hypotheses; 'be honest' -
whatever that means; and so on) and, a fortiori, the principles of 
logical empiricism (be precise; base your theories on measurements; 
avoid vague and untestable ideas; and so on), though practised 
in special areas, give an inadequate account of the past development 
of science as a whole and are liable to hinder it in the future. They give 
an inadequate account of science because science is much more 
I 0. This illusion is the core of Elie Zahar's excellent paper on the development 
from Lorentz to Einstein. According to Zahar, Einstein superseded Lorentz with the 
explanation of the perihelion of Mercury (1915). But in 1915 nobody had as yet 
succeeded in giving a relativistic account of clasical perturbation theory to the degree 
of approximation reached by Laplace and Poincare, and the implications of Lorentz on 
the atomic level (electron theory of metals) were not accounted for either, but were 
gradually replaced by the quantum theory: Lorentz was 'superseded' not by one, but by 
at least two different and mutually incommensurable programes. Lakatos, in 
his excellent reconstruction of the development of the research programme of 
Copernicus from the Commmtariolus to the De Revol., notes progressive changes but 
o because he omits the dynamical and the optical problems and concentrates on 
tnematics, pure and simple. Small wonder that both Zahar and Lakatos are under the 
!pression that the content condition is still satisfied. Cf. my short note 'Zahar on 
Etnstein', in the BritishJoumalfor the Philosoplry of Science, March 1974 as well as R.N. 
Ngaev, 'Special Relativity as a Stage in the Development of Quantum Theory', 
Htstoria Scientarium, No. 34, 1988, pp. 57fT. 

158 
AGAINST METHOD 
'sloppy' and 'irrational' than its methodological image. And they are 
liable to hinder it because the attempt to make science more 'rational' 
and more precise is bound to wipe it out, as we have seen. The 
difference between science and methodology which is such an 
obvious fact of history, therefore, indicates a weakness of the latter, 
and perhaps of the 'laws of reason' as well. For what appears as 
'sloppiness', 'chaos' or 'opportunism' when compared with such laws 
has a most important function in the development of those very 
theories which we today regard as essential parts of our knowledge of 
nature. These 'deviations', these 'errors ', are preconditions of progress. 
They permit knowledge to survive in the complex and difficult world 
which we inhabit, they permit us to remain free and happy agents. 
Without 'chaos', no knowledge. Without a frequent dismissal of 
reason, no progress. Ideas which today form the very basis of science 
exist only because there were such things as prejudice, conceit, 
passion; because these things oposed reason; and because they were 
permitted to have their way. We have to conclude, then, that even within 
science reason cannot and should not be allowed to be comprehen­
sive and that it must often be overruled, or eliminated, in favour of 
other agencies. There is not a single rule that remains valid under al 
circumstances and not a single agency to which appeal can always be 
made.1 1  
I I .  Even Lakatos' ingenious methodology does not escape this indictment. 
Lakatos seems liberal because he forbids very little and he seems rational because he is 
stiU forbids something. But the only thing he forbids is to describe a 'degenerating 
research programme', i.e. a research programme lacking in novel predictions and 
cluttered with ad hoc adaptations, as progressive. He does not forbid its use. But this 
means that his standards permit a criminal to commit as many crimes as he wants 
provided he never lies about them. Details in my Philosophical Papm, Vol. 2, Chapter 
10. 

Appendix 1 
Having listened to one of my anarchistic sermons, Professor Wigner 
exclaimed: 'But surely, you do not read all the manuscripts which 
people send you, but you throw most of them into the wastepaper 
basket.' I most certainly do. 'Anything goes' does not mean that I 
shall read every single paper that has been written - God forbid! - it 
means that I make my selection in a highly individual and 
idiosyncratic way, partly because I can't be bothered to read what 
doesn't interest me - and my interests change from week to week and 
day to day - partly because I am convinced that humanity and even 
Science will profit from everyone doing his own thing: a physicist 
might prefer a sloppy and partly incomprehensible paper full of 
mistakes to a crystal-clear exposition because it is a natural extension 
of his own, still rather disorganized, research and he might achieve 
success as well as clarity long before his rival who has vowed never to 
read a single woolly line (one of the assets of the Copenhagen School 
was its ability to avoid premature precision). On other occasions he 
might look for the most perfect proof of a principle he is about to use 
in order not to be sidetracked in the debate of what he considers to be 
his main results. There are of course so-called 'thinkers' who 
subdivide their mail in exactly the same way, come rain, come 
sunshine, and who also imitate each other's principles of choice - but 
we shall hardly admire them for their uniformity, and we shall 
certainly not think their behaviour 'rational'. Science needs people 
who are adaptable and inventive, not rigid imitators of 'established' 
behavioural patterns. 
In the case of institutions and organizations such as the National 
Science Foundation the situation is exactly the same. The 
physiognomy of an organization and its efficiency depends on its 
members and it improves with their mental and emotional agility. 
$ven Procter and Gamble realized that a bunch of yes-men is inferior 
m competitive potential to a group of people with unusual opinions 
and business has found ways of incorporating the most amazing 
nonconformists into their machinery. Special problems arise with 
159 

160 
AGAINST METHOD 
foundations that distribute money and want to do this in a just and 
reasonable way. Justice seems to demand that the allocation of funds 
be carried out on the basis of standards which do not change from 
one applicant to the next and which reflect the intellectual situation in 
the fields to be supported. The demand can be satisfied in an ad hoc 
manner without appeal to universal 'standards of rationality': any free 
association of people must respect the illusions of its members and 
must give them institutional support. The illusion of rationality 
becomes especially strong when a scientific institution opposes 
political demands. In this case one class of standards is set against 
another such class - and this is quite legitimate: each organization, 
each party, each religious group has a right to defend its particular 
form of life and all the standards it contains. But scientists go much 
further. Like the defenders of The One True Religion before them 
they insinuate that their standards are essential for arriving at the 
Truth, or for getting Results and they deny such authority to the 
demands of the politician. They oppose all political interference, and 
they fall over each other trying to remind the listener, or the reader, of 
the disastrous outcome of the Lysenko affair. 
Now we have seen that the belief in a unique set of standards that 
has always led to success and will always lead to success is nothing but 
a chimera. The theoretical authority of science is much smaller than it 
is supposed to be. Its social authority, on the other hand, has by now 
become so overpowering that political interference is necessary to restore a 
balanced development. And to judge the efeas of such interference one 
must study more than one unanalysed case. One must remember 
those cases where science, left to itself, committed grievous blunders 
and one must not for9et the instances when political interference did 
improve the situation. Such a balanced presentation of the evidence 
may even convince us that the time is overdue for adding the 
separation of state and science to the by now quite customary 
separation of state and church. Science is only one of the many 
instruments people invented to cope with their surroundings. It is not 
the only one, it is not infallible and it has become too powerful, too 
pushy, and too dangerous to be left on its own. Next, a word about the 
praaical aim rationalists want to realize with the help of their 
methodology. 
Rationalists are concerned about intellectual pollution. I share this 
concern. Illiterate and incompetent books flood the market, empty 
verbiage full of strange and esoteric terms claims to express profound 
I. An example was discussed in the text to footnotes 9-12 of Chapter 4. 

APPENDIX I 
161 
insights, 'experts' without brains, character, and without even a 
modicum of intellectual, stylistic, emotional temperament tell us 
about our 'condition' and the means for improving it, and they do not 
only preach to us who might be able to look through them, they are let 
loose on our children and permitted to drag them down into their 
own intellectual squalor.2 'Teachers' using grades and the fear of 
failure mould the brains of the young until they have lost every ounce 
of imagination they might once have possessed. This is a disastrous 
situation, and one not easily mended. But I do not see how a 
rationalistic methodology can help. As far as I am concerned the first 
and the most pressing problem is to get education out of the hands of 
the 'professional educators'. The constraints of grades, competition, 
regular examination must be removed and we must also separate the 
process of learning from the preparation for a particular trade. I grant that 
business, religions, special professions such as science or prostitu­
tion, have a right to demand that their participants and/or 
practitioners conform to standards they regard as important, and that 
they should be able to ascertain their competence. I also admit that 
this implies the need for special types of education that prepare a man 
or a woman for the corresponding 'examinations'. The standards 
taught need not be 'rational' or 'reasonable' in any sense, though they 
will be usually presented as such; it suffices that they are accepted by 
the groups one wants to join, be it now Science, or Big Business, or 
The One True Religion. After all, in a democracy 'reason' has just as 
much right to be heard and to be expressed as 'unreason' especially in 
view of the fact that one man's 'reason' is the other man's insanity. 
But one thing must be avoided at all costs: the special standards 
which define special subjects and special professions must not be 
allowed to permeate general education and they must not be made the 
defining property of a 'well-educated person'. General education 
should prepare citizens to choose between the standards, or to find their 
way in a society that contains groups committed to various standards, 
but it must under no condition bend their minds so that they confonn to the 
standards of one particular group. The standards will be considered, they 
will be discussed, children will be encouraged to get proficiency in the 
more important subjects, but only as one gets proficiency in a game, that 
is, without serious commitment and without robbing the mind of its 
ability to play other games as well. Having been prepared in this way a 
young person may decide to devote the rest of his life to a particular 
profession and he may start taking it seriously forthwith. This 
2. Even the law now seems to suppon these tendences, as is shown in Peter 
Huber's Galileo's Revenge, New York, 1991. 

162 
AGAINST METHOD 
'commibnent' should be the result of a conscious decision, on the 
basis of a fairly complete knowledge of alternatives, and not a foregone 
conclusion. 
All this means, of course, that we must stop the scientists from 
taking over education and from teaching as 'fact' and as 'the one true 
method' whatever the myth of the day happens to be. Agreement with 
science, decision to work in accordance with the canons of science 
should be the result of examination and choice, and not of a particular 
way of bringing up children. 
It seems to me that such a change in education and, as a result, in 
perspective will remove a great deal of the intellectual pollution 
rationalists deplore. The change of perspective makes it clear that 
there are many ways of ordering the world that surrounds us, that the 
hated constraints of one set of standards may be broken by freely 
accepting standards of a different kind, and that there is no need to 
reject all order and to allow oneself to be reduced to a whining stream 
of consciousness. A society that is based on a set of well-defined and 
restrictive rules, so that being human becomes synonymous with 
obeying these rules, forces the dissenter into a no-man 's-land of no rules 
at all and thus robs him of his reason and his humanity. It is the paradox 
of modem irrationalism that its proponents silently identify 
rationalism with order and articulate speech and thus see themselves 
forced to promote stammering and absurdity - many forms of 
'mysticism' and 'existentialism' are impossible without a firm but 
unrealized commibnent to some principles of the despised ideology 
Gust remember the 'theory' that poetry is nothing but emotions 
colourfully expressed). Remove the principles, admit the possibility 
of many different forms of life, and such phenomena will disappear 
like a bad dream. 
My diagnosis and my suggestions coincide with those of Lakatos ­
up to a point. Lakatos has identified overly-rigid rationality principles 
as the source of some versions of irrationalism and he has urged us to 
adopt new and more liberal standards. I have identified overly-rigid 
rationality principles as well as a general respect for 'reason' as the 
source of some forms of mysticism and irrationalism, and I also urge 
the adoption of more liberal standards. But while Lakatos' great 
'respect for great science'3 makes him look for the standards within 
the confines of modem science 'of the last two centuries',4 I 
recommend to put science in its place as an interesting but by no 
means exclusive form of knowledge that has many advantages but 
3. 'History', p. I I3. 
4. ibid., p. I I I. 

APPENDIX I 
163 
also many drawbacks: 'Although science taken as a whole is a 
nuisance, one can still learn from it.'5 Also I don't believe that 
charlatans can be banned just by tightening up rules. 
Charlatans have existed at all times and in the most tightly-knit 
professions. Some of the examples which Lakatos mentions6 seem 
to indicate that the problem is created by too much control and not by 
too litde. 7 This is especially true of the new 'revolutionaries' and 
their 'reform' of the universities. Their fault is that they are Puritans 
and not that they are libertines.8 Besides, who would expect that 
cowards will improve the intellectual climate more readily than will 
libertines? (Einstein saw this problem and he therefore advised 
people not to connect their research with their profession: research 
has to be free from the pressures which professions are likely to 
impose.'1 We must also remember that those rare cases where liberal 
methodologies dn encourage empty verbiage and loose thinking 
('loose' from one point of view, though perhaps not from another) 
may be inevitable in the sense that the guilty liberalism is also a 
precondition of a free and humane life. 
Finally, let me repeat that for me the chauvinism of science is a 
much greater problem than the problem of intellectual pollution. It 
may even be one of its major causes. Scientists are not content with 
running their own playpens in accordance with what they regard as 
the rules of scientific method, they want to universalize these rules, 
they want them to become part of society at large and they use every 
means at their disposal - argument, propaganda, pressure tactics, 
intimidation, lobbying -
to achieve their aims. The Chinese 
Communists recognized the dangers inherent in this chauvinism and 
they proceeded to remove it. In the process they restored important 
parts of the intellectual and emotional heritage of the Chinese people 
and they also improved the practice of medicine10• It would be of 
advantage if other governments followed suit. 
5. Gottfried Benn, letter to Gert Micha Simon of I I  October 1949, quoted from 
Gottfried Benn, Lyrik und Prosa, Briefo und Dokumente, Wiesbaden, 1962, p. 235. 
6. 'Falsification', p. 176, footnote I. 
7. Cf. also his remarks on 'false consciousness' in 'History', pp. 94, 108fT. 
8. For an older example, cf. the Bom-EimteinLettm, New York, 1971, p. I SO. 
9. ibid., pp. 105fT. 
10. Cf. text to footnotes 9-12 of Chapter 4. 

1 6  
Finally, the kind of comparison that underlies most methodologies is possible 
only in some rather simple cases. It breaks down when we try to compare 
non-scientific views with science or when we consider the most advanced, 
most general and therefore most mythological parts of science itself. 
I have much sympathy with the view, formulated clearly and elegantly 
by Whorf (and anticipated by Bacon), that languages and the reaction 
patterns they involve are not merely instruments for describing events 
(facts, states of affair), but that they are also shapers of events (facts, 
states of affairs), 1 that their 'grammar' contains a cosmology, a 
comprehensive view of the world, of society, of the situation of man2 
which influences thought, behaviour, perception.3 According to 
Whorf the cosmology of a language is expressed partly by the overt 
use of words, but it also rests on classifications 'which ha[ve] no overt 
mark . . .  but which operate [] through an invisible "central exchange" 
of linkage bonds in such a way as to determine other words which 
mark the class.'4 Thus '[t]he gender nouns, such as boy, girl, father, 
wife, uncle, woman, lady, including thousands of given names like 
George, Fred, Mary, Charlie, Isabel, Isadore, Jane, John, Alice, 
Aloysius, Esther, Lester, bear no distinguishing mark of gender like 
the Latin - us  or -a within each motor process, but nevertheless each 
of these thousands of words. has an invariable linkage bond 
connecting it with absolute precision either to the word "he" or to the 
word "she" which, however, does not come into the overt behaviour 
1. According to Whorf 'the background linguistic system (in other words, the 
grammar) of each language is not merely a reproducing system for voicing ideas, but 
rather is itself a shaper of ideas, the programme and guide for the individual's mental 
activity, for his analysis of impressions, for his synthesis of his mental stock in trade'. 
Language, Thought and Reality, Cambridge, Mass., 1956, p. 121. See also Appendix 2. 
2. As an example cf. Whorfs analysis of Hopi Metaphysics in ibid., pp. 57fT. 
3. 'Users of markedly different grammars are pointed by their grammars towards 
different types of observations . . .  ', ibid., p. 221 .  
4. ibid., p .  69. 
164 

S I XTEEN 
165 
picture until and unless special situations of discourse require 
it.'5 
Owert classifications (which, because of their subterranean nature, 
are 'sensed rather than comprehended - awareness of [them] has an 
intuitive quality'6 - which 'are quite apt to be more rational than 
overt ones'7 and which may be very 'subtle' and not connected 'with 
any grand dichotomy'8) create 'patterned resistances to widely 
divergent points of view'. 9 If these resistances oppose not just the 
truth of the resisted alternatives but the presumption that an 
alternative has been presented, then we have an instance of 
incommensurability. 
I also believe that scientific theories, such as Aristotle's theory of 
motion, the theory of relativity, the quantum theory, classical and 
modem cosmology are sufficiently general, sufficiently 'deep' and 
have developed in sufficiently complex ways to be considered along 
the same lines as natural languages. The discussions that prepare the 
transition to a new age in physics, or in astronomy, are hardly ever 
restricted to the overt features of the orthodox point of view. They 
often reveal hidden ideas, replace them by ideas of a different kind, 
and change overt as well as covert classifications. Galileo's analysis of 
the tower argument led to a clearer formulation of the Aristotelian 
theory of space and it also revealed the difference between impetus (an 
5. ibid., p. 68. 
6. ibid., p. 70. Even '[a] phoneme may assume definite semantic duties as part of 
its rapport. In English the phoneme 3 ('thorn'] (the voiced sound of th) occurs initially 
only in the cryptotype [covert classification not connected with any grand dichotomy ­
p. 70] of demonstrative particles (the, this, there, than, etc.). Hence, there is a psychic 
pressure against accepting the voiced sound of th in new or imaginary words: thig, thay, 
thob, thuzzle, etc., not having demonstrative meaning. Encountering such a new word 
(e.g. thob) on a page, we will "instinctively" give it the voiceless sound 9 of th in "think". 
But it is not "instinct". Just our old friend linguistic rapport again' (p. 76, my italics). 
7. ibid., p. 80. The passage continues: ' . . .  some rather formal and not very 
meaningful linguistic group, marked by some overt feature, may happen to coincide 
very roughly with some concatenation of phenomena in such a way as to suggest a 
rationalization of this parallelism. In the course of phonetic change, the distinguishing 
mark, ending, or what not is lost, and the class passes from a formal to a semantic one. 
Its reactance is now what distinguishes it as a class, and its idea is what unifies it. As 
time and use go on, it becomes increasingly organized around a rationale, it attracts 
òemantically suitable words and loses former members that now are semantically 
mappropriate. Logic is now what holds it together.' Cf. also Mill's account of his 
educational development as described in text to foomote I 4 of Chapter 11. 
8. Whorf, op. cit., p .  70. Such subde classifications are called cryptotypes by 
Whorf. A cryptotype is 'a submerged, subde, and elusive meaning, corresponding to 
no actual word, yet shown by linguistic analysis to be functionally important in the 
grammar'. 
9. ibid., p. 247. 

166 
AGAINST METHOD 
absolute magnitude that inheres in the object) and momentum (which 
depends on the chosen reference system). Einstein's analysis of simul­
taneity unearthed some features of the Newtonian cosmology which, 
though unknown, had influenced all arguments about space and time, 
while Niels Bohr found in addition that the physical world could not be 
regarded as being entirely separated from the observer and thus gave 
content to the idea of independence that was part of classical physics. 
Attending to cases such as these we realize that scientific arguments 
may indeed be subjected to 'patterned resistances' and we expect that 
incommensurability will also occur among theories. 
(As incommensurability depends on covert classifications and 
involves major conceptual changes it is hardly ever possible to give an 
explicit definition of it. Nor will the customary 'reconstructions' 
succeed in bringing it to the fore. The phenomenon must be shown, 
the reader must be led up to it by being confronted with a great variety 
of instances, and he must then judge for himself. This wil be the 
method adopted in the present chapter.) 
Interesting cases of incommensurability occur already in the 
domain of perception. Given appropriate stimuli, but different systems 
of classification (different 'mental sets'), our perceptual apparatus 
may produce perceptual objects which cannot be easily compared.10 
A direct judgement is impossible. We may compare the two objects in 
our memory, but not while attending to the same piaure. The first 
drawing below goes one step further. It gives rise to perceptual 
objects which do not just negate other perceptual objects - thus 
retaining the basic categories - but prevent the formation of any 
object whatsoever (note that the cylinder in the middle fades into 
nothingness as we approach the inside of the two-pronged stimulus). 
Not even memory can now give us a full view of the alternatives. 
10. 'A master of introspection, Kenneth Clark, has recendy described to us most 
vividly how even he was defeated when he attempted to "stall" an illusion. Looking at a 
great Velasquez, he wanted to observe what went on when the brush strokes and dabs of 
pigment on the canvas transformed themselves into a vision of transfigured reality as he 
stepped back. But try as he might, stepping backward and forward, he could never hold 
both visions at the same time . .  .', E. Gombrich,Art and Illusion, Princeton, 1956, p. 6. 

S IXTEEN 
167 
Every picture with only a modicum of perspective exhibits this 
phenomenon: we may decide to pay attention to the piece of paper on 
which the lines are drawn - but then there is no three-dimensional 
pattern; on the other hand we may decide to investigate the 
properties of this pattern, but then the surface of the paper 
disappears, or is integrated into what can only be called an illusion. 
There is no way of 'catching' the transition from the one to the 
other. 1 1  In all these cases the perceived image depends on 'mental 
sets' that can be changed at will, without the help of drugs, hypnosis, 
reconditioning. But mental sets may become frozen by illness, as a 
result of one's upbringing in a certain culture, or because of 
physiological determinants not in our control. (Not every change of 
language is accompanied by perceptual changes.) Our attitude 
towards other races, or towards people of a different cultural 
background, often depends on 'frozen' sets of the second kind: 
having learned to 'read' faces in a standard way we make standard 
judgements and are led astray. 
An interesting example of physiologically determined sets leading 
to incommensurability is provided by the development of human 
perception. As has been suggested by Piaget and his school, 12 a 
child's perception proceeds through various stages before it reaches 
its relatively stable adult form. In one stage, objects seem to behave 
very much like after-images and are treated as such. The child 
I I .  Cf. R.L. Gregory, The Intelligent Eye, London, 1970, Chapter 2. Cf. also the 
distinction between eikon and phantasma in Plato, Sophistes, 23Sb8ff: 'This "appear­
ing" or "seeming" without really "being" . . .  all these expressions have always been 
and still are deeply involved in perplexity.' Plato talks about the distortions in statues of 
colossal size which were introduced to make them apear with the proper proportions. 
'I cannot make use of an illusion and watch it,' says Gombrich in such cases, op. cit., 
p. 6. 
12. ]. Piaget, The Construction of Reality in the Child, New York, 1954, pp. Sff. 

168 
AGAINST METHOD 
follows the object with his eyes until it disappears; he does not make 
the slightest attempt to recover it, even if this should require but a 
minimal physical (or intellectual) effort, an effort, moreover, that is 
already within the child's reach. There is not even a tendency to 
search - and this is quite appropriate, 'conceptually' speaking. For it 
would indeed be nonsensical to 'look for' an after-image. Its 
'concept' does not provide for such an operation. 
The arrival of the concept, and of the perceptual image, of material 
objects, changes the situation quite dramatically. There occurs a 
drastic reorientation of behavioural patterns and, so one may 
conjecture, of thought. After-images, or things somewhat like them, 
still exist; but they are now difficult to find and must be discovered 
by special methods (the earlier visual world therefore literally dis­
appears).13 Such methods proceed from a new conceptual scheme 
(after-images occur in humans, they are not parts of the physical 
world) and cannot lead back to the exact phenomena of the previous 
stage. (These phenomena should therefore be called by a different 
name, such as 'pseudo-after-images' - a very interesting perceptual 
analogue to the transition from, say, Newtonian mechanics to special 
relativity: relativity, too, does not give us Newtonian facts, but 
relativistic analogues of Newtonian facts.) Neither after-images nor 
pseudo-after-images have a special position in the new world. For 
example, they are not treated as evidence on which the new notion of a 
material object is supposed to rest. Nor can they be used to explain 
this notion: after-images arise together with it, they depend on it, and 
are absent from the minds of those who do not yet recognize material 
objects; and pseudo-after-images disappear as soon as such 
recognition takes place. The perceptual field never contains after­
images together with pseudo-after-images. It is to be admitted that 
every stage possesses a kind of observational 'basis' to which special 
attention is paid and from which a multitude of suggestions are 
received. However, this basis (a) changes from stage to stage, and (b) it 
is part of the conceptual apparatus of a given stage, not its one and 
only source of interpretation as some empiricists would like to make 
us believe. 
Considering developments such as these, we may suspect that the 
family of concepts centring upon 'material object' and the family of 
concepts centring upon 'pseudo-after-image' are incommensurable 
13. This seems to be a general feature of the acquisition of new perceptual worlds: 
'The older representations for the most part have to be suppressed rather than 
reformed,' writes Stratton in his epoch-making essay 'Vision without Inversion of the 
Retinal Image'. The PsychologiCIJI RevieJI!lV, 1897, p. 471. 

S I X TEEN 
169 
in precisely the sense that is at issue here; these families cannot be 
used simultaneously and neither logical nor perceptual connections 
can be established between them. 
Now is it reasonable to expect that conceptual and perceptual 
changes of this kind occur in childhood only? Should we welcome the 
fact, if it is a fact, that an adult is stuck with a stable perceptual world 
and an accompanying stable conceptual system, which he can modify 
in many ways but whose general outlines have forever become 
immobilized? Or is it not more realistic to assume that fundamental 
changes, entailing incommensurability, are still possible and that 
they should be encouraged lest we remain forever excluded from 
what might be a higher stage of knowledge and consciousness? 
Besides, the question of the mobility of the adult stage is at any rate an 
empirical question that must be attacked by research, and cannot be 
settled by methodological fiat. 14 The attempt to break through the 
boundaries of a given conceptual system is an essential part of 
such research (it also should be an essential part of any interesting 
life). 
Such an attempt involves much more than a prolonged 'critical 
discussion'1 5 as some relics of the enlightenment would have us 
believe. One must be able to produce and to grasp new perceptual and 
conceptual relations, including relations which are not immediately 
apparent (covert relations - see above) and that cannot be achieved by 
a critical discussion alone (cf. also above, Chapters 1 and 2). The 
orthodox accounts neglect the covert relations that contribute to their 
meaning, disregard perceptual changes and treat the rest in a rigidly 
standardized way so that any debate of unusual ideas is at once 
stopped by a series of routine responses. But now this whole array of 
responses is in doubt. Every concept that occurs in it is suspect, 
especially 'fundamental' concepts such as 'observation', 'test', and, of 
course, the concept 'theory' itself. And as regards the word 'truth', we 
can at this stage only say that it certainly has people in a tizzy, but 
has not achieved much else. The best way to proceed in such 
circumstances is to use examples which are outside the range of the 
routine responses. It is for this reason that I have decided to examine 
means of representation different from languages or theories and to 
develop my terminology in connection with them. More especially, I 
shall examine styles in painting and drawing. It will emerge that there 
14. As Lakatos attempts to do: 'Falsification', p. 179, footnote 1 :  'Incommen­
surable theories are neither inconsistent with each other, nor comparable for content. 
But we can make them, by a dictionary, inconsistent and their content comparable.' 
15. Popper in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, p. 56. 

170 
A G A I N S T  M E T H O D  
are no 'neutral' objects which can be represented in any style, and 
which measure its closeness to 'reality'. The application to languages 
is obvious. 
The 'archaic s#le' as defined by Emanuel Loewy in his work on 
ancient Greek art 6 has the following characteristics. 
(1) The structure and the movement of the figures and of their 
parts are limited to a few typical schemes; (2) the individual forms are 
stylized, they tend to have a certain regularity and are 'executed with 
. . .  precise abstraction';17 (3) the representation of a form depends 
on the contour which may retain the value of an independent line or 
form the boundaries of a silhouette. 'The silhouettes could be given a 
number of postures: they could stand, march, row, drive, fighti die, 
lament. . . .  But always their essential structure must be clear'; 8 (4) 
co/our appears in one shade only, and gradations of light and shadow 
are missing; (5) as a rule the figures show their parts (and the larger 
episodes their elements) in their most complete aspea - even if this 
means awkwardness in composition, and 'a certain disregard of 
spatial relationships'. The parts are given their known value even 
when this conflicts with their seen relationship to the whole;19 thus 
(6) with a few well-determined exceptions the figures which form a 
composition are arranged in such a way that uverlaps are avoided and 
objects situated behind each other are presented as being side by 
side; (7) the mvironment of an action (mountains, clouds, trees, etc.) 
is either completely disregarded or it is omitted to a large extent. The 
action forms self-contained units of typical scenes (battles, funerals, 
etc.).20 
These stylistic elements which are found, in various modifications, 
in the drawings of children, in the 'frontal' art of the Egyptians, in 
early Greek art, as well as among so-called Primitives, are explained 
1 6. Die Naturtliedergabe in der jj/teren Griechischm Kunst, Rome, 190, Chapter I .  
Loewy uses 'archaic' as a generic term covering phenomena in Egyptian, Greek and 
Primitive Art, in the drawings of children and of untutored observers. In Greece his 
remarks apply to the geometric style (100 to 700 DC) down to the archaic period (700 to 
500 DC) which treats the human figure in greater detail and involves it in lively 
episodes. Cf. also F. Matz, Geschichte der Griechischm Kunst, Vol. I, 1950, as weD as 
Beazly and Ashmole, Greek Sculpture and Painting, Cambridge, 1966, Chapters II and 
III. 
17. Webster, From Mycerae to Homer, New York, 1 964, p. 292. Webster regards 
this use of'simple and clear patterns' in Greek geometric art as 'the forerunner oflater 
developments in art (ultimately the invention of perspective), mathematics, and 
philosophy'. 
18. Webster, op. cit., p. 205. 
19. ibid., p. 207. 
20. Beazly and Ashmole, op. cit., p. 3. 

SIXTEEN 
171 
by Loewy on the basis of psychological mechanisms: 'Side by side 
with the images which reality presents to the physical eye there exists 
an entirely different world ofimages which live or, better, come to life 
in our mind only and which, although suggested by reality, are totally 
transformed. Every primitive act of drawing . . .  tries to reproduce 
these images and them alone with the instinctive regularity of a 
psychical function.'21 The archaic style changes as a result of 
'numerous planned observations of nature which modify the pure 
mental images',22 initiate the development towards realism and thus 
start the history of art. Natural, physiological reasons are given for the 
archaic style and for its change. 
Now it is not clear why it should be more 'natural' to copy memory 
images than images of perception which are better defined and more 
permanent.23 We also find that realism often precedes more 
schematic forms of presentation. This is true of the Old Stone 
Age, 24 of Egyptian Art, 25 of Attic Geometric Art. 26 In all these 
cases the 'archaic style' is the result of a conscious efort (which may 
of course be aided, or hindered, by unconscious tendencies and 
physiological laws) rather than a natural reaction to internal deposits 
21. Loewy, op. cit., p. 4. 
22. ibid., p. 6. 
23. The facts of perspective are noticed hut they do not enter the pictorial 
presentation; this is seen from literary descriptions. Cf. H. Schafer, Von Aegyptisch" 
Kunst, Wiesbaden, 1963, pp. 88fT, where the problem is further discussed. 
24. Cf. Paolo Graziosi, Palaeolithic Art, New York, 1 960, and Andre Leroc­
Gourhan, Treasures ofPrehistoricArt, New York, 1967, both with exceUent illustrations. 
These results were not known to Loewy: Cartailhac's 'Mea culpa d'un sceptique', for 
example, appeared only in 1902. 
25. Cf. the change in the presentation of animals in the course of the transition 
from predynastic times to the First Dynasty. The Berlin lion (Berlin, Staatliches 
Museum, Nr. 22440) is wild, threatening, quite different in expression and execution 
from the majestic animal of the Second and Third Dynasties. The latter seems 
to he more a representation of the concept lion than of any individual lion. Cf. 
also the difference between the falcon on the victory tablet of King Narmer 
(backside) and on the burial stone of King Wadji (Djet) of the First Dynasty. 
'Everywhere one advanced to pure clarity, the forms were strengthened and made 
simple,' Schafer, op. cit., pp. 12fT, especially p. 1 5  where further details are 
given. 
26. 'Attic geometric an should not he called primitive, although it has not the kind 
of photographic realism which literary scholars seem to demand in painting. It is a 
highly sophisticated an with its own conventions which serve its own purposes. As with 
the shapes and the ornamentation, a revolution separates it from late Mycenaean 
painting. In this revolution figures were reduced to their minimum silhouettes, and , 
out of these minimum silhouettes the new an was built up.' Webster, op. cit., 
p. 205. 

172 
AGAINST METHOD 
of external stimuli. 27 Instead of looking for the psychological causes 
of a 'style' we should therefore rather try to discover its elements, 
analyse their function, compare them with other phenomena of the 
same culture 
Oiterary style, sentence construction, grammar, 
ideology) and thus arrive at an outline of the underlying world-view 
including an account of the way in which this world-view influences 
perception, thought, argument, and of the limits it imposes on the 
roaming about of the imagination. We shall see that such an analysis 
of outlines provides a better understanding of the process of 
conceptual change than either a naturalistic account which 
recognizes only one 'reality' and orders artworks by their closeness to 
it, or trite slogans such as 'a critical discussion and a comparison of 
. . .  various frameworks is always possible'.28 Of course, some kind of 
comparison is always possible (for example, one physical theory may 
sound more melodious when read aloud to the accompaniment of a 
guitar than another physical theory). But lay down specific rules for the 
process of comparison, such as the rules of logic as applied to the 
relation of content classes, or some simple rules of perspective and 
you will find exceptions, undue restrictions, and you will be forced to 
talk your way out of trouble at every turn. It is much more interesting 
and instructive to examine what kinds of things can be said 
(represented) and what kinds of things cannot be said (represented) if 
the comparison has to take place within a certain specified and historically 
well-entrenched framework. For such an examination we must go 
beyond generalities and study frameworks in detail. I start with an 
account of some examples of the archaic style. 
The human figure shows the following characteristics: 'the men 
are very tall and thin, the trunk of a triangle tapering to the waist, the 
head of a knob with a mere excrescence for a face: towards the end of 
the style the head is lit up - the head knob is drawn in outline, and a 
dot signifies the eye'. 29 All, or almost all, parts are shown in profile 
and they are strung together like the limbs of a puppet or a rag doll. 
They are not 'integrated' to form an organic whole. This 'additive' 
feature of the archaic style becomes very clear from the treatment of 
the eye. The eye does not participate in the actions of the body, it 
does not guide the body or establish contact with the surrounding 
situation, it does not 'look'. It is added on to the profile head like part 
2 7. This thesis is funher supponed by the observation that so-called Primitives 
often tum their back to the objects they want to draw; Schafer, op. cit., p. 102, after 
Conze. 
28. Popper, in Criticism, etc., p. 56. 
29. Beazly and Ashmole, op. cit., p. 3. 

S IXTEEN 
173 
of a notation as if the artist wanted to say: 'and beside all these other 
things such as legs, arms, feet, a man has also eyes, they are in the 
head, one on each side'. Similarly, special states of the body (alive, 
dead, sick) are not indicated by a special arrangement of its parts, but 
by putting the same standard body into various standard positions. 
Thus the body of the dead man in a funeral carriage is articulated in 
exactly the same way as that of a standing man, but it is rotated 
through 90 degrees and inserted in the space between the bottom of 
the shroud and the top of the bier. 30 Being shaped like the body of a 
live man it is in adition put into the death position. Another instance 
is the picture of a kid half swallowed by a lion. 31 The lion looks 
ferocious, the kid looks peaceful, and the act of swallowing is simply 
tacked on to the presentation of what a lion is and what a kid is. (We 
have what is called a paratactic aggregate: the elements of such an 
aggregate are all given equal importance, the only relation between 
them is sequential, there is no hierarchy, no part is presented as being 
subordinate to and determined by others.) The picture reads: 
ferocious lion, peaceful kid, swallowing of kid by lion. 
The need to show every essential part of a situation often leads to a 
separation of parts which are actually in contact. The picture 
becomes a list. Thus a charioteer standing in a carriage is shown as 
standing above the floor (which is presented in its fullest view) and 
unencumbered by the rails so that his feet, the floor, the rails can all 
be clearly seen. No trouble arises if we regard the painting as a visual 
catalogue of the parts of an event rather than as an illusory rendering 
of the event itself (no trouble arises when we say: his ftet touched the 
floor which is reaangular, and he was surrounded by a railing . . . )32 
But such an interpretation must be learned, it cannot be simply read 
off the picture. 
The amount of learning needed may be considerable. Some 
Egyptian drawings and paintings can be decoded only with the help 
of either the represented object itself or with the help of three­
dimensional copies of it (statuary in the case of humans, animals, 
etc.). Using such information we learn that the chair in Figure A 
represents the object of Figure C and not the object of Figure B and 
that it must be read: 'chair with backrest and four legs, legs connected 
30. Webster, op. cit., p. 204: 'The painter feels the need to say that he has two 
arms, two legs, and a manly chest.' 
3 I. R. Hampl, Die Gleichnisse Homm und die Bildkunst seiner Zeit, Tiibingen, 1952. 
3 2. 'All geometric pictures of chariots show at least one of these distortions.' 
Webster, op. cit., p. 204. Late Mycenaean pottery, on the other hand, has the legs of 
the occupants concealed by the side. 

174 
AGAINST METHOD 
by support' where it is understood that the front legs are connected 
with the back legs and not with each other.33 The interpretation of 
groups is complicated and some cases are not yet understood. 34 
FlGURE A 
FlGURE B 
FlGURE C 
(Being able to 'read' a certain style also includes knowledge of 
what features are i"elroant. Not every feature of an archaic list has 
representational value just as not every feature of a written sentence 
plays a role in articulating its content. This was overlooked by the 
Greeks who started inquiring into the reasons for the 'dignified 
postures' of Egyptian statues (already Plato commented on this). 
Such a question 'might have struck an Egyptian artist as it would 
strike us if someone inquired about the age or the mood of the king 
on the chessboard'.35) 
1 
So far a brief account of some peculiarities of the 'archaic' style. 
A style can be described and analysed in various ways. The 
descriptions given so far paid attention to fonnal features: the archaic 
style provides visible lists whose parts are arranged in roughly the 
same way in which they occur in 'nature' except when such an 
arrangement is liable to hide important elements. All parts are on the 
33. Schafer, op. cit., p. 123. 
34. ibid., pp. 223fT. 
35. Gombrich, op. cit., p. 134, with literature. 

S IXTEEN 
175 
same level, we are supposed to 'read' the lists rather than 'see' them 
as illusory accounts of the situation. 36 The lists are not organized in 
any way except sequentially, that is, the shape of an element does not 
depend on the presence of other elements (adding a lion and the act 
of swallowing does not make the kid look unhappy; adding the 
process of dying does not make a man look weak). Archaic pictures 
are paratactic aggregates, not hypotactic systems. The elements of the 
aggregate may be physical parts such as heads, arms, wheels, they 
may be states of affair such as the fact that a body is dead, they may be 
actions, such as the action of swallowing. 
Instead of describing the formal features of a style, we may 
describe the ontological features of a world that consists of the elements 
represented in the style, arranged in the appropriate way, and we may 
also describe the impression such a world makes upon the viewer. 
This is the procedure of the art critic who loves to dwell on the 
peculiar behaviour of the characters which the artist puts on his 
canvas and on the 'internal life' the behaviour seems to indicate. 
Thus G.M.S. Hanfmann37 writes on the archaic figure: 'No matter 
how animated and agile archaic heroes may be, they do not appear to 
move by their own will. Their gestures are explanatory formulae 
imposed upon the actors from without in order to explain what sort of 
action is going on. And the crucial obstacle to the convincing 
portrayal of inner life was the curiously detached character of the 
archaic eye. It shows that a person is alive, but it cannot adjust itself to 
the demands of a specific situation. Even when the archaic artist 
succeeds in denoting a humorous or tragic mood, these factors of 
externalized gesture and detached glance recall the exaggerated 
animation of a puppet play.' 
An ontological description frequently adds just verbiage to the 
36. 'We come closer to the factual content of frontal [geradvorsulliger] drawings of 
objects, if we stan by reading off their partial contents in the form of narrative 
declarative sentences. The frontal mode of representation gives us a "visual concept" 
[Sehbegriff] of the thing (the situation) represented.' Schafer, op. cit., p. 1 18. Cf. also 
Webster, op. cit., p. 202, about the 'narrative' and 'explanatory' character of 
Mycenaean and geometric an. But cf. H.A. Groenewegen-Frankfon, Arresl and 
Movemenl, London, 1951, pp. 33f: the scenes from daily life on the walls of Egyptian 
tombs 'should be "read": harvesting entails ploughing, sowing, and reaping; care of 
canle entails fording of streams and milking . . .  the sequence of scenes is purely 
conceptual, not narrative, nor is the writing which occurs with the scenes dramatic in 
character. The signs, remarks, names, songs and explanations, which illuminate the 
action . . .  do not link events or explain their development; they are typical sayings 
belonging to typical situations.' 
37. 'Narration in Greek An', American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 61, January 
1957, p. 74. 

176 
AGAINST METHOD 
formal analysis; it is nothing but an exercise in 'sensitivity' and 
cuteness. However, we must not disregard the possibility that a 
particular style gives a precise account of the world as it is perceived by the 
artist and his contemporaries and that every formal feature corresponds 
to (hidden or explicit) assumptions inherent in the underlying 
cosmology. (In the case of the 'archaic' style we must not disregard 
the possibility that humans then actually felt themselves to be what 
we today would call puppets guided by outside forces and that they 
saw and treated others accordingly.) Such a realistic interpretation of 
styles would be in line with Whorfs thesis that in addition to being 
instruments for describing events (which may have other features, not 
covered by any description) languages are also shapers of events (so 
that there is a linguistic limit to what can be said in a given language, 
and this limit coincides with the limits of the thing itself) but it would 
go beyond it by including non-linguistic means ofrepresentation.38 
The realistic interpretation is very plausible. But it must not be taken 
for granted. 39 
It must not be taken for granted, for there are technical failures, 
special purposes (caricature) which may change a style without 
changing the cosmology. We must also remember that humans have 
roughly the same neurophysiological equipment, so that perception 
cannot be bent in any direction one chooses.40 And in some cases we 
can indeed show that deviations from a 'faithful rendering of nature' 
occur in the presence of a detailed knowledge of the object and side 
by side with more 'realistic' presentations: the workshop of the 
sculptor Thutmosis in Tel al-Amama (the ancient Achet-Aton) 
contains masks directly taken from live models with all the details of 
the formation of the head (indentations) and of the face intact, as well 
as heads developed from such masks. Some of these heads preserve 
the details, others eliminate them and replace them by simple forms. 
An extreme example is the completely smooth head of an Egyptian 
man. It proves that 'at least some artists remained consciously 
independent of nature'.41 During the reign of Amenophis IV (BC 
1364--1347) the mode of representation was changed twice; the first 
change, towards a more realistic style, occurred merely four years 
38. Cf. footnote l and text of the present chapter. 
39. For a sketch of the problems that arise in the case of physical theories cf. my 
'Reply to Criticism', Boston Studies in the Philosophy ofScimce, Vol. 2, 1965, sections 5-
8, and especially the list of problems on p. 234. Hanson, Popper and others take it for 
granted that realism is correct. 
40. It may be different with drug-induced states, especially when they are made 
pan of a systematic course of education. 
41. Schafer, op. cit., p. 63. 

S IXTEEN 
177 
after his ascension to the throne which shows that the technical ability 
for realism existed, was ready for use, but was intentionally left 
undeveloped. An inference from style (or language) to cosmology and modes 
of perception therefore needs special argument: it cannot be made as a matter 
of course. (A similar remark applies to any inference from popular 
theories in science, such as the theory of relativity, or the idea of the 
motion of the earth, to cosmology and modes of perception.) 
The argument (which can never be conclusive) consists in pointing 
to characteristic features in distant fields. If the idiosyncrasies of a 
particular style of painting are found also in statuary, in the grammar 
of contemporary languages (and here especially in covert classifica­
tions which cannot be easily twisted around), if it can be shown that 
these languages are spoken by artists and by the common folk alike, if 
there are philosophical principles formulated in the languages which 
declare the idiosyncrasies to be features of the world and not just 
artifacts and which try to account for their origin, if man and nature 
have these features not only in paintings, but also in poetry, in 
popular sayings, in common law, if the idea that the features are parts 
of normal perception is not contradicted by anything we know from 
physiology, or from the psychology of perception, if later thinkers 
attack the idiosyncrasies as 'errors' resulting from an ignorance of the 
'true way', then we may assume that we are not just dealing with 
technical failures and particular purposes, but with a coherent way of 
lift, and we may expect that people involved in this way of life see the 
world in the same way in which we now see their pictures. It seems 
that all these conditions are satisfied in archaic Greece: the formal 
structure and the ideology of the Greek epic as reconstructed both 
from the text and from later references to it repeat all the peculiarities 
of the later geometric and the early archaic style!2 
To start with, about nine-tenths of the Homeric epics consist of 
formulae which are prefabricated phrases extending in length from a 
single word or two to several complete lines and which are repeated at 
appropriate places!3 One-fifth of the poems consist of lines wholly 
repeated from one place to another; in 28,000 Homeric lines there 
are about 25,000 repeated phrases. Repetitions occur already in 
Mycenaean court poetry and they can be traced to the poetry of 
42. Webster, op. cit., pp. 294ff. 
43. In the 20th century the role of formulae was described and tested by Milman 
Parry, L 'Epitheu traditi01elle chez Homere, Paris, 1928; Haroard Studies in Classical 
Philology, Vols. 41, 1930, 43, 1932. For a brief account cf. D.l. Page, History and the 
Homeric Iliad, Berkeley, 1966, Chapter VI, as weU as G.S. Kirk, Homer and the Epic, 
Cambridge, 1965, Part I. 

178 
AGAINST METHOD 
eastern courts: 'Titles of gods, kings, and men must be given 
correctly, and in a courtly world the principle of correct expression 
may be extended further. Royal correspondence is highly formal, and 
this formality is extended beyond the messenger scenes of poetry to 
the formulae used for introducing speeches. Similarly, operations are 
reported in the terms of the operation order, whether the operation 
order itself is given or not, and this technique is extended to other 
descriptions, which have no such operation orders behind them. 
These compulsions all derive ultimately from the court of the king, 
and it is reasonable to suppose that the court in tum enjoyed such 
formality in poetry.'44 The conditions of (Sumerian, Babylonian, 
Hurrian, Hethitic, Phoenician, Mycenaean) courts also explain the 
occurrence of standardized elements of content (typical scenes; 
the king and the nobles in war and peace; furniture; description 
of beautiful things) which, moving from city to city, and even 
across national boundaries are repeated, and adapted to local 
circumstances. 
The slowly arising combination of constant and variable elements 
that is the result of numerous adaptations of this kind was utilized by 
the illiterate poets of the 'Dark Age' of Greece who developed a 
language and forms of expression that best serve the requirements of 
oral composition. The requirement of memory demanded that there be 
ready-made descriptions of events that can be used by a poet who 
composes in his mind, and without the aid of writing. The 
requirement of metre demanded that the basic descriptive phrases be 
fit for use in the various parts of the line the poet is about to complete: 
'Unlike the poet who writes out his lines . . .  [the oral poet] cannot 
think without hurry about his next word, nor change what he has 
made nor, before going on, read over what he has just written . . . .  He 
must have for his use word groups all made to fit his verse.'45 
Economy demanded that given a situation and a certain metrical 
constraint (beginning, middle or end of a line) there be only one way 
of continuing the narration - and this demand is satisfied to a 
surprising extent: 'All the chief characters of the 1/iad and the 
Odyssey, if their names can be fitted into the last half of the verse along 
with an epithet, have a noun-epithet formula in the nominative, 
beginning with a simple consonant, which fills the verse between 
the trochaic caesure of the third foot and the verse end: for in­
stance, noA.U'tA.w; btoà 'ObuooEuà. In a list of thirty-seven 
characters who have formulae of this type, which includes all those 
44. Webster, op. cit., pp. 75f. 
45. M. Parry, Harvard Stud Cl. Phil., 41, 1930, p. 77. 

S IXTEEN 
179 
having any importance in the poems, there are only three names 
which have a second formula which could replace the first.'46 'If you 
take in the five grammatic cases the singular of all the noun-epithet 
formulae used for Achilles, you will find that you have forty-five 
different formulae of which none has, in the same case, the same 
metrical value.'47 Being provided for in this manner, the Homeric 
poet 'has no interest in originali" of expression, or in variety. He uses 
or adapts inherited formulae.'4 He does not have a 'choice, do[es] 
not even think in terms of choice; for a given part of the line, whatever 
declension case was needed, and whatever the subject matter might 
be, the formular vocabulary supplied at once a combination of words 
ready-made'.49 
Using the formulae the Homeric poet gives an account of typical 
scenes in which objects are occasional1c described by 'adding the parts 
on in a string of words in apposition'. 0 Ideas we would today regard 
as being logically subordinate to others are stated in separate, 
grammatically co-ordinate propositions. Example (Iliad, 9.556fl): 
Meleagros 'lay by his wedded wife, fair Cleopatra, daughter of fair­
ankled Marpessa, daughter of Euenos, and of Ides, who was the 
strongest of men on earth at that time - and he against lord Phoebus 
Apollo took up his bow for the sake of the fair-ankled maid: her then 
in their halls did her father and lady mother call by the name of 
Alkyon because . .  .' and so on, for ten more lines and two or three 
more major themes before a major stop. This paratactic feature of 
Homeric poetry which parallels the absence of elaborate systems of 
subordinate clauses in early Greek51 also makes it clear why 
46. ibid., pp. 86f. 
47. ibid., p. 89. 
48. Page, op. cit., p. 230. 
49. ibid., p. 242. 
50. Webster, op. cit., pp. 99f; my italics. 
51. Cf. Raphael Kiihner,Ausfohrliche Grommotik der Griechischen Sproche, 2. Teil, 
reprinted Darmstadt, 1966. In the 20th century such a paratactic or 'simultanistic', 
way of presentation was used by the early expressionists, for example by Jacob von 
Hoddis in his poem Weltende: 
Dem Biirger fliegt vom spitzen Kopf der Hut, 
In allen Liiften hallt es wie Geschrei. 
Dachdecker stiirzen ab und gehn entzwei, 
Und an den Kiisten - liest man-steigt die Flut. 
Der Sturm ist da, die wilden Meere hupfen 
An Land, urn dicke Damme zu zerdriicken. 
Die meisten Menschen haben einen Schnupfen. 
Die Eisenbahnen fallen von den Brucken. 

180 
AGAINST METHOD 
Aphrodite is called 'sweetly laughing' when in fact she complains 
tearfully (Iliad, 5.3 7 5), or why Achilles is called 'swift footed' when he 
is sitting talking to Priam (Iliad, 24.559). Just as in late geometric 
pottery (in the 'archaic' style of Loewy) a dead body is a live body 
brought into the position of death (cf. above, text to footnote 30) or an 
eaten kid a live and peaceful kid brought into the appropriate relation 
to the mouth of a ferocious lion, in the very same way Aphrodite 
complaining is simply Aphrodite - and that is the laughing goddess ­
inserted into the situation of complaining in which she participates 
only externally, without changing her nature. 
The additive treatment of events becomes very clear in the case of 
(human) motion. In Iliad, 22.298, Achilles drags Hector along in the 
dust 'and dust arose around him that was dragged, and his dark hair 
flowed loose on either side, and in the dust lay his once fair head' ­
that is, the process of dragging contains the state of lying as an 
independent .part which together with other such parts constitutes 
the motion.5 Speaking more abstractly, we might say that for the 
poet 'time is composed of moments'.53 Many of the similes assume 
that the parts of a complex entity have a life of their own and can be 
separated with ease. Geometrical man is a visible list of parts and 
positions; Homeric man is put together from limbs, surfaces, 
connections which are isolated by comparing them with inanimate 
objects of precisely defined shape: the trunk of Hippolochos rolls 
through the battle field like a log after Agamemnon has cut ofT his 
Von Hoddis claims Homer as a precursor, explaining that simultaneity was used by 
Homer not in order to make an event more transparent but in order to create a feeling 
of immeasurable spaciousness. When Homer describes a battle and compares the 
noise of the weapons with the beat of a woodcutter, he merely wants to show that while 
there is battle there is also the quietness of woods, interrupted only by the work of the 
woodcutter. Catastrophe cannot be thought without simultaneously thinking of some 
utterly unimportant event. The Great is mixed up with the Small, the Important with 
the Trivial. (For the report cf.J.R. Becher in Expressionismus, ed. P. Raabe, Olten and 
Freiburg, I 965, pp. 50fT; this short article also contains a description of the 
tremendous impression von Hoddis' eight-liner made when it first came out in I 91 1.) 
One cannot infer that the same impression was created in the listener of the Homeric 
singers who did not possess a complex and romanticizing medium that had 
deteriorated into tearful sentimentality as a background for comparison. 
52. Cf. Gebhard Kurz, Darstellungsfonnen menschlicher Bewegung in tier !lias, 
Heidelberg, 1966, p. 50. 
53. This is the theory ascribed to Zeno by Aristotle, Physics, 239b, 31. The theory 
comes forth most clearly in the argument of the arrow: 'The arrow at flight is at rest. 
For, if everything is at rest when it occupies a space equal to itself, and what is in flight 
at any given moment always occupies a space equal to itself, it cannot move' (after 
Physics, 239b). We cannot say that the theory was held by Zeno himself, but we may 
conjecture that it played a role in Zeno's time. 

S IXTEEN 
181 
arms and his head (Iliad, 1 1.146 -
OAJ.lo¨, round stone of 
cylindrical shape), the body of Hector spins like a top (Iliad, 14.412), 
the head of Gorgythion drops to one side 'like a garden /.opy being 
heavy with fruit and the showers of spring' (Iliad, 8.302); 4 and so on. 
Also, the formulae of the epic, especially the noun-epithet combina­
tions, are frequently used not according to content but according to 
metrical convenience: 'Zeus changes from counsellor to storm­
mountain god to paternal god not in connection with what he is doing, 
but at the dictates of metre. He is not nephelegerata Zeus when 
he is gathering clouds, but when he is filling the metrical unit, 
v v - v v - -',55 just as the geometrical artist may distort spatial 
relations - introduce contact where none exists and break it where it 
occurs - in order to tell the visual story in his own particular way. 
Thus the poet repeats the formal features used by the geometric and 
the early archaic artists. Neither seems to be aware of an 'underlying 
substance' that keeps the objects together and shapes their parts so 
that they reflect the 'higher unity' to which they belong. 
Nor is such a 'higher unity' found in the concepts of the language. 
For example, there is no expression that could be used to describe the 
human body as a single entity.56 Soma is the corpse, demas is 
accusative of specification, it means 'in structure', or 'as regards 
shape', reference to limbs occurs where we today speak of the body 
(yui:a, limbs as moved by the joints; JA.tAm, limbs in their 
bodily 
strength; 
MA.uvto 
yui:a, 
his 
whole 
body 
trembled; 
tOQo¨ f:x JA.£Atwv EQQ£V, his body was filled with strength). 
All we get is a puppet put together from more or less articulated 
parts. 
The puppet does not have a soul in our sense. The 'body' is an 
aggregate of limbs, trunk, motion, the 'soul' is an aggregate of 
'mental' events which are not necessarily private and which may 
belong to a different individual altogether. 'Never does Homer in his 
description of ideas or emotions, go beyond a purely spatial, or 
quantitative definition; never does he attempt to sound their special, 
54. Kurz, loc. cit. 
55. R. Lattimore, The Iliad of Homer, Chicago, 1951, pp. 39f. 
56. For the following cf. B. Snell, The Discuvery of the Mind, Harper Torchbooks, 
I 960, Chapter 1 .  Snell's views have been criticized but seem to survive the criticism. 
Cf. the repon in F. Krafft, Vergleichende Untersuchungen zu Homer und Hesiod, 
Hypomnemata, Heft 6, Gi:ittingen, 1963, pp. 25fT. In his Gesammelte Schrijien, 
Gi:ittingen, 1966, p. 18, Snell also argues that 'in Homer we never find a personal 
decision, a conscious choice made by an acting human being. A human being who is 
faced with various possibilities never thinks: "now it depends on me, it depends on 
what I decide to do".' 

182 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
non-physical nature.'57 Actions are initiated not by an 'autonomous 
I', but by further actions, events, occurrences, including divine 
interference. And this is precisely how mental events are 
ex­
perienced. 58 Dreams, unusual psychological feats such as sudden 
remembering, sudden acts of recognition, sudden increase of vital 
energy, during battle, during a strenuous escape, sudden fits of anger 
are not only explained by reference to gods and demons, they are also 
felt as such. Agamemnon's dream 'listened to his [Zeus'] words and 
descended' (Iliad, 2.16) - the dream descends, not a figure in it - 'and 
it stood then beside his [Agamemnon's] head in the likeness of 
Nestor' (Iliad, 2.20). One does not have a dream (a dream is not a 
'subjective' event), one sees it (it is an 'objective' event) and one also 
sees how it approaches and moves away.59 Sudden anger, fits of 
strength are described and felt to be divine acts:60 'Zeus builds up 
and Zeus diminishes strength in man the way he pleases, since his 
power is beyond all others' (Iliad, 20.241) is not just an objective 
description (that may be extended to include the behaviour of 
animals) it also expresses the feeling that the change has entered from 
the outside, that one has been 'filled . . .  with strong courage' (Iliad, 
13.60). Today such events are either forgotten or regarded as purely 
accidental.61 'But for Homer6 or for early thought in general, there is 
no such thing as accident.' 2 Every event is accounted for. This 
makes the events clearer, strengthens their objective features, 
moulds them into the shape of known gods and demons and thus 
turns them into powerful evidence for the divine apparatus that is 
57. Snell, GesammelteSchriften, p. 18. 
58. Cf. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, Boston, I 957, Chapter I .  
59. With some effort this experience can be repeated even today. Step 1 :  lie down, 
close your eyes, and attend to your hypnagogic hallucinations. Step 2: permit the 
hallucinations to proceed on their own and according to their own tendencies. They 
will then change from events in front of the eyes into events that gradually surround the 
viewer but without yet making him an active participant of an action in a three­
dimensional dream-space. Step 3: switch over from viewing the hallucinatory event to 
being part of a complex of real events which act on the viewer and can be acted upon by 
him. Step 3 can be reversed either by the act of an almost non-existent will or by an 
outside noise. The three-dimensional scenery becomes two-dimensional, runs 
together into an area in front of the eyes, and moves away. It would be interesting to see 
how such formal elements change from culture to culture. 
60. Today we say that somebody is 'overcome' by emotions and he may feel his 
anger as an alien thing that invades him against his will. The daemonic ontology of the 
Greeks contains objective terminology for describing this feature of our emotions and 
thereby stabilizes it. 
6 I .  Psychoanalysis and related ideologies now again contribute to making such 
events pan of a wider context and thereby lend them substantiality. 
62. Dodds, op. cit., p. 6. 

S IXTEEN 
183 
used for explaining them: 'The gods are present. To recognize this as 
a given fact for the Greeks is the first condition for comprehending 
their religion and their culture. Our knowledge of their presence 
rests upon an (inner or outer) experience of either the Gods 
themselves or of an action of the Gods. '63 
To sum up: the archaic world is much less compact than the world 
that surrounds us, and it is also experienced as being less compact. 
Archaic man lacks 'physical' unity, his 'body' consists of a multitude 
of parts, limbs, surfaces, connections; and he lacks 'mental' unity, his 
'mind' is composed of a variety of events, some of them not even 
'mental' in our sense, which either inhabit the body-puppet as 
additional constituents or are brought into it from the outside. Events 
are not shaped by the individual, they are complex arrangements of 
parts into which the body-puppet is inserted at the appropriate 
place.64 This is the world-view that emerges from an analysis of the 
formal features of 'archaic' art and Homeric poetry, taken in 
conjunction with an analysis of the concepts which the Homeric poet 
used for describing what he perceives. Its main features are 
63. Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, Der Glaube der Hellenen, 1, 1955, p. 17. Our 
conceptions of the world subdivide an otherwise uniform material and create 
differences in perceived brightness where objective brightness has no gradient. The 
same process is responsible for the ordering of the rather chaotic impressions of our 
inner life, leading to an (inner) perception of divine interference, and it may even 
introduce daemons, gods, sprites into the domain of outer perceptions. At any rate -
there is a sufficient number of daemonic experiences not to reject this conjecture out 
of hand. 
64. This means that success is not the result of an effort on the part of the 
individual but the fortunate fitting together of circumstances. This shows itself even in 
words like :n:Qdnnv, which seem to designate activities. In Homer such words 
emphasize not so much the effect of the agent as the fact that the result comes about in 
the right way, that the process that brings it about does not encounter too many 
disturbances; it fits into the other processes that surround it (in the Attic dialect 
Eu:n:anw still means 'I am doing well'). Similarly ttuxnv emphasizes 
not so much a personal achievement as the fact that things go well, that they fit into 
their surroundings. The same is true of the acquisition of knowledge. 'Odysseus has 
seen a lot and experienced much, moreover, he is the :n:ol.uf.LiJxavoß who can 
always help himself in new ways, and, finally, he is the man who listens to his goddess 
Athena. The part ofknowledge that is based on seeing is not really the result of his own 
activity and research, it rather happened to him while he was driven around by external 
circumstances. He is very different from Solon who, as Herodotus tells us, was the first 
to travel for theoretical reasons, because he was interested in research. In Odysseus 
e knowledge of many things is strangely separated from his activity in the field of the 
E:n:(oao6m: this activity is restricted to finding means for reaching a certain 
aim, in order to save his life and the life of his associates.' B. Snell, Die a/ten Griechen 
und Wir, Gottingen, 1962, p. 48. In this place also a more detailed analysis of pertinent 
terms. Cf. also footnote 56 on the apparent non-existence of personal decisions. 

184 
AGAINST METHOD 
experienced by the individuals using the concepts. These individuals live 
indeed in the same kind of Jl)()rld that is constructed by their artists. 
Further evidence for the conjecture can be obtained from an 
examination of 'meta-attitudes' such as general religious attitudes 
and 'theories' of (attitudes to) knowledge. 
For the lack of compactness just described reappears in the field of 
ideology. There is a tolerance in religious matters which later 
generations found morally and theoretically unacceptable and which 
even today is regarded as a manifestation of frivolous and simple 
minds. 65 Archaic man is a religious eclectic, he does not object to 
foreign gods and myths, he adds them to the existing furniture of the 
world without any attempt at synthesis, or a removal of contradic­
tions. There are no priests, there is no dogma, there are no 
categorical statements about the gods, humans, the world.66 (This 
tolerance can still be found with the Ionian philosophers of nature 
who develop their ideas side by side with myth without trying to 
eliminate the latter.) There is no religious 'morality' in our sense, nor 
are the gods abstract embodiments of eternal principles. 67 This they 
became later, during the archaic age and as a result they 'lost [their] 
humanity. Hence Olympianism in its moralized form tended to 
become a religion of fear, a tendency which is reflected in the 
religious vocabulary. There is no word for "god-fearing" in the 
Iliad.'68 This is how life was dehumanized by what some people are 
pleased to call 'moral progress' or 'scientific progress'. 
Similar remarks apply to the 'theory of knowledge' that is implicit 
in this early world view. The Muses in Iliad, 2.284ff, have knowledge 
because they are close to things - they do not have to rely on rumours ­
and because they know all the many things that are of interest to the 
writer, one after the other. 'Quantity, not intensity is Homer's 
standard of judgement' and of knowledge,69 as becomes clear 
from 
such 
words 
as 
Jtol.:uq>QWV 
and 
Jtol.:uiJ:rnc;, 
'much 
pondering' and 'much thinking', as well as from later criticisms such 
as 
'Learnin! of many things [JtoAUJ.La9(fl] 
does not teach 
intelligence'. 0 An interest in, and a wish to understand, many 
amazing things (such as earthquakes, eclipses of the sun and the 
moon, the paradoxical rising and falling of the Nile), each of them 
65. Example: F. Schachermayer, Die frihe Klassik der Grieclren, Stuttgart, 1966. 
66. Cf. Wilamowitz-MoeUendorf, op. cit. 
67. M.P. Nilsson, A History ofGreek Religion, Oxford, 1949, p. 1 52. 
68. Dodds, op. cit., p. 35. 
69. Snell, TheDisaJVery oftheMind, p. l8. 
70. Heraclitus, after Diogenes Laertius, IX, I. 

SIXTEEN 
185 
explained in its own particular way and without the use of universal 
principles, persists in the coastal descriptions of the 8th and 7th (and 
later) centuries (which simply enumerate the tribes, tribal habits, and 
coastal formations that are successively met during the journey), and 
even a thinker such as Thales is satisfied with making many 
interesting observations and providing many explanations without 
trying to tie them together in a system. 71 (The first thinker to 
construct a 'system' was Anaximander, who followed Hesiod.) 
Knowledge so conceived is not obtained by trying to grasp an essence 
behind the reports of the senses, but by (1) putting the observer in the 
right position relative to the object (process, aggregate), by inserting 
him into the appropriate place in the complex pattern that constitutes 
the world, and (2) by adding up the elements which are noted under 
these circumstances. It is the result of a complex survey carried out 
from suitable vantage points. One may doubt a vague report, or a 
fifth-hand account, but it is not possible to doubt what one can clearly 
see with one's own eyes. The object depicted or described is the 
proper arrangements of the elements which may include foreshort­
enings and other perspectoid phenomena.72 The fact that an oar 
looks broken in water lacks here the sceptical force it assumes in 
another ideology.73 Just as Achilles sitting does not make us doubt 
that he is swift-footed - as a matter of fact, we would start doubting 
his swiftness if it turned out that he is in principle incapable of sitting 
- in the very same way the bent oar does not make us doubt that it is 
perfectly straight in air - as a matter of fact, we would start doubting 
its straightness if it did not look bent in water. 74 The bent oar is not 
71. The idea that Thales used a principle expressing an underlying unity of 
natural phenomena and that he identified this principle with water is first found in 
Aristotle, Metaphysics, 983b6-12 and 26fT. A closer look at this and other passages and 
consultation of Herodotus suggests that he still belongs to the group of those thinkers 
who deal with numerous extraordinary phenomena, without tying them together in a 
system. Cf. the vivid presentation in F. Krafft, Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften, l, 
Freiburg, 1971, Chapter 3. 
72. Perspectoid phenomena are sometimes treated as if they were special 
properties of the objects depicted. For example, a container of the Old Kingdom 
(Ancient Egypt) has an indentation on top, indicating perspective, but the indentation 
is presented as a feature of the object itself, Schafer, op. cit., p. 266. Some Greek 
artists try to find situations where perspective does not need to be considered. Thus 
the peculiarity of the so-called red-figure style that arises in about 530 BC 'does not so 
much consist in the fact that foreshortenings are drawn, but in the new and highly 
varied ways to circumvent them', E. Pfuhl, Malerei und Zeichnung der Griechen, Vol. I, 
Munich, 1923, p. 378. 
73. Cf. the discussion in Chapter I of A.]. Ayer's Foundations of Empirical 
Knowledge. The example was familiar in antiquity. 
14. This is also the way in which J .L. Austin takes care of the case. Cf. Sense and 

186 
AGAINST METHOD 
an aspect that denies what another aspect says about the nature of the 
oar, it is a particular part (situation) of the real oar that is not only 
compatible with its straightness, but that demands it: the objects of 
knowledge are as additive as the visible lists of the archaic artist and 
the situations described by the archaic poet. 
Nor is there any uniform conception of knowledge.75 A great 
variety of words is used for expressing what we today regard as 
different forms of knowledge, or as different ways of acquiring 
knowledge. oocp(a 76 means expertise in a certain profession 
(carpenter, singer, general, physician, charioteer, wrestler) including 
the arts (where it praises the artist not as an outstanding creator but as 
a master of his craft); ELOEVat, literally 'having seen', refers 
to knowledge gained from inspection; 0\lV(TJJ.U, especially in 
the Iliad, though often translated as 'listening' or 'understanding', is 
stronger, it contains the idea of following and obeying, one absorbs 
something and acts in accordance with it (hearing may play an 
important role). And so on. Many of these expressions entail a 
receptive attitude on the part of the knower, he, as it were7 acts out the 
behaviour of the things around him, he follows them, 7 he acts as 
befits an entity that is inserted at the place he occupies. 
To repeat and to conclude: the modes of representation used 
during the early archaic period in Greece are not just reflections of 
incompetence or of special artistic interests, they give a faithful 
account of what are felt, seen, thought to be fundamental features of 
the world of archaic man. This world is an open world. Its elements 
are not formed or held together by an 'underlying substance', they 
are not appearances from which this substance may be inferred with 
difficulty. They occasionally coalesce to form assemblages. The 
relation of a single element to the assemblage to which it belongs is 
like the relation of a part to an aggregate of parts and not like the 
relation of a part to an overpowering whole. The particular aggregate 
called 'man' is visited, and occasionally inhabited by 'mental events'. 
Sensibilia, New York, I 962. It is clear that problems such as the 'problem of the 
existence of theoretical entities' cannot arise under these circumstances either. Al 
these problems are created by the new approach that superseded the additive ideology 
of archaic and pre-archaic times. 
75. B. Snell, Die Ausdricke for den Begrif des Wissens in der vtnplatonischen 
Philasophie, Berlin, I 924. A short account is given in Snell, Die a/ten Griechen und llir, 
pp. 4 I fT. Cf. also von Fritz, Philosophie und sprachli&her Ausdruckbei Demomt, Plato, und 
Aristoteles, Leipzig-Paris-London, 1938. 
76. Only occurrence in Homer, Iliad, 15, 42, concerning the oocp£a of a 
carpenter (an 'expert carpenter' translates Lattimore). 
77. Cf. Snell,Ausdricke, p. 50. 

SIXTEEN 
187 
Such events may reside in him, they may also enter from the outside. 
Like every other object man is an exchange station of influences 
rather than a unique source of action, an 'I' (Descartes' 'cogito' has 
no point of attack in this world, and his argument cannot even start). 
There is a great similarity between this view and Mach's cosmology 
except that the elements of the archaic world are recognizable 
physical and mental shapes and events while Mach's elements are 
more abstract, they are as yet unknown aims of research, not its object. 
In sum, the representational units of the archaic world view admit of a 
realistic interpretation, they express a coherent ontology, and 
Whorfs observations apply. 
At this point I interrupt my argument in order to make some 
comments which connect the preceding observations with the 
problems of scientific method. 
1. It may be objected that foreshortenings and other indications of 
perspective are such obvious features of our perceptual world that 
they cannot have been absent from the perceptual world of the 
Ancients. The archaic manner of presentation is therefore incom­
plete, and its realistic interpretation incorrect. 
Reply: Foreshortenings are not an obvious feature of our percep­
tual world unless special attention is drawn to them (in an age of 
photography and film this is rather frequently the case). Unless we 
are professional photographers, film-makers, painters we perceive 
things, not aspects. Moving swiftly among complex objects we notice 
much less change than a perception of aspects would permit. 
Aspects, foreshortenings, if they enter our consciousness at all, are 
usually suppressed just as after-images are suppressed when the 
appropriate stage of perceptual development is completed78 and 
they are noticed in special situations only?9 In ancient Greece such 
special situations arose in the theatre, for the first-row viewers of the 
impressive productions of Aeschylus and Agatharchos, and there is 
indeed a school that ascribes to the theatre a decisive influence on the 
development of perspective.80 Besides, why should the perceptual 
world of the ancient Greeks coincide with ours? It needs more 
argument than reference to a non-existent form of perception to 
consolidate the objection. 
78. Cf. foomote I 2fT and text of the present chapter. 
79. Cf. foomote 13. 
80. Cf. Part II of Hedwig Kenner, Das Thealer und der Realismus in der Griechischen 
Kunst, Vienna, l954, especiallypp. l2lf. 

188 
AGAINST METHOD 
2. The procedure used for establishing the peculiarities of the 
archaic cosmology has much in common with the method of an 
anthropologist who examines the world-view of an association of 
tribes. The differences are due to the scarcity of the evidence and to 
the particular circumstances of its origin (written sources; works of 
art; no personal contact). Let us take a closer look at this procedure! 
An anthropologist trying to discover the cosmology of his chosen 
tribe and the way in which it is mirrored in language, in the arts, in 
daily life, first learns the language and the basic social habits; he 
inquires how they are related to other activities, including such prima 
facie unimportant activities as milking cows and cooking meals;81 he 
tries to identify key ideas. 82 His attention to minutiae is not the 
result of a misguided urge for completeness but of the realization that 
what looks insignificant to one way of thinking (and perceiving) may 
play a most important role in another. (The differences between the 
paper-and-pencil operations of a Lorentzian and those of an 
Einsteinian are often minute, if discernible at all; yet they reflect a 
major clash of ideologies.) 
Having found the key ideas the anthropologist tries to understand 
them. This he does in the same way in which he originally gained an 
understanding of his own language, including the language of the 
special profession that provides him with an income. He internalizes 
the ideas so that their connections are firmly engraved in his memory 
and his reactions, and can be produced at will. 'The native society has 
to be in the anthropologist himself and not merely in his notebooks if 
he is to understand it.'83 This process must be kept free from external 
interference. For example, the researcher must not try to get a better 
hold on the ideas of the tribe by likening them to ideas he already 
knows, or finds more comprehensible or more precise. On no 
account must he attempt a 'logical reconstruction'. Such a procedure 
would tie him to the known, or to what is preferred by certain groups, 
and would forever prevent him from grasping the unknown world­
view he is examining. 
Having completed his study, the anthropologist carries within 
himself both the native society and his own background, and he may 
now start comparing the two. The comparison decides whether the 
native way of thinking can be reproduced in European terms 
(provided there is a unique set of' European terms'), or whether it has 
a 'logic' of its own, not found in any Western language. In the course 
81. Evans-Pritchard, Social Anthropology, New York, 1965, p. 80. 
82. ibid., p. 80. 
83. ibid., p. 82. 

SIXTEEN 
189 
of the comparison the anthropologist may rephrase certain native 
ideas in English. This does not mean that English as spoken 
independently of the comparison already contains native ideas. It means 
that languages can be bent in many directions and that understanding 
does not depend on any particular set of rules. 
3. The examination of key ideas passes through various stages, 
none of which leads to a complete clarification. Here the researcher 
must exercise firm control over his urge for instant clarity and logical 
perfection. He must never try to make a concept clearer than is 
suggested by the material (except as a temporary aid for further 
research). It is this material and not his logical intuition that 
determines the content of the concepts. To take an example. The 
Nuer, a Nilotic tribe which has been examined by Evans-Pritchard, 
have some interesting spatio-temporal concepts. 84 The researcher 
who is not too familiar with Nuer thought wil find the concepts 
'unclear and insufficiently precise'. To improve matters he might try 
explicating them, using modem logical notions. That might create 
clear concepts, but they would no longer be Nuer concepts. If, on the 
other hand, he wants to get concepts which are both clear and Nuer, 
then he must keep his key notions vague and incomplete until the right 
information comes along, i.e. until field study turns up the missing 
elements which, taken by themselves, are just as unclear as the 
elements he has already found. 
Each item of information is a building block of understanding, 
which means that it has to be clarified by the discovery of further 
blocks from the language and ideology of the tribe rather than by 
premature definitions. Statements such as ' . . .  the Nuer . . .  cannot 
speak of time as though it was something actual, which passes, can be 
waited for, can be saved, and so forth. I do not think that they ever 
experience the same feeling of fighting against time, or of having to 
co-ordinate activities with an abstract passage of time, because their 
points of reference are mainly the activities themselves, which are 
generally of a leisurely character . . .  '85 are either building blocks - in 
this case their own content is incomplete and not fully understood -
or they are preliminary attempts to anticipate the arrangement of the 
totality of all blocks. They must then be tested, and elucidated by the 
discovery of further blocks rather than by logical clarifications (a 
child learns the meaning of a word not by logical clarification but by 
84. Evans-Pritchard, The Nuer, Oxford, 1940, Part Ill; cf. also the brief account in 
Social Anthropology, pp. 102fT. 
85. The Nuer, p. 103. 

190 
AGAINST METHOD 
realizing how it goes together with things and other words). Lack of 
clarity of any particular anthropological statement reflects the 
scarcity of the material rather than the vagueness of the logical 
intuitions of the anthropologist, or of his tribe. 
4. Exactly the same remarks apply to any attempt to explore 
important modem notions such as the notion ofincommensurability. 
Within the sciences incommensurability is closely connected with 
meaning. A study of incommensurability in the sciences will 
therefore produce statements that contain meaning-terms - but 
these terms will be only incompletely understood, just as the term 
'time' is incompletely understood in the quotation of the preceding 
paragraph. Thus the remark that such statements should be made 
only after production of a clear theory of meaning86 is as sensible as 
the remark that statements about Nuer time, which are the material 
that leads to an understanding ofNuer time, should be written down 
only after such an understanding has been achieved. 
5. Logicians are liable to object. They point out that an examina­
tion of meanings and of the relation between terms is the task of logic, 
not of anthropology. Now by 'logic' one may mean at least two 
different things. 'Logic' may mean the study of, or results of the study 
of, the structures inherent in a certain type of discourse. And it may 
mean a particular logical system, or set of systems. 
A study of the first kind belongs to anthropology. For in order to 
see, for example, whether AB v AB = A is part of the 'logic of 
quantum theory' we shall have to study quantum theory. And as 
quantum theory is not a divine emanation but a human product, we 
shall have to study it in the form in which human products usually are 
available, that is, we shall have to study historical records - textbooks, 
original papers, records of meetings and private conversations, 
letters, and the like. (In the case of quantum theory our position is 
improved by the fact that the tribe of quantum theoreticians has not 
yet died out. Thus we can supplement historical study with 
anthropological field work such as the work of Kuhn and his 
collaborators. 87) 
86. Achinstein, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4, Minneapolis, 
1970, p. 224, says that 'Feyerabend owe[s] us a theory of meaning' and Hempel is 
prepared to accept incommensurability only after the notion of meaning involved in it 
has been made clear, op. cit., p. 156. 
87. Report in T.S. Kuhn, J.L. Heilbron, P. Forman and L. Allen, Sources for the 
History ofQuantum Physics, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1967. The 
material assembled under the programme described in this report can be consulted at 
various universities, the University of California in Berkeley among them. 

S IXTEEN 
191 
It is to be admitted that these records do not, by themselves, 
produce a unique solution to our problems. But who has ever 
assumed that they do? Historical records do not produce a unique 
solution for historical problems either, and yet nobody suggests that 
they be neglected. There is no doubt that the records are necessary for 
a logical study in the sense examined now. The question is how they 
should be used. 
We want to discover the structure of the field of discourse, of 
which the records give an incomplete account. We want to learn 
about it without changing it in any way. In our example we are not 
interested in whether a perfeaed quantum mechanics of the future 
employs AB v AB = A or whether an invention of our own, whether a 
little bit of 'reconstruction' which changes the theory so that it 
conforms to some preconceived principles of modern logic and 
readily provides the answer employs that principle. We want to know 
whether quantum theory as aaually praaised by physicists employs the 
principle. For it is the work of the physicists and not the work of the 
reconstructionists we want to examine. And this work may well be full 
of contradictions and lacunae. Its 'logic' (in the sense in which I am 
now using the term) may well be 'illogical' when judged from the 
point of view of a particular system of formal logic. 
Putting the question in this way we realize that it may not admit of 
any answer. There may not exist a single theory, one 'quantum 
theory', that is used in the same way by all physicists. The difference 
between Bohr, Dirac, Feynman and von Neumann suggests that this 
is more than a distant possibility. To test the possibility, i.e. to either 
eliminate it or to give it shape, we must examine concrete cases. Such 
an examination of concrete cases may then lead to the result that 
quantum theoreticians differ from each other as widely as do 
Catholics and the various types of Protestants: they may use the same 
texts (though even that is doubtful - just compare Dirac with von 
Neumann), but they sure are doing different things with them. 
The need for anthropological case studies in a field that initially 
seemed to be dominated by a single myth, always the same, always 
used in the same manner, indicates that our common knowledge of 
science may be severely defective. It may be entirely mistaken (some 
mistakes have been hinted at in the preceding chapters). In these 
circumstances, the only safe way is to confess ignorance, to abandon 
reconstructions, and to start studying science from scratch. We must 
approach science like an anthropologist approaches the mental 
contortions of the medicine-men of a newly discovered association of 
tribes. And we must be prepared for the discovery that these 
contortions are wildly illogical (when judged from the point of view of 

192 
AGAINST METHOD 
a particular system of formal logic) and have to be wildly illogical in 
order to function as they do. 
6. Only a few philosophers of science interpret 'logic' in this 
sense, however. Only few philosophers are prepared to concede that 
the basic structures that underlie some newly discovered idiom might 
differ radically from the basic structures of the more familiar systems 
of formal logic and absolutely nobody is ready to admit that this might 
be true of science as well. Most of the time the 'logic' (in the sense 
discussed so far) of a particular language, or of a theory, is 
immediately identified with the features of a particular logical system 
without considering the need for an inquiry concerning the adequacy 
of such an identification. Professor Giedymin, for example, 88 means 
by 'logic' a favourite system of his which is fairly comprehensive, but 
by no means all-embracing. (For example, it does not contain, nor 
could it be used to formulate, Hegel's ideas. And there have been 
mathematicians who have doubted that it can be used for expressing 
informal mathematics.) A logical study of science as Giedymin and 
his fellow logicians understand it is a study of sets of formulae of this 
system, of their structure, the properties of their ultimate con­
stituents (intension, extension, etc.), of their consequences and of 
possible models. If this study does not repeat the features an 
anthropologist has found in, say, science then this either shows that 
science has some faults, or that the anthropologist does not know any 
logic. It does not make the slightest difference to the logician in this 
second sense that his formulae do not look like scientific statements, 
that they are not used like scientific statements and that science could 
not possibly grow in the simple ways his brain is capable of 
understanding (and therefore regards as the only permissible ways). 
He either does not notice the discrepancy or he regards it as being 
due to imperfections that cannot enter a satisfactory account. Not 
once does it occur to him that the 'imperfections' might have a 
positive funaion, and that scientific progress might be impossible 
once they are removed. For him science is axiomatics plus model 
theory plus correspondence rules plus observation language. 
Such a procedure assumes (without noticing that there is an 
assumption involved) that an anthropological study which familiar­
izes us with the overt and the hidden classifications of science has 
been completed, and that it has decided in favour of the axiomatic 
(etc., etc.) approach. No such study has ever been carried out. And 
the bits and pieces of field work available today, mainly as the result of 
88. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, August 1970, pp. 257fT and 
February 1971, pp. 39fT. 

S I XTEEN 
193 
the work of Hanson, Kuhn, Lakatos and the numerous historians 
who remained untouched by positivistic prejudices, show that the 
logician's approach removes not just some inessential embroideries 
of science, but those very features which make scientific progress and 
thereby science possible. 
7. The discussions of meaning I have alluded to are another 
illustration of the deficiencies of the logician's approach. For 
Giedymin, this term and its derivatives, such as the term 'incommen­
surability', are 'unclear and insufficiently precise'. I agree. Giedymin 
wants to make the terms clearer, he wants to understand them better. 
Again agreement. He tries to obtain the clarity he feels is lacking by 
explication in terms of a particular kind of formal logic and of the 
double language model, restricting the discussion to 'intension' and 
'extension' as explained in the chosen logic. It is here that the 
disagreement starts. For the question is not how 'meaning' and 
'incommensurability' occur within a particular logical system. The 
question is what role they play in (actual, i.e. non-reconstructed) 
science. Clarification must come from a more detailed study of this 
role, and lacunae must be filled with the results of such study. And as 
the filling takes time the key terms will be 'unclear and insufficiently 
precise' for years and perhaps decades. (See also items 3 and 4 
above.) 
8. Logicians and philosophers of science do not see the situation 
in this way. Being both unwilling and unable to carry out an informal 
discussion, they demand that the main terms of the discussion be 
'clarified'. And to 'clarifY' the terms of a discussion does not mean to 
study the aditional and as yet unknown properties of the domain in 
question which one needs to make them fully understood, it means to 
fill them with existing notions from the entirely different domain of 
logic and common sense, preferably observational ideas, until they 
sound common themselves, and to take care that the process of filling 
obeys the accepted laws of logic. The discussion is permitted to 
proceed only after its initial steps have been modified in this manner. 
So the course of an investigation is deflected into the narrow 
channels of things already understood and the possibility of fun­
damental conceptual discovery (or of fundamental conceptual 
change) is considerably reduced. Fundamental conceptual change, 
on the other hand, presupposes new world-views and new languages 
capable of expressing them. Now, building a new world-view, and a 
corresponding new language, is a process that takes time, in science 
as well as in meta-science. The terms of the new language become 
clear only when the process is fairly advanced, so that each single 
word is the centre of numerous lines connecting it with other words, 

194 
AGAINST METHOD 
sentences, bits of reasoning, gestures which sound absurd at first but 
which become perfectly reasonable once the connections are made. 
Arguments, theories, terms, points of view and debates can therefore 
be clarified in at least two different ways: (a) in the manner already 
described, which leads back to the familiar ideas and treats the new as 
a special case of things already understood, and (b) by incorporation 
into a language of the future, which means that one must learn to argue 
with unexplained terms and to use sentences for which no clear rules of usage 
are as yet available. Just as a child who starts using words without yet 
understanding them, who adds more and more uncomprehended 
linguistic fragments to his playful activity, discovers the sense-giving 
principle only after he has been active in this way for a long time - the 
activity being a necessary presupposition of the final blossoming forth 
of sense - in the very same way the inventor of a new world-view (and 
the philosopher of science who tries to understand his procedure) 
must be able to talk nonsense until the amount of nonsense created 
by him and his friends is big enough to give sense to all its parts. 
There is again no better account of this process than the description 
which John Stuart Mill has left us of the vicissitudes of his education. 
Referring to the explanations which his father gave him on logical 
matters, he wrote: 'The explanations did not make the matter at all 
clear to me at the time; but they were not therefore useless; they 
remained as a nucleus for my observations and reflections to 
crystallise upon; the import of his general remarks being interpreted 
to me, by the particular instances which came under my notice 
afterwards.'89 Building a new language (for understanding the world, 
or knowledge) is a process of exactly the same kind except that the 
initial 'nuclei' are not given, but must be invented. We see here how 
essential it is to learn talking in riddles, and how disastrous an effect 
the drive for instant clarity must have on our understanding. (In 
addition, such a drive betrays a rather narrow and barbaric mentality: 
'To use words and phrases in an easy going way without scrutinizing 
them too curiously is not, in general, a mark of il breeding; on the 
contrary, there is something low bred in being too precise . . .  .'  
All these remarks are rather trivial and can be illustrated 
89. There is much more randomness in this process than a rationalist would ever 
permit, or suspect, or even notice. Cf. von Kleist, 'Uber die allmahliche Verfertigung 
der Gedanken beim Reden', inMeisterwerke Deutscher Literaturkritik, ed. Hans Meyer, 
Stuttgart, 1962, pp. 741-7. Hegel had an inkling of the situation. Cf. K. Loewith and]. 
Riedel (eds), Hegel, Studienausgahe I. Frankfurt, 1968, p. 54. For Mill cf. Chapter I I, 
footnote 13. 
90. Plato, Theaitetos, 184c. Cf. also I. Diiring,Aristoteles, Heidelberg, 1966, p. 379, 
criticizing Aristotle's demand for instant precision. 

S I XTEEN 
195 
by obvious examples. Classical logic arrived on the scene only 
when there was sufficient argumentative material (in mathematics, 
rhetoric, politics) to serve as a starting point and as a testing ground. 
Arithmetic developed without any clear understanding of the 
concept of number; such understanding arose only when there 
existed a sufficient amount of arithmetical 'facts' to give it substance. 
In the same way a proper theory of meaning (and of incommen­
surability) can arise only after a sufficient number of'facts' has been 
assembled to make such a theory more than an exercise in concept­
pushing. This is the reason for the examples in the present section. 
9. There is still another dogma to be considered before returning 
to the main narration. It is the dogma that all subjects, however 
assembled, quite automatically obey the laws of logic, or ought to 
obey the laws of logic. If this is so, then anthropological field work 
would seem to be superfluous. 'What is true in logic is true in 
psychology . . .  in scientific method, and in the history of science,' 
writes Popper.91 
This dogmatic assertion is neither clear nor is it (in one of its main 
interpretations) true. To start with, assume that the expressions 
'psychology', 'history of science', 'anthropology' refer to certain 
domains of facts and regularities (of nature, of perception, of the 
human mind, of society). Then the assertion is not clear as there is not 
a single subject - LOGIC - that underlies all these domains. There 
is Hegel, there is Brouwer, there are the many logical systems 
considered by modem constructivists. They offer not just different 
interpretations of one and the same bulk of logical 'facts', but 
different 'facts' altogether. And the assertion is not true as there exist 
legitimate scientific statements which violate simple logical rules. For 
example, there are statements which play an important role in 
established scientific disciplines and which are observationally 
adequate only if they are self-contradictory: fixate a moving pattern 
that has just come to a standstill, and you will see it move in the 
opposite direction, but without changing its position. The only 
phenomenologically adequate description is 'it moves, in space, but it 
does not change place' - and this description is self-contradictory.92 
91 . Objeaive Knowledge, Oxford, 1972, p. 6. Anticipated e.g. by Comte, Course, SZO 
Lec;on and, of course, Aristotle. 
92. It has been objected (Ayer, G.E.L. Owen) that we are dealing with appearances, 
n?t with actual events, and that the correct description is 'itappears to move . . . .  'But the 
difficulty remains. For if we introduce the 'appear', we must put it at the beginning of the 
sentence, which will read 'it appears that it moves and does not change place'. And as 
apȩearances belong to the domain of phenomenological psychology we have made our 
pomt, viz. that this domain contains self-inconsistent elements. 

196 
AGAINST METHOD 
There are examples from geometry: 93 thus the enclosed figure 
(which need not appear in the same way to every person) is seen as an 
isosceles triangle whose base is not halved by the perpendicular. And 
there are examples with a 
= b & b 
= c & a l!> c as the only 
phenomenologically adequate description. 94 Moreover, there is not 
a single science, or other form oflife that is useful, progressive as well 
as in agreement with logical demands. Every science contains 
theories which are inconsistent both with facts and with other 
theories and which reveal contradictions when analysed in detail. 
Only a dogmatic belief in the principles of an allegedly uniform 
discipline 'Logic' will make us disregard this situation. And the 
objection that logical principles and principles of, say, arithmetic 
differ from empirical principles by not being accessible to the method 
of conjecture and refutations (or, for that matter, any other 
'empirical' method) has been defused by more recent research in this 
field.95 
Secondly, let us assume that the expressions 'psychology', 'anthro­
pology', 'history of science', 'physics' do not refer to facts and laws, 
but to certain methods of assembling facts including certain ways 
of connecting observation with theory and hypothesis. That is, let 
us consider the activity 'science' and its various subdivisions. Then 
we may lay down ideal demands of knowledge and knowledge­
acquisition, and we may try to construct a (social) machinery that 
obeys these demands. Almost all epistemologists and philosophers of 
science proceed in this way. Occasionally they succeed in finding a 
93. E. Rubin, 'Visual Figures Apparendy Incompatible with Geometry', Aao 
Psycho/ogica, VII, 1950, pp. 365fT. Cf. also the drawings on pages 166-7. 
94. E. Tranekjaer-Rasmussen, 'Perspectoid Distances', Aao Psychologica, XI, 
1955, p. 297. 
95. Mainly by the work of lmre Lakatos, 'Proofs and Refutation', British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science, 1962/63. 

S IXTEEN 
197 
machinery that might work in certain ideal conditions, but they never 
inquire, or even find it worth inquiring, whether the conditions are 
satisfied in this real world of ours. Such an inquiry, on the other 
hand, will have to explore the way in which scientists actually deal 
with their surroundings, it will have to examine the actual shape of 
their product, viz. 'knowledge', and the way in which this product 
changes as a result of decisions and actions in complex social and 
material conditions. In a word, such an inquiry will have to be 
anthropological. 
There is no way of predicting what an anthropological inquiry will 
bring to light. In the preceding chapters, which are rough sketches of 
an anthropological study of particular episodes, it has emerged that 
science is full of lacunae and contradictions, that ignorance, 
pigheadedness, reliance on prejudice, lying, far from impeding the 
forward march of knowledge may actually aid it and that the 
traditional virtues of precision, consistency, 'honesty', respect for 
facts, maximum knowledge under given circumstances, if practised 
with determination, may bring it to a standstill. It has also emerged 
that logical principles not only play a much smaller role in the 
(argumentative and non-argumentative) moves that advance science, 
but that the attempt to enforce them would seriously impede science. 
(One cannot say that von Neumann has advanced the quantum 
theory. But he certainly made the discussion of its basis more long­
winded and cumbersome.96) 
Now a scientist engaged in a certain piece of research has not yet 
completed all the steps that lead to definite results. His future is still 
open. Will he follow the barren and illiterate logician who preaches to 
him about the virtues of clarity, consistency, experimental support (or 
experimental falsification), tightness of argument, 'honesty', and so 
on, or will he imitate his predecessors in his own field who advanced 
by breaking most of the rules logicians want to lay on him? Will he rely 
on abstract injunctions or on the results of a study of concrete 
episodes? I think the answer is clear and with it the relevance of 
anthropological field work not just for the anthropologists but also for 
the members of the societies he examines. I now continue my 
narration and proceed to describing the transition from the paratactic 
universe of the archaic Greeks to the substance-appearance universe 
of their followers. 
. 96. Besides, the imprecisions which he removes from the formalism now reappear 
In the relation between theory and fact. Here the correspondence principle stiU reigns 
supreme. Cf. footnote 25 of Chapter 5. 

198 
AGAINST METHOD 
The archaic cosmology (which from now on I shall call cosmology A 
contains things, events, their parts; it does not contain appearances. 9 
Complete knowledge of an object is complete enumeration ofits parts 
and peculiarities. Humans cannot have complete knowledge. There 
are too many things, too many events, too many situations (Iliad, 
2.488), and they can be close to only a few of them (Iliad, 2.485). But 
although humans cannot have complete knowledge, they can have a 
sizeable amount of it. The wider their experience, the greater the 
number of adventures, of things seen, heard, read, the greater their 
knowledge. 98 
The new cosmology (cosmology B) that arises in the 7th to 5th 
centuries BC distingu!shes between much-knowing, 3tOAUJ.la8(TJ, 
and true knowledge,99 and it warns against trustino§ 'custom 
born of manifold experience', £eo~ 3tOAU3tELQOV.1 
Such a 
distinction and such a warning make sense only in a world whose 
structure differs from the structure of A. In one version which played a 
large role in the development of Western civilization and which 
underlies such problems as the problem of the existence of theoretical 
entities and the problem of alienation the new events form what one 
might call a True World, while the events of everyday life are now 
appearances that are but its dim and misleading reflection.101 The 
True World is simple and coherent, and it can be described in a 
uniform way. So can every act by which its elements are 
comprehended: a few abstract notions replace the numerous concepts 
that were used in cosmology A for describing how humans might be 
'inserted' into their surroundings and for expressing the equally 
numerous types ofinformation thus gained. From now on there is only 
one important type of information, and that is: knowledge. 
97. Snell, Ausdricke, p. 28 (referring to Homer), speaks of a 'knowledge that 
proceeds from appearances and draws their multitude together in a unit which is then 
posited as their true essence'. This may apply to the Presocratics, it does not apply to 
Homer. In the case of Homer 'the world is comprehended as the sum of things, visible 
in space, and not as reason acting intensively' (ibid., p. 67, discussing Empedokles; cf. 
also the lines following the quotation for a further elaboration of the theme). 
98. Snell, Die a/ten Griemen und Wir, p. 48. 
99. Cf. Heraclitus, fr. 40 (Diels-Kranz). 
100. Parnenides, fr. 7, 3. 'Here for the first time sense and reason are contrasted'; 
W.K. Guthrie, A History of Greek Philosophy, Vol. II, Cambridge, I 965, p. 25. 
I 01. This distinction is characteristic of certain mythological views as well. Homer 
thus differs both from the preceeding mythologies and from the succeeding 
philosophies. His point of view is of great originality. In the 20th century J .L. Austin 
has developed similar ideas. And he has criticized the development from Thales via 
Plato to the present essentialism. Cf. the first chapter of Sense and Sensibilia. Chapter 3 
of Fare11ell to Reason contains details. 

S I XTEEN 
199 
The conceptual totalitarianism that arises as a result of the slow 
arrival of world B has interesting consequences, not all of them 
desirable. Situations which made sense when tied to a particular type 
of cognition now become isolated, unreasonable, apparendy inconsis­
tent with other situations: we have a 'chaos of appearances'. The 
'chaos' is a direct consequence of the simplification oflanguage that 
accompanies the belief in a True World.102 Moreover, all the 
manifold abilities of the observers are now directed towards this True 
World, they are adapted to a uniform aim, shaped for one particular 
purpose, they become more similar to each other which means that 
humans become impoverished togerl1er with their language. They 
become impoverished at precisely the moment they discover an 
autonomous 'I' and proceed to what some have been pleased to call a 
'more advanced notion of God' (allegedly found in Xenophanes), 
which is a notion of God lacking the rich variety of typically human 
features.103 'Mental' events which before were treated in analo 
with events of the body and which were experienced accordingly1 
become more 'subjective', they become modifications, actions, 
revelations of a spontaneous soul: the distinction between appearance 
(first impression, mere opinion) and reality (true knowledge) spreads 
everywhere. Even the task of the artist now consists in arranging his 
shapes in such a manner that the underlying essence can be grasped 
with ease. In painting this leads to the development of what one can 
only call systematic methods for deceiving the eye: the archaic artist 
treats the surface on which he paints as a writer might treat a piece of 
papyrus; it is a real surface, it is supposed to be seen as a real surface 
(though attention is not always directed to it) and the marks he draws 
on it are comparable to the lines of a blueprint or the letters of a word. 
They are symbols that inform the reader of the struaureoftheobjea, ofits 
parts, of the way in which the parts are related to each other. The 
simple drawing overleaf, for example, may represent three paths 
meeting at a point. The artist using perspective on the other hand, 
regards the surface and the marks he puts on it as stimuli that trigger the 
illusion of an arrangement of three-dimensional objects. The illusion 
occurs because the human mind is capable of producing illusory 
experiences when properly stimulated. The drawing is now seen 
102. Snell, Ausdricke, pp. 80f; von Fritz, Plrilosoplrie und spraclrliclrer Ausdn.d: bei 
Dmwkrit, Plato urliAristoteles, Leipzig-Paris-London, 1938, p. I I .  
103 ' . . .  in becoming the embodiment of cosmic justice Zeus lost his humanity. 
Hence Olympianism in its moralized form tended to become a religion of fear . . .  ', 
Dodds, Greeks, p. 35. For Xenophanes cf. Chapter 2 of FarerDellto Reason. 
104. Snell, Disaroery, p. 69. 

200 
AGAINST METHOD 
either as the comer of a cube that extends towards the viewer, or as the 
comer of a cube that points away from him (and is seen from below), or 
else as a plane floating above the surface of the paper carrying a two­
dimensional drawing of three paths meeting. 
Combining this new way of seeing with the new concept of 
knowledge that has just been described, we obtain new entities, viz. 
physical objects as they are understood by most contemporary 
philosophers. To explain, let me again take the case of the oar. 
In the archaic view 'the oar' is a complex consisting of parts some of 
which are objects, some situations, some events. It is possible to say 
'the straight oar is broken' (not 'appears to be broken') just as it is 
possible to say 'swift-footed Achilles is walking slowly', for the 
elements are not set against each other. They are part of a paratactic 
aggregate. Just as a traveller explores all parts of a strange country and 
describes them in a 'periegesis' that enumerates its peculiarities, one 
by one, in the same way the student of simple objects such as oars, 
boats, horses, people inserts himself into the 'major oar-situations', 
apprehends them in the appropriate way, and reports them in a list of 
properties, events, relations. And just as a detailed periegesis exhausts 
what can be said about a country, in the same way a detailed list 
exhausts what can be said about an object.105 'Broken in water' 
belongs to the oar as does 'straight to the hand'; it is 'equally real'. In 
cosmology B, however, 'broken in water' is a 'semblance' that 
contradias what is suggested by the 'semblance' of straightness and 
thus shows the basic untrustworthiness of all semblances.106 The 
concept of an object has changed from the concept of an aggregate of 
equi-important perceptible parts to the concept of an imperceptible 
I 05. The idea that knowledge consists in lists reaches back far into the Sumerian 
past. Cf. von Soden, Leislung und Grenzen Sumerisch-Babylonischer Wisenschaft, new 
edn, Darmstadt, I 965. The difference between Babylonian and Greek mathematics 
and astronomy lies precisely in this. The one develops methods for the presentation of 
what we today caD 'phenomena' and which were interesting and relevant events in the 
sky, while the other tries to develop astronomy, 'while leaving the heavens alone' 
(Plato, Rep., 530bf; Lgg., SI Sa). 
I06. Xenophanes, fr. 34. 

S IXTEEN 
201 
essence underlying a multitude of deceptive phenomena. (We may 
guess that the appearance of an object has changed in a similar way, 
that objects now look less 'flat' than before.) 
Considering these changes and peculiarities, it is plausible to 
assume that the comparison of A and B as interpreted by the participants 
(rather than as 'reconstructed' by logically well-trained but otherwise 
illiterate outsiders) will raise various problems. In the remainder of 
this chapter only some aspects of some of these problems will be 
discussed. Thus I shall barely mention the psychological changes that 
accompany the transition from A to B and which are not just a matter of 
conjecture, but can be established by independent research. Here is 
rich material for the detailed study of the role of frameworks (mental 
sets, languages, modes of representation) and the limits of rationalism. 
To start with, cosmos A and cosmos B are built from different 
elements. 
The elements of A are relatively independent parts of objects which 
enter into external relations. They participate in aggregates without 
changing their intrinsic properties. The 'nature' of a particular 
aggregate is determined by its parts and by the way in which the parts 
are related to each other. Enumerate the parts in the proper order, and you 
have the objea. This applies to physical aggregates, to humans (minds 
and bodies), to animals, but it also applies to social aggregates such a& 
the honour of a warrior. 
The elements of B fall into two classes: essences (objects) and 
appearances (of objects - what follows is true only of some rather 
streamlined versions of B). Objects (events, etc.) may again combine. 
They may form harmonious totalities where each part gives meaning 
to the whole and receives meaning from it (an extreme case is 
Parmenides where isolated parts are not only unrecognizable, but 
altogether unthinkable). Aspects properly combined do not produce 
objeas, but psychological conditions for the apprehension of phantoms 
which are but other aspects, and particularly misleading ones at that 
(they look so convincing). No enumeration of aspeas is identical with the 
objea (problem of induction). 
The transition from A to B thus introduces new entities and new 
relations between entities (this is seen very clearly in painting and 
statuary). It also changes the concept and the self-experience of 
humans. An archaic individual is an assemblage oflimbs, connections, 
trunk, neck, head, 107 (s)he is a puppet set in motion by outside forces 
107. 'To be precise, Homer does not even have any words for the arms and the 
legs; he speaks of hands, lower arms, upper arms, feet, calves, and thighs. Nor is there 
a comprehensive term for the trunk.' Snell, Discuvery, Chapter I, footnote 7. 

202 
AGAINST METHOD 
such as enemies, social circumstances, feelings (which are described 
and perceived as objective agencies - see above): 108 'Man is an open 
target of a roeat many forces which impinge on him, and penetrate his 
very core.' 09 He is an exchange station of material and spiritual, but 
always objective, causes. And this is not just a 'theoretical' idea, it is a 
social fact. Man is not only described in this way, he is pictured in this way, 
and he feels himself to be constituted in this manner. He does not 
possess a central agency of action, a spontaneous 'I' that produces its 
own ideas, feelings, intentions, and differs from behaviour, social 
situations, 'mental' events of type A. Such an I is neither mentioned 
nor is it noticed. It is nowhere to be found within A. But it plays a very 
decisive role within B. Indeed, it is not implausible to assume that some 
outstandiny;eculiarities ofB such as aspects, semblances, ambiguity 
of feeling1 
enter the stage as a result of a sizeable increase of self­
consciousness. 
Now one might be inclined to explain the transition as follows: 
archaic man has a limited cosmology; he discovered some things, he 
missed others. His universe lacks important objects, his language lacks 
important concepts, his perception lacks important structures. Add 
the missing elements to cosmos A, the missing terms to language A, the 
missing structures to the perceptual world of A, and you obtain cosmos 
B, language B, perception B. 
Some time ago I called the theory underlying such an explanation 
the 'hole theory' or the 'Swiss cheese theory' oflanguage (and other 
means of representation). According to the hole theory every 
cosmology (every language, every mode of perception) has sizeable 
lacunae which can be filled, leaving everything else unchanged. The hole 
theory is beset by numerous difficulties. In the present case there is the 
difficulty that cosmos B does not contain a single element of cosmos A. 
Neither common-sense terms, nor philosophical theories; neither 
painting and statuary, nor artistic conceptions; neither religion, nor 
theological speculation contain a single element of A once the 
transition to B has been completed. This is a historicalfact!11 Is this 
108. 'Emotions do not spring spontaneously from man, but are bestowed on him 
by the gods,' ibid., p. 52. See also the account earlier in the present chapter. 
109. ibid., p. 20. 
1 10. Cf. Sappho's 'bitter-sweet Eros', ibid, p. 60. 
I l l. The fact is not easy to establish. Many presentations of A, including some 
very detailed and sophisticated ones, are infected by B-concepts. An example is 
quoted in footnote 97 to the present chapter. Here as elsewhere only the 
anthropological method can lead to knowledge that is more than a reflection of wishful 
thinking. A similar situation in the course of individual development is described in the 
text to fn. 12 of the present chapter. 

S IXTEEN 
203 
fact an accident, or has A some structural properties that prevent the 
co-existence of A-situations and B-situations? Let us see! 
I have already mentioned an example that might give us an inkling of 
a reason as to why B does not have room for A-facts: the drawing 
below may be the intersection of three paths as presented in 
accordance with the principles of A-pictures (which are visual lists). 
Perspective having been introduced (either as an objective method or 
as a mental set), it can no longer be seen in this manner. Instead oflines 
on paper we have the illusion of depth and a three-dimensional 
panorama, though of a rather simple kind. There is no way of 
incorporating the A-picture into the B-picture except as part of this 
illusion. But an illusion of a visual list is not a visual list. 
The situation becomes more transparent when we tum to concepts. 
I have said above that the 'nature' of an object (=aggregate) in A is 
determined by the elements of the aggregate and the relation between 
the elements. One should add that this determination is 'closed' in the 
sense that the elements and their relations constitute the object; when 
they are given, then the object is given as well. For example, the 
'elements' described by Odysseus in his speech in Iliad, 9.225ff 
constitute honour, grace, respect. A-concepts are thus very similar to 
notions such as 'checkmate': given a certain arrangement of pieces on 
the board, there is no way of 'discovering' that the game can still be 
continued. Such a 'discovery' would not fil a gap, it would not add to 
our knowledge of possible chess positions, it would put an end to the 
game. And so would the 'discovery' of'real meanings' behind other 
moves and other constellations. 
Precisely the same remarks apply to the 'discovery' of an individual 
I that is different from faces, behaviour, objective 'mental states' of 
the type that occur in A, to the 'discovery' of a substance behind 
'appearances' (formerly elements of A), or to the 'discovery' that 
honour may be lacking despite the presence of al its outer 
manifestations. A statement such as Heraclitus' 'you could not find 
the limits of the soul though you are travelling every way, so deep is its 
logos' (Diels, B 45) does not just ad to cosmos A, it undercuts 

204 
AGAINST METHOD 
the principles which are needed in the construction of A-type 
'mental states' while Heraclitus' rejection of JtOAUJ.laSCTJ and 
Parmenides' rejection of an £eo' JtOA tJtELQOV undercuts 
rules that govern the construction of every single fact of A. An 
entire world-view, an entire universe of thought, speech, perception 
is dissolved. 
It is interesting to see how this process of dissolving manifests itself 
in particular cases. In his long speech in Iliad, 9 .308fT, Achilles wants 
to say that honour may be absent even though all its outer 
manifestations are present. The terms of the language he uses are so 
intimately tied to definite social situations that he 'has no language to 
express his disillusionment. Yet he expresses it, and in a remarkable 
way. He does it by misusing the language he disposes of. He asks 
questions that cannot be answered and makes demands that cannot 
be met.'112 He acts in a most 'irrational' way. 
The same irrationality is found in the writings of all other early 
authors. Compared with A the Presocratics speak strangely indeed. 
So do the lyrical poets who explore the new possibilities of selthood 
they have 'discovered'. Freed from the fetters of a well-constructed 
and unambiguous mode of expression and thinking, the elements of 
A lose their familiar function and start floating around aimlessly- the 
'chaos of sensations' arises. Freed from firm and unambiguous social 
situations feelings become fleeting, ambivalent, contradictory: 'I 
love, and I love not; I rave, and I do not rave,' writes Anakreon.113 
Freed from the rules of late geometric painting the artists produce 
strange mixtures of perspective and blueprint. 114 Separated from 
well-determined psychological sets and freed of their realistic 
import, concepts may now be used 'hypothetically' without any 
odium of lying and the arts may begin exploring possible worlds in an 
imaginative way. 115 This is the same 'step back' which was earlier 
I 12. A. Parry, 'The Language of Achilles', Trans. C5 Proc. Amer. Phil. Assoc., 87, 
I 956, p. 6. Cf. the discussion of the case in Farewell to Reason, Chapter I 0. 
I 13. Diehl,AnthologiaLyrictl, fr. 79. 
I 14. Pfuhl, op. cit., cf. also J. White, Perspeaive in Ancient Drawing and Painting, 
London, 1965. 
I I 5. Plutarch reports the following story in his Life of Solon: 'When the company of 
Thespis began to exhibit tragedy, and its novelty was attracting the populace but had 
not yet got as far as public competitions, Solon, being fond of listening and learning 
and being rather given in his old age to leisure and amusement, and indeed to drinking 
parties and music, went to see Thespis act in his own play, as was the practice in 
ancient times. Solon approached him after the performance and asked him if he was 
not ashamed to tell so many lies to so many people. When Thespis said there was 
nothing dreadful in representing such works and actions in fun, Solon struck the 
ground violently with his walking stick: "If we applaud these things in fun," he said, 

S IXTEEN 
205 
seen to be a necessary presupposition of change and, possibly, 
progress 1 16-only it now does not just discard observations, it discards 
some important standards of rationality as well. Seen from A (and also 
from the point of view of some later ideologies) all these thinkers, 
poets, artists, are raving maniacs. 
Remember the circumstances which are responsible for this 
situation. We have a point of view (theory, framework, cosmos, mode 
of representation) whose elements (concepts, 'facts', pictures) are 
built up in accordance with certain principles of construction. The 
principles involve something like a 'closure': there are things that 
cannot be said, or 'discovered', without violating the principles 
(which does not mean contradicting them). Say the things, make the 
discovery, and the principles are suspended. Now take those 
constructive principles that underlie every element of the cosmos (of 
the theory), every fact (every concept). Let us call such principles 
universal principles of the theory in question. Suspending universal 
principles means suspending all facts and all concepts. Finally, let us 
call a discovery, or a statement, or an attitude incommensurable with 
the cosmos (the theory, the framework) if it suspends some of its 
universal principles. Heraclitus B 45 is incommensurable with the 
psychological part of A: it suspends the rules that are needed for 
constituting individuals and puts an end to all A-facts about 
individuals (phenomena corresponding to such facts may of course 
persist for a considerable time as not all conceptual changes lead to 
changes in perception and as there exist conceptual changes that 
never leave a trace in the appearances; however, such phenomena 
can no longer be described in the customary way and cannot therefore 
count as observations of the customary 'objective facts'). 
Note the tentative and vague nature of this explanation of 
'incommensurable' and the absence of logical terminology. The 
reason for the vagueness has already been explained (items 3 and 4 
above). The absence of logic is due to the fact that we deal with 
phenomena outside of its domain. My purpose is to find terminology 
"we shaU soon find ourselves honouring them in earnest".' The story seems 
historically impossible yet elucidates a widespread attitude (for this attitude cf. 
Chapter 8 of John Forsdyke Greece before Homer, New York, 1964). Solon himself 
seems to have been somewhat less impressed by traditional forms of thought and he 
may have been one of the first dramatic actors (of the political variety): G. Else, The 
Origin and Early Form ofTragerly, Cambridge, 1965, pp. 40fT. The opposite attitude, 
which reveals the secure and already somewhat conceited citizen of B, is expressed by 
Simonides who answered the question why the Thessalians were not deceived by him 
by saying 'Because they are too stupid'. Plutarch, De aud. poet., l SD. 
1 16. Chapter I I ,  text to footnote 5. 

206 
AGAINST METHOD 
for describing certain complex historical-anthropological phenomena 
which are only imperfectly understood rather than defining 
properties oflogical systems that are specified in detail. Terms, such 
as 'universal principles' and 'suspend', are supposed to summarize 
anthropological information much in the same way in which Evans­
Pritchard's account of Nuer time (text to footnote 85) summarizes 
the anthropological information at his disposal (cf. also the brief 
discussion in item 3 above). The vagueness of the explanation 
reflects the incompleteness and complexity of the material and invites 
articulation by further research. The explanation has to have some 
content - otherwise it would be useless. But it must not have too much 
content, or else we have to revise it every second line. 
Note, also, that by a 'principle' I do not simply mean a statement 
such as 'concepts apply when a finite number of conditions is 
satisfied', or 'knowledge is enumeration of discrete elements which 
form paratactic aggregates' but the grammatical habit corresponding 
to the statement. The two statements just quoted describe the habit 
of regarding an object as given when the list of its parts has been fully 
presented. This habit is suspended (though not contradicted) by the 
conjeaure that even the most complete list does not exhaust an object; 
it is also suspended (but again not contradicted) by any unceasing 
search for new aspects and new properties. (It is therefore not 
feasible to define 'incommensurability' by reference to state­
ments. 1 17) If the habit is suspended, then A -objects are suspended 
with it: one cannot examine A-objects by a method of conjectures 
and refutations that knows no end. 
How is the 'irrationality' of the transition period overcome? It is 
overcome in the usual way (cf. item 8 above), i.e. by the determined 
production of nonsense until the material produced is rich enough to 
permit the rebels to reveal, and everyone else to recognize, new 
universal principles. (Such revealing need not consist in writing the 
principles down in the form of clear and precise statements.) 
Madness turns into sanity provided it is sufficiently rich and 
sufficiently regular to function as the basis of a new world-view. And 
when that happens, then we have a new problem: how can the old 
view be compared with the new view? 
From what has been said it is obvious that we cannot compare the 
contents of A and B. A-facts and B-facts cannot be put side by side, 
not even in memory: presenting B-facts means suspending principles 
1 17. This takes care of a criticism in foomote 63 of Shapere's article in Mind and 
Cosmos, Pittsburgh, 1966. The classifications achieved by the principles are 'covert' in 
the sense ofWhorf: cf. above, foomote 4 and text down to foomote 9. 

S IXTEEN 
207 
assumed in the construction of A-facts. All we can do is draw B­
pictures of A-facts in B, or introduce B-statements of A-facts into B. 
We cannot use A-statements of A-facts in B. Nor is it possible to 
translate language A into language B. This does not mean that we 
cannot discuss the two views - but the discussion wil lead to sizeable 
changes of both views (and of the languages in which they are 
expressed). 
Now it seems to me that the relation between, say, classical 
mechanics (interpreted realistically) and quantum mechanics (inter­
preted in accordance with the views of Niels Bohr), or between 
Newtonian mechanics (interpreted realistically) and the general 
theory of relativity (also interpreted realistically) is in many respects 
similar to the relation between cosmology A and cosmology B. Thus 
every fact of Newton's mechanics presumes that shapes, masses, 
periods are changed only by physical interactions and this 
presumption is suspended by the theory of relativity. Similarly the 
quantum theory constitutes facts in accordance with the uncertainty 
relations which are suspended by the classical approach. 
At this point it is important to interpret the situation in a 
sensible manner of else scientific (cultural) change becomes an 
inexplicable miracle. The idea that comprehensive ways of thinking, 
acting, perceiving such as cosmology A (and, in a much more narrow 
domain, classical physics) and cosmology B (relativity or quantum 
mechanics) are closed frameworks with fixed rules creates an 
unbridgeable gulf between situations which, though different in 
surprising ways, are yet connected by arguments, allusions, 
borrowings, analogies, general principles of the kind explained in the 
text above. Logicians who confine the term 'argument' to chains of 
reasoning involving stable and precise concepts and who reconstruct 
theories and world-views using equally precise and unambiguous 
terms are forced to call such connections 'irrational' while their 
opponents can report the 'discovery' that science, that alleged 
stronghold of reason, often violates reason in a decisive way. Both are 
talking about chimaeras, not about science and culture as they really 
are. Things change when we use scientific practice or cultural reality 
and not logic as our informants, in other words, when we engage in 
sociological research, not in reconstruction. We then discover 
that scientific concepts (and concepts, shapes, percepts, styles in 
general) are ambiguous in the sense that decisive events can affect 
their appearance, their perceived implications and, with them, the 
'logic' they obey. Achilles (see the text to footnote 1 12 above) 
'misuses' the language he has at his disposal by asserting a difference 
between 'real' honour and its social manifestations. Asserting 

208 
AGAINST METHOD 
differences is not in conflict with view A; for example, there is a great 
difference between the knowledge, the power, the actions of the gods 
on the one side and the knowledge, the power and the actions of 
humans on the other. Assuming that honour is in the hands of gods 
who don't give a damn about the aspirations of humans devalues the 
social manifestations of honour, makes them secondary. The 
assumption fits well into the general outlines of view A but Achilles is 
the first to make it. Why? Because his anger, his suffering makes him 
see connections which, because of a widespread optimism, are not 
part of the general views about honour and do not contribute to its 
'definition'. He seems to violate basic social rules but viewed with the 
anxiety caused by Agamemnon's actions such rules give way to a 
different idea that is regarded as being implicit in the existing material 
but as not having surfaced so far. Generalizing, we can say that 
concepts have potentialities over and above the usages that seem to 
define them; it is this feature that makes them capable of connecting 
entirely different conceptual systems. More about this in my (I 
promise!) last book, The Conquest of Abundance. 

Appendix 2 
Whorf speaks of 'Ideas', not of 'events' or of 'facts', and it is not 
always clear whether he would approve of my extension of his views. 
On the one hand he says that 'time, velocity, and matter are not 
essential to the construction of a consistent picture of the universe, 1 
and he asserts that 'we cut up nature, organize it into concepts, and 
ascribe significances as we do, largely because we are partial to an 
agreement to organize it in this way', 2 which would seem to imply 
that widely different languages posit not just different ideas for the 
ordering of the same facts, but that they posit also different facts. The 
'linguistic relativity principle' seems to point in the same direction. It 
says, 'in informal terms, that users of markedly different grammars 
are pointed by their grammars towards different types of observations 
and different evaluations of externally similar acts of observation, and 
hence are not equivalent observers, but must arrive at somewhat 
different views of the world'.3 But the 'more formal statements'4 of 
the principle already contains a different element, for here we are 
told that 'all observers are not led by the same physical evidence to the 
same picture of the universe, unless their linguistic backgrounds are 
similar, or can in some way be calibrated',5 which can either mean 
that observers using widely different languages will posit diferent faas 
under the same physical circumstances in the same physical world, or 
it can mean that they will arrange similar faas in diferent ways. The 
second interpretation finds some support in the examples given, 
where different isolates of meaning in English and Shawnee are said 
to be 'used in reporting the same experience'6 and where we read that 
'languages classify items of experience differently'; 7 experience is 
l .  Whorf, op. cit., p. 216. 
2. ibid., p. 213. 
3. ibid., p. 221. 
4. ibid., p. 221. 
5. ibid., p. 214, my italics. 
6. ibid., p. 208. 
7. ibid., p. 209. 
209 

210 
AGAINST METHOD 
regarded as a uniform reservoir offacts which are classified differently 
by different languages. 
It finds further support in Whorl's 
description of the transition from the horror-vacui account of 
barometric phenomena to the modem theory: 'If once these 
sentences [Why does water rise in a pump? Because Nature abhors a 
vacuum.] seemed satisfying to logic, but today seem idiosyncrasies of 
a particular jargon, the change did not come about because science 
has discovered new facts. Science has adopted new linguistic 
formulations of the old facts, and now that we have become at home 
in the new dialect, certain traits of the old one are no longer binding 
on us'.8 However, I regard these more conservative statements as 
secondary when compared with the great influence ascribed to 
grammatical categories and especially to the more hidden 'rapport 
systems' of a language.9 
Whorf and those who follow him regard language as the main and 
perhaps as the only 'shaper of events'. That"is much too narrow a 
point of view. Animals have no language in the sense ofWhorf, yet 
they do not live in a shapeless world. Planets, at least as conceived 
today, are not even alive, but they affect their surroundings and react 
to them in a lawful manner. In humans rituals, music, the arts, 
adaptive behaviour that occurs without the interposition of words 
make important contributions to the way in which the world appears 
and, to those living accordingly, is. In the sciences we have not only 
statements (the old idea that science is a system of statements has by 
now been thoroughly discredited), but observations, experimental 
equipment, an intuitive relation between observers and their 
equipment that has to be learned in a practical way and cannot be 
written down, the work of experimentalists which has much in 
common with the work of artists - what they want are not merely 
results, but results that emerge in a simple, compelling and 
aesthetically pleasing way - and so on. A concentration on language 
alone, or on 'texts', can easily lead into absurdity, as is shown 
by Austin and by the practice of deconstruction: on the one 
hand philosophers produce texts, like poets; on the other hand 
they take it for granted that their texts reveal a reality beyond the 
thoughts, impressions, memories, figures of speech, etc., etc. from 
which they arose. (Scientific realists to a certain extent share in this 
predicament.) 
Finally, some comments on what I think about incommensurability 
and how I arrived at the idea. 
8. ibid., p. 222. 
9. ibid., pp. 68ff. 

APPENDIX 2 
211 
I think that incommensurability turns up when we sharpen our 
concepts in the manner demanded by the logical positivists and their 
offspring and that it undermines their ideas on explanation, reduction 
and progress. Incommensurability disappears when we use concepts 
as scientists use them, in an open, ambiguous and often counter­
intuitive manner. Incommensurability is a problem for philosophers 
not for scientists, though the latter may become psychologically 
confused by unusual things. I arrived at the phenomenon while 
studying the early literature on basic statements and by considering 
the possibility of perceptions radically different from our own. In my 
thesis 10 I examined the meaning of observational statements. I 
considered the idea that such statements describe 'what is given' and 
tried to identify this 'given'. Phenomenologically this did not seem to be 
possible; we notice objects, their properties, their relations, not 'the 
given'. It is of course true that we can give quick reports on the 
properties of everyday objects but this does not change them into 
non-objects but only shows that we have a special relation to them. 
Phenomenologically what is given consists of the same things which 
can also exist unobserved - it is not a new kind of object. Special 
arrangements such as the reduction screen introduce new con­
ditions, they do not reveal ingredients in objects we already know. 
Result: the given cannot be isolated by observation. 
The second possibility was to isolate it by logical means: what is 
given can be ascertained with certainty, hence I obtain the given 
contained in the table before me by removing from the statement 
'there is a table' all the consequences that make future corrections 
possible. This shows that the given is the result of an unreasonable 
decision: untestable statements cannot serve as a basis for science. 
Following this argument I introduced the assumption that the 
meaning of observation statements depends on the nature of the 
objects described and, as this nature depends on the most advanced 
theories, on the content of these theories. Or as I formulated it in my 
first English paper on the topic: the interpretation of an observation 
language is determined by the theories which we use to explain what 
we observe, and it changes as soon as these theories change. 1 1  In a 
word: observation statements are not just theory-/aden (the views of 
Toulmin, Hanson and apparently also Kuhn) but fully theoretical 
and the distinction between observation statements ('protocol 
l 0. Vienna, 195 1 - written after two years of extensive discussion in the Kraft 
Circle and supervised by Professor Victor Kraft of the University of Vienna. 
I I. 'An Attempt at a Realistic Interpretation of Experience', Proc. Arist. Soc. 1958, 
reprinted in Philosophical Papers, Vol. I .  The passage (in italics) is on p. 31. 

212 
AGAINST METHOD 
statements' in the terminology of the Vienna Circle) and theoretical 
statements is a pragmatic distinction, not a semantic distinction; 
there are no special 'observational meanings'. Thus in the same year 
as Hanson (Hanson'sPatterns ofDiscuvery appeared in 1958) and four 
years before Kuhn I formulated a thesis a weaker form of which 
became very popular later on. Moreover, my thesis not only was 
stronger than the thesis of theory-ladenness, it also came from a 
different source. For while Toulmin and Hanson were inspired by 
Wittgenstein's Philosophical brvestigations I started from and returned 
to ideas that had been developed in the Vienna Circle - and I said 
so.12 Quine, whose philosophy shows close connections to the 
philosophy of the Vienna Circle, 13 also used a criterion of 
observability that is rather similar to mine. 14 
Now when Feigl heard of these ideas he pointed out that 
interpreting observations in terms of the theories they are 
observations of makes nonsense of crucial experiments; for how can 
an experiment decide between two theories when its interpretation 
already depends on these theories and when the theories themselves 
have no common elements, such as a common observation language? 
In the paper just mentioned and in 'Explanation, Reduction and 
Empiricism', published in 1962, I took up the challenge. I first 
increased it by constructing cases where important terms of one 
theory cannot in any way be defined in another which, moreover, tries 
to do its job. My example which I found in Anneliese Maier's Die 
Vor/iufer Gali/eis im 14. Jahrhundert was the relation of the terms 
'impetus' and 'momentum'. I also developed a theory of test to 
answer the challenge. In 1962 I called theories such as those 
containing 'impetus' and 'momentum' incommensurable theories, 
said that only a special class of theories, so-called non-instantial 
theories could be (but need not be) incommensurable and added that 
successive incommensurable theories are related to each other by 
replacement, not by subsumption. The year 1962 is also that of 
Kuhn's great book - but Kuhn used a different approach to apply the 
same term to a similar (not an identical) situation. His approach was 
historical, while mine was abstract. 
In 1960 I started the studies described in chapters 8, 9 and 16. 
They revealed tht perception and experimentation obey laws of their 
I 2. Philosophico/Papers, Vol. I, pp. 49, I 25. 
13. Details in Dirk Koppelberg, Die Aujhebung der Analytischen Philosophic, 
Frankfurt, 1987. 
14. Philosophicol Papers, Vol. l, pp. l7f. 

APPENDIX 2 
213 
own which cannot be reduced to theoretical assumptions and are 
therefore beyond the grasp of theory-bound epistemologies. 
I also joined Kuhn in demanding a historical as opposed to 
an epistemological grounding of science but I still differ from 
him by opposing the political autonomy of science. Apart from 
that our views (i.e. my published views and Kuhn's as yet 
unpublished recent philosophy) by now seem to be almost 
identical, 15 except that I have little sympathy for Kuhn's attempt to 
tie up history with philosophical or linguistic, but at any rate with 
theoretical ropes: a connection with theory just brings us back to what 
I at least want to escape from - the rigid, though chimaerical 
(deconstruction!) boundaries of a 'conceptual system'. 
15. Cf. my 'Realism and the Historicity of Knowledge', The Journal of Philosophy, 
Vol. lxxvi, 1989, pp. 353fT, esp. footnote 26 and the postscript to the present essay. 

1 7  
Neither science nor rationality are universal measures of excellence. They are 
particular traditions, unaware of their historical grounding. 
So far I have tried to show that reason, at least in the form in which it 
is defended by logicians, philosophers and some scientists, does not 
fit science and could not have contributed to its growth. This is a 
good argument against those who admire science and are also slaves 
of reason. They must now make a choice. They can keep science; 
they can keep reason; they cannot keep both. 
But science is not sacrosanct. The mere fact that it exists, is 
admired, has results is not sufficient for making it a measure of 
excellence. Modem science arose from global objections against 
earlier views and rationalism itself, the idea that there are general 
rules and standards for conducting our affairs, affairs of knowledge 
included, arose from global objections to common sense (example: 
Xenophanes against Homer). Are we to refrain from engaging in 
those activities that gave rise to science and rationalism in the first 
place? Are we to rest content with their results? Are we to assume that 
everything that happened after Newton (or after Hilbert) is 
perfection? Or shall we admit that modem science may have basic 
faults and may be in need of global change? And, having made the 
admission, how shall we proceed? How shall we localize faults and 
carry out changes? Don't we need a measure that is independent of 
science and conflicts with it in order to prepare the change we want to 
bring about? And will not the rejection of rules and standards that 
conflict with science forever prevent us from finding such a measure? 
On the other hand - have not some of the case studies shown that a 
blunt application of 'rational' procedures would not have given us a 
better science, or a better world but nothing at all? And how are we to 
judge the results themselves? Obviously there is no simple way of 
guiding a practice by rules or of criticizing standards of rationality by 
a practice. 
The problems I have sketched are old ones and much more 
214 

S EVENTEEN 
215 
general than the problem of the relation between science and 
rationality. They occur whenever a rich, well-articulated and familiar 
practice - a practice of composing, of painting pictures, of stage 
production, of selecting people for public office, of keeping order and 
punishing criminals, a practice of worship, of organizing society - is 
confronted by a practice of a different kind that can interact with it. 
The interactions and their results depend on historical conditions and 
vary from one case to the next. A powerful tribe invading a country 
may impose its laws and change the indigenous traditions by force 
only to be changed itself by the remnants of the subdued culture. A 
ruler may decide, for reasons of convenience, to use a popular and 
stabilizing religion as the basic ideology of his empire and may 
thereby contribute to the transformation both of his empire and of 
the religion chosen. An individual, repelled by the theatre of his time 
and in search of something better, may study foreign plays, ancient 
and modem theories of drama and, using the actors of a friendly 
company to put his ideas into practice, change the theatre of a whole 
nation. A group of painters, desirous of adding the reputation of 
being scientists to their already enormous reputation as skilled 
craftsmen, may introduce scientific ingredients such as geometry 
into painting and thereby create a new style and new problems for 
painters, sculptors, architects. An astronomer, critical of the 
difference between classical principles of astronomy and the existing 
practice and desirous to restore astronomy to its former splendour, 
may find a way to achieve his aim and so initiate the removal of the 
classical principles themselves. 
In all these cases we have a practice, or a tradition, we have certain 
influences upon it, emerging from another practice or tradition and 
we observe a change. The change may lead to a slight modification of 
the original practice, it may eliminate it, it may result in a tradition 
that barely resembles either of the interacting elements. 
Interactions such as those just described are accompanied by 
changing degrees of awareness on part of the participants. Copernicus 
knew very well what he wanted and so did Constantine the Great (I 
am now speaking about the initial impulse, not about the 
transformation that followed). The intrusion of geometry into 
painting is less easily accounted for in terms of awareness. We have 
no idea why Giotto tried to achieve a compromise between the 
surface of the painting and the corporeality of the things painted, 
especially as pictures were not yet regarded as studies of a material 
reality. We can surmise that Brunelleschi arrived at his construction 
by a natural extension of the architects' method of representing 
three-dimensional objects and that his contacts with contemporary 

216 
AGAINST METHOD 
scientists were not without consequence. It is still more difficult to 
understand the gradually rising claims of artisans to make 
contributions to the same kind of knowledge whose principles were 
explained at universities in very different terms. Here we have not a 
critical study of alternative traditions as we have in Copernicus, or in 
Constantine, but an impression of the uselessness of academic science 
when compared with the fascinating consequences of the journeys of 
Columbus, Magellan and their successors. There arose then the idea 
of an 'America of Knowledge', of an entirely new and as yet 
unforeseen continent of knowledge that could be discovered, just as 
the real America had been discovered: by a combination of skill and 
abstract study. Marxists have been fond of confounding insufficient 
information concerning the awareness that accompanies such 
processes with irrelevance and they have ascribed only a secondary 
role to individual consciousness. In this they were right - but not in 
the way they thought. For new ideas, though often necessary, were not 
sufficient for explaining the changes that now occurred and that 
depended also on the (often unknown and unrealized) circumstances 
under which the ideas were applied. Revolutions have transformed 
not only the practices their initiators wanted to change but the very 
principles by means of which, intentionally or unintentionally, they 
carried out the change. 
Now considering any interaction of traditions we may ask two 
kinds of questions which I shall call observer questions and participant 
questions respectively. 
Observer questions are concerned with the details of an interaction. 
They want to give a historical account of the interaction and, perhaps, 
formulate laws, or rules of thumb, that apply to all interactions. 
Hegel's triad: position, negation, synthesis (negation of the negation) 
is such a rule. 
Participant questions deal with the attitude the members of a 
practice or a tradition are supposed to take towards the (possible) 
intrusion of another. The observer asks: what happens and what is 
going to happen? The participant asks: what shall I do? Shall I 
support the interaction? Shall I oppose it? Or shall I simply forget 
about it? 
In the case of the Copernican Revolution, for example, the 
observer asks: what impact did Copernicus have on Wittenberg 
astronomers at about 1560? How did they react to his work? Did they 
change some of their beliefs and if so, why? Did their change of 
opinion have an effect on other astronomers, or were they an isolated 
group, not taken seriously by the rest of the profession? 
The questions of a participant are: this is a strange book indeed -

S EVENTEEN 
217 
should I take it seriously? Should I study 1t m detail or only 
superficially or should I simply continue as before? The main theses 
seem absurd at first sight - but, maybe, there is something in them? 
How shall I find out? And so on. 
It is clear that observer questions must take the questions of the 
participants into account and participants will also listen most 
carefully (if they are inclined that way, that is) to what observers have 
to say on the matter - but the intention is different in both cases. 
Observers want to know what is going on, participants what to do. An 
observer describes a life he does not lead (except accidentally), a 
participant wants to arrange his own life and asks himself what 
attitude to take towards the things that may influence it. 
Participants can be oportunists and act in a straightforward and 
practical way. In the late 1 6th century many princes became 
Protestants because this furthered their interests and some of their 
subjects became Protestants in order to be left in peace. When 
British colonial officials replaced the laws and habits of foreign tribes 
and cultures by their own 'civilized' laws the latter were often 
accepted because they were the laws of the king, or because one had 
no way to oppose them, and not because of any intrinsic excellence. 
The source of their power and 'validity' was clearly understood, both 
by the officials and by the more astute of their unfortunate subjects. 
In the sciences and especially in pure mathematics one often pursues 
a particular line of research not because it is regarded as intrinsically 
perfect, but because one wants to see where it leads. I shall call the 
philosophy underlying such an attitude of a participant a pragmatic 
philosophy. 
A pragmatic philosophy can flourish only if the traditions to be 
judged and the developments to be influenced are seen as temporary 
makeshifts and not as lasting constituents of thoughts and action. A 
participant with a pragmatic philosophy views practices and 
traditions much as a traveller views foreign countries. Each country 
has features he likes and things he abhors. In deciding to settle down 
a traveller will have to compare climate, landscape, language, 
temperament of the inhabitants, possibilities of change, privacy, 
looks of male and female population, theatre, opportunities for 
advancement, quality of vices and so on. He wil also remember that 
his initial demands and expectations may not be very sensible and so 
permit the process of choice to affect and change his 'nature' as well 
which, after all is just another (and minor) practice or tradition 
entering the process. So a pragmatist must be both a participant and 
an observer even in those extreme cases where he decides to live in 
accordance with his momentary whims entirely. 

218 
AGAINST METHOD 
Few individuals and groups are pragmatists in the sense just 
described and one can see why: it is very difficult to see one's own 
most cherished ideas in perspective, as parts of a changing and, 
perhaps, absurd tradition. Moreover this inability not only exists, it is 
also encouraged as an attitude proper to those engaged in the study and 
the improvement of man, society, knowledge. Hardly any religion has 
ever presented itself just as something worth trying. The claim is 
much stronger: the religion is the truth, everything else is error and 
those who know it, understand it but still reject it are rotten to the 
core (or hopeless idiots). 
Two elements are contained in such a claim. First, one 
distinguishes between traditions, practices and other results of 
individual and/or collective human activity on the one side and a 
different domain that may act on the traditions without being one. 
Secondly, one explains the structure of this special domain in detail. 
Thus the word of God is powerful and must be obeyed not because 
the tradition that carries it has much force, but because it is outside 
all traditions and provides a way of improving them. The word of 
God can start a tradition, its meaning can be handed on from one 
generation to the next, but it is itself outside all traditions. 
The first element - the belief that some demands are 'objective' 
and tradition-independent - plays an important role in rationalism 
which is a secularized form of the belief in the power of the word of 
God. And this is how the opposition reason-practice obtains its 
polemical sting. For the two agencies are not seen as two practices 
which, while perhaps of unequal value, are yet both imperfect and 
changing human products but as one such product on the one side 
and lasting measures of excellence on the other. Early Greek 
rationalism already contains this version of the conflict. Let us 
examine what circumstances, assumptions, procedures - what 
features of the historical process - are responsible for it! 
To start with the traditions that oppose each other - Homeric 
common sense and the various forms of rationalism that arise in the 
6th to 4th centuries - have diferent internal struaures.1 On the one 
hand we have complex ideas that cannot be easily explained, they 
'work' but one does not know how, they are 'adequate', but one does 
not know why, they apply in special circumstances only, are rich in 
content but poor in similarities and, therefore, in deductive 
connections. On the other side there are relatively clear and simple 
concepts which, having just been introduced, reveal a good deal of 
1 .  For details see Chapter 16. 

S EVENTEEN 
219 
their structure and which can be linked in many ways. They are poor 
in content, but rich in deductive connections. The difference 
becomes especially striking in the case of mathematics. In geometry, 
for example, we start with rules of thumb applying to physical objects 
and their shapes under a great variety of circumstances. Later on it 
can be proved why a given rule applies to a given case - but the proofs 
make use of new entities that are nowhere found in nature. 
In antiquity the relation between the new entities and the familiar 
world of common sense gave rise to various theories. One of them 
which one might call Platonism assumes that the new entities are real 
while the entities of common sense are but their imperfect copies. 
Another theory, due to the Sophists, regards natural objects as real 
and the objects of mathematics (the objects of 'reason') as 
simpleminded and unrealistic images of them. These two theories 
were also applied to the difference between the new and fairly 
abstract idea of knowledge propagated by Plato (but found already 
before) and the common-sense knowledge of the time (Plato wisely 
uses a distorted image of the latter to give substance to the former). 
Again it was either said that there existed only one true knowledge 
and that human opinion was but a pale shadow ofit or human opinion 
was regarded as the only substantial knowledge in existence and the 
abstract knowledge of the philosophers as a useless dream ('I can see 
horses, Plato,' said Antisthenes, 'but I nowhere see your ideal 
horse'). 
It would be interesting to follow this ancient conflict through 
history down to the present. One would then learn that the conflict 
turns up in many places and has many shapes. Two examples must 
suffice to illustrate the great variety of its manifestations. 
When Gottsched wanted to reform the German theatre he looked 
for plays worth imitating. That is, he looked for traditions more 
orderly, more dignified, more respectable than what he found on the 
stage of his time. He was attracted by the French theatre and here 
mainly by Corneille. Being convinced that 'such a complex edifice of 
poetry (as tragedy) could hardly exist without rules'2 he looked for 
the rules and found Aristotle. For him the rules of Aristotle were not 
a particular way of viewing the theatre, they were the reason for 
excellence where excellence was found and guides to improvement 
where improvement seemed necessary. Good theatre was an 
embodiment of the rules of Aristotle. Lessing gradually prepared a 
different view. First he restored what he thought to be the real 
2. 'Vorrede zum "Sterbenden Cato" ' quoted from). Chr. Gottsched, Schriften zur 
Literatur, Stuttgan, 1972, p. 200. 

220 
AGAINST METHOD 
Aristotle as opposed to the Aristotle of Comeille and Gottsched. 
Next he permitted violations of the letter of Aristotle's rules provided 
such violations did not lose sight of their aim. And, finally he 
suggested a different paradigm and emphasized that a mind inventive 
enough to construct it need not be restricted by rules. If such a mind 
succeeds in his efforts 'then let us forget the textbook!'3 
In a different (and much less interesting) domain we have the 
opposition between those who suggest that languages be constructed 
and reconstructed in accordance with simple and clear rules and who 
favourably compare such idea/ languages with the sloppy and opaque 
natural idioms and other philosophers who assert that natural 
languages, being adapted to a wide variety of circumstances, could 
never be adequately replaced by their anaemic logical competitors. 
This tendency to view differences in the structure of traditions 
(complex and opaque vs simple and clear) as differences in kind (real 
vs imperfect realization of it) is reinforced by the fact that the critics 
of a practice take an observer's position with respect to it but remain 
participants of the practice that provides them with their objections. 
Speaking the language and using the standards of this practice they 
'discover' limitations, faults, errors when all that really happens is 
that the two practices - the one that is being criticized and the one 
that does the criticizing- don't fit each other. Many arguments against 
an out-and-out materialism are of this kind. They notice that 
materialism changes the use of 'mental' terms, they illustrate the 
consequences of the change with amusing absurdities (thoughts 
having weight and the like) and then they stop. The absurdities show 
that materialism clashes with our usual ways of speaking about 
minds, they do not show what is better - materialism or these ways. 
But taking the participants' point of view with respect to common 
sense turns the absurdities into arguments against materialism. It is 
as if Americans were to object to foreign currencies because they 
cannot be brought into simple relations (1: 1 or 1 :10 or 1:1 00) to the 
dollar. 
The tendency to adopt a participant's view with respect to the 
position that does the judging and so to create an Archimedian point 
for criticism is reinforced by certain distinctions that are the pride 
and joy of armchair philosophers. I refer to the distinction between 
an evaluation and the fact that an evaluation has been made, a 
3. Hamburger Dramalurgie, Stuck 48. Cf., however, Lessing's criticism of the 
claims of the 'original geniuses' of his time in Stick 96. Lessing's account of the 
relation between 'reason' and practice is quite complex and in agreement with the view 
developed further below. 

SEVENTEEN 
221 
proposal and the fact that the proposal has been accepted, and the 
related distinction between subjective wishes and objective standards 
of excellence. When speaking as observers we often say that certain 
groups accept certain standards, or think highly of these standards. 
Speaking as participants we equally often use the standards without 
any reference to their origin or to the wishes of those using them. We 
say 'theories ought to be falsifiable and contradiction free' and not 'I 
want theories to be falsifiable and contradiction free' or 'scientists 
become very unhappy unless their theories are falsifiable and 
contradiction free'. Now it is quite correct that statements of the first 
kind (proposals, rules, standards) (a) contain no reference to the 
wishes of individual human beings or to the habits of a tribe and (b) 
cannot be derived from, or contradicted by, statements concerning 
such wishes, or habits, or any other facts. But that does not make 
them 'objective' and independent of traditions. To infer from the 
absence of terms concerning subjects or groups in 'there ought to 
be . .  .' that the demand made is 'objective' would be just as erroneous 
as to claim 'objectivity' i.e. independence from personal or group 
idiosyncrasies, for optical illusions and mass hallucinations on the 
grounds that the subject, or the group, nowhere occurs in them. 
There are many statements that are formulated 'objectively', i.e. 
without reference to traditions or practices, but are still meant to be 
understood in relation to a practice. Examples are dates, co-ordinates, 
statements concerning the value of a currency, statements of logic 
(after the discovery of alternative logics), statements of geometry 
(after the discovery of Non-Euclidean geometries) and so on. The 
fact that the retort to 'you ought to do X' can be 'that's what you 
think!' shows that the same is true of value statements. And those 
cases where the reply is not allowed can be easily rectified by using 
discoveries in value theory that correspond to the discovery of 
alternative geometries, or alternative logical systems: we confront 
'objective' value judgement from different cultures or different 
practices and ask the objectivist how he is going to resolve the 
conflict.4 Reduction to shared principles is not always possible and 
so we must admit that the demands or the formulae expressing them 
4. In the play The Ruling Class (later turned into a somewhat vapid film with Peter 
O'Toole) two madmen claiming to be God are confronted with each other. This 
marvellous idea so confuses the playwright that he uses fire and brimstone instead of 
dialogue to get over the problem. His final solution, however, is quite interesting. The 
one madman turns into a good, upright, normal British Citizen who plays Jack the 
Ripper on the side. Did the playwright mean to say that our modem 'objectivists' who 
have been through the fire of relativism can return to normalcy only if they are 
Permitted to annihilate all disturbing elements? 

222 
AGAINST METHOD 
are incomplete as used and have to be revised. Continued insistence 
on the 'objectivity' of value judgements however would be as illiterate 
as continued insistence on the 'absolute' use of the pair 'u)rdown' 
after discovery of the spherical shape of the earth. And an argument 
such as 'it is one thing to utter a demand and quite a different thing to 
assert that a demand has been made - therefore a multiplicity of 
cultures does not mean relativism' has much in common with the 
argument that antipodes cannot exist because they would fall 'down'. 
Both cases rest on antediluvian concepts (and inadequate distinc­
tions). Small wonder our 'rationalists' are fascinated by them. 
With this we have also our answer to (b). It is true that stating a 
demand and describing a practice may be two different things and 
that logical connections cannot be established between them. This 
does not mean that the interaction between demands and practices 
cannot be treated and evaluated as an interaction of practices. For the 
difference is due, first, to a difference between observer-attitude and 
participant-attitude: one side, the side defending the 'objectivity' of 
its values, uses its tradition instead of examining it - which does not 
tum the tradition into an objective measure of validity. And secondly, 
the difference is due to concepts that have been adapted to such one­
sidedness. The colonial official who proclaims new laws and a new 
order in the name of the king has a much better grasp of the situation 
than the rationalist who recites the mere letter of the law without any 
reference to the circumstances of its application and who regards this 
fatal incompleteness as proof of the 'objectivity' of the laws recited. 
After this preparation let us now look at what has been called 'the 
relation between reason and practice'. 
Simplifying matters somewhat we can say that there exist three 
views on the matter. 
A. Reason guides practice. Its authority is independent of the 
authority of practices and traditions and it shapes the practice in 
accordance with its demands. This we may call the idealistic version of 
the relation. 
B. Reason receives both its content and its authority from practice. 
It describes the way in which practice works and formulates its 
underlying principles. This version has been called naturalism and it 
has occasionally been attributed to Hegel (though erroneously so). 
Both idealism and naturalism have difficulties. 
The difficulties of idealism are that the idealist does not only want 
to 'act rationally' he also wants his rational actions to have results. 
And he wants these results to occur not only among the idealizations 
he uses but in the real world he inhabits. For example, he wants real 

S EVENTEEN 
223 
human beings to build up and maintain the society of his dreams, he 
wants to understand the motions and the nature of real stars and real 
stones. Though he may advise us to 'put aside (all observation of) the 
heavens'5 and to concentrate on ideas only he eventually returns to 
nature in order to see to what extent he has grasped its laws.6 It then 
often turns out and it often has turned out that acting rationally in the 
sense preferred by him does not produce the expected results. This 
conflict between rationality and expectations was one of the main 
reasons for the constant reform of the canons of rationality and much 
encouraged naturalism. 
But naturalism is not satisfactory either. Having chosen a popular 
and successful practice the naturalist has the advantage of'being on 
the right side', at least for the time being. But a practice may 
deteriorate; or it may be popular for the wrong reasons. (Much of the 
popularity of modem scientific medicine is due to the fact that sick 
people have nowhere else to go and that television, rumours, the 
technical circus of well equipped hospitals convince them that they 
could not possibly do better.) Basing standards on a practice and 
leaving it at that may forever perpetuate the shortcomings of this 
practice. 
The difficulties of naturalism and idealism have certain elements 
in common. The inadequacy of standards often becomes clear from 
the barrenness of the practice they engender, the shortcomings of 
practices often are very obvious when practices based on different 
standards flourish. This suggests that reason and practice are not two 
different kinds of entities but parts of a single dialeaical process. 
The suggestion can be illustrated by the relation between a map 
and the adventures of a person using it or by the relation between an 
artisan and his instruments. Originally maps were constructed as 
images of and guides to reality and so, presumably, was reason. But 
maps like reason contain idealizations (Hecataeus of Miletus, for 
example, imposed the general outlines of Anaximander's cosmology 
on his account of the occupied world and represented continents by 
geometrical figures). The wanderer uses the map to find his way but 
he also corrects it as he proceeds, removing old idealizations and 
introducing new ones. Using the map no matter what will soon get 
him into trouble. But it is better to have maps than to proceed without 
them. In the same way, the example says, reason without the 
guidance of a practice will lead us astray while a practice is vastly 
improved by the addition of reason. 
5. Plato, Rtpublic, 530bf. 
6. Epinomis. 

224 
AGAINST METHOD 
This account, though better than naturalism and idealism and 
much more realistic, is still not entirely satisfactory. It replaces a one­
sided action (of reason upon practice or practice upon reason) by an 
interaction but it retains (certain aspects oO the old views of the 
interacting agencies: reason and practice are still regarded as entities 
of different kinds. They are both needed but reason can exist without 
a practice and practice can exist without reason. Shall we accept this 
account of the matter? 
To answer the question we need only remember that the 
difference between 'reason' and something 'unreasonable' that must 
be formed by it or can be used to put it in its place arose from turning 
structural differences of practices into differences ofkind. Even the 
most perfect standards or rules are not independent of the material 
on which they act (how else could they find a point of attack in it?) and 
we would hardly understand them or know how to use them were 
they not well-integrated parts of a rather complex and in places quite 
opaque practice or tradition, viz. the language in which the defensor 
rationis expresses his stem commands. 7 On the other hand even the 
most disorderly practice is not without its regularities, as emerges 
from our attitude towards non-participants.8 What is called 'reason '  
and 'praaice' are therefore two diferent types of praaice, the difference 
being that the one clearly exhibits some simple and easily producible 
formal aspects, thus making us forget the complex and hardly 
understood properties that guarantee the simplicity and producibility, 
while the other drowns the formal aspects under a great variety of 
accidental properties. But complex and implicit reason is still reason 
and a practice with simple formal features hovering above a pervasive 
but unnoticed background of linguistic habits is still a practice. 
Disregarding (or, rather, not even noticing) the sense-giving and 
application-guaranteeing mechanism in the first case and the implicit 
regularities in the second a rationalist perceives law and order here 
and material yet in need of being shaped there. The habit, also 
commented upon in an earlier part of this section, to take a 
participant's point of view with respect to the former and an 
7. This point has been made with great force and with the help of many examples 
by Wittgenstein (cf. my essay 'Wittgenstein's Philosophical lrvestigations', Phil Rev., 
1955). What have rationalists replied? Russell (coldly): 'I don't understand.' Sir Karl 
Popper (breathlessly): 'He is right, he is right-I don't understand it either!' In a word: 
the point is irrelevant because leading rationalists don't understand it. I, on the other 
hand, would stan doubting the intelligence (and perhaps also the inte.Uectual honesty) 
of rationalists who don't understand (or pretend not to understand) such a simple 
point. 
8. Cf. my shon comments on 'coven classifications' in Chapter 16. 

SEVENTEEN 
225 
observer's attitude towards the latter further separates what is so 
intimately connected in reality. And so we have finally two agencies, 
stem and orderly reason on the one side, a malleable but not entirely 
yielding material on the other, and with this all the 'problems of 
rationality' that have provided philosophers with intellectual (and, let 
us not forget, also with financial) nourishment ever since the 'Rise of 
Rationalism in the West'. One cannot help noticing that the 
arguments that are still used to support this magnificent result are 
indistinguishable from those of the theologian who infers a creator 
wherever he sees some kind of order: obviously order is not inherent 
in matter and so must have been imposed from the outside. 
The interaction view must therefore be supplemented with a 
satisfactory account of the interacting agencies. Presented in this way 
it becomes a triviality. For there is no tradition no matter how hard­
headed its scholars and how hard-limbed its warriors that will remain 
unaffected by what occurs around it. At any rate - what changes, and 
how, is now a matter either for historical research or for political action 
carried out by those who participate in the interacting traditions. 
I shall now state the implications of these results in a series of theses 
with corresponding explanations. 
We have seen that rational standards and the arguments supporting 
them are visible parts of special traditions consisting of clear and 
explicit principles and an unnoticed and largely unknown but 
ahsolutely necessary background of dispositions for action and 
juu6ement. The standards become 'objective' measures of excel­
lence when adopted by participants of traditions of this kind. We have 
then 'objective' rational standards and arguments for their validity. 
We have further seen that there are other traditions that also lead to 
judgements though not on the basis of explicit standards and 
principles. These value judgements have a more 'immediate' 
character, but they are still evaluations, just like those of the 
rationalist. In both cases judgements are made by individuals who 
participate in traditions and use them to separate 'Good' from 'Evil'. 
We can therefore state: 
i. Traditions are neither good nor bad, they simply are. 'Objectively 
speaking', i.e. independently of participation in a tradition, there is 
not much to choose between humanitarianism and anti-Semitism. 
Corollary: rationality is not an arbiter of traditions, it is itself a 
tradition or an aspect of a tradition. It is therefore neither good nor 
bad, it simply is. 

226 
AGAINST METHOD 
ii. A tradition assumes desirable or undesirable properties only when 
compared with some tradition, i.e. only when viewed by participants 
who see the world in terms of its values. The projections of these 
participants appear objeaive and statements describing them sound 
objeaive because the participants and the tradition they project are 
nowhere mentioned in them. They are subjeaive because they depend 
on the tradition chosen and on the use the participants make of it. 
The subjectivity is noticed as soon as participants realize that 
different traditions give rise to different judgements. They will then 
have to revise the content of their value statements just as physicists 
revised the content of even the simplest statement concerning length 
when it was discovered that length depends on reference systems and 
just as everybody revised the content of 'down' when it was 
discovered that the earth is spherical. Those who don't carry out the 
revision cannot pride themselves on forming a special school of 
especially astute philosophers who have overcome moral relativism, 
just as those who still cling to absolute lengths cannot pride 
themselves on forming a special school of especially astute physicists 
who have overcome relativity. They are just pig-headed, or badly 
informed, or both. 
iii. i. and ii. imply a relativism of precisely the kind that seems to have 
been defended by Protagoras. Protagorean relativism is reasonable 
because it pays attention to the pluralism of traditions and values. 
And it is civilized for it does not assume that one's own village and the 
strange customs it contains are the navel of the world. 9 
iv. Every tradition has special ways of gaining followers. Some 
traditions reflect about these ways and change them from one group 
to the next. Others take it for granted that there is only one way of 
making people accept their views. Depending on the tradition 
adopted this way will look acceptable, laughable, rational, foolish, or 
will be pushed aside as 'mere propaganda'. Argument is propaganda 
for one observer, the essence of human discourse for another. 
v. We have seen that individuals or groups participating in the 
interaction of traditions may adopt a pragmatic philosophy when 
judging the events and structures that arise. The principles of their 
philosophy often emerge only during the interaction (people change 
while observing change or participating in it and the traditions they 
use may change with them). This means that judging a historical process 
one may use an as yet unspecified and unspecifiable praaice. One may base 
9. Protagoras is discussed in detail in Chapter l, sections 3ff of Farwell to Reason. 

S EVENTEEN 
227 
judgements and actions on standards that cannot be specified in 
advance but are introduced by the very judgements (actions) they are 
supposed to guide and one may even act without any standards, 
simply following some natural inclination. The fierce warrior who 
cures his wounded enemy instead of killing him has no idea why he 
acts as he does and gives an entirely erroneous account of his reasons. 
But his action introduces an age of collaboration and peaceful 
competition instead of permanent hostility and so creates a new 
tradition of commerce between nations. The question - how will you 
decide what path to choose? How will you know what pleases you and 
what you want to reject? has therefore at least two answers, viz. (1) 
there is no decision but a natural development leading to traditions 
which in retrospect give reasons for the action had it been a decision 
in accordance with standards or (2) to ask how one will judge and 
choose in as yet unknown surroundings makes as much sense as to 
ask what measuring instruments one will use in as yet unexplored 
domains. Standards which are intellectual measuring instruments 
often have to be irrvented to make sense of new historical situations 
just as measuring instruments have constantly to be invented to make 
sense of new physical situations. 
vi. There are therefore at least two diferent ways of colleaively 
deciding an issue which I shall call a guided exchange and an open 
exchange respectively. 
In the first case some or all participants adopt a well-specified 
tradition and accept only those responses that correspond to its 
standards. If one party has not yet become a participant of the chosen 
tradition he will be badgered, persuaded, 'educated' until he does ­
and then the exchange begins. Education is separated from decisive 
debates, it occurs at an early stage and guarantees that the grown-ups 
will behave properly. A rational debate is a special case of a guided 
exchange. If the participants are rationalists then all is well and the 
debate can start right away. If only some participants are rationalists 
and if they have power (an important consideration!) then they will 
not take their collaborators seriously until they have also become 
rationalists: a society based on rationality is not entirely free; one has 
to play the game of the intellectuals.10 
An open exchange, on the other hand, is guided by a pragmatic 
philosophy. The tradition adopted by the parties is unspecified in the 
10. 'It is perhaps hardly necessary to say', says John Stuart Mill, 'that this doctrine 
(pluralism of ideas and institutions) is meant to apply only to human beings in the 
̮aturity of their faculties' - i.e. to fellow intellectuals and their pupils. 'On Liberty', 
m The Philosophy ofJohn StWJrt Mill, ed. M. Cohen, New York, 1961, p. 197. 

228 
AGAINST METHOD 
beginning and develops as the exchange proceeds. The participants 
get immersed into each other's ways of thinking, feeling, perceiving 
to such an extent that their ideas, perceptions, world-views may be 
entirely changed - they become different people participating in a 
new and different tradition. An open exchange respects the partner 
whether he is an individual or an entire culture, while a rational 
exchange promises respect only within the framework of a rational 
debate. An open exchange has no organon though it may invent one, 
there is no logic though new forms oflogic may emerge in its course. 
An open exchange establishes connections between different 
traditions and transcends the relativism of points iii and iv. However, 
it transcends it in a way that cannot be made objective but depends in 
an unforeseeable manner on the (historical, psychological, material) 
conditions in which it occurs. (Cf. also the last paragraph of Chapter 
16.) 
vi. A free society is a society in which all traditions are given equal 
rights, equal access to education and other positions of power. This is an 
obvious consequence of i, ii and iii. If traditions have advantages only 
from the point of view of other traditions then choosing one tradition 
as a basis of a free society is an arbitrary act that can be justified only 
by resorting to power. A free society thus cannot be based on any 
particular creed; for example, it cannot be based on rationalism or on 
humanitarian considerations. The basic structure of a free society is a 
protective structure, not an ideology, it functions like an iron railing not 
like a conviction. But how is this structure to be conceived? Is it not 
necessary to debate the matter or should the structure be simply 
imposed? And if it is necessary to debate the matter then should this 
debate not be kept free from subjective influences and based on 
'objective' considerations only? This is how intellectuals try to 
convince their fellow citizens that the money paid to them is well 
spent and that their ideology should continue to assume the central 
position it now has. I have already exposed the errors-cum­
deceptions behind the phrase of the 'objectivity of a rational debate': 
the standards of such a debate are not 'objective' they only appear to 
be 'objective' because reference to the group that profits from their 
use has been omitted. They are like the invitations of a clever tyrant 
who instead of saying 'I want you to do . . .  ' or 'I and my wife want you 
to do . . .  ' says 'What all of us want is . . .  ' or 'what the gods want of us 
is . . .  ' or, even better, 'it is rational to do . .  .' and so seems to leave out 
his own person entirely. It is somewhat depressing to see how many 
intelligent people have fallen for such a shallow trick. We remove it by 
observing: 

SEVENTEEN 
229 
vtll. that a free society will not be imposed but will emerge only where 
people engaging in an open exchange (cf. vi above) introduce protective 
structures of the kind alluded to. Citizen initiatives on a small scale, 
collaboration between nations on a larger scale are the developments 
I have in mind. The United States are not a free society in the sense 
described here. 
ix. The debates settling the structure of a free society are open debates not 
guided debates. This does not mean that the concrete developments 
described under the last thesis already use open debates, it means that 
they could use them and that rationalism is not a necessary ingredient 
of the basic structure of a free society. 
The results for science are obvious. Here we have a particular 
tradition, 'objectively' on par with all other traditions (theses i and 
vi). Its results will appear magnificent to some traditions, execrable 
to others, barely worth a yawn to still further traditions. Of course, 
our well-conditioned materialistic contemporaries are liable to burst 
with excitement over events such as the moonshots, the double helix, 
non-equilibrium thermodynamics. But let us look at the matter from 
a different point of view, and it becomes a ridiculous exercise in 
futility. It needed billions of dollars, thousands of well-trained 
assistants, years of hard work to enable some inarticulate and rather 
limited contemporaries1 1  to perform a few graceless hops in a place 
nobody in his right mind would think of visiting- a dried out, airless, 
hot stone. But mystics, using only their minds, travelled across the 
celestial spheres to God himself, whom they viewed in all his 
splendour, receiving strength for continuing their lives and 
enlightenment for themselves and their fellow men. It is only the 
illiteracy of the general public and of their stem trainers, the 
intellectuals, and their amazing lack of imagination that makes them 
reject such comparisons without further ado. A free society does not 
object to such an attitude but it will not permit it to become a basic 
ideology either. 
x. A free society insists on the separation of science and society. More 
about this topic in Chapter 19. 
I I .  Cf. Norman Mailer, Of a Fire on the Moon, London, 1970. 

1 8  
Yet it is possible to evaluate standards of rationality and to imprllVe them. 
The principles of impruvement are neither abllVe tradition nor beyond 
change and it is impossible to nail them down. 
I shall now illustrate some of these results by showing how standards 
are and have been criticized in physics and astronomy and how this 
procedure can be extended to other fields. 
Chapter 17 started with the general problem of the relation 
between reason and practice. In the illustration reason becomes 
scientific rationality, practice the practice of scientific research, and 
the problem is the relation between scientific rationality and 
research. I shall discuss the answers given by idealism, naturalism 
and by a third position, not yet mentioned, which I shall call naive 
anarchism. 
According to idealism it is rational (proper, in accordance with the 
will of the gods - or whatever other encouraging words are being 
used to befuddle the natives) to do certain things-come what may. It is 
rational (proper, etc.) to kill the enemies of the faith, to avoid ad hoc 
hypotheses, to despise the desires of the body, to remove 
inconsistencies, to support progressive research programmes and so 
on. Rationality Gustice, the Divine Law) are universal, independent 
of mood, context, historical circumstances and give rise to equally 
universal rules and standards. 
There is a version of idealism that seems to be somewhat more 
sophisticated but actually is not. Rationality (the law, etc.) is no longer 
said to be universal, but there are universally valid conditional 
statements asserting what is rational in what context and there are 
corresponding conditional rules. 
Some reviewers have classified me as an idealist in the sense just 
described with the proviso that I try to replace familiar rules and 
standards by more 'revolutionary' rules such as proliferation and 
counterinduction and almost everyone has ascribed to me a 
'methodology' with 'anything goes' as its one 'basic principle'. But in 
230 

EI GHTEEN 
231 
Chapter 2 I say quite explicitly that 'my intention is not to replace one 
set of general rules by another such set: my intention is, rather, to 
convince the reader that, all methodologies, even the most obvious ones, 
have their limits' or, to express it in terms just explained, my intention 
is to show that idealism, whether of the simple or of the context­
dependent kind, is the wrong solution for the problems of scientific 
rationality. These problems are not solved by a change of standards 
but by taking a different view of standards altogether. 
Idealism can be dogmatic and it can be critical. In the first case the 
rules proposed are regarded as final and unchangeable; in the second 
case there is the possibility of discussion and change. But the 
discussion does not take practices into account- it remains restricted 
to an abstract domain of standards, rules and logic. 
The limitation of all rules and standards is recognized by naive 
anarchism. A naive anarchist says (a) that both absolute rules and 
context-dependent rules have their limits and infers (b) that all rules 
and standards are worthless and should be given up. Most reviewers 
regard me as a naive anarchist in this sense, overlooking the many 
passages where I show how certain procedures aided scientists in 
their research. For in my studies of Galileo, of Brownian motion, 
of the Presocratics I not only demonstrate the failures of familiar 
standards, I also try to show what not so familiar procedures 
did actually succeed. Thus while I agree with (a) I do not agree 
with (b). I argue that all rules have their limits and that there 
is no comprehensive 'rationality', I do not argue that we should 
proceed without rules and standards. I also argue for a context­
ual account but again the contextual rules are not to replace the 
absolute rules, they are to supplement them. Moreover, I suggest a 
new relation between rules and practices. It is this relation and not any 
particular rule-content that characterizes the position I wish to 
defend. 
This position adopts some elements of naturalism but it rejects the 
naturalist philosophy. According to naturalism rules and standards 
are obtained by an analysis of traditions. As we have seen the problem 
is which tradition to choose. Philosophers of science will of course 
opt for science as their basic tradition. But science is not one tradition, 
it is many, and so it gives rise to many and partly incompatible 
standards (I have explained this difficulty in my discussion of 
Lakatos). 1 Besides, the procedure makes it impossible for the 
philosopher to give reasons for his choice of science over myth 
I. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2, Chapter I 0. Cf. also Chapter 19. 

232 
AGAINST METHOD 
or Aristotle. Naturalism cannot solve the problem of scientific 
rationality. 
As in Chapter 17 we can now compare the drawbacks of 
naturalism and idealism and arrive at a more satisfactory view. 
Naturalism says that reason is completely determined by research. Of 
this we retain the idea that research can change reason. Idealism says 
that reason completely guverns research. Of this we retain the idea 
that reason can change research. Combining the two elements we 
arrive at the idea of a guide who is part of the activity guided and 
is changed by it. This corresponds to the interactionist view of 
reason and practice formulated in Chapter 17 and illustrated by 
the example of the map. Now the interactionist view assumes 
two different entities, a disembodied guide on the one side and a 
well-endowed practice on the other. But the guide seems dis­
embodied only because its 'body', i.e. the very substantial practice 
that underlies it, is not noticed and the 'practice' seems crude and in 
need of a guide only because one is not aware of the complex and 
rather sophisticated laws it contains. Thus the problem is not the 
interaction of a practice with something different and external, but the 
development of one tradition under the impact of others. A look at the way 
in which science treats its problems and revises its 'standards' 
confirms this picture. 
In physics theories are used both as descriptions of facts and as 
standards of speculation and factual accuracy. Measuring instruments 
are constructed in accordance with laws and their readings are tested 
under the assumption that these laws are correct. In a similar way 
theories giving rise to physical principles provide standards to judge 
other theories by: theories that are relativistically invariant are better 
than theories that are not. Such standards are of course not 
untouchable. The standard of relativistic invariance, for example, 
may be removed when one discovers that the theory of relativity has 
serious shortcomings. Shortcomings are occasionally found by a 
direct examination of the theory, for example by an examination ofits 
mathematics, or its predictive success. They may also be found by the 
development of alternatives (cf. Chapter 3) - i.e. by research that 
violates the standards to be examined. 
The idea that nature is infinitely rich both qualitatively and 
quantitatively leads to the desire to make new discoveries and thus to 
a principle of content increase which gives us another standard to 
judge theories by: theories that have excess content over what is 
already known are preferable to theories that have not. Again the 
standard is not untouchable. It is in trouble the moment we discover 
that we inhabit a finite world. The discovery is prepared by the 

EIGHTEEN 
233 
development of 'Aristotelian' theories which refrain from going 
beyond a given set of properties - it is again prepared by research that 
violates the standard. 
The procedure used in both cases contains a variety of elements 
and so there are different ways of describing it, or reacting to it. 
One element and to my mind the most important one is 
cosmological. The standards ·we use and the rules we recommend 
make sense only in a world that has a certain structure. They become 
inapplicable, or start running idle in a domain that does not exhibit 
this structure. When people heard of the new discoveries of 
Columbus, Magellan, Diaz they realized that there were continents, 
climates, races not enumerated in the ancient accounts and they 
conjectured there might be new continents of knowledge as well, that 
there might be an 'America of Knowledge' just as there was a new 
geographical entity called 'America', and they tried to discover it by 
venturing beyond the limits of the received ideas. The demand for 
content increase now became very plausible. It arose from the wish to 
discover more and more of a nature that seemed to be infinitely rich 
in extent and quality. The demand has no point in a finite world that 
is composed of a finite number of basic qualities. 
How do we find the cosmology that supports or suspends our 
standards? The reply introduces the second element that enters the 
revision of standards, viz. theorizing in a general sense, including 
myth and metaphysical speculation. The idea of a finite world 
becomes acceptable when we have theories describing such a world 
and when these theories tum out to be better than their infinitist 
rivals. The world is not directly given to us, we have to catch it 
through the medium of traditions which means that even the 
cosmological argument refers to a certain stage of competition 
between world-views, theories of rationality included. 
Now when scientists become accustomed to treating theories in a 
certain way, when they forget the reasons for this treatment but 
simply regard it as the 'essence of science' or as an 'important part of 
what it means to be scientific', when philosophers aid them in their 
forgetfulness by systematizing the familiar procedures and showing 
how they flow from an abstract theory of rationality then the theories 
needed to show the shortcomings of the underlying standards will not 
be introduced or, if they are introduced, will not be taken seriously. 
They will not be taken seriously because they clash with customary 
habits and systematizations thereof. 
For example, a good way of examining the idea that the world is 
finite both qualitatively and quantitatively is to develop an 
Aristotelian cosmology. Such a cosmology provides means of 

234 
AGAINST METHOD 
description adapted to a finite world while the corresponding 
methodology replaces the demand for content increase by the 
demand for adequate descriptions of this kind. Assume we introduce 
theories that correspond to the cosmology and develop them in 
accordance with the new rules. What will happen? Scientists will be 
unhappy for the theories have unfamiliar properties. Philosophers of 
science will be unhappy because they introduce standards unheard of 
in their profession. Being fond of surrounding their unhappiness 
with arias called 'reasons' they will go a little further. They will say 
that they are not merely unhappy, but have 'arguments' for their 
unhappiness. The arguments in most cases are elaborate repetitions 
and variations of the standards they grew up with and so their 
cognitive content is that of 'But the theory is ad hoc!' or 'But the 
theories are developed without content increase!' And all one hears 
when asking the further question why that is so bad is either that 
science has proceeded differently for at least 200 years or that 
content increase solves some problems of confirmation theory. Yet 
the question was not what science does but how it can be improved 
and whether adopting some confirmation theories is a good way of 
learning about the world. No answer is forthcoming. And so 
interesting possibilities are removed by firmly insisting on the status 
quo. It is amusing to see that such insistence becomes the more 
determined the more 'critical' the philosophy that is faced with the 
problem. We, on the other hand, retain the lesson that the validity, 
usefulness, adequacy of popular standards can be checked only by research 
that violates them. 
A further example, to illustrate the point. The idea that 
information concerning the external world travels undisturbed via 
the senses into the mind leads to the standard that all knowledge 
must be checked by observation: theories that agree with observation 
are preferable to theories that do not. This simple standard is in need 
of replacement the moment we discover that sensory information is 
distorted in many ways. We make the discovery when developing 
theories that conflict with observation and finding that they excel in 
many other respects (Chapters 5 to 1 1  describe how Galileo 
contributed to the discovery). 
Finally, the idea that things are well defined and that we do not live 
in a paradoxical world leads to the standard that our knowledge must 
be self-consistent. Theories that contain contradictions cannot be 
part of science. This apparently quite fundamental standard which 
many philosophers accept as unhesitatingly as Catholics once 
accepted the dogma of the immaculate conception of the Virgin loses 
its authority the moment we find that there are facts whose only 

E IGHTEEN 
235 
adequate description is inconsistent and that inconsistent theories 
may be fruitful and easy to handle while the attempt to make them 
conform to the demands of consistency creates useless and unwieldy 
monsters.2 
The last example raises further questions which are usually 
formulated as objections against it (and against the criticism of other 
standards as well, standards of content increase included). 
One objection is that non-contradiction is a necessary condition of 
research. A procedure not in agreement with this standard is not 
research - it is chaos. It is therefore not possible to examine non­
contradiction in the manner described in the last example. 
The main part of the objection is the second statement and it is 
usually supported by the remark that a contradiction implies every 
statement. This it does - but only in rather simple logical systems. 
Now it is clear that changing standards or basic theories has 
repercussions that must be taken care of. Admitting velocities larger 
than the velocity of light into relativity and leaving everything else 
unchanged gives us some rather puzzling results such as imaginary 
masses . and velocities. Admitting well-defined positions 
and 
momenta into the quantum theory and leaving everything else 
unchanged creates havoc with the laws of interference. Admitting 
contradictions into a system of ideas allegedly connected by the laws 
of standard logic and leaving everything else unchanged makes us 
assert every statement. Obviously we shall have to make some further 
changes, for example we shall have to change some rules of 
derivation in the last case. Carrying out the change removes the 
problems and research can proceed as planned. (Scientific practice 
containing inconsistencies is already arranged in the right way.) 
But - says an objection that is frequently raised at this point: how 
will the results of the research be evaluated if fundamental standards 
have been removed? For example, what standards show that research 
in violation of content increase produces theories which are 'better 
than their infinitist rivals' as I said a few paragraphs ago? Or what 
standards show that theories in conflict with observations have 
something to offer while their observationally impeccable rivals have 
not? Does not a decision to accept unusual theories and to reject 
familiar ones assume standards and is it not clear, therefore, that 
cosmological investigations cannot try to provide alternatives to all 
standards? These are some of the questions one hears with tiring 
regularity in the discussion of 'fundamental principles' such as 
2. Cf. Chapter I 6, text to footnotes 9 I fT. 

236 
AGAI NST METHOD 
consistency, content increase, observational adequacy, falsifiability, 
and so on. It is not difficult to answer them. 
It is asked how research leading to the revision of standards is to be 
evaluated. For example, when and on what grounds shall we be 
satisfied that research containing inconsistencies has revealed a fatal 
shortcoming of the standard of non-contradiction? The question 
makes as little sense as the question what measuring instruments will 
help us to explore an as yet unspecified region of the universe. We 
don't know the region, we cannot say what will work in it. To advance 
we must either enter the region, or start making conjectures about it. 
We enter the region by articulating unusual intellectual, social, 
emotional tendencies, no matter how strange they may seem when 
viewed through the spectacles of established theories or standards. It 
would certainly be silly to disregard physical features that do not agree 
with deeply ingrained spiritual notions. But it is equally shortsighted 
to curtailfontasies that do not seem to fit into the physical universe. 
Fantasies and, in fact, the entire subjectivity of human beings are just 
as much a part of the world as fleas, stones and quarks and there is no 
reason why we should change them to protect the latter. 
Similar considerations apply to the standards that are supposed to 
guide our thoughts and actions. They are not stable and they cannot 
be stabilized by tying them to a particular point of view. For Aristotle 
knowledge was qualitative and observational. Today knowledge is 
quantitative and theoretical, at least as far as our leading natural 
scientists are concerned. Who is right? That depends on what kind of 
information has privileged status and this in tum depends on the 
culture, or the 'cultural leaders' who use the information. Many 
people, without much thought, prefer technology to harmony with 
Nature; hence, quantitative and theoretical information is regarded 
as 'real' and qualities as 'apparent' and secondary. But a culture that 
centres on humans, prefers personal acquaintance to abstract 
relations (intelligence quotients; efficiency statistics) and a naturalists' 
approach to that of molecular biologists will say that knowledge is 
qualitative and will interpret quantitative laws as bookkeeping 
devices, not as elements of reality. 
Combining the considerations of the last two paragraphs we see 
that even the apparently hardest scientific 'fact' can be dissolved by 
decisions undermining the values that make it a fact and/or by 
research that replaces it by facts of a different kind. This is not 
a new procedure. Philosophers from Parmenides to 20th-century 
(undialectical) materialists and scientists from Galileo and Descartes 
to Monod used it to devalue, and to declare as mere appearance, the 
qualitative features of human life. But what can be used to support 

EIGHTEEN 
237 
science can also be used against it. The (cultural) measuring 
instruments that separate 'reality' from 'appearance' change and 
must change when we move from one culture to another and from 
one historical stage to the next, just as our physical measuring 
instruments change and must change when we leave one physical 
region (one historical period) and enter another. 

1 9  
Science is neither a single tradition, nor the best tradition there is, except for 
people who have become accustomed to its presence, its benefits and its 
disadvantages. In a democracy it should be separated from the state just as 
churches are now separated from the state. 
I shall now sumarize the arguments of the preceding chapters by 
trying to answer the following three questions. 
1 .  What is science? How do scientists proceed, how do their 
standards differ from the standards of other enterprises? 
2. What's so great about science? What are the reasons that might 
compel us to prefer the sciences to other forms of life and ways of 
gathering knowledge? 
3. How are we to use the sciences and who decides the matter? 
My answer to the first question is that the wide divergence of 
individuals, schools, historical periods, entire sciences makes it 
extremely difficult to identifY comprehensive principles either of 
method, or of fact. The word 'science' may be a single word - but 
there is no single entity that corresponds to that word. 
In the domain of method we have scientists like Salvador Luria who 
want to tie research to events permitting 'strong inferences', 
'predictions that will be stronfly supported and sharply rejected by a 
clear-cut experimental step'. 
According to Luria the experiments (Luria and Delbrueck, 1943) 
which showed that the resistance of bacteria to phage invasion is a 
result of environment-independent mutations and not of an 
adaptation to the environment had precisely this character. There 
was a simple prediction: fluctuations, from one culture to the next, of 
surviving colonies of bacteria on an agar containing an excess of 
bacteriophages would be small in the first case, but would contain 
I. S.E. Luria, A Slot Machine, a Broken Test Tube, New York, 1985, p. l iS. 
238 

NINETEEN 
239 
avalanches in the second. The prediction could be tested in a simple 
and straightforward way and there was a decisive result. (The result 
refuted Lamarckism, which was popular among bacteriologists but 
practically extinct elsewhere - a first indication of the complexity of 
science.) 
Scientists inclined in the manner of Luria show a considerable 
'lack of enthusiasm in the "big problems" of the Universe or of the 
early Earth or in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the upper 
atmosphere',2 al subjects that are 'loaded with weak inferences'.3 
In a way they are continuing the Aristotelian approach which 
demands close contact with e'rerience and objects to following a 
plausible idea to the bitter end. 
However, this was precisely the procedure adopted by Einstein, by 
researchers in celestial mechanics between Newton and Poincare, by 
the proponents of atomism and, later, the kinetic theory, by 
Heisenberg during the initial stages of matrix mechanics and by 
almost all cosmologists. Einstein's first cosmological paper is a purely 
theoretical exercise containing not a single astronomical constant. 
The subject of cosmology itself for a long time found few supporters 
among physicists. Hubble the observer was respected, the rest had a 
hard time: 
Journals accepted papers from observers, giving them only the most 
cursory refereeing whereas our own papers always had a stiff passage, 
to a point where one became quite worn out with explaining points of 
mathematics, physics, fact and logic to the obtuse minds who 
constitute the mysterious anonymous class of referees, doing their 
work, like owls, in the darkness of the night. 5 
'Is it not really strange', asks Einstein, 'that human beings are normally 
deaf to the strongest argument while they are always inclined 
to overestimate measuring accuracies?'6 - but just such an 'over­
estimating of measuring accuracies' is the rule in epidemiology, 
demography, genetics, spectroscopy and in other subjects. The 
variety increases when we move into sciences like cultural 
2. ibid., p. 1 19. 
3. ibid. 
4. De Coelo 293a24ff. 
5. F. Hoyle in Y. Terzian and E.M. Bilson (eds), Cosmology and Astrophysics, Ithaca 
and London, 1982, p. 21. 
6. Letter to Max Born, quoted from the Born-Einstein Leters, New York, 1971, 
p. 192. 

240 
AGAINST METHOD 
anthropology where a compromise has to be found between the 
effects of personal contact and the idea of an objective approach on 
the one side and the practical needs for quick action and theoretical 
thoroughness on the other. 'To hear a seminar at a university about 
modes of production in the morning', writes Robert Chambers, 
and then attend a meeting in a government office about agricultural 
extension in the afternoon leaves a schizoid feeling. One might not 
know that both referred to the same small farmers and might doubt 
whether either discussion has anything to contribute to the other. 7 
But is it not true that scientists proceed in a methodical way, 
avoid accidents and pay attention to observation and experiment? 
Not always. Some scientists propose theories and calculate cases 
which have little or no connection with reality. 'The great growth 
in technical achievements which began in the nineteenth century', 
we read in L. Prandtl's lectures Fundamentals of Hydro- and 
Aeromechanics, 
left scientific knowledge far behind. The multitudinous problems of 
practice could not be answered by the hydrodynamics of Euler; they 
could not even be discussed. This was chiefly because, starting from 
Euler's equations of motion the science had become more and more a 
purely academic analysis of the hypothetical frictionless 'ideal fluid'. 
This theoretical development is associated with the names of 
Helmholtz, Kelvin, Lamb and Rayleigh. 
The analytical results obtained by means of this so called 'classical 
hydrodynamics' virtually do not agree at all with the practical 
phenomena . . . .  Therefore the engineers . . .  put their trust in a mass 
of empirical data collectively known as the 'science of hydraulics', 
a branch of knowledge which grew more and more unlike hydro­
dynamics.8 
According to Prandtl we have a disorderly collection of facts on the 
one side, sets of theories starting from simple but counterfactual 
assumptions on the other and no connection between the two. More 
recently the axiomatic approach in quantum mechanics and 
especially in quantum field theory was compared by cynical observers 
to the shakers, 'a religious sect of New England who built solid barns 
7. Rural Developmml, London, 1983, p. 29. 
8. Ed. O.G. Tietjens, New York, 1954, p. 3. 

N I NETEEN 
241 
and led celibate lives, a non -scientific equivalent of proving rigorous 
theorems and calculating no cross sections' .9 
Yet in quantum mechanics this apparently useless activity has led 
to a more coherent and far more satisfactory codification of the facts 
than had been achieved before, while in hydrodynamics 'physical 
commonsense' occasionally turned out to be less accurate than the 
results of rigorous proofs based on wildly unrealistic assumptions. An 
early example is Maxwell's calculation of the viscosity of gases. For 
Maxwell this was an exercise in theoretical mechanics, an extension 
of his work on the rings of Saturn. Neither he nor his contemporaries 
believed the outcome - that viscosity remains constant over a wide 
range of density - and there was contrary evidence. Yet more precise 
measurements confirmed the prediction.1° Few people were pre­
pared for such a tum of events. Mathematical curiosity had started 
the work, cross-fertilization, not general principles, had brought it 
to a conclusion. 
Meanwhile the situation has changed in favour of theory. In the 
sixties and seventies, when science was still in public favour, theory 
got the upper hand, at universities, where it increasingly replaced 
professional skills, even in medicine, and in special subjects such as 
biology or chemistry where earlier morphological and substance­
related research was replaced by a study of molecules. In cosmology a 
firm belief in the Big Bang now tends to devalue observations that 
clash with it. 'Such observations', writes C. Burbidge, 
are delayed at the r.:fereeing stage as long as possible with the hope 
that the author will give up. If this does not occur and they are 
published the second line of defence is to ignore them. If they give rise 
to some comment, the best approach is to argue simply that they are 
hopelessly wrong and then, if all else fails, an observer may be 
threatened with loss of telescope time until he changes his program. 1 1  
9. R.F. Streater and A.S. Wightman, PCT, Spin, Statistics and A/I That, New York, 
1964, p. l . 
I 0. For quantum mechanics cf. sections 4.1 and 4.2 of Hans Primas, Chemistry, 
Quantum Mechanics and Reduaionism, Berlin-New York, 1981. Maxwell's calculations 
are reproduced in The Scientific Papm ofJames Clerk Mart/Jell, ed. W.D. Niven, New 
York, 1965 (first published in 1890), pp. 377fT. The conclusion is stated on p. 391 : 'A 
remarkable result here presented to us . . .  is that if this explanation of gaseous friction 
be true, the coefficient of friction is independent of the density. Such a consequence of 
a mathematical theory is very stanling, and the only experiment I have met with on the 
s̯bject does not seem to confirm it.' For examples from hydrodynamics cf. G. 
B•rkhoff, Hydrodynamics, New York, 1955, sections 20 and 21. 
I I .  'Problems of Cosmogony and Cosmology', in F. Bertola, j.W. Sulentic and 
D.F. Madore (eds), New Ideas in Astronomy, Cambridge, 1988, p. 229. 

242 
AGAINST METHOD 
Thus all we can say is that scientists proceed in many different ways, 
that rules of method, if mentioned explicitly, are either not obeyed at 
all, or function at most like rules of thumb and that important results 
come from the confluence of achievements produced by separate and 
often conflicting trends. The idea that ' "scientific" knowledge is in 
some way peculiarly positive and free from differences of opinion'1 2 
is nothing but a chimaera. 
The situation in the arts is quite similar - as a matter of fact, it 
occurs in all areas of human activity. Cennino Cennini's Libro 
deii'Arte of 1390 contains practical advice based on a rich experience 
and complex skills. Leon Battista Alberti'sDellaPittura of1435/6 is a 
theoretical treatise closely tied to central perspective and academic 
optical theory. Perspective soon became a mania among artists. 
Leonardo and Raphael then pointed out, the one in words, the other 
practically (cf. the sphere on the right hand side of his School of Athens 
in the Stanza della Segnatura of the Vatican), that a picture that is to 
be viewed under normal circumstances, from a comfortable but not 
well-defined distance and with both eyes wide open cannot obey the 
rules of central perspective. They thereby clarified the difference 
between physiological optics and geometrical optics which Kepler, 
more than a century later, still tried to bridge by an easily refuted 
hypothesis (cf. Ch. 9, text to footnote 50). But central perspective 
remained a basis on which various changes were superimposed. 
So far I have been talking about procedure, or method. Now 
methods that are not used as a matter of habit, without any thought 
about the reasons behind them, are often tied to metaphysical beliefs. 
For example, a radical form of empiricism assumes either that 
humans are the measure of things or that they are in harmony with 
them. Applied consistently methodological rules may produce results 
which agree with the corresponding metaphysics. Luria's procedure 
is an example. It did not fail; it helped to build a subject which today is 
at the forefront of research. Einstein's approach did not end in 
disaster; it led to one of the most fascinating modern theories -
general relativity. But methods are not restricted to the area where 
they scored their first triumphs. Luria's requirements, for example, 
also turned up in cosmology; they had been used by Heber Curtis, in 
his 'grand debate' with Harlow Shapely; by Ambarzumjan, who 
opposed empiricism to abstract principles; and they are now being 
applied by Halton Arp, Margaret Geller and their collaborators. 
Whatever the results, a world built up in the manner of Luria has 
12. N.R. Campbell, Foundations of Science, New York, 1957, p. 21. 

N I N ETEEN 
243 
little in common with the world of Einstein and this world again 
differs considerably from the world of Bohr. Johann Theodore 
Merz describes in detail how abstract world-views using cor­
responding methods produced results which slowly filled them with 
empirical content. 13 He discusses the following views. First, the 
astronomical view, which rested on mathematical refinements of 
action at a distance laws and was extended (by Coulomb, Neumann, 
Ampere and others) to electricity and magnetism. Laplace's theory of 
capillarity was an outstanding achievement of this approach. 
Secondly, the atomic view, which played an important role in chemical 
research (example: stereochemistry) but was also opposed by 
chemists. Thirdly, the kinetic and mechanical view, which employed 
atoms in the area ofheat and electric phenomena. For some scientists 
atomism was the foundation of everything. Fourthly, the physical view, 
which tried to achieve universality in a different way, on the basis of 
general notions such as the notion of energy. It could be connected 
with the kinetic view, but often was not. Physicians, physiologists and 
chemists like Mayer, Helmholtz, du Bois Reymond and, in the 
practical area, Liebig were outstanding representatives of this view in 
the second half of the 19th century while Ostwald, Mach and Duhem 
extended it into the 20th. Starting his description of the morphological 
view, Merz writes: 
The different aspects of nature which I have reviewed in the foregoing 
chapters and the various sciences which have been elaborated by their 
aid, comprise what may appropriately be termed the abstract study of 
natural objects and phenomena. Though all the methods of reasoning 
with which we have so far become acquainted originated primarily 
through observation and the reflection over things natural, they have 
this in common that they - for the purpose of examination - remove 
their objects out of the position and surroundings which nature has 
assigned to them: that they abstract them. This process of abstraction 
is either literally a process of removal from one place to another, from 
the great work - and storehouse of nature herself to the small 
workroom, the laboratory of the experimenter; or - where such 
removal is not possible - the process is carried out merely in the realm 
of contemplation; one or two special properties are noted and 
described, whilst the number of collateral data are for the moment 
disregarded. [A third method, not developed at the time, is the 
creation of 'unnatural' conditions and, thereby, the production of 
'unnatural' phenomena.] 
13. A History of European Thought in the 19th Century (first published 1904-12). 

244 
AGAINST METHOD 
. . .  There is, moreover, in addition to the aspect of convenience, 
one very powerful inducement for scientific workers to persevere in 
their process of abstraction. . . . This is the practical usefulness of 
such researches in the arts and industries. . . . The wants and 
creations of artificial life have thus proved the greatest incentives to 
the abstract and artificial treannent of natural objects and processes 
for which the chemical and electrical laboratories with the calculating 
room of the mathematician on the one side and the workshop and 
factory of the other, have in the course of the century become so 
renowned . . . .  
There is, however, in the human mind an opposite interest which 
fortunately counteracts to a considerable extent the one-sided 
working of the spirit of abstraction in science . . . .  This is the genuine 
love of nature, the consciousness that we lose all power if, to any great 
extent, we sever or weaken that connection which ties us to the world 
as it is - to things real and natural: it finds its expression in the ancient 
legend of the mighty giant who derived all his strength from his 
mother earth and collapsed if severed from her . . . .  In the study of 
natural objects we meet [therefore] with a class of students who are 
attracted by things as they . . . .  [Their] sciences are the truly 
descriptive sciences, in opposition to the abstract ones. 14 
I have quoted this description at length for it shows how different 
procedures rest on and provide evidence for, different world-views. 
Finally, Merz mentions the genetic view, the psychophysical view, the 
vitalistic view, the statistical view together with their procedures and 
their findings. 
What can a single comprehensive 'world-view of science' or a 
single comprehensive idea of science offer under such circumstances? 
It can offer a survey, a list similar to the list given by Merz, 
enumerating the achievements and drawbacks of the various 
approaches as well as the clashes between them and it can identify 
science with this complex and somewhat scattered wars on many 
fronts. Alternatively it can put one view on top and subordinate the 
others to it, either by pseudo-derivations, or by declaring them to be 
meaningless. Reductionists love to play that game. Or it can 
disregard the differences and present a paste job where each 
particular view and the results it has achieved is smoothly connected 
with the rest thus producing an impressive and coherent edifice -
'the' scientific world-view. 
14. Ibid., Vol. Z, New York, 196S, pp. 200f. 

NINETEEN 
245 
Expressing it differently we may say that the assumption of a single 
coherent world-view that underlies all of science is either a 
metaphysical hypothesis trying to anticipate a future unity, or a 
pedagogical fake; or it is an attempt to show, by a judicious up- and 
downgrading of disciplines, that a synthesis has already been 
achieved. This is how fans of uniformity proceeded in the past (cf. 
Plato's list of subjects in Chapter vii of his Republic), these are the 
ways that are still being used today. A more realistic account, 
however, would point out that '[t]here is no simple "scientific" map of 
reality - or if there were, it would be much too complicated and 
unwieldy to be grasped or used by anyone. But there are many 
different maps of reality, from a variety of scientific viewpoints'.15 
It may be objected that we live in the 20th century, not in the 19th, 
and that many unifications which seemed impossible then have been 
achieved by now. Examples are statistical thermodynamics, molecu­
lar biology, quantum chemistry and superstrings. These are indeed 
flourishing subjects, but they have not produced the unity the phrase 
'the' scientific view of the world insinuates. Actually, the situation is 
not very different from that which Merz had noticed in the 19th 
century. Truesdell and others continue the physical approach: 
Prandtl maligned Euler, Truesdell praises him for having provided 
rigorous concepts for research. Morphology, though given a low 
status by some and declared to be dead by others, has been revived by 
ecologists and by Lorenz's study of animal behaviour (which added 
forms of motion to the older static forms) and it has always been of 
importance in galactic research (Hubble's classification). Having 
been in the doghouse, cosmology is now being courted by high 
energy physicists but clashes with the philosophy of complementarity 
accepted by the same group. Commenting on the problem M. 
Kafatos and R. Nadeu write: 
The essential requirement of the Copenhagen interpretation that the 
experimental setup must be taken into account when making 
observations is seldom met in observations with cosmological import 
[though such observations rely on light, the paradigm case of 
complementarity].16 
Moreover, the observations of Arp, M. Geller and others have 
I S. John Ziman, Teaching and LeamingAbout Science and Society, Cambridge, 1980, 
p. l 9. 
16. 'Complementarity and Cosmology', in M. Kafatos (ed.), Bell's Theorem, 
Quantum Theory and the Conceptions of the Universe, Dordrecht, 1980, p. 263. 

246 
AGAINST METHOD 
thrown considerable doubt on the homogeneity assumption which 
plays a central role in it. Extended to I ,000 megaparsec, Geller's 
research may blow up the entire subject. We have a rabid materialism 
in some parts (molecular biology, for example), a modest to radical 
subjectivism in others (some versions of quantum measurement, 
anthropic principle). There are many fascinating results, specula­
tions, attempts at interpretation and it is certainly worth knowing 
them. But pasting them together into a single coherent 'scientific' 
world-view, a procedure which has the blessings even of the Pope17 
- this is going too far. After all, who can say that the world which so 
strenuously resists unification really is as educators and meta­
physicians want it to be - tidy, uniform, the same everywhere? 
Besides, as was shown in Chapters 3ff, a paste job eliminates 
precisely those conflicts that kept science going in the past and will 
continue inspiring its practitioners if preserved. 
At this point some defenders of uniformity rise to a higher level. 
Science may be complex, they say, but it is still 'rational'. Now the 
word 'rational' can either be used as a collecting bag for a variety of 
procedures - this would be its nominalist interpretation - or it 
describes a general feature found in every single scientific action. I 
accept the first definition, but I reject the second. In the second case 
rationality is either defined in a narrow way that excludes, say, the 
arts; then it also excludes large sections of the sciences. Or it is 
defined in a way that lets all of science survive; then it also applies to 
love-making, comedy and dogfights. There is no way of delimiting 
'science' by something stronger and more coherent than a list. 
I come to the second question -what's so great about science? There 
are various measures of greatness. Popularity, i.e. familiarity with 
some results and the belief that they are important, is one of them. 
Now it is true that despite periodic swings towards the sciences and 
away from them they are still in high repute with the general public ­
or, rather, not the sciences, but a mythical monster 'science' (in the 
singular - in German it sounds even more impressive: Die 
Wissenschaft). For what the general public seems to assume is that the 
achievements they read about in the educational pages of their 
newspapers and the threats they seem to perceive come from a single 
source and are produced by a uniform procedure. They know that 
biology is different from physics which is different from geology. But 
17. Cf. his message on the occasion of the 300th anniversary of Newton's 
Principia, published in John Paul l/ on Science and Religion, Notre Dame, 1990, esp. 
M6ff. 

N I NETEEN 
247 
these disciplines, it is assumed, arise when 'the scientific way' is 
applied to different topics; the scientific way itself, however, remains 
the same. I have tried to argue that scientific practice is much more 
diverse. Adding that scientists keep complaining about the scientific 
illiteracy of the general public and that by the 'general public' they 
mean the Western middle class, not Bolivian peasants (for example), 
we have to conclude that the popularity of science is a very doubtful 
matter indeed. 
What about practical advantages? The answer is that 'science' 
sometimes works and sometimes doesn't. Some sciences (economic 
theory, for example) are in a pretty sorry shape. Others are 
sufficiently mobile to tum disaster into triumph. The can do so because 
they are not tied to any particular method or world-view. The fact that an 
approach is 'scientific' according to some clearly formulated criterion 
therefore is no guarantee that it will succeed. Each case must be judged 
separately, especially today, when the fear ofindustrial espionage, the 
wish to overtake competitors on the way to a Nobel Prize, the uneven 
distribution of funds, national rivalries, fear of accusations (of 
malpractice, plagiarism, waste of funds, etc.) put restrictions on what 
some dreamers, many philosoRhers among them, still regard as a 
'free intellectual adventure'. 8 The question of truth, finally, 
remains unresolved. Love of truth is one of the strongest motives for 
replacing what really happens by a streamlined account, or, to 
express it in a less polite manner, love of truth is one of the strongest 
motives for lying to oneself and to others. Besides, the quantum 
theory seems to show, in the precise manner so much beloved by the 
admirers of science, that reality is either one, which means there are 
no observers and no things observed, or it is many, in which case what 
is found does not exist in itself but depends on the approach chosen. 
What are the views that are being compared with science when it is 
declared to be superior? E.O. Wilson, the 'father' of sociobiology, 
writes: 
religion . . .  will endure for a long time as a vital force in society. Like 
the mythical giant Antaeus who drew energy from his mother, the 
earth, religion cannot be defeated by those who may cast it down. The 
spiritual weakness of scientific naturalism is due to the fact that it has 
no such primal source of power . . . .  So the time has come to ask: does 
I 8. This was realized by government advisers after the postwar euphoria had worn 
off. See Joseph Ben-David, Scientific Growth, Berkeley, I 991, p. 525, quoted above. 

248 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
a way exist to divert the power of religion into the services of the great 
new enterprise?19 
For Wilson the main feature of the alternatives is that they have 
power. I regard this as a somewhat narrow characterization. World­
views also answer questions about origins and purposes which sooner 
or later arise in almost every human being. Answers to these 
questions were available to Kepler and Newton and were used by 
them in their research; they are no longer available today, at least not 
within the sciences. They are part of non-scientific world-views 
which therefore have much to offer, also to scientists. When Western 
Civilization invaded what is now called the Third World it imposed 
its own ideas of a proper environment and a rewarding life. It thereby 
disrupted delicate patterns of adaptation and created problems that 
had not existed before. Both human decency and some appreciation 
of the many ways in which humans can live with nature prompted 
agents of development and public health to think in more complex or, 
as some would say, more 'relativistic' ways. There exist approaches, 
the approach called 'Primary environmental Care' among them, 
which offer legal, political and scientific information but modified in 
accordance with the needs, the wishes and, what is most important, 
the skills and the knowledge of local populations.20 Similarly, the 
movement called liberation theology has modified Church doctrine 
to bring it closer to the spiritual needs of the poor and disadvantaged, 
especially in South America. 
Let me point out, incidentally, that not all ideas which seem 
repulsive to the prophets of a New Age come from science. The idea 
of a world machine and the related idea that nature is material to be 
shaped by man should not be blamed on modem, i.e. post-Cartesian, 
science. It is older and stronger than a purely philosophical doctrine 
could ever be. The expression 'world machine' is found in Pseudo 
Dionysius Areopagita, a mystic of unknown identity who wrote about 
500 AD and had tremendous influence. Oresme, who died in 1382 
as bishop of Lisieux, compares the universe to a vast mechanical 
clock set running by God so that 'all the wheels move as 
harmoniously as possible'. The sentiment can be easily understood: 
19. On HumanNature, Cambridge, Mass., 1972, pp. 192f. 
20. Lessons Learned in Community-Based Errvironmental Management, Proceedings 
of the 1990 Primary Environmental Care Workshop, ed. Grazia Borrini, International 
Course for Primary Health Care Managers at District Level in Developing Countries, 
lstituto Superiore di Saniti, Rome, I 991 .  For a more popular presentation cf. Grazia 
Borrini, 'Primary Environmental Care: For Environmental Advocates and Policy­
Makers', UNESCO Courier, forthcoming. 

NI N ETEEN 
249 
this was the time when mechanical clocks 'of astounding intricacy 
and elaboration' were constructed all over Europe - every town was 
supposed to have one. Lynn White Jr., from whose book I have taken 
this information, also describes the change of attitude that occurred 
in the Carolingian Age: 
The old Roman Calendars had occasionally shown genre scenes of 
human activity but the dominant tradition (which continued in 
Byzantium) was to depict the months as passive personifications being 
symbols of attributes. The new Carolingian calendar which set the 
pattern for the Middle Ages . . .  shows a coercive attitude towards 
natural resources . . . .  The pictures [are about) scenes of ploughing, 
harvesting, woodchopping; people knocking down acorns for the pigs, 
pig slaughtering. Man and Nature are now two things and man is the 
master.21 
To sum up: there is no 'scientific world-view' just as there is no 
uniform enterprise 'science' -except in the minds of metaphysicians, 
schoolmasters and politicians trying to make their nation competi­
tive. Still, there are many things we can learn from the sciences. But 
we can also learn from the humanities, from religion and from the 
remnants of ancient traditions that survived the onslaught ofWestem 
Civilization. No area is unified and perfect, few areas are repulsive 
and completely without merit. There is no objective principle that 
could direct us away from the supermarket 'religion' or the 
supermarket 'art' towards the more modem, and much more 
expensive supermarket 'science'. Besides, there are large areas of 
knowledge and action in which we use procedures without any idea as 
to their comparative excellence. An example is medicine, which, 
though not a science, has increasingly been connected with scientific 
research. There are many fashions and schools in medicine just as 
there are many fashions and schools in psychology. It follows, first, 
the idea of a comparison of 'Western medicine' with other medical 
procedures does not make sense. Secondly, such a comparison is 
often against the law, even if there should be volunteers: a test is 
legally impossible. Adding to this that health and sickness are 
culture-dependent concepts we see that there are domains, such as 
medicine with no scientific answer to question 2. This is not really a 
drawback. The search for objective guidance is in conflict with the 
idea of individual responsibility which allegedly is an important 
21. Mediaeval Technology and Social Change, Oxford, 1960, pp. 56 f. 

250 
AGAINST METHOD 
ingredient of a 'rational' or scientific age. It shows fear, indecision, a 
yearning for authority and a disregard for the new opportunities that 
now exist: we can build world-views on the basis of a personal choice 
and thus unite, for ourselves and for our friends, what was once 
separated by a series ofhistorical accidents.22 
On the other hand, we can agree that in a world full of scientific 
products scientists may be given a special status just as henchmen 
had a special status at times of social disorder or priests had when 
being a citizen coincided with being the member of a single universal 
Church. We can also agree that appealing to a chimaera (such as that 
of a uniform and coherent 'scientific world-view') can have important 
political consequences. In 1854 Commander Perry, using force, 
opened the ports of Hakodate and Shimoda to American ships for 
supply and trade. This event demonstrated the military inferiority of 
Japan. The members of the Japanese enlightenment of the early 
1870s, Fukuzawa among them, now reasoned as follows. Japan can 
keep its independence only if it becomes stronger. It can become 
stronger only with the help of science. It will use science effectively 
only if it does not just practise science but also believes in the 
underlying ideology. To many traditional Japanese this ideology ­
'the' scientific world-view - was barbaric. But, so the followers of 
Fukuzawa argued, it was necessary to adopt barbaric ways, to regard 
them as advanced, to introduce the whole of Western Civilization in 
order to surviveP Having been thus prepared Japanese scientists 
soon branched out as their Western colleagues had done before and 
falsified the uniform ideology that had started the development. The 
lesson I draw from this sequence of events is that a uniform 'scientific 
view of the world' may be useful for people doing science- it gives them 
motivation without tying them down. It is like a flag. Though 
presenting a single pattern it makes people do many different things. 
However, it is a disaster for outsiders (philosophers, fly-by-night 
mystics, prophets of a New Age). It suggests to them the most 
narrowminded religious commitment and encourages a similar 
narrowmindedness on their part. 
22. Wolfgang Pauli, who was deeply concerned about the intellectual situation of 
the time, demanded that science and religion again be united: letter to M. Fierz, 8 
August 1948. I agree but would add, entirely in the spirit of Pauli, that the unification 
should be a personal matter; it should not be prepared by philosophical-scientific 
alchemists of the mind and imposed by their minions in education. (It is different in the 
Third World where a strong faith still survives.) 
23. Details in Carmen Blacker, The Japanese Enlightenment, Cambridge, 1969. For 
the political background cf. Chapters 3 and 4 of Richard Storry,A History of Modern 
Japan, Harmondsworth, 1982. 

NINETEEN 
251 
What I have said so far already contains my answer to question 3: a 
community will use science and scientists in a way that agrees with its 
values and aims and it will correct the scientific institutions in its 
midst to bring them closer to these aims. The objection that science is 
self-correcting and thus needs no outside interference overlooks, 
first, that every enterprise is self-correcting (look at what happened to 
the Catholic Church after Vatican II) and, secondly, that in a 
democracy the self-correction of the whole which tries to achieve 
more humane ways ofliving overrules the self-correction of the parts 
which has a more narrow aim - unless the parts are given temporary 
independence. Hence in a democracy local populations not only will, 
but also should, use the sciences in ways most suitable to them. The 
objection that citizens do not have the expertise to judge scientific 
matters overlooks that important problems often lie across the 
boundaries of various sciences so that scientists within these sciences 
don't have the needed expertise either. Moreover, doubtful cases 
always produce experts for the one side, experts for the other side, 
and experts in between. But the competence of the general public 
could be vastly improved by an education that exposes expert 
fallibility instead of acting as if it did not exist. 

20 
The point of view underlying this book is not the result of a well-planned train 
of thought but of arguments prompted by accidental encounters. Anger at the 
wanton destruction of cultural achievements from which we all could have 
learned, at the conceited assurance with which some intellectuals interfere 
with the lives of people, and contempt for the treacly phrases they use to 
embellish their misdeeds was and still is the motive force behind my work. 
The problem of knowledge and education in a free society first struck 
me during my tenure of a state fellowship at the Weimar Institut zur 
Methodologischen Emeuerung des Deutschen Theaters (1946), 
which was a continuation of the Deutsches Theater Moskau under 
the directorship of Maxim Vallentin. Staff and students of the Institut 
periodically visited theatres in Eastern Germany. 1 A special train 
l .  Like many people of my generation I was involved in the Second World War. This 
event had little influence on my thinking. For me the war was a nuisance, not a moral 
problem. Before the war I had intended to study astronomy, acting and singing and to 
practise these professions simultaneously. I had excellent teachers (Adolf Vogel, my 
singing teacher, had an international reputation and taught outstanding opera singers 
such as Norman Bayley) and had just overcome some major vocal difficulties when I 
received my draft notice (l was eighteen at the time). How inconvenient, I thought. Why 
the hell should I participate in the war games of a bunch ofidiots? How do I get out ofit? 
Various attempts misfired and I became a soldier. I applied for officers' training to avoid 
bullets as long as possible. The attempt was not entirely successful; I was a lieutenant 
before the war had come to an end and found myselfin the middle of the German retreat 
in Poland and then in East Germany, surrounded by fleeing civilians, infantry units, 
tanks, Polish auxiliaries whom I suddenly commanded (the higher officers quickly 
disappeared when matters became sticky). The whole colourful chaos then appeared to 
me like a stage and I became careless. A bullet hit me on my right hand, a second bullet 
grazed my face, a third got stuck in my spine, I fell to the ground, unable to rise, but with 
the happy thought 'the war is over for me, now at last I can return to singing and my 
beloved astronomy books'. It was only much later that I became aware of the moral 
problems of the entire age. It seems to me that these problems are still with us. They arise 
whenever an individual or a group objectivizes its own personal conceptions of a god 
life and acts accordingly. Cf. Fart:rJellto Reas01, pp. 309fT. This explains the occasional 
violence of my arguments. 
252 

TWENTY 
253 
brought us from city to city. We arrived, dined, talked to the actors, 
watched two or three plays. After each performance the public was 
asked to remain seated while we started a discussion of what we had 
just seen. There were classical plays, but there were also new plays 
which tried to analyse recent events. Most of the time they dealt with 
the work of the resistance in Nazi Germany. They were indistin­
guishable from earlier Nazi plays eulogizing the activity of the Nazi 
underground in democratic countries. In both cases there were 
ideological speeches, outbursts of sincerity and dangerous situations 
in the cops and robbers tradition. This puzzled me and I commented 
on it in the debates: how should a play be structured so that one 
recognizes it as presenting the 'good side'? What has to be added to 
the action to make the struggle of the resistance fighter appear 
morally superior to the struggle of an illegal Nazi in Austria before 
1938? It is not sufficient to give him the 'right slogans' for then we 
take his superiority for granted, we do not show wherein it consists. 
Nor can his nobility, his 'humanity' be the distinguishing mark; every 
movement has scoundrels as well as noble people among its 
followers. A playwright may of course decide that sophistication is 
luxury in moral battles and give a black-white account. He may lead 
his followers to victory but at the expense of turning them into 
barbarians. What, then, is the solution? At the time I opted for 
Eisenstein and ruthless propaganda for the 'right cause'. I don't know 
whether this was because of any deep conviction of mine, or because I 
was carried along by events, or because of the magnificent art of 
Eisenstein. Today I would say that the choice must be left to the 
audience. The playwright presents characters and tells a story. If he 
errs it should be on the side of sympathy for his scoundrels, for 
circumstances and suffering play as large a role in the creation of evil 
and evil intentions as do those intentions themselves, and the general 
tendency is to emphasize the latter. The playwright (and his 
colleague, the teacher) must not try to anticipate the decision 
of the audience (of the pupils) or replace it by a decision of his 
own if they should tum out to be incapable of making up their 
own minds. Under no circumstances must he try to be a 'moral force'. 
A moral force, whether for good or for evil, turns people into slaves 
and slavery, even slavery in the service of The Good, or of God 
Himself, is the most abject condition of all. This is how I see the 
situation today. However, it took me a long time before I arrived at 
this view. 
After a year in Weimar I wanted to add the sciences and the 
humanities to the arts, and the theatre. I left Weimar and became a 
student (history, auxiliary sciences) at the famous lnstitut fur 

254 
AGAINST M ET H O D  
Osterreichische Geschichtforschung which is part of the University 
of Vienna. Later on I added physics and astronomy and so finally 
returned to the subjects I had decided to pursue before the 
interruptions of the Second World War. 
There were the following 'influences'. 
(l) The Kraft Circle. Many of us science and engineering students 
were interested in the foundations of science and in broader 
philosophical problems. We visited philosophy lectures. The lectures 
bored us and we were soon thrown out because we asked questions 
and made sarcastic remarks. I still remember Professor Heintel 
advising me with raised arms: 'Herr Feyerabend, entweder sie halten 
das Maul, oder sie verlassen den Vorlesungsaal!' We did not give up 
and founded a philosophy club of our own. Victor Kraft, one of my 
teachers, became our chairman. The members of the club were 
mostly students, 2 but there were also visits by faculty members 
and foreign dignitaries. Juhos, Heintel, Hollitscher, von Wright, 
Anscombe, Wittgenstein came to our meetings and debated with 
us. Wittgenstein, who took a long time to make up his mind and 
then appeared over an hour late, gave a spirited performance 
and seemed to prefer our disrespectful attitude to the fawning 
admiration he encountered elsewhere. Our discussions started 
in 1949 and proceeded with interruptions up to 1952 (or 1953). 
Almost the whole of my thesis was presented and analysed at the 
meetings and some of my early papers are a direct outcome of these 
debates. 
(2) The Kraft Circle was part of an organization called the Austrian 
College Society. The Society had been founded in 1945 by Austrian 
resistance fighters3 to provide a forum for the exchange of scholars 
and ideas and so to prepare the political unification of Europe. There 
were seminars, like the Kraft Circle, during the academic year and 
international meetings during the summer. The meetings took place 
(and still take place) in Alpbach, a small mountain village in Tirol. 
Here I met outstanding scholars, artists, politicians and I owe my 
academic career to the friendly help of some of them. I also began 
suspecting that what counts in a public debate are not arguments but 
2. Many of them have now become scientists or engineers. Johnny Sagan is 
Professor of Mathematics at the University of Illinois, Henrich Eichhorn director of 
New Haven observatory, Goldberger-de Buda adviser to electronic firms, while Erich 
Jantsch, who died much too soon, met members of our circle at the astronomical 
observatory and later became a guru of dissident or pseudo-dissident scientists, trying 
to use old traditions for new purposes. 
3. Otto Molden, brother of Fritz Molden of the Molden publishing house, was for 
many years the dynamic leader and organizer. 

TWENTY 
255 
certain ways of presenting one's case. To test the suspicion I 
intervened in the debates defending absurd views with great 
assurance. I was consumed by fear - after all, I was just a student 
surrounded by bigshots-but having once attended an acting school I 
proved the case to my satisfaction. The difficulties of scientific 
rationality were made very clear by 
(3) Felix Ehrenhaft, who arrived in Vienna in 1947. We, the 
students of physics, mathematics, astronomy, had heard a lot about 
him. We knew that he was an excellent experimenter and that his 
lectures were performances on a grand scale which his assistants had 
to prepare for hours in advance. We knew that he had taught 
theoretical physics which was as exceptional for an experimentalist 
then as it is now. We were also familiar with the persistent rumours 
that denounced him as a charlatan. Regarding ourselves as defenders 
of the purity of physics we looked forward to exposing him in public. 
At any rate our curiosity was aroused-and we were not disappointed. 
Ehrenhaft was a mountain of a man, full of vitality and unusul 
ideas. His lectures compared favourably (or unfavourably, depend­
ing on the point of view) with the more refined performances of his 
colleagues. 'Are you dumb? Are you stupid? Do you really agree with 
everything I say?' he shouted at us who had intended to expose him 
but sat in silent astonishment at his performance. The question was 
more than justified for there were large chunks to swallow. Relativity 
and quantum theory were rejected at once, and almost as a matter of 
course, for being idle speculation. In this respect Ehrenhaft' s attitude 
was very close to that of Stark and Lenard both of whom he 
mentioned with approval. But he went further and criticized the 
foundations of classical physics as well. The first thing to be removed 
was the law of inertia: undisturbed objects instead of going in a 
straight line were supposed to move in a helix. Then came a sustained 
attack on the principles of electromagnetic theory and especially 
on the equation div B 
= 0. Many years before the fundamental 
debate he produced convincing evidence for mesoscopic magnetic 
monopoles. Then new and surprising properties of light were 
demonstrated - and so on and so forth. Each demonstration was 
accompanied by a few gently ironical remarks on 'school physics' and 
the 'theoreticians' who built castles in the air without considering the 
experiments which Ehrenhaft devised and continued devising in all 
fields and which produced a plethora of inexplicable results. 
We had soon an opportunity to witness the attitude of orthodox 
physicists. In 1949 Ehrenhaft came to Alpbach. In that year Popper 
conducted a seminar on philosophy, Rosenfeld and M.H.L. Pryce 
taught physics and philosophy of physics (mainly from Bohr's 

256 
AGAINST METHOD 
comments on Einstein which had just appeared), Max Hartmann 
biology, Duncan Sandys talked on problems of British politics, 
Hayek on economics and so on. There was Hans Thirring, the senior 
theoretical physicist from Vienna, a superb teacher who constantly 
tried to impress on us that there were more important things than 
science, who had taught physics to Feigl, Popper as well as the 
present author and was an early and very active member of the peace 
movement. His son Walter Thirring, now Professor of Theoretical 
Physics in Vienna, was also present - a very distinguished audience 
and a very critical one. 
Ehrenhaft came well prepared. He set up a few of his simple 
experiments in one of the country houses of Alpbach and invited 
everyone he could lay hands on to have a look. Every day from two or 
three in the afternoon participants went by in an attitude of wonder 
and left the building (if they were theoretical physicists, that is) as if 
they had seen something obscene. Apart from these physical 
preparations Ehrenhaft also carried out, as was his habit, a beautiful 
piece of advertising. The day before his lecture he attended a fairly 
technical talk by von Hayek on 'The Sensory Order' (now available, 
in expanded form, as a book). During the discussion he rose, 
bewilderment and respect in his face, and started in a most innocent 
voice: 'Dear Professor Hayek. This was a marvellous, an admirable, a 
most learned lecture. I did not understand a single word . . .  .' Next 
day his lecture had an overflow audience. 
In this lecture Ehrenhaft gave a brief account of his discoveries, 
adding general observations on the state of physics. 'Now, 
gentlemen,' he concluded triumphantly, turning to Rosenfeld and 
Pryce who sat in the front row, 'what can you say?' And he answered 
immediately. 'There is nothing at all you can say with all your fine 
theories. Sitzen miissen sie bleiben! Still miissen sie sein!' 
The discussion, as was to be expected, was quite turbulent and it 
was continued for days with Thirring and Popper taking Ehrenhaft's 
side against Rosenfeld and Pryce. Confronted with the experiments 
the latter occasionally acted as some of Galileo's opponents must 
have acted when confronted with the telescope. They pointed out 
that no conclusions could be drawn from complex phenomena and 
that a detailed analysis was needed. In short, the phenomena were a 
Dreckefect- a word that was heard quite frequently in the arguments. 
What was our attitude in the face of all this commotion? 
None of us was prepared to give up theory or to deny its excellence. 
We founded a Club for the Salvation of Theoretical Physics and 
started discussing simple experiments. It turned out that the relation 
between theory and experiment was much more complex than is 

TWENTY 
257 
shown in textbooks and even in research papers. There are a few 
paradigmatic cases where the theory can be applied without major 
adjustments but the rest must be dealt with by occasionally rather 
doubtful approximations and auxiliary assumptions.4 I find it 
interesting to remember how little effect all this had on us at the time. 
We continued to prefer abstractions as if the difficulties we had 
found had not been an expression of the nature of things but could be 
removed by some ingenious device, yet to be discovered. Only much 
later did Ehrenhaft's lesson sink in and our attitude at the time as well 
as the attitude of the entire profession provided me then with an 
excellent illustration of the nature of scientific rationality. 
(4) Philipp Frank came to Alpbach a few years after Ehrenhaft. He 
undermined common ideas of rationality in a different way by 
showing that the arguments against Copernicus had been perfectly 
sound and in agreement with experience while Gailieo's procedures 
were 'unscientific' when viewed from a modem standpoint. His 
observations fascinated me and I examined the matter further. 
Chapters 8 to 1 1  are a late result of this study (I am a slow worker). 
Frank's work has been treated quite unfairly by philosophers like 
Putnam who prefer simplistic models to the analysis of complex 
historical events. Also his ideas are now commonplace. But it was he 
who announced them when almost everyone thought differently. 
(5) In Vienna I became acquainted with some of the foremost 
Marxist intellectuals. This was the result of an ingenious PR job by 
Marxist students. They turned up - as did we - at all major 
discussions whether the subject was science, religion, politics, the 
theatre, or free love. They talked to those of us who used science to 
ridicule the rest - which was then my favourite occupation - invited 
us to discussions of their own and introduced us to Marxist thinkers 
from all fields. I came to know Berthold Viertel, the director of the 
Burgtheater, Hanns Eisler, the composer and music theoretician, and 
Walter Hollitscher, who became a teacher and, later on, one of my best 
friends. When starting to discuss with Hollitscher I was a raving 
positivist, I favoured strict rules of research and had only a pitying 
smile for the three basic principles of dialectics which I had read in 
Stalin's little pamphlet on dialectical and historical materialism. I was 
interested in the realist position, I had tried to read every book on 
realism I could lay hands on (including Kiilpe's excellent Realisierung 
and, of course, Materialism and Empiriocriticism) but I found that the 
arguments for realism worked only when the realist assumption had 
4. Cf. Chapter 5 on ad hoc approximations. 

258 
AGAINST M ETHOD 
already been introduced. Kiilpe, for example, emphasized the 
distinction between impression and the thing the impression is about. 
The distinction gives us realism only if it characterizes real features 
of the world -which is the point at issue. Nor was I convinced by the 
remark that science is an essentially realistic enterprise. Why should 
science be chosen as an authority? And were there not positivistic 
interpretations of science? The so-called 'paradoxes' of positivism, 
however, which Lenin exposed with such consummate skill, did not 
impress me at all. They arose only if the positivist and the realist 
mode of speech were mixed and they exposed their difference. They 
did not show that realism was better though the fact that realism came 
with common sense gave the impression that it was. 
Hollitscher never presented an argument that would lead, step by 
step, from positivism into realism and he would have regarded the 
attempt to produce such an argument as philosophical folly. He 
rather developed the realist position itself, illustrated it by examples 
from science and common sense, showed how closely it was 
connected with scientific research and everyday action and so 
revealed its strength. It was of course always possible to turn a 
realistic procedure into a positivistic procedure by a judicious use of 
ad hoc hypotheses and ad hoc meaning changes and I did this 
frequently, and without shame (in the Kraft Circle we had developed 
such evasions into a fine art). Hollitscher did not raise semantic 
points, or points of method, as a critical rationalist might have done, 
he continued to discuss concrete cases until I felt rather foolish with 
my abstract objections. For I saw now how closely realism was 
connected with facts, procedures, principles I valued and that it had 
helped to bring them about while positivism merely described the results 
in a rather complicated way after they had been found: realism had 
fruits, positivism had none. This at least is how I would speak today, 
long after my realist conversion. At the time I became a realist not 
because I was convinced by any particular argument, but because the 
sum total of realism plus the arguments in favour of it plus the ease 
with which it could be applied to science and many other things I 
vaguely felt but could not lay a finger on5 finally looked better to me 
5. I remember that Reichenbach's answer to Dingler's account of relativity played 
an imponant pan: Dingler extrapolated from what could be achieved by simple 
mechanical operations (manufacture of a Euclidean plain surface, for example) while 
Reichenbach pointed out how the actual structure of the world would modifY the 
results of these operations in the large. It is of course true that Reichenbach's account 
can be interpreted as a more efficient predictive machine and that it seemed impressive 
to me only because I did not slide into such an interpretation. Which shows to what 
extent the force of arguments depends on irrational changes of attitude. 

TWENTY 
259 
than the sum total of positivism plus the arguments one could offer 
for it plus . . .  etc., etc. The comparison and the final decision had 
much in common with the comparison of life in different countries 
(weather, character of people, melodiousness of language, food, 
laws, institutions, weather, etc., etc.) and the final decision to take a 
job and to start life in one of them. Experiences such as these have 
played a decisive role in my attitude towards rationalism. 
While I accepted realism I did not accept dialectics and historical 
materialism - my predilection for abstract arguments (another 
positivist hangover) was still too strong for that. Today Stalin's rules 
seem to me preferable by far to the complicated and epicycle-ridden 
standards of our modem friends of reason. 
From the very beginning of our discussion Hollitscher made it 
clear that he was a communist and that he would try to convince me of 
the intellectual and social advantages of dialectical and historical 
materialism. There was none of the mealy-mouthed 'I may be wrong, 
you may be right-but together we shall find the truth' talk with which 
'critical' rationalists embroider their attempts at indoctrination but 
which they forget the moment their position is seriously endangered. 
Nor did Hollitscher use unfair emotional or intellectual pressures. 
Of course, he criticized my attitude but our personal relations have 
not suffered from my reluctance to follow him in every respect. This 
is why Walter Hollitscher is a teacher while Popper, whom I also 
came to know quite well, is a mere propagandist. 
At some point of our acquaintance Hollitscher asked me whether I 
would like to become a production assistant of Brecht - apparently 
there was a position available and I was being considered for it. I 
declined. For a while I thought that this was one of the biggest 
mistakes of my life. Enriching and changing knowledge, emotions, 
attitudes through the arts now seems to me a much more fruitful 
enterprise and also much more humane than the attempt to influence 
minds (and nothing else) by words (and nothing else). Reading about 
the tensions inside the Brecht Circle, the almost religious attitude of 
some of its members, I now think that I escaped just in time. 
(6) During a lecture (on Descartes) I gave at the Austrian College 
Society I met Elizabeth Anscombe, a powerful and, to some people, 
forbidding British philosopher who had come to Vienna to learn 
German for her translation of Wittgenstein's works. She gave me 
manuscripts ofWittgenstein's later writings and discussed them with 
me. The discussions extended over months and occasionally 
proceeded from morning over lunch until late into the evening. They 
had a profound influence upon me though it is not at all easy to 
specify particulars. On one occasion which I remember vividly 

260 
AGAINST MET I I O D  
Anscombe, by a series of skilful questions, made me see how our 
conception (and even our perceptions) of well-defined and apparently 
self-contained facts may depend on circumstances not apparent in 
them. There are entities such as physical objects which obey a 
'conservation principle' in the sense that they retain their identity 
through a variety of manifestations and even when they are not present 
at all while other entities such as pains and after-images are 
'annihilated' with their disappearance. The conservation principles 
may change from one developmental stage of the human organism to 
another6 and they may be different for different languages (cf. Whorfs 
'covert classifications' as described in Chapter 16). I conjectured that 
such principles would play an important role in science, that they might 
change during revolutions and that deductive relations between pre­
revolutionary and post-revolutionarytheories might be broken ofT as a 
result. I explained this early version ofincommensurability in Popper's 
seminar (1952) and to a small group of people in Anscom be's flat in 
Oxford (also in 1 952 with Geach, von Wright and L.L. Hart present) 
but I was not able to arouse much enthusiasm on either occasion. 
Wittgenstein's emphasis on the need for concrete research and his 
objections to abstract reasoning ('Look, don't think!') somewhat 
clashed with my own tendency towards abstractness and the papers in 
which his influence is noticeable are therefore mixtures of concrete 
examples and sweeping principles. 7 Wittgenstein was prepared to take 
me on as a student in Cambridge but he died before I arrived. Popper 
became my supervisor instead. 
(7) I had met Popper in Alpbach in 1 948. I admired his freedom of 
manners, his cheek, his disrespectful attitude towards the German 
philosophers who gave the proceedings weight in more senses than 
one, his sense of humour (yes, the relatively unknown Karl Popper of 
1948 was very different from the established Sir Karl of later years) 
and I also admired his ability to restate ponderous problems in simple 
and journalistic language. Here was a free mind, joyfully putting 
forth his ideas, unconcerned about the reaction of the 'professionals.' 
Things were different as regards these ideas themselves. The 
members of our circle knew deductivism from Kraft who had written 
about it before Popper,8 the falsificationist philosophy was taken for 
6. Cf. Chapter 16, text to footnotes 12fT. 
7. For details cf. my comments on these papers in Der Wissenschafistheoretische 
Realismus und die Autoritat der Wissenschafien, Vieweg Wiesbaden, 1978. 
8. Cf. my review of Kraft's Erkenntnislehre in BJPS, Vol. 13, 1963, pp. 319fT. and 
esp. p. 3 21, second paragraph. Cf. also the references in Popper, Logic of Scientific 
Discuvery. Mill's System of Logic, Vol. 2, London, 1879, Chapter 14, gives a detailed 
account of the procedure. 

TWENTY 
261 
granted in the physics seminar of the conference under the 
chairmanship of Arthur March and so we did not understand what all 
the fuss was about. 'Philosophy must be in a desperate state', we said, 
'if trivialities such as these can count as major discoveries.' Popper 
himself did not seem to think too much ofhis philosophy of science at 
the time for when asked to send us a list of publications he included 
the Open Society but not the Logic of Scientific Discovery. 
While in London I read Wittgenstein's Philosophical Irrvestigations 
in detail. Being of a rather pedantic tum of mind I rewrote the 
book so that it looked more like a treatise with a continuous 
argument. Part of this treatise was translated by Anscombe into 
English and published as a review by Philosophical Review in 1955. I 
also visited Popper's seminar at the LSE. Popper's ideas were similar 
to those of Wittgenstein but they were more abstract and anaemic. 
This did not deter me but increased my own tendencies to 
abstraction and dogmatism. At the end of my stay in London Popper 
invited me to become his assistant. I declined despite the fact that 
I was broke and did not know where my next meal was going to 
come from. My decision was not based on any clearly recogniz­
able train of thought but I guess that having no fixed philosophy I 
preferred stumbling around in the world of ideas at my own speed 
to being guided by the ritual of a 'rational debate'. Again I was 
lucky. Joseph Agassi who got the job did not have much privacy. 
Two years later Popper, Schrodinger and my own big mouth got 
me a job in Bristol where I started lecturing on the philosophy of 
science. 
(8) I had studied theatre, history, mathematics, physics and 
astronomy; I had never studied philosophy. The prospect ofhaving to 
address a large audience of eager young people did not exactly fill my 
heart with joy. One week before the lectures started I sat down and 
wrote everything I knew on a piece of paper. It hardly filled a page. 
Agassi came up with some excellent advice: 'Look, Paul,' he said, 'the 
first line, this is your first lecture; the second line, this is your second 
lecture - and so on.' I took his advice and fared rather well except 
that my lectures became a stale collection of wisecracks from 
Wittgenstein, Bohr, Popper, Dingler, Eddington and others. While 
in Bristol I continued my studies of the quantum theory. I found that 
important physical principles rested on methodological assumptions 
that are violated whenever physics advances: physics gets authority 
from ideas it propagates but never obeys in actual research, 
methodologists play the role of publicity agents whom physicists hire 
to praise their results but whom they would not permit access to the 
enterprise itself. That falsificationism is not a solution became very 

262 
AGAINST METHOD 
clear in discussions with David Bohm who gave a Hegelian account 
of the relation between theories, their evidence, and their 
successors.9 The material of Chapter 3 is the result of these 
discussions (I first published it in 1961).10 Kuhn's remarks on the 
omnipresence of anomalies fitted these difficulties rather nicely1 1  
but I still tried to find general rules that would cover all cases12 and 
non-scientific developments as well.13 Two events made me realize 
the futility of such attempts. One was a discussion with Professor 
C. F. von Weizsiicker in Hamburg (1 965) on the foundations of the 
quantum theory. Von Weizsiicker showed how quantum mechanics 
arose from concrete research while I complained, on general 
methodological grounds, that important alternatives had been 
omitted. The arguments supporting my complaint were quite good -
they are the arguments summarized in Chapter 3 - but it was 
suddenly clear to me that imposed without regard to circumstances 
they were a hindrance rather than a help: a person trying to solve a 
problem whether in science or elsewhere must be given complete 
freedom and cannot be restricted by any demands, norms, however 
plausible they may seem to the logician or the philosopher who has 
thought them out in the privacy of his study. Norms and demands 
must be checked hi research, not by appeal to theories of rationality. 
In a lengthy article 4 I explained how Bohr had used this philosophy 
and how it differs from more abstract procedures. Thus Professor 
von W eizsiicker has prime responsibility for my change to 
'anarchism' - though he was not at all pleased when I told him so 
in 1977. 
9. I have explained the Hegelianism of Bohm in the essay ' Against Method' which 
appeared in Vol. 4 of the Minnesota Studies for the Philosophy of Science, 1970. 
I 0. Popper once remarked (in a discussion at the Minnesota Center for the 
Philosophy of Science in the year 1962) that the example of Brownian motion is just 
another version of Duhem's example (conflict between specific laws such as Kepler's 
laws and general theories such as Newton's theory). But there is a most imponant 
difference. The deviations from Kepler's laws are in principle observable ('in 
principle' meaning 'given the known laws of nature') while the microscopic deviations 
from the second law of thermodynamics are not (measuring instruments are subjected 
to the same fluctuations as the things they are supposed to measure). Here we cannot 
do without an alternative theory. Cf. Chapter 4, fn. 2. 
I I. I read Kuhn's book in manuscript in 1960 and discussed it extensively with 
Kuhn. 
12. Cf. the account in 'Reply to Criticism', Boston Studies, Vol. 2, 1965. 
13. Cf. 'On the Improvement of the Sciences and the Ans and the Possible 
Identity of the Two' in Boston Studies, Vol. 3, 1967. 
14. 'On a Recent Critique of Complementarity', Philosophy of Science 1968/69 
(two pans). 

TWENTY 
263 
(9) The second event that prompted me to move away from 
rationalism and to become suspicious of all intellectual pretensions 
was quite different. To explain it, let me start with some general 
observations. The way in which social problems, problems of energy 
distribution, ecology, education, care for the old and so on are 
'solved' in First World societies can be roughly described in the 
following way. A problem arises. Nothing is done about it. People get 
concerned. Politicians broadcast this concern. Experts are called in. 
They develop theories and plans based on them. Power-groups with 
experts of their own effect various modifications until a watered down 
version is accepted and realized. The role of experts in this process 
has gradually increased. We have now a situation where social and 
psychological theories of human thought and action have taken the 
place of this thought and action itself. Instead of asking the people 
involved in a problematic situation, developers, educators, tech­
nologists and sociologists get their information about 'what these 
people really want and need' from theoretical studies carried out by 
their esteemed colleagues in what they think are the relevant fields. 
Not live human beings, but abstract models are consulted; not the 
target population decides, but the producers of the models. 
Intellectuals all over the world take it for granted that their models 
will be more intelligent, make better suggestions, have a better grasp 
of the reality ofhumans than these humans themselves. What has this 
situation got to do with me? 
From 1958 to 1990 I was a Professor of Philosophy at the 
University of California in Berkeley. My function was to carry out the 
educational policies of the State of California which means I had to 
teach people what a small group of white intellectuals had decided 
was knowledge. I hardly ever thought about this function and I would 
not have taken it very seriously had I been informed. I told the 
students what I had learned, I arranged the material in a way that 
seemed plausible and interesting to me - and that was all I did. Of 
course, I had also some 'ideas of my own' - but these ideas moved in a 
fairly narrow domain (though some of my friends said even then that I 
was going batty). 
In the years around 1964 Mexicans, blacks, Indians entered the 
university as a result of new educational policies. There they sat, 
partly curious, partly disdainful, partly simply confused hoping to get 
an 'education'. What an opportunity for a prophet in search of a 
following! What an opportunity, my rationalist friends told me, to 
contribute to the spreading of reason and the improvement of 
mankind! What a marvellous opportunity for a new wave of 
enlightenment! I felt very differently. For it now dawned on me that 

264 
AGAINST METHOD 
the intricate arguments and the wonderful stories I had so far told to 
my more or less sophisticated audience might just be dreams, 
reflections of the conceit of a small group who had succeeded in 
enslaving everyone else with their ideas. Who was I to tell these 
people what and how to think? I did not know their problems though I 
knew they had many. I was not familiar with their interests, their 
feelings, their fears though I knew that they were eager to learn. Were 
the arid sophistications which philosophers had managed to 
accumulate over the ages and which liberals had surrounded with 
schmaltzy phrases to make them palatable the right thing to offer to 
people who had been robbed of their land, their culture, their dignity 
and who were now supposed first to absorb and then to repeat the 
anaemic ideas of the mouthpieces of their oh so human captors? 
They wanted to know, they wanted to learn, they wanted to 
understand the strange world around them - did they not deserve 
better nourishment? Their ancestors had developed cultures of their 
own, colourful languages, harmonious views of the relation between 
people, and between people and nature whose remnants are a living 
criticism of the tendencies of separation, analysis, self-centredness 
inherent in Western thought. These cultures have important 
achievements in what is today called 
sociology, psychology, 
medicine, they express ideals of life and possibilities of human 
existence. Yet they were never examined with the respea they deserved 
except by a small number of outsiders; they were ridiculed and 
replaced as a matter of course first by the religion of brotherly love 
and then by the religion of science or else they were defused by a 
variety of'interpretations'. Now there was much talk ofliberation, of 
racial equality - but what did it mean? Did it mean the equality of 
these traditions and the traditions of the white man? It did not. 
Equality meant that the members of different races and cultures now 
had the wonderful chance to participate in the white man's manias, 
they had the chance to participate in his science, his technology, his 
medicine, his politics. These were the thoughts that went through my 
head as I looked at my audience and they made me recoil in revulsion 
and terror from the task I was supposed to perform. For the task- this 
now became clear to me - was that of a very refined, very 
sophisticated slavedriver. And a slavedriver I did not want to be. 
Experiences such as these convinced me that intellectual 
procedures which approach a problem through concepts are on the 
wrong track and I became interested in the reasons for the 
tremendous power this error has now over minds. I started examining 
the rise of intellectualism in Ancient Greece and the causes that 
brought it about. I wanted to know what it is that makes people who 

TWENTY 
265 
have a rich and complex culture fall for dry abstractions and multilate 
their traditions, their thought, their language so that they can 
accommodate the abstractions. I wanted to know how intellectuals 
manage to get away with murder - for it is murder, murder of minds 
and cultures that is committed year in year out at schools, 
universities, educational missions in foreign countries. The trend 
must be reversed, I thought, we must start learning from those we 
have enslaved for they have much to offer and, at any rate, they have 
the right to live as they see fit even if they are not as pushy about their 
rights and their views as their Western conquerors have always been. 
In 1964-5 when these ideas first occurred to me I tried to find an 
intel/eaual solution to my misgivings, that is, I took it for granted that 
it was up to me and the likes of me to devise educational policies for 
other people. I envisaged a new kind of education that would live 
from a rich reservoir of different points of view permitting the choice 
of traditions most advantageous to the individual. The teacher's task 
would consist in facilitating the choice, not in replacing it by some 
'truth' of his own. Such a reservoir, I thought, would have much in 
common with a theatre of ideas as imagined by Piscator and Brecht 
and it would lead to the development of a great variety of means of 
presentation. The 'objective' scientific account would be one way of 
presenting a case, a play another way (remember that for Aristotle 
tragedy is 'more philosophical' than history because it reveals the 
struaure of the historical process and not only its accidental details), a 
novel still another way. Why should knowledge be shown in the 
garment of academic prose and reasoning? Had not Plato observed 
that written sentences in a book are but transitory stages of a complex 
process of growth that contains gestures, jokes, asides, emotions and 
had he not tried to catch this process by means of the dialogue? And 
were there not different forms of knowledge, some much more 
detailed and realistic than what arose as 'rationalism' in the 7th and 
6th century in Greece? Then there was Dadaism. I had studied 
Dadaism after the Second World War. What attracted me to this 
movement was the style its inventors used when not engaged in 
Dadaistic activities. It was clear, luminous, simple without being 
banal, precise without being narrow; it was a style adapted to the 
expression of thought as well as of emotion. I connected this style 
with the Dadaistic exercises themselves. Assume you tear language 
apart, you live for days and weeks in a world of cacophonic sounds, 
jumbled words, nonsensical events. Then, after this preparation, you 
sit down and write: 'the cat is on the mat'. This simple sentence 
which we usually utter without thought, like talking machines (and 
much of our talk is indeed routine), now seems like the creation of an 

266 
AGAINST METHOD 
entire world: God said let there be light, and there was light. Nobody 
in modem times has understood the miracle oflanguage and thought 
as well as the Dadaists for nobody has been able to imagine, let alone 
create, a world in which they play no role. Having discovered the 
nature of a living order, of a reason that is not merely mechanical, the 
Dadaists soon noticed the deterioration of such an order into routine. 
They diagnosed the deterioration oflanguage that preceded the First 
World War and created the mentality that made it possible. After the 
diagnosis their exercises assumed another, more sinister meaning. · 
They revealed the frightening similarity between the language of the 
foremost commercial travellers in 'importance', the language of 
philosophers, politicians, theologians, and brute inarticulation. The 
praise of honour, patriotism, truth, rationality, honesty that fills our 
schools, pulpits, political meetings imperceptibly merges into inarticula­
tion no matter how much it has been wrapped into literary language 
and no matter how hard its authors try to copy the style of the classics, 
and the authors themselves are in the end hardly distinguishable 
from a pack of grunting pigs. Is there a way to prevent such 
deterioration? I thought there was. I thought that regarding all 
achievements as transitory, restricted and personal and every truth as 
created by our love for it and not as 'found' would prevent the 
deterioration of once promising fairy-tales and I also thought that it 
was necessary to develop a new philosophy or a new religion to give 
substance to this unsystematic conjecture. 
I now realize that these considerations were just another example of 
intellectualistic conceit and folly. It is conceited to assume that one 
has solutions for people whose lives one does not share and whose 
problems one does not know. It is foolish to assume that such an 
exercise in distant humanitarianism will have effects pleasing to the 
people concerned. From the very beginning of Western Rationalism 
intellectuals have regarded themselves as teachers, the world as a 
school and 'people' as obedient pupils. In Plato this is very clear. The 
same phenomenon occurs among Christians, Rationalists, Fascists, 
Marxists. Marxists did not try to learn from those they wanted to 
liberate; they attacked each other about interpretations, viewpoints, 
evidence and took it for granted that the resulting intellectual hash 
would make fine food for the natives (Bakunin was aware of the 
doctrinarian tendencies of contemporary Marxism and he intended 
to return all power - power over ideas included - to the people 
immediately concerned). My own view differed from those just 
mentioned but it was still a view, an abstract fancy I had invented and 
now tried to sell without having shared even an ounce of the lives of 

TWENTY 
267 
the receivers. This I now regard as insufferable conceit. So - what 
remains? 
Two things remain. I could follow my own advice to address and 
try to influence only those people whom I think I understand on a 
personal basis. This includes some of my friends; it may include 
philosophers I have not met but who seem to be interested in similar 
problems and who are not too upset by my style and my general 
approach. It may also include people from different cultures who are 
attracted, even fascinated by Western science and Western 
intellectual life, who have started participating in it but who still 
remember, in thought as well as in feeling the life of the culture they 
left behind. My account might lessen the emotional tension they are 
liable to feel and make them see a way of uniting, rather than 
opposing to each other, the various stages of their lives. 
Another possibility is a change of subject. I started my career as a 
student of acting, theatre production and singing at the Institute for 
the Methodological Reformation of the German Theatre in the 
German Democratic Republic. This appealed to my intellectualism 
and my dramatic propensities. My intellectualism told me that 
problems had to be solved by thought. My dramatic propensities 
made me think that hamming it up was better than going through an 
abstract argument. There is of course no conflict here for argument 
without illustration leads away from the human elements which affect 
the most abstract problems. The arts, as I see them today, are not a 
domain separated from abstract thought, but complementary to it 
and needed to fully realize its potential. Examining this function of 
the arts and trying to establish a mode of research that unites their 
power with that of science and religion seems to be a fascinating 
enterprise and one to which I might devote a year (or two, or 
three . . .  ). 

Postscript on Relativism 
In a critical notice of my book Farewell to Reason Andrew Lugg 
suggests 'that Feyerabend and likeminded social critics should treat 
relativism with the disdain that they normally reserve for rational­
ism'.1 This I have now done, in Three Dialogues of Knorvledge,Z 
where I say that relativism gives an excellent account of the relation 
between dogmatic world-views but is only a first step towards an 
understanding of live traditions, and in Beyond Reason: Essays on the 
Philosophy of Paul K Feyerabend, where I write that 'relativism is as 
much of a chimaera as absolutism [the idea that there exists an 
objective truth], its cantankerous twin'.3 In the same book I call my 
earlier advice to keep hands off traditions an 'idiocy'.4 In both cases I 
raise objections against relativism, indicate why I changed my mind. 
and mention some of the remaining difficulties. 
Andrew Lugg adds that my 'commitment to relativism as a general 
theory (or principled outlook) is considerably less than total and [that 
I] can plausibly be read as arguing that the trouble with traditional 
versions of relativism is that they are pitched at too high a level of 
abstraction'.5 This is certainly true of what I say in Farewell - but 
anticipations (which I notice only now, as a result of Lugg's 
comments) occur already in Science in a Free Society.6 There I 
distinguish between participants and external observers of traditions, 
describe objectivism as an illusion created by the special position of 
the former and summarize my arguments in a series of theses, all of 
them printed in italics. Thesis i reads: Traditions are neither good 
nor bad, they simply are. Thesis ii: A tradition assumes desirable or 
I. Can.JounudofPirilosophy, Vol. 21, 199l, p. l l6 - received 1989. 
2. Oxford, 1991, pp. 151 ff. (MS finished 1989/90.) 
3. Dodrecht, 1991, p. 515. (MS finished 1989.) 
4. ibid., p. 509. 
5. Joe. cit. 
6. London, 1978, part I, section 2, pp. 27fT- reprinted without change in Chapter 
1 7  of the second edition of Against Met/rod, London, 1988, and with added comment in 
Chapter 17, pp. 225fT of the present edition. 
268 

POSTSCRIPT ON RELATIVISM 
269 
undesirable properties only when compared with some tradition, i.e. 
only when viewed by participants who see the world in terms of their 
own values. And so on. This sounds like Protagoras, and I say so, in 
thesis iii. However, I then describe (theses v and vi) how traditions 
interact. I discuss two possibilities, a guided exchange and an open 
exchange. A guided exchange adopts 'a well-specified tradition and 
accept[ s] only those responses that correspond to its standards. If one 
party has not yet become a participant . . . he will be badgered, 
persuaded, 'educated' until he does - and then the exchange begins.' 
'A rational debate', I continue, 'is a special case of a guided exchange.' 
In the case of an open exchange 'the participants get immersed into 
each other's ways of thinking, feeling, perceiving to such an extent 
that their ideas, perceptions, world-views may be entirely changed ­
they become different people participating in a new and different 
tradition. An open exchange respects the partner whether he is an 
individual or an entire culture, while a rational exchange promises 
respect only within the framework of a rational debate. An open 
exchange has no organon though it may invent one; there is no 
logic though new forms of logic may emerge in its course.' In sum, 
an open exchange is part of an as yet unspecified and unspecifiable 
practice. 
These comments imply, first, that traditions are rarely well defined 
(open exchanges are going on all the time) and, secondly, that their 
interactions cannot be understood in general terms. Keeping 
traditions alive in the face of external influences we act in an only 
partly conscious way. We can describe results after they have 
occurred, we cannot incorporate them into a lasting theoretical 
structure (such as relativism). In other words, there cannot be any 
theory of knowledge (except as part of a special and fairly stable · 
tradition), there can at most be a (rather incomplete) history of the 
ways in which knowledge has changed in the past. In my next book I 
shall discuss some episodes of such a history. 
In the meantime I have started using the term 'relativism' again, 
but in a new sense. In the second edition of the present book I 
explained this sense by saying that 'Scientists [and, for that matter, all 
members of relatively uniform cultures] are sculptors of reality.'7 
That sounds like the strong programme of the sociology of science 
except that sculptors are restricted by the properties of the material 
they use. Similarly individuals, professional groups, cultures can 
create a wide variety of surroundings, or 'realities' - but not all 
7. op. cit., p. 270. Cf. also the more detailed account in 'Realism and the 
Historicity of Knowledge' ,Journal of Philosophy, 1989. 

270 
AGAINST METHOD 
approaches succeed: some cultures thrive, others linger for a while 
and then decay. Even an 'objective' enterprise like science which 
apparently reveals Nature As She Is In Herself intervenes, 
eliminates, enlarges, produces and codifies the results in a severely 
standardized way - but again there is no guarantee that the results 
will congeal into a unified world. Thus all we apprehend when 
experimenting, or interfering in less systematic ways, or simply living 
as part of a well-developed culture is how what surrounds us responds 
to our actions (thoughts, observations, etc.); we do not apprehend these 
surroundings themselves: Culture and Nature (or Being, to use 
a more general term) are always entangled in a fashion that can be 
explored only by entering into further and even more complicated 
entanglements. 
Now, considering that scientists use different and often contradic­
tory methods of research (I describe some of them in Chapter 19 of 
the present edition), that most of these methods are successful and 
that numerous non-scientific ways of life not only survived but 
protected and enriched their inhabitants we have to conclude that 
Being responds differently, and positively, to many different 
approaches. Being is like a person who shows a friendly face to a 
friendly visitor, becomes angry at an angry gesture, remains unmoved 
by a bore without giving any hint as to the principles that make Him 
(Her? It? Them?) act the way they do in the different circumstances. 
What we find when living, experimenting, doing research is therefore 
not a single scenario called 'the world' or 'being' or 'reality' but a 
variety of responses, each of them constituting a special (and not 
always well-defined) reality for those who have called it forth. This is 
relativism because the type of reality encountered depends on the 
approach taken. However, it differs from the philosophical doctrine 
by admitting failure: not every approach succeeds. In my reply to 
critics8 I called this form of relativism 'cosmological' relativism, in 
an article published in lride9 I spoke of an 'ontological' relativism, in 
'Nature as a Work of Art'10 I argued that the world of modem 
science (and not only the description of this world) is an artwork 
constructed by generations of artisan/ scientists while in 'Realism 
and the Historicity of Knowledge'1 1  I indicated how such views are 
related to the ideas of Niels Bohr. In the last article I also mentioned 
8. In Gonzalo Munevar (ed.), Beyrmd Reason, Dodrecht-Boston-London, 1991, p. 
570. 
9. No. 8, n.s.,Jan.-Apr. 1992. 
10. Commrm Knowledge, Vol. I, No. 3, 1993. 
I I .  op. cit., footnote 7 above. 

POSTS CRIPT ON RELATIVISM 
271 
that ontological relativism might be similar to Thomas Kuhn's more 
recent philosophy. 
Having before me a copy of Kuhn's Robert and Maurine 
Rothschild Distinguished Lecture of 19 November 1991 I can now 
describe the similarities and the differences in greater detail. 
We both oppose the strong programme in the sociology of science. 
As a matter of fact I would say, exactly as Kuhn does, that 'the claims 
of the strong programme' are 'absurd: an example of deconstruction 
gone mad'. I also agree that it is not enough to undermine the 
authority of the sciences by historical arguments: why should the 
authority of history be greater than that of, say, physics? All we can 
show historically is that a general appeal to scientific authority runs 
into contradictions. That undermines any such appeal; however, it 
does not tell us how science should now be interpreted or used. 
(Such questions, I would say, have to be answered by the interested 
parties themselves, according to their standards, conceptions, 
cultural commitments.) 
Kuhn says that 'the difficulties that have seemed to undermine the 
authority of science should not be simply seen as observed facts about 
its practice. Rather they are necessary characteristics of any 
developmental or evolutionary process.' But how do we know that 
science is an evolutionary process rather than a static way of finding 
more facts and better laws? Either from 'observed facts about its 
practice' or from interpretations that are imposed from the outside. 
In the first case we are back at the situation Kuhn wants to overcome 
while the second case means that science is being incorporated into a 
wider (cultural) context - a context that values developments - and is 
interpreted accordingly (the procedure I mentioned in parentheses 
above). It seems that is what Kuhn really wants, i.e. he wants to settle 
the question philosophically, not by appealing to facts. I would agree 
if I knew that for him this is one way among many and not the only 
possible procedure. 
Summarizing his argument Kuhn makes three assertions. 'First, 
the Archimedian platform, outside history, outside of time and space, 
is gone beyond recall.' Yes, and no. It is gone as a structure that can 
be described and yet shown to be independent of any description. It is 
not gone as an unknown background of our existence which affects 
us but in a way which forever hides its 
essence. 
Nor is 
Archimedianism gone as a possible approach. It would be the 
politically correct approach in a theocracy, for example. 
Secondly, Kuhn says that in the absence of an Archimedian 
platform 'comparative evaluation is all there is'. That is of course true 
- and trivially so. Thirdly, he challenges the traditional notion of truth 

272 
AGAINST METHOD 
as correspondence to reality. 'I am not suggesting, let me emphasize, 
that there is a reality which science fails to get at. My point is, rather, 
that no sense can be made of the notion of a reality as it has ordinarily 
functioned in the philosophy of science.' Here I agree with the 
proviso that more metaphysical notions of reality (such as those 
proposed by Pseudo Dionysius Areopagita) have not yet been 
disposed of. 
Let me repeat that the cultures that call forth a certain reality and 
these realities themselves are never well defined. Cultures change, 
they interact with other cultures and the indefiniteness resulting 
therefrom is reflected in their worlds. This is what makes 
intercultural understanding and scientific change possible: poten­
tially every culture is all cultures. We can of course imagine a world 
where cultures are well defined and strictly separated and where 
scientific terms have finally been nailed down. In such a world only 
miracles or revelation could reform our cosmology. 

Index 
Alberti, Leon Battista 242 
anamnesis 71-3, 105 
anarchism 49 
anything goes 14, 23 1 
epistemological 9 
methodology and 9-10, 1 2-13, 
19, 262 
naive 4 7-9, 23 1 
political 1 2-13 
Anaximander 95, 1 85 
Anscombe, Elizabeth 259-60 
anthropology 1 88-90, 197 
case study of quantum 
tribe 190-1 
anything goes see anarchism 
appearances 195n, l97-8, 203 
see also natural 
interpretations 
argument 
emotions and 16-17 
incommensurability and I SO 
value of 15-17, 64 
see also anarchism; 
incommensurability 
Aristotle 
Copernican theory and 72-3, 
79 
cosmology 44, 1 09-12, 135, 141, 
233-4 
dynamics and motion 34n, 121, 
135 
intuitive view ofhumans 1 24 
knowledge & perception 89 
Arp, Halton 242, 245 
art 
archaic style and perception 
169-186 
perspective 185n, 1 87, 199-201, 
203, 215 
TheAssayer(Galileo) 39-40n, 80 
astronomy 
ancient 36n, 1 35, 136 
Ptolemaic 1 35-6 
mediaeval 135, 136 
see also Copernicus; Galileo; 
Newton; telescope 
auxiliary sciences 5 1-2, 1 10, 
1 13-14 
Bacon, Francis 32n, 60, 1 12-13n, 
1 17-18 
Barrow, Isaac 45-6 
Bohm, David 262 
Bohr, Niels 15n, 31-2, 40 
Boltzmann, Ludwig 46 
Brahe, Tycho 55, 135, 142 
Brecht, Bertolt 9, 259 
Brownian motion (Dr Robert 
Brown) 27-8, 28n, 262n 
Bruno, Giordano 127 
Burbidge, C. 241 
Carnap, Rudolph 1 19 
Chambers, Robert 240 
children 
development of 15-17 
perceptual stages 150, 1 67-8 
Chalmers, Alan 76n 
China 
medicine 36-7 
Church & Christianity 248 
accepts proven science 132-3 
attitudes 1 25-6, 130-1 
Galileo and 124, 1 25-34 
273 

274 
I N DEX 
clashing with accepted theories 
see counterinduction 
classical mechanics 46-7, 72-3, 
1 13 
classifications 164-6 
common sense 
Copernicanism and 103-4, 1 10, 
1 12-13 
see also natural interpretations; 
observation 
communication 
guided vs open 45-6, 229 
concepts 
archaic/paratactic 1 70-6, 
177-85, 199-203, 218-19 
changes of 155 
integral nature of 60-1, 205 
totalitarianism of 165-9, 
199-207 
see also ideas; counterinduction; 
natural interpretations 
consistency condition 24-7, 28-30, 
50,234-5 
Copernicus, Nicholas 
acceptance of 96, 145-6 
defies evidence 1 7, 35, 39-40, 
5 1 , 60, 6 1  
effectof'Revolution' 135-6 
Galileo's defence of 72, 77 
methodology 138-42 
symbol of progress 1 16-21 
theory detached from experience 
103-4, 1 10, 1 12-13 
see also Galilei, Galileo 
cosmology 238, 241 , 242 
archaic 1 84-6, 1 88, 198-9, 239 
Aristode and 44, 109-12, 135, 
141 
cultural perceptions and 1 7  5-6 
fmite 233-4 
need for re-evaluation 1 13-15, 
1 20 
see also astronomy; concepts 
counterinduction 
Copernican theory and 51-3, 
77-80 
tool for research 20-3, 61-4 
crisis, theory of 145-6 
critical rationalism 14 7, 15 1-8 
see also Popper, Karl; rationalism 
culture 3-4 
Dadaism 265-6 
Descartes, Rene 54 
DiscourseonMelhod 49n 
dialectic 1 8  
Diogenes ofSinope 62 
discovery 1-2, 46-7, 106, 1 17 
see also science; theories of science 
Duhem, Pierre 24 
education 263-5 
science 2, 1 1-12, 161-2 
Ehrenhaft, Felix 28, 4 7 
Einstein, Alben 
Brownian motion and 28 
methodology 10-1 1, 42-3n, 
138n, 163, 239 
theory 18, 44, 107, 242 
electrodynamics 4 7 
empiricism 18, 20, 29, 72, 109-10, 
1 17-18, 147 
Aristode and 109-10 
autonomyprinciple 29 
epistemological illusion 73 
epistemology 9, 1 1, 12, 1 36 
illusions 73, 1 38, 156 
prejudices 196-7 
essentialism see paratactic 
aggregates 
evaluation of theories see 
methodology 
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 189 
events, effects on science 16-17, 138 
experience see natural 
interpretations; observation 
experiments see empiricism; 
facts 
facts 
autonomy principle 26-7 
collection & discovery 77, 144-5 
selection & suppression 20-1, 
50-1 , 155 

INDEX 
275 
theoretical nature 1 1 ,  22, 
39-40, 63 
see also counterinduction; 
empiricism; natural 
interpretations 
fairy-tales see myths & fairy-tales 
faith see religion 
f&sification 23, 145, 154, 221 
science suffocated by 50-I, 1 54 
see also critical rationalism; 
Popper, Karl 
Favaro, Antonio 127 
Feigl, Herbert 147-8, 212 
Feller, Margaret 242, 245-6 
Frank, Philipp 257 
formalism see logic 
freedom 17, 228-9 
Galilei, Galileo 17-18, 39-40, 49, 
54, 123 
TheAssayer 39-40n, 80 
boat argument 65-7 
counterinduction and 77-80 
dynamics & mechanics 24-5 
moon and 91-9 
propaganda 65, 70-3, 76n, 
104--5, 1 1 8  
SidereusNuncius 81-2 
telescope and optics 81-5, 
88-90, 99-102 
tower argument 54-60, 68, 
74-6, 107 
tri&s of 125-34 
see also Church; Copernicus, 
Nicholas 
Giedymin,J. 192-3 
Gottsched,j ohann 219 
government and science 163 
grammar see language & 
linguistics 
Greeks, ancient 264--5 
art & culture shape views 170-4, 
177-87, 198-202 
astronomy & cosmology 36n, 
184-7, 197-202 
see also Aristotle; Plato; 
Parmenides 
Hanson, N.R. 212 
Hanfmann, G.M.S. 175 
Heraclitus 95, 203-4 
hermetic writings 35, 141 
Hesse, Mary 34-6 
history 
conceptu& changes 172, 201 
education of science 1 1-12 
evaluation of theories 1-2, 32, 
33-7, 107-8, 212 
events of, effects on science 
16-17 
materi&ism 259 
methodology 9-10, 5 1-3, 147-8 
traditions 225-6, 228 
world views 243-5 
Hollitscher, W&ter 257-9 
Homer 177-82, 203, 204 
humanitarianism 3-4, 1 62, 228 
Hubble, E.P. 239 
Hume, David 50 
hypnagogic h&lucination 182n 
hypotheses 106 
adhoc 14-15,44, 49, 75 
contradictory 14-15, 20-3 
see also ideas; theories 
idealism 222-3, 230-1 
ideas 
and action 17, 149, 216, 232 
comparison to other ideas 21 
see also concepts; hypotheses 
ideology 17-18, 62, 184 
Iliad (Homer) 177-82, 203, 204 
incommensurability 150, 1 65, 190 
author's arrival at thesis 21 1-13, 
262-3 
suspension of univers&s 205-7 
inconsistency see consistency 
theory; facts 
individu&, development of 12 
see also freedom; humanitarianism 
inductive logic see logic 
instruments 17, 1 10, 232 
see also telescope 
intuition 1 1, ISO 
irrationalism 158, 204 

276 
INDEX 
Japan 250 
justification 147-9 
Kant, Immanuel 5 1 , 55-6, 56n 
Kaufmann, W. 40 
Kepler,Johann 24, 94n, 242 
Optics 45, 82, 88, 9ln, 98n, 
99-100 
polyopia of 88n 
Kierkegaard, Seren 17, 1 54 
knowledge 2 1  
'America of 2 1 6  
enumeration v s  understanding 
184-6 
see also epistemology 
Kraft Circle 254-5 
Kropotkin, Peter A. 13 
Kuhn, Thomas 3 1 , 2 1 1, 212-13 
Lagella,J ulius Caesar 84 
Lakatos, lmre 34n, 158n, 162-3 
language & linguistics 
classification 164-5 
deterioration of 266 
effectof 164, 172, 199 
invention of scientific 1 1, 18, 
63-4, 71, 150, 193-4 
observation 57, 59, 64, 71, 1 12 
philosophy 206-7, 220 
relativity principle 208-9 
translating ideas & concepts 
188-9, 206-7, 209-10 
law & order see under methodology 
learning see education 
Lessing, Gotthold 2 19-20 
Lenin, Vladimir I. 9n, 10 
liberty see freedom 
linguistics see language & linguistics 
Loewy, Emmanuel 17R1 
logic 
anthropology and 190-4 
contradiction of 15n, 194-6 
falsification 5R1 
inductive 1 5, 152 
limits speculation 1 1, 106, 192, 
195 
Lorentz, Hendrik 46-7 
Lorenz, Konrad 13ln, 245 
Luria, S.E. 238-9, 242 
Lysenko, Tromfim D. 37, 160 
McMullin, Ernan 68-9n, 91 n 
Maestlin, Michael 135-6, 142-4 
Marx, Karl, & Marxism 1 07n 
mathematics 50, 136, 195 
Maxwell,] ames Clerk 46, 241 
Medawar, Peter 13 l n  
medicine 36-8, 249 
Melanchthon, Philip 135 
mental sets 199, 202 
Merz,Johann T. 243-4 
metaphysics, science as 76, 78, 1 14, 
121, 154, 245 
methodology 
as the activity of science 239-42 
anarchistic 9-10, 12-13, 19, 23 1 
counterinduction 2R3, 5 1-3, 
61-4 
critical rationalism 14 7, 151-8 
empiricism 18, 20, 29, 72, 
109-10, 1 1 7-18 
falsification 23, 5R1, 145, 155 
law & order 13, 19 
logic and IOn, 1 1, 15n, 106, 152, 
19R7, 221 
patience needed with status 
quo 1 14-15 
pluralistic 2R3, 28, 32, 33, 108 
preconceptions in 1-2, 5R3 
problemsof 187-97 
rational 12-13, 17, 147 
scientific progress and 14-19, 
157-8 
see also hypotheses; rationalism; 
science; theories of science 
Mill,John Stuart 1 19, 1 94 
describes acceptance of theories 
29-30, 3 1  
OnLiberty 34n, 38 
mind/body problem 64, 123-4 
model theory see theories of 
science 
morality 16, 253 
see also humanitarianism 

INDEX 
277 
motion 
Galileo and 55--60, 65-76, 
1 20-1 
perpetual 27-8, 28n 
relativity of 69-70n, 70-1 
myth & fairy-tales 21, 36n, 53 
natural interpretations 22, 59, 
60-5, 74 
see also observation 
naturalism 222-3, 23 1-2 
Neumann, John von 49n 
Neurath, Otto 149 
Newton, Isaac 35, 40, 168 
acceptance of theory 24-5 
optics 44-6 
Nuerpeoples 189-90 
objectivity 217, 221-2, 225--6, 228 
see also facts; mental sets 
observation 
astronomical vs terrestrial 84-5, 
86-92 
Copernicus moves science 
from 103-5, 1 10, 1 12 
historical changes 52 
language 57, 59, 64, 71, 1 12 
natural interpretations 22, 59, 
60-5, 74 
sensory 56-7, 234 
theories and 39, 149, 1 5 1  
see also methodology; perception; 
telescope 
Odyssq (Homer) 178 
ontology 155, 175--6 
Optics (Kepler) 45, 82, 88, 9ln, 
98n, 99-100 
optics 24, 44-6, 137-8, 242 
natural observation 86-7 
telescope and 82, 86-98, 104-5 
Oresme, Nicole 248 
para tactic aggregates 169-7 5, 
177-86, 199-202 
Parmenides 43-4, 62, 204 
participant vs observer 215-21 
passion (Kierkegaardian) 17 
perception 95, 108-9, 1 14, 152 
of archaic cultures 169-75 
conceptual framework and 
1 64-8, 175-7 
see also natural interpretations; 
observation; perspective 
perpetual motion 27-8, 28n, 262n 
Perry, Commander Ŗatthew 250 
perspective 185n, 187, 1 99-200, 
202-3, 215, 242 
Philosophical brvestigations 
(Wittgenstein) 261 
philosophy of science 1-4, 9, 148, 
1 5 1 , 1 54, 1 96-7 
'pragmatic' 217-18, 227-8 
standards 233 
see also Bacon, Francis; Kuhn, 
Thomas; theories of science 
physics 47, 73, 1 13 
see also motion; optics 
Piaget,Jean 167 
Plato 71, 15 1, 245 
pluralism 20-3, 29, 32, 33 
Plutarch 96, 98, 204-5n 
Popper, Sir Karl R. 34n, 42n, 147, 
15 1-8 
author's acquaintance with 
260-1 
Prandtl, L. 240 
prejudice, recognition 22-3, 58 
presuppositions 58 
see also facts: theoretical nature 
propaganda 16-17, 1 14 
Galileo and 65, 70-3, 76n, 
104-5, 1 18 
Protagoras 226 
Pseudo Dionysius Apropagita 248 
psychology see mental sets; 
perception 
Ptolemy (Claudius 
Ptolemaeus) 135, 137-40 
public participation in science 2, 21 
Pythagoreans 35 
quantum theory 18, 44 
case study of 190-1 
Quine, Willard van Orman 212 

278 
INDEX 
rationalism 2, 62, 64, 1 14, 
16R1. 246, 265 
critical 147, 15 1-8 
falsification 23, 5R1, 145, 154 
'Law ofReason' 12-13 
nature of 15, 1 15-16, 224-5 
objectivity 217, 221-2, 225-6, 
228 
reconstruction 191 
vs science 214-15 
standards within 230 
realism 141-2, 144 
naive 59-60, 7R1 
reality assumptions 141-2 
relativity 
Einstein's 1 8-19, ŗ1, 48-9 
Galileo's 73-4, 1 1 8 
religion 1 1 , 53, 137, 218 
co-existence with science 
see also Church & Christianity 
research 
see facts; empiricism; 
methodology 
Sacrobosco,Johannes 1 36 
Schwarzchild solution 48 
science 
anarchism 9-10, 12-13, 14, 
19 
auxiliary 5 1-2, 1 10, 1 13-14 
chauvinismin 2-4, 37 
coherence vs subdivision 136-8, 
144 
conservativism in 1 1, 106, 192 
cultural influence 3-4 
discovery & success 2-4, 46-7, 
106, 1 16, 148 
education and 2, 1 1-12, 161-2 
money and 37 
standards 1, 12, 161-3, 214, 
227-8, 23 1 , 232-3, 238-42 
world views 243-5 
see also history; methodology; 
philosophy of science; theories 
of science 
senses see under natural 
interpretations; observation 
Sidereus Nuncius (Galileo) 81-2 
speculation see hypotheses; ideas; 
metaphysics 
Stalin,Joseph 257 
state see government 
status quo 1 14-15 
The Struaure of Scientific Revolutions 
Q(uhn) 31, 212-13 
Swiss cheese theory 262 
technology 263 
telescope 
celestial difficulties 86-91 
Galileo and 81-5, 120 
senses and 93-102, 103-4 
terrestrial success 83-4 
see also optics 
tests see empiricism; methodology 
Thales 1 85n 
theology see Church & Christianity; 
religion 
theories of science 
acceptance of 17-18, 3R2, 63, 
77 
changing of perceptions 2R3, 
52-3, 1 23-4 
consistency conditions 24-7, 
28-30, 50, 234-5 
historical view 1-2, 32, 33-7 
incommensurability 150, 165, 
190, 205-7, 21 1-13 
justification 147-9 
as metaphysics 76, 78, 1 14, 121, 
154 
numerical disagreement 39-42 
qualitative disagreement 39, 
42-50 
philosophical 1-4, 9, 3 1 ,  148, 
1 5 1 , 154, 196, 212-13 
separation from observation .14 7, 
15 1-8 
terminology 1 1, 18, 63-4, 71, 
150, 202-3 
world views 243-5 
see also concepts; history; 
hypotheses; methodology; 
science 

tradition 225-6, 228 
see also history 
translation 207 
understanding 
see knowledge; perception 
USA, unfree society 229 
value judgements 22 1 , 227 
Voodoo and witchcraft 35-6, 78n 
Weizacker, C.F. von 262 
INDEX 
279 
White, Lynn 249 
Whorf, Benjamin L. 164-5, 176, 
209, 210 
Wilson, E.O. 247-8 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 224, 260 
Philosophical brvestigations 261 
world views, abstract 243-5 
Xenophanes 95 
Zahar, Elie 157n 
Zeno 62 

