
Figure 
Drawing Methods for Artists

Translation © 2017 Quarto Publishing Group USA Inc. 
The original German edition was published as Figur: Menschen zeichnen.
© 2016 by Haupt Berne, Switzerland
www.haupt.ch
First Published in the United States of America in 2017 by Rockport Publishers, an imprint of 
The Quarto Group, 100 Cummings Center, Suite 265-D, Beverly, MA 01915, USA. 
T (978) 282-9590 F (978) 283-2742 QuartoKnows.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without written 
permission of the copyright owners. All images in this book have been reproduced with the 
knowledge and prior consent of the artists concerned, and no responsibility is accepted by 
producer, publisher, or printer for any infringement of copyright or otherwise, arising from the 
contents of this publication. Every effort has been made to ensure that credits accurately comply 
with information supplied. We apologize for any inaccuracies that may have occurred and will 
resolve inaccurate or missing information in a subsequent reprinting of the book.
Rockport Publishers titles are also available at discount for retail, wholesale, promotional, and 
bulk purchase. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager by email at specialsales@quarto.
com or by mail at The Quarto Group, Attn: Special Sales Manager, 401 Second Avenue North, 
Suite 310, Minneapolis, MN 55401, USA.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ISBN: 978-1-63159-306-2
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available. 
Cover, design, and artwork: Peter Boerboom and Tim Proetel 
Printed in China
Digital edition: 978-1-63159-436-6
Softcover edition: 978-1-63159-306-2

Peter Boerboom and Tim Proetel
Figure 
Drawing Methods for Artists
Over 130 Methods for Sketching, Drawing, and Artistic Discovery

Contents

From Line to Figure  
6
1. Shrink   
8
2. Outline  
20
3. Interior Contour  
34
4. Join Together  
44
5. Structure   
66
6. Measure  
80
7. Fill In   
92
8. Bend and Stretch  
112
9. Curves  
124
10. Bandage  
138
11. Facial Expressions  
156
12. Improvise  
168
Definitions  
186
About the Authors   
190

6  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
From Line to Figure

To create a picture of the human figure is a never-ending 
theme in art. Whether as perfect half-gods and beauty queens 
or realistic, touchable individuals, or whether as imposing 
rulers or tormented souls, images outlast us and tell of our 
time, our misery, and our dreams.
We’re surrounded by photographic images. Quickly created 
and often shared, they are ever present in today’s picture-
cosmos but a drawn human figure is different. It is unique. The 
creation is more than just pushing a button; it is an intense 
moment of observation, followed by decisions, which are 
made with every line. How do I interpret what I see and show 
what I mean?
To sketch a figure means to capture it, fix it in our mind just like 
a fleeting thought, and contain it on a piece of paper. This skill 
can be developed through close observation. Experimentation 
is another approach to constructing a figure, which can be 
accomplished without a subject. A spot turns into an idea, a 
line leads to a concept, and from that a figure is developed. Try 
it out! Look! And try again! Figures don’t have to be anatomically 
correct if the outlines are imaginative and the lines and 
expression are lively.
The focus of this book is the enjoyment of drawing and the 
question of how to draw people successfully with both simple 
and more complex methods. We show you how to comprehend 
the human figure and build up a repertoire for your own 
approach while doing so. We invite you to experiment and 
venture into the big theme of figure, body, and human.
  7

8  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
1. Shrink
The fear of drawing people incorrectly can be 
inhibiting, but with simple tools and basic 
knowledge, we can commit to paper expressive, 
funny, refreshing, and surprising figures. Quickly 
drawing miniature figures relieves the pressure to 
achieve something grand. Not every detail has to 
be right; ideas are noted and jotted down on paper. 
You will gradually develop a sense for proportions 
and an eye for posture. Without the constraint of 
fear, you may end up creating a line of figures that 
tell their own narrative.

  9

10  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Use different approaches to collect ideas.

Shrink  11
Let all the ideas happen on paper. 
The ones that are fun can then be explored further.

12  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Think simple; quickly move from figure to figure and find a 
rhythm. The figures next to each other turn into a scene.

Shrink  13
Label theatrical postures
or create dialogues that could inspire more ideas.

14  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Use circular motions to create heads and  
torsos for your figures.

Create distinctive silhouettes by considering  
body build, posture, hairstyle, and age.
Shrink  15

16  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Shifting the position of the feet adds spatial orientation. 

Stretch the body from the hands, feet, and head.
Shrink  17

18  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Explore different poses while drawing with a brush. 

Add more detailed hands and feet.
Shrink  19

20  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
2. Outline
People, like other objects, don’t have physical 
outlines. Indeed, the figure distinguishes itself from 
its environment but because of each movement, 
turn, or change of perspective, the form varies. The 
contour only emerges once a line captures the 
body. This is an invention of drawing, maybe even 
the most fundamental. The outline makes it 
possible to create simple, concise figures from 
three-dimensional entities. That’s how the line 
separates the figure from the background; outside 
of the contour lives the rest of the world.  

  21

22  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Legs and arms give the figure movement and life.

The suggestion of hands and feet stabilizes these figures  
and highlights their positions in the imagined space.
Outline  23

24  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Is this the front or the back of the figure?  
The position of the feet provides clarity.

Outline  25
A slowly drawn line ensures concentration on particular details.

26  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Draw a continuing line and bend it like a piece of wire.

Ambiguous lines can confine areas or open them up.
Outline  27




This figure is drawn from the outside.
Outline  31

32  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
These figures look like they‘ve been  
carved out of pieces of wood.

Create a figure and background,  
like this example.

34  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
3. Interior Contour
The outline is continued toward the inside and 
follows the visible overlaps. This way, the figure 
doesn’t only distinguish itself from the background 
as a closed form, but becomes a conceivable form 
by adding contours within. Looking at a side view 
of the figure, the arms and legs appear behind 
rather than next to each other, and they overlap 
with other body parts. The linear contours of a 
figure turn into a lively interplay of hints and 
recesses of light and shadow.

  35

36  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Contours within the figure become necessary when exterior 
lines overlap and make it difficult to discern the different parts 
of the body from one another.

Create a figure by drawing light for dark and dark for light.
Interior Contour  37

38  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
On one side, the simple line is enough; on the other side,  
a two-dimensional shadow borders the figure.

Open shadows connect the figures  
with their environment.
Interior Contour  39

40  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The optical equilibrium is balanced  
between light and dark.

Differentiate contours within the figures.
Interior Contour  41

42  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Combine the silhouettes of body fragments and  
arrange them into tight groups of people.
Interior Contour  43

44  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
4. Join Together
Consider the limbs on a figure as reduced singular 
shapes that are combined into many variations. In 
random assembly, such as on a mannequin or when 
performing a jumping-jack, the segments overlap 
where joints and hinges would be. Hints and open 
space between parts are enough to indicate the 
posture or movement of a human figure. Extremes 
can be explored and the order of these parts doesn’t 
always have to make perfect sense. Understanding 
how the different parts of the human figure  
work together is about testing possibilities  
and impossibilities.

  45

46  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Note where all the joints are in this jumping figure.

The shoulder and hip joints sit behind  
each other in a side view.
Join Together  47

48  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The overlapping joints propel the hips and  
knees forward so they appear closer to the viewer.

Try segmenting: Separating the arms into  
sections gives them the appearance of movement.
Join Together  49

50  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Note the arcs in the shoulders and upper arms  
and in the hips and legs.

Separate the upper body from the lower body and  
make each section appear to move.
Join Together  51

52  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Think about spacing and arrangement  
when placing shapes near one another.

Start with shapes for the head, shoulders, and pelvis  
and then add the hands and feet.
Join Together  53

54  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
First draw the arms and legs using a wide brush,  
adding a bend at the joints.

Next, add the upper body and head.  
In which direction should the hands and  
feet point for a handstand?
Join Together  55

56  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Each change creates a new posture.  
Add the thin lines after the arms and legs.

Paint with a brush just like you would lay out cutout shapes  
on a piece of paper and assemble them.
Join Together  57

58  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Five strokes make up a figure.

The long lines from the shoulder to the heel include the hips.
Join Together  59

60  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Movement comes from loose  
configurations of the basic shapes.

Join Together  61

62  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

You can either split up the different parts of the figure or  
keep them together during the drawing process.
Join Together  63


Differentiate the joints and leave empty spaces in between.
Join Together  65

66  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
5. Structure
Creating the framework is the beginning to 
developing a figure from the inside out. While 
drawing, the framework is imagined, with the 
design stemming from where the emphasis must be 
to give the figure stability. A flexible vertical line, 
derived from the spine, as well as moveable 
horizontals (shoulders and hip girdle), are the most 
important axes on which the whole figure is 
oriented. Finally, the body is laid around the 
structure like a shell—it surrounds it.

  67

68  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Create an  for the shoulders, spine, and hips.

Use simple lines to create a skeleton structure.
Structure  69

70  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Curve and bend the  torso.

In addition, bend the axes so that one side curves inward.
Structure  71

72  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
engaged leg 
relaxed leg
Contrapposto, which means “counterpose“ in Italian, is the 
classical ideal of the standing figure in which movement and 
stillness are balanced. The figure stands with one leg  
holding its weight and the other leg relaxed.  
The hip and shoulder axes sit at opposite angles.

The hip of the engaged leg is pushed upward and  
the shoulder declines. The relaxed leg is free of its weight- 
bearing responsibility, and because the position of the hip is 
lower, it seems a bit longer than the engaged leg.
Structure  73

74  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Change the alignment of the axes.

Structure  75
Have the figures stand with their feet  
planted firmly on the ground.

76  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Expand the directional axes beyond the figure.

The more the figure is shown in a side view, the shorter  
its hip and shoulder axes become.
Structure  77

78  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Construct the upper body with two triangles,  
one inside another.

Structure  79
The connection between the triangles is flexible.

80  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
6. Measure
Measuring a body is a delicate affair. Idealism, 
reality, wish, and cliché can create a wide variety 
of contradictions. Besides aesthetic norms, 
dimensional ratio plays an important role when 
drawing bodies and faces in correct proportions.  
A simple unit, such as the size of the head or  
hand, is used as a proportion to measure the  
length or width of the other body parts.  
Where is the body center; how many times  
does the head fit into the height of the body?

  81

82  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The body’s center is between the navel and crotch.

Body height is  
generally equal to  
seven and  
a half heads.

How far down  
does the arm reach?

Measure  85
The eyes sit in the middle of the head. The length of the nose 
matches the distance from the chin to the tip of the nose.

86  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
To move from a frontal view to a three quarters profile, the 
distance between the nose bridge and the eye is shortened. 
On the frontal view, the distance seems bigger because  
the nasal bridge creates a distinct separation.

Measure  87
Make sure the back of the head isn‘t too small  
in a profile. The neck is noticeably higher than the chin.

88  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The round head and relatively low-placed eyes  
create a childlike sketch.

Measure  89
A child’s head is proportionally bigger  
to the body length than an adult’s head is.

90  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
It isn’t a complicated formula: The bones in the palm of the 
hand are as long as the three finger bones together.

Measure  91
The thumb, however, is as long  
as two finger bones put together.

92  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
7. Fill In
Common geometric shapes—such as triangles, 
trapezoids, circles, and arrows—are simple to draw. 
They serve as outside shapes into which a figure is 
fit. Even if the bodies seem a bit stiff at first, they 
have a compact, sign-like appeal. Once the figure is 
released from its geometric bonds, its shape is 
obtained. This playful approach of filling various 
geometric forms with figures tests the  
imagination and shows you how various  
body parts relate to one other.

  93

94  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
First sketch random geometric shapes.

Fill In  95
The idea of how a figure could fit into it  
already emerges while drawing the outside shape.

You can stretch the figure inside the arrow

or spread it out. 

98  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Even if the figure breaks away from the stiff basic  
shape of the triangle, it still retains its basic geometry.

Fill In  99
Triangles are helpful to align sitting, stable figures.

100  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The points of the triangle line up with the upper tip of the 
head and the shoulders below.

Fill In  101
Place the head, neck, and nape within the triangle.

102  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
You can make the figure play hide and seek.

Fill In  103
Scrunch up a figure to fit within the shape.

104  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The trapezoid-like shape of the upper body helps  
to visualize the turning and bending of the torso.

Fill In  105
While drawing, stand up and try it yourself  
to see how far you can turn.

106  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Use a large circular shape for the palm and  
a smaller one for the heel of the hand at the thumb.

Isn’t there a tool hidden inside every human hand?
Fill In  107

108  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Divide the parts of the face without drawing  
the nose, mouth, and eyes.

Fill In  109
Use more shapes to differentiate the parts further.

110  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Hatchings, closely spaced parallel lines, 
 correspond with the real  
facial features and turn into patterns.

Use symmetry as a guide.
Fill In  111

112  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
8. Bend and Stretch
Many archaic human depictions are static and show 
a more symbol-like portrayal rather than a lively 
one. With the increasing demand for realistic 
pictures, the ingenuity of design also developed 
further. Muscles bend and stretch, the spine curves 
and turns, and the focal points move. This creates 
momentum and tension. One difficulty while 
drawing moving figures is to bring them into 
harmony with your imagination. Therefore, you 
need overlapping, directional changes, and 
foreshortening (angling the figure so it appears 
closer to the viewer). You can depict a moving 
figure with an open line that follows the movement 
or by using a constructed approach in which  
the joint points are laid out first.

  113

114  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

From an accordion to a body: The more condensed areas  
are at the bends, as opposed to the stretched ones.
Bend and Stretch  115

116  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Even complicated poses can be solved  
with the accordian method.

Bend and Stretch  117
Observe how changes in posture  
are determined by the bending of the spine.

118  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Begin by marking four joints on a piece of paper and then 
complete the sketch with the contours of the arms and hands.

Different viewpoints and turns change  
the distance between the joints.
Bend and Stretch  119

120  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Human hands grip, thanks to opposable thumbs.

Without thumbs, we could barely hold a tool;  
our fine motor skills would be restricted.
Bend and Stretch  121

122  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
While sketching phases of movement,  
forgo details to avoid being slowed down.

Decide which view is most effective. The runner here  
is more recognizable when viewed from  
the side rather than from the front.
Bend and Stretch  123

124  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
9. Curves
The human figure is rich in curves. Lines swing and 
bend distinctively around the shoulders, belly, 
breasts, and waist. The arms and calves are long 
stretching waves, while the toes are short ripples. 
While drawing a figure, we think of sweeping bends 
instead of sharp edges; the body becomes 
smoother and the form moving. Depending on 
format, the wrist, the forearm, or even the whole 
arm fulfills the drawing movement and  
makes the line dynamic.

  125

126  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Try drawing steep curves.

Draw quickly without thinking first.
Curves  127

128  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Curves  129
Describe movement with circular lines.

130  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Tools can be sources of inspiration.  
Japanese brushes, for example, are so soft that  
the width of the line can be varied distinctively.

While painting motion, try varying the pressure  
you put on the brush; natural curves will  
emerge almost automatically, such as at the calf.
Curves  131

132  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Curves  133
Reverse curves can indicate weight.


Finger joints, elbows, or knees all have characteristic curves 
and folds. The contours of the body are convex and  
concave lines, differing from fixed straight lines.
Curves  135

136  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Count the joints of the toes on your own foot.  
Where do they bend, widen, or tighten?

Draw the small toes like receding waves.
Curves  137

138  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
10. Bandage
Just like a bandage is wrapped around a body, a line 
can be, too. The drawing movements are circular, 
swinging, and quick rather than tentative. The 
imagination of a body’s shape dominates the 
drawing, not the outlines or anatomic integrity. 
Through the encasing bands and loops, the body 
parts obtain volume. Even if the bandages are only 
partially applied, this method supports a sculptural 
look and dynamic. During the drawing of  
the face in half profile, staggered ellipses (tilted, 
flattened circles) create a helpful structure for the 
positioning of the nose, eyes, and mouth.

  139

140  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Bandage  141

142  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Find the appropriate proportions using horizontal lines.

The stripes align with the movement of the body parts.
Bandage  143


Experiment with the ideas of bandaging:  
Lines are drawn from one side to the other  
to create shapes and therefore can’t overlap.
Bandage  145

146  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Take on the bird’s-eye perspective and let the circles  
become smaller from head to toe.

Or draw the other way around, coiling the loops upward.
Bandage  147

148  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
While bandaging, think of socks, boots, and sandals.

Note how this bandaging is wound and contoured.
Bandage  149

150  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
With a circling pen, create a head shape  
and draw in the face.

Even for odd head shapes, an ellipse is helpful  
to position the head’s center and eyes.
Bandage  151

152  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Three to four ellipses determine the alignment of all facial 
parts. The eyes, nose, and mouth sit like orbiting planets.

Bandage  153
Put the head, neck, and shoulder together as with a doll. 

154  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Bandage  155
The helmets simplify the imagination of  
sculptural head shapes.

156  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
11. Facial Expressions
Every face is different and changes expressions with 
moods, tempers, and emotions. Facial expressions 
send signals that we can read and interpret.  
We can easily differentiate the emotionally  
moved face from the fixed, inanimate mask.  
The drawn visage is interpreted as a person. The 
bow of an eyebrow, the line width of the lips, a 
sudden wrinkle in the forehead: These are nuances 
that give a face character. Subtle nuances decide 
whether a laugh is hearty or sardonic. It could easily 
turn into a grin. It is more the organic interaction  
of all the parts that make it successful than the  
correct rendition of each part.

  157

158  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Facial Expressions  159
Muscle movement creates facial expressions.
corrugator supercilii
frontalis muscle
orbicularis oculi

160  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
depressor anguli oris
orbicularis oris
Observe your facial muscles in a mirror  
and draw different emotions.
levator labii superioris
depressor labii inferioris

Facial Expressions  161
risorius
risorius and  
zygomaticus major
mentalis

162  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The coming together of all the parts decides the expression.

Facial Expressions  163
Don’t be afraid of wrinkles.

When you combine the head,  
neck, and shoulders, many  
possible expressions emerge.

Facial Expressions  165
Once the lower jaw goes into action, the 
head becomes distinctively more expressive.

166  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
For all heads, first draw the oval, then add  
the eyes, nose, mouth, the hair and its accompanying  
shadow, and a hint of the lower neck and upper body.

Vary the nose area and paint the mouth  
with one or two lines.
Facial Expressions  167

168  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
12. Improvise 
When in the moment, let something unplanned 
emerge and be led by the process. This opens up 
new possibilities during drawing: one line leads to 
another, a brush stroke opens up space for 
associations, and so on. While creating, we make 
interpretations—a breast, leg, belly, or a hump. We 
create spontaneously, instead of following a finished 
idea. The risk of something going wrong is always a 
possibility, therefore, improvising simultaneously 
requires looseness and concentration. The 
prerequisite for this is collecting and developing 
ideas. Simple, made-up rules steer the process;  
they release the pressure to be imaginative. 
Improvising means not knowing  
what is coming next.

  169

170  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
In the beginning, all possibilities are open.

Improvisation only emerges while rendering a sketch.
Improvise  171

172  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Using a fountain pen, create the figure in one fluid motion  
as if laying down a string on a piece of paper.

Improvise  173
Find and create contours.

174  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
These figures depict quickness.

Improvise  175
These figures depict slowness.

176  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists

Improvise  177

178  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Depending on what happens during the first brush strokes, 
the whole figure emerges. Improvising is  
exciting, and the results can be surprising.

Improvise  179

180  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Dip your fingers in ink and start drawing— 
your hand becomes your drawing tool.

It‘s not the anatomical correctness, but  
the immediacy of the actual doing that counts.
Improvise  181

182  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Place dots freely on a piece of paper and let the shape deve-
lop. This is much more exciting than determining  
the outline beforehand and then painting it.

Improvise  183

184  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
The brush circles, making the joints turn.

Improvise  185
A rule turns improvisational drawing into a game in which the 
lines lead from left to right and cannot cross each other.

186  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Definitions

  187
Anatomy
This is scientific knowledge about the human or animal figure. During the 
Renaissance, artists started cutting open dead bodies and drawing them, 
probably in hopes that this insight would help in their artistic practice to be 
able to depict more lifelike people. The anatomy drawings by Leonardo da 
Vinci were unsurpassed in realism and detail well into the twentieth century.
Anatomical Drawing
Today this type of drawing takes place more commonly in medical institutions 
instead of at art academies. An anatomical room exists at the Academy of Fine 
Arts in Vienna, but only one professor dissected corpses there at the end of the 
nineteenth century.
Caricature
This style was used in France for political commentary by Honoré Daumier 
(1808–1879). It is closely linked to the spreading of newspapers as an 
information medium. When a caricature targets a ruling person, it has to 
simultaneously show similarities and be exaggerated and pointed. The drawing 
can make a point naturally and without many words.
Contour
This type of drawing emphasizes the outer edge to clearly differentiate some-
thing from its environment. Outlined eyes, for example, seem bigger, more 
dominant, clearer, and sharper.
Contrapposto
This is the balance of calm and motion within a figure. Using this principle, the 
Greek classics developed an ideal, harmonious depiction of the human figure.
Facial Expressions
The many facial muscles allow for diverse expressions. It is questionable whether 
the abundance of human expressions can be reduced down to a few basic 
emotions and if a facial expression is universally open to interpretation and 
independent from heritage and socialization.
Figural
This is the artistic depiction of human, animal, or geometric shapes. The 
opposite of abstract painting, figural depictions use anything corporeal as an 
origin. The boundaries show fluid transitions; the conflict between both 
positions especially shaped paintings of the twentieth century.

188  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Gesture
With hands, arms, and even the whole body, spoken words are visually painted. 
Common gestures, such as lifting the shoulders upward, say everything.
Ideal
This is a wide field influenced by philosophy, politics, advertisement, and 
fashion. In ancient Greece, people philosophized about the ideal body; 
originally, the word idea descends from ancient Greek. On one side, an ideal is 
subject to contemporary taste. On the other side, there are reliable factors for 
a universal sense of beauty. This is especially true regarding the body; for 
example, its symmetry and the golden ratio, such as the proportion of width to 
height in a face. 
Likeness
This is the highest grade of resemblance without removal of the essential 
difference between origin and portrayal. 
Mannequin
A wooden model of the human body with movable limbs, a mannequin can be 
helpful to create different postures and movements while drawing. But a 
mannequin is just a mannequin.
Mask
This is a facial coverup for religious or cultural rituals and for plays, such as 
African masks, carnival masks, protective masks, death masks, and so on. With 
this small piece of disguise, you become someone else quickly, which enables 
the wearer of a mask to do exceptional deeds.
Model
Often in architecture and design, a model serves as an example of something 
that doesn‘t yet exist, usually in the form of illustrated plans. In visual arts, a 
model is typically the inspiration for and origin of a piece of art. Many artists 
develop physical or emotional relationships with their models, which are reflected 
in the finished artwork. Examples include Pablo Picasso and Lucian Freud.
Nude
This is the depiction of the naked human body. During the drawing, the 
undressed model holds still for long periods of time so that there is enough 
time to draw a study of the figure. This exact observation teaches the basic 

Definitions  189
understanding of the body. Variations of this method include very quick 
drawings of posture, taking unusual perspectives, or experimenting with 
different mediums.
Outline
Quickly sketch outlines and don‘t get caught up in the details. The edge that 
separates the object or figure from the environment is of vital importance.
Portrait
This is the depiction of a whole figure, the face, or a half-length portrait. The 
resemblance of the portrayed person is obvious. People who wanted to obtain 
and preserve their faces past their own lifetimes depended on painting back in 
the old days. Today this task has been taken over by photography. The most 
famous portrait in art history is the Mona Lisa, whose resemblance to a real 
person is speculative. This painting was once considered a leading example of 
portraiture in art.
Pose
In comparison to natural movement or postures, the pose is rigid and usually 
reflects the artist‘s vision. Often poses are used when creating self-portraits. 
Posing in front of a camera means to take on a certain posture that can be 
quickly drawn. 
Self-Portrait
For a depiction of one’s own figure, self-questioning and presentation are 
important factors. It can be blunt, comical, vain, or sober. Reviewing the self-
portraits of Max Beckmann, Rembrandt, and Goya can reveal something about 
how the artists viewed themselves. With masks and costumes, Cindy Sherman 
increases the self-portrayal into an obsessive deliberate confusion.
Silhouette/Paper Cut
This is a more or less simplified paper cut drawing. It usually is black or white 
and can also be used as a template for printing or spraying. As a silhouette, the 
facial features are more distinct than as in a profile.
Torso
This is only the trunk of the human body, with the limbs missing. For Rodin, the 
design of a torso was an artistic principle to emphasize the work process 
through supposed incompleteness.

190  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
About the Authors

  191
Peter Boerboom and Tim Proetel both studied at the Academy of Fine 
Arts in Munich between 1991 and 1998 under renowned painter and teacher 
Horst Sauerbruch. Their long friendship has repeatedly led to joint work. This 
book is the latest result of their collaboration, which included many drawings 
and discussions. Three volumes about perspective, light, and motion are 
already published; more volumes on new themes are being planned.
Tim Proetel is an advisor for art at the state institution of school quality 
and educational research and teaches art and theater at an academic high 
school, both in Munich.
Peter Boerboom also studied communications design at the College for 
Design in Munich. He is a founding member of the artist group Department 
for Public Appearance and executes art and photography projects together 
with Carola Vogt.

192  Figure Drawing Methods for Artists
Also Available
Drawing Perspective 
Methods for Artists 
978-1-63159-303-1 
Figure Drawing for Artists 
978-1-63159-065-8 
The Urban Sketching Handbook: 
People and Motion 
978-1-59253-962-8 


