FF2023 ARTIST OFFER
  
FF2023 ARTIST OFFER
Artist Offer for Visual & Human Arts at Future Forest 2023
Artist Name:
Nate Guimond
has been selected to participate for two days during the festival between August 3rd-6th, 2023. The exact days of your commitment
will be communicated in the artist advance. We have a minimum of six-hour commitment during the scheduled days, but artists are
welcome to participate further if they choose.
Art Gallery:
You have chosen not to particpate in displaying your art in the gallery. Anyone displaying art in the gallery will need to contribute to
the supervision of the art gallery on a day they are not scheduled elsewhere. The exact schedule will be communicated in the artist's
advance, and commitment will not be more than six hours.
Artists Fee:
 $160.00 CAD
Ticket Allocation:
One Weekend Ticket(s) including Thursday Entry
*Note artists who are accepted to multiple disciplines. This does not constitute additional tickets 
Guest Policy:
As of 2023, Future Forest will no longer include guest passes in our artist compensation packages. This decision was made for
several reasons. Firstly, we want to offer our artists competitive and fair compensation. To do this, we have established standards to
ensure that every artist receives the maximum compensation.
Secondly, offering guest passes is not necessarily fair to all of our artists, as not everyone is interested in or would benefit from
them. Finally, our festival has limited capacity, and offering guest passes reduces the number of tickets available for sale to the
general public. We appreciate your understanding on this matter.
Vehicle Pass Allocation:
Zone B
Meal:
Includes Two Meal Voucher(s)
Terms & Conditions:
Artists must sign this contract and agree to terms to confirm their spot no later than April 5th, 2023
Artists must submit Future Pass membership numbers for every member of your collective no later than April 30th. 
Artists must have Future Pass QR to check into the festival 

The artist is responsible for ensuring that the contact information in their contract is the name we can use to write a check. If
there are any issues with the contract's contact information, the artist should contact us immediately at
visualarts@futureforest.ca
Artists may announce their selection once we email you the graphics and confirm. Please do not announce until this time.
Artists are responsible for bringing their own materials and anything needed for set-up. This includes painting canvas, easel
etc. 
Upon arriving, artists must report to Chelsea MacCornick, the Artist Coordinator at The Gallery located at the Prism Stage. The
Gallery is a gathering space for artists to share collective work created on-site. This Artistic Gallery Space will also feature a
Human Artist Body Painting station for Visual and Human Artists to express and collaborate.
Any sales and arranged payment methods are confidential and only negotiated between the artist and the buyer.
If you would like to display your art or sell your work on-site or have your work displayed at the gallery after you finish painting,
you agree that as an independent artist, you are still fully responsible for all work displayed, sold, or represented at Future
Forest. 
Saturday, there will be a Future Forest open gallery ARTIST TALK by the workshops area for any artist that wants to showcase
their work and engage in an open artist-sharing circle.
Artists will retain all rights to artwork otherwise agreed upon. 
All murals will be stored on-site unless other agreements have been made.
There are allocated areas for Visual Artists to share at each stage.
Artists are responsible for sharing the stages with other Artists unless discussed. 
Set times and tear down begin and end at times indicated on the final festival schedule.
This offered amount is inclusive of travel expenses unless otherwise stated. No further travel costs will be reimbursed.
Artists will be paid VIA cheque on site from the Info booth starting Sunday, August 6th. 
No entry before 8 am on Thursday, August 3rd, unless signed up & confirmed to volunteer with other work, which will be
included in your contract.
Parking, if included in the offer, is in Zone B. If artists want to park in Zone A, they must upgrade at the gate ($50)
If the artist must cancel due to unforeseen circumstances or has any special requests, they must email
visualarts@futureforest.ca as soon as possible. 
You will receive a complete artist schedule and location assignment at a later date.
In addition to the agreed fee, Future Forest Art Experience will provide the stage, sound and lights for the performance.
All fees are fully delivered, so any additions are at artists' own cost.
The address for the festival site is:
Contract signatory & address:
Future Forest Art Experience, A-158 Leinster Street, , Saint John, NB, E2L1J5
Signed on 04/12/2023 
 Nate Guimond

