 

 
2​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
Author​ ​Biography 
Tamim Mobayed holds a B.Sc. and M.Sc. in Psychology, from Queen’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Belfast, and is currently an M.A. candidate in Islamic Thought and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Applied Ethics at Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Qatar, as well as an M.Phil.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
candidate​ ​in​ ​Child​ ​Psychology,​ ​from​ ​his​ ​Alma​ ​Mater​ ​in​ ​Northern​ ​Ireland. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer: The views, opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
papers and articles are strictly those of the authors. Furthermore, Yaqeen does not
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
endorse any of the personal views of the authors on any platform. Our team is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
diverse on all fronts, allowing for constant, enriching dialogue that helps us
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
produce​ ​high-quality​ ​research. 
Copyright​ ​©​ ​2017.​ ​Yaqeen​ ​Institute​ ​for​ ​Islamic​ ​Research 
 

 
3​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
Introduction 
In 1965, an American scientist by the name of Gordon Moore made a relatively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
specific prediction about the number of transistors within a dense integrated circuit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that would go on to become an accurate projection of technological change as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
whole. Moore predicted that the number of transistors within such circuits would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
double approximately every year. This prediction of exponential growth turned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
out to be descriptive of much more than mere transistor populations within circuits.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scientific discovery and consequent developments in technology are now widely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accepted​ ​as​ ​growing​ ​exponentially,​ ​exhibiting​ ​acceleration.  
This growth has brought with it a pushing of boundaries at an unprecedented
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
speed. Writer and futurist Arthur C. Clarke (d. 2008) famously commented that,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.” Indeed,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2
we appear to be on the verge of witnessing nanotechnological interventions that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would have mere decades ago been the stuff of science fiction. Transhumanism is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
term coined by British biologist Julian Huxley (d. 1975), brother of renowned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
novelist and philosopher Aldous Huxley (d. 1963), that now refers to the process of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
improving the quality and length of human life by way of biotechnological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions
including,
but
not
limited
to,
nanotechnology,
cybernetics,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pharmacological and gene therapies. While transhumanists herald this as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beginning of perhaps the greatest chapter in human history, those opposed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism​ ​are​ ​warning​ ​that​ ​all​ ​that​ ​proverbially​ ​glitters​ ​is​ ​not​ ​necessarily​ ​gold.  
Some scholars, both Islamic and non-Islamic, have suggested that the propagation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of transhumanism presents one of the greatest challenges to humanity brought
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about by modernity. To use human discovery to alter humankind, at as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fundamental a level as proposed by transhumanism, provokes numerous profound
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions related to theology, philosophy, biology, psychology, and of course,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ethics. What is interesting, and might be seen as setting the tone for this discussion,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1​ ​Franklin,​ ​D.​ ​(2017).​ ​Vanishing​ ​Point:​ ​The​ ​rise​ ​of​ ​the​ ​invisible​ ​computer​.​ ​The​ ​Guardian.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/26/vanishing-point-rise-invisible-computer 
2​ ​Clarke,​ ​A.​ ​C.​ ​(1961).​ ​Profiles​ ​of​ ​the​ ​Future:​ ​An​ ​inquiry​ ​into​ ​the​ ​limits​ ​of​ ​the​ ​possible.​ ​Gateway​ ​Publishing. 
Huntingdon. 
3​ ​Huxley,​ ​J.​ ​(1957).​ ​New​ ​Bottles​ ​for​ ​New​ ​Wine​.​ ​ ​London.​ ​Chatto​ ​and​ ​Windus. 

 
4​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
is one of the key points taken from the story of Adam in the Qur'an. He is misled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
by the devil, in part by the promise that eating from the forbidden tree will grant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
him immortality (Qur'an 7:20); immortality is very much a part of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanist agenda. This paper attempts to grapple with some of the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significant issues raised by transhumanism that will need to be addressed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Muslims. The main question is: what are the challenges inherent in attempting to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reconcile​ ​Islam​ ​with​ ​transhumanism? 
 
Introduction​ ​to​ ​Transhumanism 
 
A​ ​Brief​ ​History​ ​of​ ​Transhumanism 
Swedish philosopher Nick Bostrom provided a thorough history of transhumanist
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
thought in his 2005 paper. The following section summarizes and discusses some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
of the key historical figures to whom he, and other scholars, have attributed the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
origins and development of transhumanist thought. The Akkadian epic of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gilgamesh, often cited as being the first surviving work of literature, contains
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within it what might be called the first written account of an individual seeking a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
transhumanist intervention: the protagonist King of Uruk sets out on a quest for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
immortality. The quest for immortality is often cited as being one of the end goals
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
of transhumanism. Of course, this king was seeking a magical intervention, rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
6
than one rooted in science and reason, the latter of which is key to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanist
movement.
However,
some
would
argue
that
instrumental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasoning, as employed by transhumanists, is not an all-encompassing form of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reason,
as will be elaborated below. Within Greek mythology we also find
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
potential precursors to transhumanism. As well as Prometheus, who angered the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gods by stealing fire from them and delivering it to humans, thus improving the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
4​ ​Bostrom,​ ​N.​ ​(2005).​ ​A​ ​History​ ​of​ ​Transhumanist​ ​Thought.​ ​Journal​ ​of​ ​Evolution​ ​and​ ​Technology,​ ​14​ ​(1),​ ​1-25. 
5​ ​Sandars,​ ​N.​ ​K.​ ​(1972).​ ​trans.​ ​The​ ​Epic​ ​of​ ​Gilgamesh​.​ ​London.​ ​Penguin.  
6​ ​Bostrom,​ ​N.​ ​(2005). 
7​ ​Noeri,​ ​G.,​ ​Horkheimer,​ ​M.,​ ​&​ ​Adorno,​ ​T.​ ​W.​ ​(2002).​ ​Dialectic​ ​of​ ​Enlightenment​.​ ​Stanford​ ​University​ ​Press. 
California. 

 
5​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
human condition, we also find the character of Daedalus. Daedalus, the father of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Icarus, tasked himself with finding ways to improve human capabilities but without
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
magic, instead opting for engineering-based solutions. The famous demise of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Icarus has served as a warning for millennia regarding the tendency of humans to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
become​ ​overly​ ​ambitious​ ​in​ ​this​ ​regard.  
While the roots of transhumanist thinking might be found in humanity’s earliest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
texts, it is the age of the European Enlightenment that is often credited as ushering
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
in the beginning of transhumanist philosophy. Europe’s Enlightenment brought
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
with it a number of intellectual upheavals that changed the course of human
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
history. The impact of the Enlightenment on three branches of knowledge in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular—science, politics and philosophy—led to a revolution in the way in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
which knowledge was approached and utilised.
The rise of secularism, at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
expense of the power of the European Church, led to a fundamental difference in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
how morality was determined and enforced. The replacement of the geocentric
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theory of our solar system by the heliocentric theory, symbolizes just how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monumental the intellectual shifts that occurred within Europe during this time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were; the very universe and the way in which it was perceived changed massively.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
11
The scientific revolution of that time brought with it a hope, certainly amongst
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
many of the elite classes of society, that a better world could be built on the back of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
science and reason. One of the era’s heavyweights, the philosopher Sir Francis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bacon (d. 1626), described a utopian island in his novel ​New Atlantis​, “where the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suffering of humanity has been removed through the development, and indeed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perfection, of scientific knowledge and its technical application.”
This reflected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
8​ ​Bostrom,​ ​N.​ ​(2005). 
9​ ​Edgar,​ ​A.​ ​(2009).​ ​The​ ​hermeneutic​ ​challenge​ ​of​ ​genetic​ ​engineering:​ ​Habermas​ ​and​ ​the​ ​transhumanists​.​ ​Medical 
Health​ ​Care​ ​Philosophy​,​ ​12​(2),​ ​157-67. 
10​ ​Bristow,​ ​W.​ ​(2010).​ ​The​ ​Enlightenment.​ ​Stanford​ ​Encyclopedia​ ​of​ ​Philosophy​.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/enlightenment/ 
11​ ​Ibid. 
12​ ​Bacon,​ ​F.​ ​(1624).​ ​The​ ​New​ ​Atlantis.​ ​Original​ ​publisher​ ​unknown.​ ​Since​ ​printed​ ​by​ ​Watchmaker​ ​Publishing. 
Oregon. 

 
6​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
the optimism felt by many at the time regarding science and its potential to elevate
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the​ ​human​ ​condition.  
The sheer optimism of this position is perhaps better understood when one is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reminded that this was before the advent of monstrosities such as the nuclear bomb
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other destructive inventions such as germ warfare, and the less dramatic, albeit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
just as toxic, discovery of carcinogenic substances. The reality that science and its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications can prove to be devastating serves as a sobering grounding of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
optimism regarding its potentialities. This conflict of potentiality is reflected in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
division amongst scientists and philosophers regarding transhumanism and other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cutting-edge​ ​applications.  
In defence of the optimism, it is important to note that it was not exactly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology and science that buoyed these intellectuals, rather, it was the idea of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
man being governed by knowledge, be it the “pure reason” of the rationalists, or
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the science of the empiricists.
Shedding the religious dogmatism that had bogged
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Europe down in war, repression, and a neglect of material science, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlightenment was a time of intellectual hope. Political philosophers of this era,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as Benjamin Franklin (d. 1790) and William Godwin (d. 1836), believed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inequality and injustice, as well as disease (and perhaps one day, death) could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eradicated through scientific advances.
Science was thus seen as an extension of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
reason,​ ​one​ ​of​ ​its​ ​most​ ​prominent​ ​schools​ ​of​ ​thought​ ​and​ ​application.  
With the seismic publication of Charles Darwin’s (d. 1882) ​Origin of Species in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1859, more than ever transhumanism seemed like a goal within reach. According
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to the theory, current humans represent merely one stage in an evolutionary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process. Therefore, who is to say that we have reached the end of this process? To
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those who accept Darwin’s theory, the idea that we will no longer evolve seems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less credible or likely than the idea that we will continue evolving. In 1923, British
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scientist J. B. S. Haldane (d. 1964) published the essay ​Daedalus; or, Science and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Future​, which presented an optimistic view of the benefits that would come
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13​ ​Markie,​ ​P.​ ​(2017)​ ​Rationalism​ ​vs.​ ​Empiricism,​ ​The​ ​Stanford​ ​Encyclopedia​ ​of​ ​Philosophy​ ​Edward​ ​N.​ ​Zalta​ ​(ed.), 
Retrieved​ ​from:​ ​https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/rationalism-empiricism/​.  
14​ ​Hughes,​ ​J.,​ ​J.​ ​(2012.​ ​The​ ​Politics​ ​of​ ​Transhumanism.​ ​Zygon​,​ ​47​ ​(4),​ ​757-776.  

 
7​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
along with mastery of science in general, and genetics in particular.
Significantly,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
15
Haldane suggested that many new scientific developments are initially seen as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blasphemous, and even abominations, initially rejected by the mainstream of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people due to the sheer differences they offer being deemed unnatural. Haldane
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seems to have anticipated some of the significant issues that would arise within this
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion;​ ​and​ ​discussion​ ​certainly​ ​did​ ​arise​ ​as​ ​his​ ​essay​ ​became​ ​a​ ​best-seller.   
16
Other writers also weighed in, offering less optimistic predictions in the case of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bertrand Russell’s (d. 1970) ​Icarus: The Future of Science
and Aldous Huxley’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Brave New World​.
The latter laid out a dystopian vision of a future in which free
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
18
will, human drive, and freedom are severely stunted by biotechnology, oppressive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
psychological practices, as well as sexual and narcotic indulgences. While George
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orwell’s (d. 1950) ​1984
did not explicitly describe biotechnology as a tool of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
19
oppression, it made a frightening case f the porotential for science and technology
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to​ ​be​ ​misused​ ​to​ ​enslave​ ​“the​ ​masses.”  
It was Huxley’s biologist brother, Julian Huxley, who would go on to coin the term
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
transhumanism​ ​in​ ​1927,​ ​writing​ ​in​ ​his​ ​text​ ​Religion​ ​Without​ ​Revelation​: 
The human species can, if it wishes, transcend itself​—​not just sporadically,
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
an individual here in one way, an individual there in another way​—​but in its
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
entirety, as humanity. We need a name for this new belief. Perhaps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism will serve: man remaining man, but transcending himself, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
realizing​ ​new​ ​possibilities​ ​of​ ​and​ ​for​ ​his​ ​human​ ​nature.  
20
The last century has witnessed the exponential development of science and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology, in line with Moore’s law. Transhumanism as an applied science has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
begun on a small scale, within the likes of pharmacology, while more fundamental
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changes to our being remain on hold due to legislative reasons. Transhumanism is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
15​ ​Haldane,​ ​J.,​ ​B.,​ ​S.​ ​(1923).​ ​Daedalus;​ ​or,​ ​Science​ ​and​ ​the​ ​Future​.​ ​A​ ​paper​ ​read​ ​to​ ​the​ ​Heretics,​ ​Cambridge,​ ​on 
February​ ​4​th​,​ ​1923.  
16​ ​Bostrom,​ ​N.​ ​(2005). 
17​ ​Russell,​ ​B.​ ​(1924).​ ​Icarus;​ ​or​ ​The​ ​future​ ​of​ ​science​.​ ​London.​ ​K.​ ​Paul,​ ​Trench,​ ​Trubner​ ​&​ ​Co.​ ​ltd.  
18​ ​Huxley,​ ​A.​ ​(1932​).​ ​Brave​ ​New​ ​World​.​ ​Harper​ ​Brothers.​ ​New​ ​York. 
19​ ​Orwell,​ ​G.​ ​(1949).​ ​Nineteen​ ​eighty-four,​ ​a​ ​novel​.​ ​New​ ​York.​ ​Harcourt.  
20​ ​Huxley,​ ​J.​ ​(1927).​ ​Religion​ ​without​ ​revelation​.​ ​London.​ ​E.​ ​Benn.  

 
8​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
already amongst us, with the theory being argued for within academic circles,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while the practice is already present within the pharmacological world, by way of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“designer drugs.” It looks like this might be just the beginning of a new wave of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
transhumanist​ ​practice;​ ​we​ ​are​ ​all​ ​likely​ ​to​ ​be​ ​affected​ ​by​ ​it​ ​in​ ​one​ ​way​ ​or​ ​another. 
Introduction​ ​to​ ​Transhumanist​ ​theory 
Bostrom remains one of the most vocal proponents of transhumanism amongst
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
philosophers. He argues for the position that transhumanism can lead to an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvement of our species, allowing us to evolve into transhumans and eventually
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
post-humans. The benefits of transhumanism include, “radical extension of human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health-span, eradication of disease, elimination of unnecessary suffering, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
augmentation of human intellectual, physical, and emotional capacities.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
According to Bostrom, transhumanists will utilize “medicine…economic, social,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
institutional
designs,
cultural
development,
and
psychological
skills
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
techniques.”
Viewing nature as “a work-in-progress, a half-baked beginning”
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
22
23
that humanity must improve upon highlights just how radically different the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worldview of transhumanists is from the Islamic view, with God saying, “We have
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indeed created humankind in the best of molds” (Qur'an 95:4). While it would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
incorrect to interpret this verse as pitting Islam against the advancement of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human race, it is certainly an indication of how different the two worldviews are in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
terms of how they view creation and the status of the human. The Qur'an contains
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verses highlighting that God has eased certain aspects of our lives by allowing us
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to cultivate nature: “And the grazing livestock He has created for you; in them is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
warmth and [numerous] benefits, and from them you eat…And they carry your
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
loads to a land you could not have reached except with difficulty to yourselves.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indeed, your Lord is Kind and Merciful.” (Qur'an 16:5;7). Improving lives by way
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of cultivating and gaining a limited mastery over nature, is not fundamentally at
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
odds with the Islamic worldview. However, there is quite some distance between
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
21​ ​Bostrom,​ ​N.​ ​Transhumanist​ ​Values.​ ​In​ ​Ethical​ ​Issues​ ​for​ ​the​ ​21​st​​ ​Century​,​ ​ed.​ ​Frederick​ ​Adams​ ​(2003). 
Philosophical​ ​Documentation​ ​Center​ ​Press.,​ ​p.​ ​4 
22​ ​Ibid,​ ​p.​ ​3 
23​ ​Ibid,​ ​p.​ ​3 

 
9​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
controlling livestock and altering the fundamental building blocks of human beings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves. 
Human​ ​Limitations 
Transhumanists see the human body and mind as limiting our full capabilities.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accordingly, they propose a range of areas that could benefit from transhumanist
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practice in terms of expanding what is possible for humans. Bostrom proposes that
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
our possible modes of being are limited by our human perspective: “We humans
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may lack the capacity to form a realistic intuitive understanding of what it would
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
be like to be a radically enhanced human.”
He argues that on one level we seem
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24
to have accepted constraints without questioning their necessity. Furthermore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanists like Bostrom propose that while we might have some idea of what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism will look like, we are incredibly naïve in trying to assess what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
posthumanism might look like, with posthumanism being the frontier beyond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism.  
Transhumanism is often crudely reduced to the idea of living forever. While
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concern with increasing lifespan is a central focus for many transhumanists,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Bostrom elaborates on this goal as being more than merely a desire to live longer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
He argues that longer lives would include higher levels of maturation and growth,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leading to a more enriched society. The examples he uses to illustrate this are
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beethoven and Goethe, considered two of Western Europe’s greatest gifts to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world in cultural terms: what might their insights have been, and how might their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work​ ​have​ ​looked,​ ​if​ ​they​ ​were​ ​with​ ​us​ ​today,​ ​having​ ​lived​ ​for​ ​hundreds​ ​of​ ​years.  
Beyond lifespan concerns, transhumanists put a strong emphasis on improving
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
human intellectual capacities. Bostrom believes that effective transhumanism can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lead to improvement in all of our cognitive faculties, including memory, attention,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and problem solving skills. Interestingly, he also thinks we might be able to think
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more effectively in both philosophical and scientific terms. He writes that, “It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
possible that failure of philosophical research to arrive at solid, generally accepted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
answers to many of the traditional big philosophical questions could be due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24​ ​Ibid,​ ​p.​ ​4 

 
10​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
fact that we are not smart enough to be successful in this kind of enquiry.”
He
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
also mentions the Platonic cave,
and how it suggests that we might be limited by
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26
our​ ​current​ ​cognitive​ ​capacities.  
Evoking images of comic book superheroes, Bostrom also believes in the potential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
for transhumanism to lead to increased sensory capabilities. Perhaps we might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adopt some of the sensory gifts of animals, such as magnetic orientation, sharper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eyesight, a more effective sense of smell, or sensors for electricity and vibration;
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he also mentions the possibility of increasing levels of sexual sensitivity and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsiveness. Bostrom also argues for the psychological potentialities of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism, talking in terms of evoking “lasting joy” and increasing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well-being, writing that we are at the mercy of our genetic disposition when it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comes to these things. Furthermore, Bostrom believes that transhumanism may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allow us to determine our own willpower and character, so that tasks such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quitting smoking will be easier, and we can more readily shape our character so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that​ ​it​ ​is​ ​“in​ ​accordance​ ​with​ ​our​ ​ideals.”  
27
Applied​ ​Transhumanism 
The scientific processes that can be applied towards transhumanist practice, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nanotechnology, cybernetics, pharmacology, and gene therapy are all already being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed​ ​and​ ​applied,​ ​albeit​ ​not​ ​always​ ​in​ ​the​ ​service​ ​of​ ​transhumanist​ ​goals.  
Nanotechnology, a term used to describe technologies developed at an atomic,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
molecular, or macromolecular level (1 to 100 nm range) is already being used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within areas such as bioengineering, biophysics, and biochemistry.
When utilized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
in the service of transhumanism, nanotechnology offers much to the field, from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
microscopic implants that monitor our bodily functions, to minuscule diagnostic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tools​ ​that​ ​enter​ ​the​ ​body​ ​and​ ​are​ ​used​ ​to​ ​more​ ​effectively​ ​diagnose​ ​illness.  
25​ ​Ibid,​ ​p.​ ​7 
26​ ​https://web.stanford.edu/class/ihum40/cave.pdf 
27​ ​Ibid,​ ​p.​ ​8 
28​ ​Musa,​ ​F.​ ​(2008).​ ​Ethical​ ​Dimensions​ ​of​ ​Nanotechnology.​ ​Tabah​ ​Foundation​,​ ​6​,​ ​1-18.  

 
11​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
Cybernetics is a term that is used to describe the study of human control functions,
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paying particular attention to the ways in which artificial systems can be used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve, or even replace, them. Accordingly, cybernetics focused on bridging the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gaps between human biological processes with technological tools. British
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engineer Kevin Warwick has famously tested various cybernetic tools on himself,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implanting computer interfaces under his skin so as to allow himself to control
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electrical​ ​devices​ ​remotely.  
Pharmacological approaches to transhumanism are already common, perhaps due
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the softening of attitudes towards psychoactive medication, which have long
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been used to treat psychological illness. Pharmacological transhumanism involves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improving an aspect of our cognitive functioning using a pharmacological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substance. Crucially, this involves improving something that is not diagnostically
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
ill. A prime example of this is the use of Modafinil, a so-called “smart drug” whose
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
use is on the rise in many countries.
It is said to promote wakefulness, memory,
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
29
and clarity of thought, making it particularly popular amongst students faced with
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple​ ​exams​ ​and​ ​assignments.  
Gene therapy involves the process of replacing faulty or ailing genes with healthier
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ones. Transhumanism would see these processes go beyond treating faulty genes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but also used to “improve” a healthy set of genes, allowing for the selection of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desired characteristics. The term “designer babies” has now entered the public
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consciousness, reflecting the propagation of this once distant idea. While
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulations are still in place restricting gene therapies to nonhumans, the last two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decades have seen them used to “improve” certain species of plant. Applied to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humans, this could hypothetically result in the development of offspring who can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
jump​ ​higher,​ ​remember​ ​better,​ ​grow​ ​taller,​ ​and​ ​so​ ​on.  
These developments are at different stages, but they are all relatively early in their
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
life cycles. The pace at which technology moves forward predicts more widespread
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use in the near future. As we have seen with other scientific advances, we may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less than a year away from any one of these practices becoming not only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29​ ​Cox,​ ​D.​ ​(2013).​ ​Is​ ​modafinil​ ​safe​ ​in​ ​the​ ​long​ ​run?.​ ​The​ ​Guardian.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2013/may/31/is-modafinil-safe-in-long-term 

 
12​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
widespread, but the norm. Addressing this issue is critical for the Muslim world.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Failing to meet the demand for answers, or to provide answers in a timely manner,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
risks​ ​driving​ ​a​ ​further​ ​wedge​ ​between​ ​scholars​ ​and​ ​laypeople.  
The​ ​Transhumanist​ ​Religious​ ​Order 
While all transhumanists are not atheists (as evidenced by the existence of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Transhumanist Association), the majority appear to be so, with one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
survey reporting that over 75% of transhumanists identify as such.
Referring back
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30
to the Enlightenment, we can see within it both the roots of contemporary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanist movements, as well as arguably the proliferation of atheism, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certainly the proliferation of secularism. However, a closer examination of the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
themes contained within this branch of science, as well as the language that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employed, suggests that a case could be made that transhumanism is in fact similar
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
to​ ​a​ ​religious​ ​movement.  
Academic Steven Goldberg (d. 2010) is one of several scholars who has argued
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the transhumanist movement might well be seen as religious. Examining the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issue from the perspective of the constitution of the United State’s prohibition on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requiring students in a public school to take a course on a particular religion,
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Goldberg
asks,
“Does
transhumanism…address
fundamental
and
ultimate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions?” and, “Is transhumanism comprehensive?,” and suggests that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answer to both of those questions is affirmative. While he goes on to say that it is
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
not associated with formal rituals or structure, there seems to be enough evidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to put forward a case that transhumanism is akin to a religion, concluding that it
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
would be dishonest to claim that “the teachings of transhumanism are merely like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the curriculum of a chemistry course or a survey course on Western philosophy.”
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
31
With this point, Goldberg highlights the idea that whereas science might be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deemed a neutral branch of knowledge, transhumanism contains within it a vision
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
30​ ​Hughes,​ ​J.​ ​J​ ​(2007).​ ​The​ ​Compatibility​ ​of​ ​Religious​ ​and​ ​Transhumanist​ ​Views​ ​of​ ​Metaphysics,​ ​Suffering,​ ​Virtue 
and​ ​Transcendence​ ​in​ ​an​ ​Enhanced​ ​Future​.​ ​Institute​ ​for​ ​Ethics​ ​and​ ​Emerging​ ​Technologies.  
31​ ​Goldberg,​ ​S.​ ​(2009).​ ​Does​ ​the​ ​wall​ ​still​ ​stand?​ ​The​ ​implications​ ​for​ ​transhumanism​ ​for​ ​the​ ​separation​ ​of​ ​church 
and​ ​state​.​ ​Georgetown​ ​University​ ​Law​ ​Center.  

 
13​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
for how human beings should be that is more akin to a religion than a branch of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
science.  
Beth Singler, of the Faraday Institute for Science and Religion, is another academic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
who has written on the similarities between religious and transhumanist
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worldviews, noting some of the commonalities as the presence of, “a god-like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being of infinite knowledge…an escape of the flesh and this limited world
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(uploading our minds); a moment of transfiguration or ‘end of days’…prophets
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(even if they work for Google),” concluding that, “Consciously or unconsciously,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
religious ideas are at work in the narratives of those discussing, planning, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hoping for a future shaped by AI.” Another similarity that can be mentioned is the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
32
goal of transhumanism, as well as of many religions and certainly the Abrahamic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ones, of reaching a utopia, with the former trying to bring this about on earth, while
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the​ ​latter​ ​aiming​ ​for​ ​it​ ​in​ ​the​ ​next​ ​life.  
Where these ideas gain particular relevance is in highlighting the reality that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism is not—as it is billed by many of its adherents—a movement away
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from religious thinking. Viewing it as an alternative religious worldview allows us
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to compare it to other worldviews. The remainder of this paper compares the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanist​ ​and​ ​Islamic​ ​worldviews.  
Islamic​ ​Analysis​ ​of​ ​Transhumanism 
Despite what some, particularly the New Atheists, might argue, Islam is by no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means a religion that is opposed to science.
Setting aside Islam’s intellectual
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33
history, which boasts many great pioneers of science, as well as contemporary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examples of Muslim scientists, one can find directly in the Qur'an commandments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to seek knowledge: “Are those who have knowledge and those who have no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge alike? Only those of understanding are mindful” (Qur'an 39:9).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the Muslim scientists’ profession is seen as an extension of her or his
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beliefs, and as such, will be governed by certain principles. God-consciousness
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32​ ​Singler,​ ​B.​ ​(2017).​ ​Why​ ​is​ ​the​ ​language​ ​of​ ​transhumanists​ ​and​ ​religion​ ​so​ ​similar?.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
https://aeon.co/essays/why-is-the-language-of-transhumanists-and-religion-so-similar 
33​ ​Ali,​ ​A.​ ​(2017).​ ​The​ ​Structure​ ​of​ ​Scientific​ ​Productivity​ ​in​ ​Islamic​ ​Civilisation:​ ​Orientalists’​ ​Fables.​ ​Yaqeen 
Institute​.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from:​ ​https://yaqeeninstitute.org/en/asadullah/scientism/ 

 
14​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
should envelop them, a ​taqwa that will have them asking fundamental questions
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about what they are doing, what they hope to achieve, what the impacts of their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research might be, and whether or not it will ultimately benefit their fellow human
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
beings.  
While both the Islamic and secular scientist will point to their ethical values, these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
values can diverge and even contradict each other; perhaps this is unsurprising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given that Muslims derive their ethical values from revelation. However, it is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
simply on ethics that the two worldviews differ. The Muslim worldview is drawn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
from revelation which contains a narrative that describes the purpose of life, and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also elaborates on the meaning behind human limitations. As transhumanists do not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use the Qur'an as a reference point, it is only natural that they would view the
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world​ ​in​ ​a​ ​significantly​ ​different​ ​manner.  
It is therefore unsurprising to find that the Muslim differing in several key aspects
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the secular scientist when it comes to transhumanism. Transhumanism
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents humanity’s most elaborate attempt to create a new reality for our being;
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
it is befitting that such a monumental change would in certain areas sit at odds with
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
those​ ​who​ ​believe​ ​in​ ​a​ ​heedful​ ​Creator.  
Do​ ​Not​ ​Transgress​ ​The​ ​Balance 
One of the most pertinent Qur'anic verses relevant to this discussion is found in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Surah Al-Rahman, “And the heaven He raised and imposed the balance. That you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not transgress within the balance. And establish weight in justice and do not make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deficient the balance” (Qur'an 55:7-9). While these verses have traditionally been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understood to be in reference to the balance of justice (Al-Jalalayn, Ibn Kathir,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maududi), some contemporary authors have extended their application to a balance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
within nature and its laws.
-
Of course, the two meanings are not mutually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 35
34​ ​Masud,​ ​I.​ ​(2015).​ ​Tafsir​ ​Surah​ ​al​ ​Rahman:​ ​The​ ​Ecosystem​ ​of​ ​Space,​ ​The​ ​Earth​ ​and​ ​Why​ ​Mankind​ ​Is​ ​Imbalanced. 
Sunnah​ ​Muakada.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
https://sunnahmuakada.wordpress.com/2015/11/01/tafsir-surah-al-rahman-the-ecosystem-of-space-the-earth-and-wh
y-mankind-is-imbalanced/ 
35​ ​Meah,​ ​J.​ ​(2016).​ ​What​ ​Islamic​ ​Ethics​ ​Have​ ​to​ ​Say​ ​in​ ​Relation​ ​to​ ​the​ ​Environment?​ ​Seekers​ ​Hub.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
http://seekershub.org/ans-blog/2016/11/30/islamic-ethics-say-relation-environment/ 
 

 
15​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
exclusive, and might even be seen as complementary. This verse is particularly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relevant to transhumanism when it comes to genetic interventions, as through such
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions we may irreparably undo a delicate balance that exists within nature.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
We cannot simply dismiss this line of argument as bioconservative fearmongering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the effects of imbalance created by humans are all around us, from global
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
warming, to extinction of animal species at an unprecedented rate, to diminishing
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
natural resources. While much attention goes to fossil fuels, we are now hearing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more and more about the impending scarcity of even more crucial resources such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as water, and perhaps not too long from now, clean air. Many of these developing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
crises were at some level initiated by scientific investigations for which scientists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had not adequately considered all the consequences. These investigations moved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forward before the complete picture could be understood, and by the time the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dangers were discovered, much damage had already been done. “And when they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are told, ‘Do not spread corruption on earth,’ they answer, ‘We are but improving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
things!’ Oh, verily, it is they who are spreading corruption but they perceive it
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
not.” (Qur'an 2:12-13). Playing with human genes is an enormous step into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
something that might not be fully understood. Errors at this level could lead to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
catastrophic fallout. Perhaps what is most interesting in these verses is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commandment to “not make deficient the balance.” This verse suggests that human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beings will reach a stage where they can upset the balance; we certainly seem to be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in​ ​the​ ​midst​ ​of​ ​that​ ​stage.  
Reflecting further upon the idea of transgressing the balance, two main themes can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be identified as relevant. One of these relates to the ill effects of transgressing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
balance. Genetically modified organisms (GMO) used as foods are now becoming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more common. GMO processes are based on some of the same principles of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanist thought, such as the need to improve creation by way of genetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention. While this topic is much too broad and deep to be covered within the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bounds of this paper, the point that can be made is that the jury is still out on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether GMO foods are harmless
or toxic. Studies have linked GMOs to a range
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
36
36​ ​Entine,​ ​J.​ ​(2013).​ ​2000+​ ​Reasons​ ​Why​ ​GMOs​ ​Are​ ​Safe​ ​to​ ​Eat​ ​And​ ​Environmentally​ ​Sustainable.​ ​Forbes. 
Retrieved​ ​from: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jonentine/2013/10/14/2000-reasons-why-gmos-are-safe-to-eat-and-environmentally-su
stainable/amp/ 

 
16​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
of ailments, including blood toxins,
gluten disorders,
breast cancer,
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
38
39
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in children.
It would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40
premature to delve into genetically modifying humans, when we have yet to get a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
grasp on the effects of genetically modified plants and animals. On this level, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
warning found in the Qur'an could be seen as stemming from a sense of protecting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
our​ ​world​ ​and​ ​ourselves.  
It could further be argued that these Qur’anic verses go beyond a warning of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
harms that might come from transgressing the balance; these verses could also be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seen as a call to intellectual responsibility and humility. The entire philosophy of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism is predicated on the aspiration for superhuman prowess, deifying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the human race, and attaining ascendancy. It involves a worship of our future
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
selves. Additionally, there is an underlying irrational assumption that a limited
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
biological organism can achieve limitless conquest in comprehending matters of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the universe and subjecting them to our will. Humanity can reach the heights of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being able to transgress the balance, while simultaneously possessing the free will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be able to choose to do so. European fiction is littered with characters who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transgressed this balance, from Victor Frankenstein and his ill-thought-out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scientific endeavors, to Icarus and his unquenchable drive for more. In the Qur'anic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
story of Pharaoh and Haman, we see a similar drive to attain supremacy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
engage​ ​in​ ​self-aggrandizement​ ​and​ ​self-deification:  
Pharaoh said: “O Chiefs! No God do I know for you but myself: therefore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
O Haman! Light me a (kiln to bake bricks) out of clay, and build me a lofty
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
palace, that I may mount up to the God of Moses: but as far as I am
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
concerned,​ ​I​ ​think​ ​(Moses)​ ​is​ ​a​ ​liar!”​ ​(Qur'an​ ​28:38)  
37​ ​Aris,​ ​A.​ ​&​ ​Leblanc.​ ​(2011).​ ​Maternal​ ​and​ ​fetal​ ​exposure​ ​to​ ​pesticides​ ​associated​ ​to​ ​genetically​ ​modified​ ​foods​ ​in 
Eastern​ ​Townships​ ​of​ ​Quebec,​ ​Canada.​ ​Reproductive​ ​Technology​,​ ​31​,​ ​1-6.  
38​ ​Smith,​ ​J.,​ ​M.​ ​(2013).​ ​Can​ ​Genetically​ ​Engineered​ ​Foods​ ​Explain​ ​the​ ​Exploding​ ​Gluten​ ​Sensitivity?​ ​Institute​ ​of 
Responsible​ ​Technology.  
39​ ​Thongprakaisang,​ ​S.,​ ​Thiantanawat,​ ​A.,​ ​Rangkadilok,​ ​N.,​ ​Suriyo,​ ​T.,​ ​&​ ​Satayavivad,​ ​J.​ ​(2013).​ ​Glyphosate 
induces​ ​human​ ​breast​ ​cancer​ ​cells​ ​growth​ ​via​ ​estrogen​ ​receptors.​ ​Food​ ​and​ ​Chemical​ ​Toxicology​,​ ​59​,​ ​129-136. 
40​ ​De​ ​Araujo,​ ​J.​ ​S.A.,​ ​Delgado,​ ​I.​ ​F.,​ ​&​ ​Paumgartten,​ ​F.​ ​J.​ ​R.​ ​(2016).​ ​Glyphosate​ ​and​ ​adverse​ ​pregnancy​ ​outcomes: 
A​ ​systematic​ ​review​ ​of​ ​observational​ ​studies.​ ​BMC​ ​Public​ ​Health​,​ ​16​,​ ​472-484. 

 
17​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
The story of the Prophet Moses and Pharaoh is one of the most frequently recurring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
stories in the Qur'an. The Pharaoh can be seen as representing an archetype of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worst type of ruler, using his power to inflict misery on his people, discriminatory,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delusional, power-hungry, and narcissistic. The Qur'anic Pharaoh had indeed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transgressed many boundaries; therefore, Moses was commanded to, “Go to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pharaoh.​ ​Indeed,​ ​he​ ​has​ ​transgressed”​ ​(Qur'an​ ​20:24).  
This particular transgression seems to have been born from his delusional desire to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
conquer the Divine; Pharaoh said, "I am your Lord, Most High" (Qur'an 79:24)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perhaps due in part to a narcissistic drive. In this account we are given insight in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the heart and mind of this despotic ruler. Pharaoh attempted to use the crafts of his
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
age to gain power over what lay before him, and the ancient Egyptians were master
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
builders. We see here a false belief that by way of his craft, Pharaoh believed he
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could conquer the Heavens, and assume divinity himself. The fate of Pharaoh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the Islamic narrative is well known, and continues to serve as a stark
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
warning​ ​to​ ​those​ ​who​ ​pursue​ ​the​ ​delusion​ ​of​ ​self-deification.  
The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche declared—on the lips of his famous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
protagonist
Zarathustra—that
human
beings
should
embrace
their
own
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self-sufficiency as an ​Ubermensch (super-man), declaring the death of God.
But
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41
does a declaration of independence from God empower the human being or shackle
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
him to a delusional pursuit for greatness and conquest? Human beings come
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together on a basis of mutual cooperation and filling each other's needs, thus
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establishing norms for social conduct. Perhaps the most dangerous men in human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
history have been those who thought they needed no one.
The Qur’anic story of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42
Pharaoh​ ​provides​ ​a​ ​key​ ​reminder​ ​of​ ​this​ ​lesson. 
Another verse from the Qur'an serves as an even more direct warning against the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential​ ​dangers​ ​of​ ​transhumanism,​ ​with​ ​Iblis​ ​saying:  
41​ ​Adrian​ ​Del​ ​Caro.​ ​Grounding​ ​the​ ​Nietzsche​ ​Rhetoric​ ​of​ ​Earth​.​ ​(De​ ​Gruyter​ ​2004).​ ​p.​ ​349. 
42​ ​Consider​ ​for​ ​instance​ ​the​ ​review​ ​of​ ​the​ ​atrocities​ ​of​ ​anti-theistic​ ​communist​ ​regimes​ ​of​ ​Soviet​ ​Russia,​ ​Maoist 
China,​ ​and​ ​Pol​ ​Pot’s​ ​Khmer​ ​Rouge.​ ​A​ ​review​ ​of​ ​some​ ​of​ ​the​ ​relevant​ ​historical​ ​details​ ​can​ ​be​ ​found​ ​in​ ​ ​Khan​ ​N. 
‘Forever​ ​on​ ​Trial​ ​-​ ​Islam​ ​and​ ​the​ ​charge​ ​of​ ​Violence.’​ ​Yaqeen​ ​Institute​ ​2016. 
https://yaqeeninstitute.org/nazir-khan/forever-on-trial-islam-and-the-charge-of-violence/ 

 
18​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
“I will mislead them, and I will create in them false desires; I will order them to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
slit​ ​the​ ​ears​ ​of​ ​cattle,​ ​and​ ​to​ ​deface​ ​the​ ​(fair)​ ​nature​ ​created​ ​by​ ​Allah…”  
And​ ​the​ ​verse​ ​continues: 
“...Whoever, forsaking Allah, takes Satan for a friend, hath of a surety suffered a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
loss​ ​that​ ​is​ ​manifest.”​ ​(Qur'an​ ​4:119)  
Here we are warned against defacing the nature of creation. There is a discussion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to be had here: does transhumanism represent a defacing or a correction of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
creation? Amongst Islamic scholarship, the use of procedures and prosthetics to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correct a defect is generally encouraged, given the narration of a companion who
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the Prophetﷺinstructed to obtain a nose made out of gold after his nose was cut
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
off in battle.
Contemporary scholars have ruled positively on the permissibility of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43
having corrective laser eye surgery.
The key difference between corrective and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
transhumanist procedures may lie in their objectives; whereas surgical procedures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attempt to correct something that has gone wrong (due to the presence of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
biological abnormality, injury, defect, or illness), the transhumanist goal is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve what is seen as a “half-baked” creation by way of giving us more than we
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as humans are born with, be it a longer life, more sensory perceptions, and so on.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Their starting point is that even a healthy human being is trapped within the bounds
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
of what they have been given, with transhumanist practice offering to give them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more. Going back to the example of GMOs, one can easily see where this can lead
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to​ ​more​ ​harm​ ​than​ ​improvement.  
Scientific​ ​Intervention​ ​vs.​ ​Jihad​ ​of​ ​the​ ​Self  
Key to the transhumanist worldview is the process of improving humankind by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way of scientific intervention, be it increasing memory through psychoactive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substances or editing genes in order to eradicate an unwanted facet of a person’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
physical or psychological makeup. German philosopher Jürgen Habermas has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
raised several critiques of such interventions. He objects to instrumentalizing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human beings, and takes issue with imposing a subjective opinion on how humans
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
43​ ​Jami​ ​al-Tirmidhi​ ​1770.​ ​https://sunnah.com/tirmidhi/24/54 
44​ ​http://www.islamweb.net/emainpage/index.php?page=showfatwa&Option=FatwaId&Id=119765 

 
19​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
“should be” and the resultant violation of autonomy. He has also opined that if one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
attempts to improve or increase one aspect of a human being, it is natural that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
another will suffer.
Certainly, Habermas’ ideas about violation of autonomy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
instrumentalizing human beings would readily find a home within Islamic thought.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Islam places a strong emphasis on autonomy: “And no bearer of burdens will bear
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the burden of another…he who grows (in goodness), grows only for himself…”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Qur'an 35:18). The Qur'an goes further, “O mankind, fear your Lord and fear a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Day when no father will avail his son, nor will a son avail his father at all…”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Qur'an 31:33). Muslims are taught to be responsible for their own actions, and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hold themselves to account, for they will alone be answerable to the Almighty for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what​ ​they​ ​have​ ​done.  
This area of inquiry highlights that transhumanist interventions may work against
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
free will. Free will is a responsibility that opens the door to individuals choosing to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
engage in behavior that is harmful to themselves, those around them, and society as
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a whole. Islam is certainly not against eradicating undesirable thoughts and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviors; engaging in the struggle to do this is one of the core aspects of being a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Muslim. But it calls people to do this by way of a struggle against oneself (​jihad​).
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Having the potential to do evil is part and parcel of having a truly free will. This is
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
not viewed as a flaw in our designs, as the transhumanist posits; rather, Islam
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
views​ ​this​ ​as​ ​being​ ​an​ ​integral​ ​part​ ​of​ ​the​ ​Divine​ ​design.  
The recognition of our human deficiencies may in fact be hard-wired to our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivational drives as human beings—we act because we have needs to fulfill,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hopes, goals, and aspirations. Imagine a utopian world where human beings were
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
so technologically sufficient that they didn’t need to move or exert any effort at all,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
their
brains
electrochemically
stimulated
to
be
in
a
constant
state
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
endorphin-induced pleasure, their bodies technologically equipped to require no
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conscious intake of food or output of waste. In such a state they would find their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
lives entirely bereft of value or purpose—why exist at all with no ultimate goal or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
quest, no obstacles to overcome, no aspirations to achieve? Is that really a desirable
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
endpoint for human existence? Nietzsche’s Last Men, devoid of challenge, robbed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45​ ​Habermas,​ ​J.​ ​(2003).​ ​The​ ​Future​ ​of​ ​Human​ ​Nature​.​ ​Cambridge.​ ​Polity​ ​Press.  

 
20​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
of aspiration, contented in their small world, “ineradicable as the flea,” believe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themselves to have found happiness.
Leon Kass’s words are even more scathing,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46
“in his moment of triumph, Promethean man will become a contented cow.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
47
Coming from the psychological perspective, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi popularized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the notion of “flow”; his thesis centres on the idea that humans are at their happiest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
when they are immersed in a challenge which is within their level of efficacy.
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
48
Without challenge, this would never be possible. More anecdotally, it is common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to hear an individual describing the sheer feeling of pleasure and worth that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
derived​ ​from​ ​overcoming​ ​an​ ​obstacle.  
The Islamic position could be described as seeing the human being as being born
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into a good state (“We have certainly created man in the best of stature” Qur'an
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95:4), who is then challenged with the realities of the world and the human
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
condition; it is this struggle that causes some of humanity to “fall” (“Then we
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
return him to the lowest of the low” Qur'an 95:5). It is adhering to God’s guidance,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
as laid out in revelation, that allows humans to succeed: “Except for those who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
believe and do righteous deeds, for they will have a reward uninterrupted” (Qur'an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
95:6); “He has succeeded who purifies it, and he has failed who instills it [with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
corruption]”​ ​(Qur'an​ ​91:9-10).  
This places the Islamic worldview in conflict with that of the transhumanist school
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in regards to what constitutes human nature. Man’s nature and creation is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“half-baked” as Bostrom writes; rather, humanity is created from a divine source
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
with divine purpose. The task then falls to each human being to struggle and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preserve their goodness, by way of inner struggle (​al-jihad al-nafs​), rather than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biotechnological intervention. This struggle is rooted in humanity’s unique position
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
of possessing free will, as opposed to other forms of creation that operate within a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
more limited scope of what we might define as choice. Muslims see this bestowing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of free will as being one of the divine secrets. God responded to the angels, when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they asked him why He would create a species who can fall to corruption, “Indeed,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
46​ ​Nietzsche,​ ​F.,​ ​&​ ​Kaufman,​ ​W.​ ​(1995).​ ​Thus​ ​spoke​ ​Zarathustra:​ ​A​ ​book​ ​for​ ​all​ ​and​ ​none​.​ ​New​ ​York.​ ​Modern 
Library.​ ​pp.​ ​21 
47​ ​Kass,​ ​L.​ ​(2002).​ ​Life,​ ​Liberty,​ ​and​ ​the​ ​Defense​ ​of​ ​Dignity​.​ ​San​ ​Francisco.​ ​Encounter​ ​Books.  
48​ ​Csikszentmihalyi,​ ​M.​ ​ ​(1990).​ ​Flow:​ ​The​ ​Psychology​ ​of​ ​Optimal​ ​Experience​.​ ​New​ ​York:​ ​Harper​ ​&​ ​Row. 

 
21​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
I know that which you do not know” (Qur'an 2:30). On reading the transhumanist
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
goal of eradicating humanity’s ills, such as rape, lying and cheating, by way of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biotechnological or genetic intervention, one must ask how this can be done while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preserving free will. It is difficult to reflect on this and not find oneself thinking of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Huxley’s​ ​dystopia.  
Eradicating​ ​Inequality
 
Bostrom argues that transhumanism can be utilised to eradicate inequality, listing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equal access to transhumanist technology as being one of the significant goals of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the movement. The latter concern for transhumanists is due to the inevitable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inequality associated with new technologies. One cannot separate a science from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the context within which it is developed. The biases that are inherent to the wider
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
governing worldview of a society are likely to be replicated and imprinted upon the
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge and practice that is developed within it. In his writings on Islam and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nanotechnology, Musa Furber describes unequal access to nanotechnology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between nations as leading to a “nano divide.”
Furber also mentions concerns
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
49
regarding the directions that such research takes. This point is particularly pertinent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
as we are already witnessing the effects of biases on what is researched within the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
medical community; tropical diseases that affect more than 1 billion people are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
understudied due to the fact that the majority of sufferers are impoverished. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
makes the disease relatively non-lucrative for pharmaceutical companies, as well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as less pressing, due to the psychological distance between those who make key
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decisions​ ​within​ ​the​ ​field​ ​and​ ​those​ ​who​ ​suffer​ ​the​ ​effects​ ​of​ ​the​ ​ailment.   
50
Aldous Huxley once wrote, “Science in itself is morally neutral; it becomes good
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
or evil according as it is applied.”
It seems likely that any inequalities present
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
51
within our societies today would naturally be extended to any new scientific or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technological developments. The prediction that transhumanist developments will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
help to eradicate inequality seems deeply mistaken. Observing what is currently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
going on within transhumanist practice reveals a clear pattern of it being the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
49​ ​Furber,​ ​M.​ ​(2008).​ ​Ethical​ ​dimensions​ ​of​ ​nanotechnology.​ ​Tabah​ ​Foundation​,​ ​6​,​ ​1-18. 
50​ ​World​ ​Health​ ​Organization​ ​(WHO).​ ​(2017).​ ​Neglected​ ​Tropical​ ​Diseases.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from: 
http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/ 
51​ ​Huxley,​ ​A.​ ​(1974).​ ​Texts​ ​and​ ​Pretexts​ ​(The​ ​collected​ ​works​ ​of​ ​Aldous​ ​Huxley)​.​ ​London:​ ​Chatto​ ​&​ ​Windus. 

 
22​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
playground of the rich. Leading figures such as Elon Musk are often millionaires if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
not billionaires (with Musk commanding a fortune of 15.6 billion U.S. dollars),
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
while the laymen and women interested in cryogenic freezing have to part with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sizeable $20,000, making such technologies unavailable to
the majority of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world’s inhabitants. Far from being an eradicator of inequality, it seems likely that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
transhumanism will involve the rich developing tools for the rich, leading to even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
higher levels of inequality within society. Keeping wealth within certain circles,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and not distributing it amongst wider society, is advised against in the Qur'an;
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Muslims are instructed to distribute wealth to those in need, “...so that it will not be
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
a​ ​perpetual​ ​distribution​ ​among​ ​the​ ​rich​ ​from​ ​among​ ​you​…​”(Qur'an​ ​59:7). 
Prolonging​ ​Life​ ​and​ ​Enriching​ ​It  
Many transhumanists include amongst their goals the pursuit of immortality. While
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attaining eternal life is a goal shared by most religious faithful, including Muslims,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trying to achieve it in this world (​dunya​) is foreign to the Muslim mind. The
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamic narrative is clear: this life is but one part of the journey of the human and
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
success does not involve prolonging it, rather, it is found in emerging from it, by
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
way​ ​of​ ​death,​ ​having​ ​lived​ ​a​ ​life​ ​of​ ​goodness​ ​and​ ​repentance.  
The​ ​Prophet​ ​ﷺ​ ​told​ ​his​ ​companions: 
Be in the world as if you were a stranger or a traveler along the path. If you
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
survive till late afternoon, do not expect [to be alive in] the morning. If you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
survive till morning, do not expect [to be alive in] the late afternoon. Take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from​ ​your​ ​health​ ​before​ ​your​ ​sickness​ ​and​ ​your​ ​life​ ​before​ ​your​ ​death.  
52
Prophetic sayings such as this paint a picture in which the life of this world is not
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
meant to be perfect, nor is it something Muslims should cling to. It is only by
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
taking the concept of the afterlife out of the equation, as many transhumanists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have,​ ​that​ ​the​ ​pursuit​ ​of​ ​longer​ ​(and​ ​perhaps​ ​everlasting)​ ​life​ ​seems​ ​worthwhile.  
However, Islam should not be seen as a body-denying religion. Shaykh Abdal
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Hakim Murad highlights this point in the context of transhumanism; while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52​ ​Bukhari​ ​–​ ​170.  

 
23​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
elements of Christianity, and some of the core ideas behind Buddhism, center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around the denial of the body, Islam gives the body its due, and its owner has a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
responsibility over it.
It must be cleaned at least a few times per day, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
53
nourished with food that is not only ​halal (permissible) but ​tayyib (good and pure)
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well; it should be kept well-groomed, perfumed, and clothed in clean clothes.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even after death, when the soul has departed, the body is washed, clothed, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prayed over. Islamic opposition to transhumanist thinking does not stem from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
denial of the body, nor this life as a whole. Muslims believe that Islam treads a fine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
balance​ ​between​ ​the​ ​extremes​ ​of​ ​body​ ​denial​ ​and​ ​the​ ​quest​ ​for​ ​bodily​ ​immortality.  
While transhumanists claim to be on the path towards enriching lives, the Islamic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
position might deem their focus to be hollow; focusing on prolonging life rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than giving it meaning, focusing on crudely improving the mind’s faculties rather
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than organically purifying it, and focusing on giving us more avenues of sensory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perception, rather than better utilizing the senses that we have already been given.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Nazir Khan makes a strong case for the existence of a form of transcending
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
human limitations already present within the Islamic tradition. While one would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not employ the term transhumanism due to the philosophical and ideological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baggage of that term, there exists an idea within Islam regarding the improvement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of one’s sensory perceptions, as well as one’s heart and mind, not altogether
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different to the transhumanist goal of improving these faculties. Khan writes that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the enemy of improved sensory faculties is being in a state of heedlessness
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(​ghafla​). He quotes the great Islamic scholar, Ibn al-Qayyim (d. 1350), “If
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
heedlessness dominates most of someone’s time, the tarnish on his heart grows in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proportion. And if the heart is tarnished, it ceases to reflect things as they are…and
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
if the tarnish builds up, blackens and envelops the heart completely, the heart’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflective quality and perception will be totally lost…” This connection between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one’s heart and the rest of one’s body is ever-present within the Islamic worldview,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
but seems to be completely ignored by secular approaches. Khan uses the famous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hadith​, when the Prophetﷺquoted the Almighty, to further back up this line of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thought; “My servant continues to draw closer to Me with voluntary acts of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
worship until he becomes beloved to Me. And when I love him, I become the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
53​ ​Murad,​ ​A.​ ​H.​ ​(2010).​ ​Our​ ​Role​ ​–​ ​Exclusive.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from​ ​https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bJGDbGcPm4 

 
24​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
hearing with which he hears, and the seeing with which he sees” (Nawawi 38). He
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also quotes Imam al-Shawkani (d. 1250 H) who wrote, “God supports a servant’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
faculties with His Divine Light such that the paths of guidance become intuitively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obvious and the allure of worldly seductions vanishes.” Here we see what might be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
called Islamic transhumanism, characterized by the link between one’s devotion to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the Almighty and how well one can perceive the world around them.
While it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
54
proposes that an individual’s faculties can improve, it is a different form of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
improvement than that proposed by secular transhumanism, and the difference
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflects the difference between the two worldviews. The Islamic endgame is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
better
hereafter
and
a
more
spiritually
and morally enlightened human;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements to the self brought about by “Islamic transhumanism” lead to an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ease in performing good, by being better placed to perceive the world as it is. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
atheistic endgame is a maximization of this life, in terms of length and enjoyment,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and so this brand of transhumanism aims to increase human experience in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world.  
Discussion​ ​and​ ​Conclusion  
Both Islamic and secular transhumanists see the human being as a flawed creature.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Muslims are taught in the Qur'an that there is a Divine reason for this. While
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
humans are seen as being created by God in an excellent mold, it is also part of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
their nature to think and behave in negative ways. Transhumanists also point to the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
state of humanity as evidence of its need for interventions. While they agree on this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point, there are significant differences in the ways in which they feel this should be
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
addressed. Central to the Islamic view is the idea of struggling against one’s lower
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self to overcome maladaptive impulses, to do justice to one’s higher self, and more
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
crucially, to live in a way that is true to the path that has been ordained by the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creator. The transhumanist idea of fundamentally changing our creation so as to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remove the possibility of committing errors does not readily find a home within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Islamic thinking. The responsibility for improving one’s conduct is placed squarely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
on the individual; it is each individual who will ultimately be responsible for their
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54​ ​Khan,​ ​N.​ ​M.​ ​(2015).​ ​Dhikr​ ​–​ ​Awakening​ ​from​ ​Illusion.​ ​Spiritual​ ​Perception:​ ​Academic​ ​Answers​ ​to​ ​Spiritual 
Questions.​ ​Retrieved​ ​from:​ ​http://spiritualperception.org/dhikr-awakening-from-illusion/ 

 
25​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
own actions. In relation to this, one of the key questions that as yet remains
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unanswered by transhumanists is how they will strive for the elimination of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wrongdoing without compromising free will. Free will and individual autonomy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are key to the Islamic narrative. The fact that human beings commit errors is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
seen as the result of a “half-baked” creation, as some transhumanists believe;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
rather, this is the fault of the individual, and to a lesser extent, can be the fault of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the societies hosting the individual. It is not only Muslims who raise concerns
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding the violation of free will that is likely to ensue with transhumanism, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
evidenced​ ​by​ ​the​ ​writings​ ​of​ ​scholars​ ​such​ ​as​ ​Habermas.  
Is it possible to formulate an “Islamic transhumanism”? It would be short-sighted
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
to reject this possibility. Islamic scholars need to grapple with questions around the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
permissibility of intervening at a genetic level to incline an individual to act in a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
“better” way; if transhumanists were to offer the possibility of modifying a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
human’s genes so that they would be less likely to lie, would that be forbidden?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less controversially, certain transhumanist practices might find a home within
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Islamic biomedical sciences. Taking the example of improving memory, such an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention might be deemed favorable so long as it brought about no harm.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Philosophers such as Leon Kass have posited that improving faculty ​x will likely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
lead to a decline in faculty ​y​,
highlighting how even this relatively benign
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55
example needs much more deliberation. The example nonetheless serves to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highlight that not all transhumanist practices touch on controversial issues such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
free​ ​will​ ​and​ ​irreversible​ ​genetic​ ​alteration.  
Rephrasing the previous question a little, and asking, “Is there an Islamic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism?,” one might argue that something similar already exists.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, this is a transhumanism that is distinct from that of the contemporary
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
secular
branch
of
transhumanism.
While
the modern movement towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transhumanism aims to improve sensory perception by way of scientific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention, Islamic transhumanism calls on believers to improve and purify their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceptions by way of God-consciousness, brought about deliberately increasing in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
remembrance of God. It might be argued that a Muslim’s transhumanist goals are
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
55​ ​Kass,​ ​L.​ ​(2003).​ ​Ageless​ ​bodies,​ ​happy​ ​souls.​ ​The​ ​New​ ​Atlantis​,​ ​1​,​ ​9-28. 

 
26​ ​ ​ ​ ​|​ ​ ​ ​Immortality​ ​on​ ​Earth?​ ​Transhumanism​ ​through​ ​Islamic​ ​Lenses 
directly tied to their devotion to God, rather than mastery of secular science. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then embodies the fundamental difference between an Islamic transhumanism and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
secular​ ​transhumanism.  
 
 
 
 
 

