 
 
The effectiveness of adaptive training for stress inoculation in a simu-
lated astronaut task
 
Tor Finseth, Michael C. Dorneich, Nir Keren, Warren Franke, Stephen Vardeman, Jonathan Segal, Andrew 
Deick, Elizabeth Cavanah, & Kelly Thompson 
Iowa State University 
 
Astronauts operate in an environment with multiple hazards that can develop into life-threatening emergency 
situations. Managing stress in emergencies may require cognitive resources and lead to diminishing perfor-
mance. Stress training aims to maintain performance under stress by methodically increasing stressor levels 
to build inoculation against stress. An adaptive virtual reality (VR) training system was developed with real-
time stress detection by using machine learning on psychophysiological responses. Using a VR simulation 
of a spaceflight emergency fire, stress classifications were used to trigger adaptations of the VR environmen-
tal stressors (e.g., smoke, alarms, flashing lights), with the goal of maintaining a manageable level of stress 
during training. Fifty-seven healthy subjects underwent task training over eight trials with adaptive training 
(adaptive, n=19); results were compared to trials with predetermined gradual increases in stressors (gradu-
ated, n=18), and with trials with constant low-level stressors (skill-only, n=20). Stress responses were meas-
ured through heart rate, heart rate variability (i.e., root mean squared of successive differences (RMSSD), 
low frequency to high frequency (LF/HF) ratio), and task performance (distance-from-fire). Heart rate de-
creased and RMSSD increased pre-post training for all experimental conditions. The LF/HF ratio decreased 
pre-post training for the adaptive condition, but not in the other conditions. Results suggests that all condi-
tions had lower stress, but the adaptive condition was more successful. Task performance showed a marginal 
increase across trials for the adaptive condition. Preliminary results suggest that training with the adaptive 
stress system can prepare individuals for responding to stressors better than skill-only and graduated training.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
As the length of spaceflights increases, astronauts are more 
likely to encounter emergencies. They will have to respond to 
these high-stress, life-threatening situations efficiently and 
quickly. Acute stress can have detrimental effects on attention, 
memory, perceptual-motor performance, judgment, and deci-
sion-making (Driskell et al., 2008). These stressful events may 
lead to increased risk of harm, injury, mortality, or mission fail-
ure. NASA seeks developing countermeasures to prevent the 
consequences due to acute stress (NASA, 2021).  
Traditional training practices focus on performance out-
comes, but often use training environments that poorly replicate 
the stress felt during operations (Driskell et al., 2008). Supple-
menting current training with training that focuses on an indi-
vidual's acute stress may prevent adverse behavior and perfor-
mance degradation during actual emergencies. Building stress 
inoculation for potentially hazardous spaceflight conditions 
may prevent freezing behavior and apportion cognitive re-
sources for the task.  
Advances in virtual reality (VR) technology allow simulat-
ing stressors that approximate those of the real task environ-
ment. It is possible to categorize trainees' stress levels by using 
machine learning algorithms with physiological sensors, which 
then facilitates personalizing an environment to build stress in-
oculation and maintain performance (Jones & Dechmerowski, 
2016). However, there is a need for further evidence that VR 
stress training programs can build inoculation and maintain per-
formance (Pallavicini et al., 2016). This paper will review 
stress, acute effects on performance, training pedagogies using 
stress, adaptive systems, and detail the development and pre-
liminary evaluation of an adaptive stress training system. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
When individuals perceive a stressor, they initiate a stress 
appraisal process wherein the perceived magnitude of the 
stressor is compared to the individual's ability to meet the de-
mand imposed by the stressor (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). This 
stress appraisal results in a stress response that causes various 
physiological, emotional, cognitive, social, and/or behavioral 
effects (Driskell et al., 2008). Physiological responses often in-
clude inhibiting the parasympathetic nervous system, which is 
responsible for calming the body, while simultaneously activat-
ing the sympathetic nervous system (Giannakakis et al., 2019). 
Due to the significant physiological response, stress can play a 
significant role in an individual’s ability to accomplish a task. 
Presence of a stressor perceived as a threatening stimuli 
such as noise, time pressure, task load or ambiguity often results 
in emotional states such as anxiety, fear, or frustration (Driskell 
et al., 2008). These emotional states dampen attentional capac-
ity by focusing the individual’s mental resources on the stressor 
(Wachtel, 1968). This, in turn, limits the amount of cognitive 
bandwidth devoted to solving novel tasks under strenuous con-
ditions, which ultimately reduces performance (Eysenck et al., 
2007). The key to retaining unstressed performance in the pres-
ence of a stressor is to adjust the individual's stress appraisal. 
Stress exposure training (SET) acclimatizes users to stress, 
which improves their ability to perform a specific task under 
stress (Johnston & Cannon-Bowers, 1996). SET is intended to 
improve performance, reduce anxiety, and increase perceived 
Copyright 2021 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved. 10.1177/1071181321651241
Proceedings of the 2021 HFES 65th International Annual Meeting
1541

 
 
control while performing tasks (Saunders et al., 1996). SET is 
an extension of a psychotherapy intervention to healthy individ-
uals in demanding environments (Meichenbaum, 1985). In 
combination with skill-only training, SET has been used in a 
myriad of professions, including, bomb disposal, emergency 
medicine, and firefighting (Driskell & Salas, 1996).  
One SET component is practicing coping skills under grad-
ually increasing stress levels, known as graduated stress expo-
sure (GSE) (Johnston & Cannon-Bowers, 1996). The key to 
successful GSE is to keep the trainee within a specific zone of 
stress—enough to engage their attention and keep them focused 
but not enough to be overwhelming, which could result in in-
creased sensitivity to a similar stressor in the future. Further, 
GSE should be implemented after the trainee has become pro-
ficient in executing the task in order to avoid stress hampering 
trainee’s ability to learn how to perform the task. The more fre-
quently the individual is familiarized with a stressful situation, 
the higher the stress threshold becomes (Driskell et al., 2008).  
An adaptive system may be able to optimize training by 
choosing when and how to automate training functions/actions. 
Adaptive systems can be characterized as a joint human-ma-
chine system that adapts its behavior to meet the user’s needs 
without explicit instruction from the user (Feigh, Dorneich, and 
Hayes, 2012). These systems include components that process 
information, classify data into categories for making decisions 
on the adaptation need, and manage the adaptation duration and 
magnitude. Adaptations can be triggered during task execution 
by either the human, environment, or the current system state 
that then satisfies predetermined adaptation rules.  
An adaptive VR-based training system can adapt stressor 
levels based on the crewmember's stress response to increase 
inoculation to stressors. For this study, an adaptive system was 
developed and evaluated. An experiment was conducted to 
compare the effectiveness of training with adaptations in com-
parison to training with graduated or skill-only pedagogies. A 
simulated emergency in the form of a fire aboard a VR Interna-
tional Space Station (VR-ISS) was used. Stress responses and 
task performance were measured across training sessions.  
 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
 
An adaptive system was designed to assess stress level via 
physiological signals in real-time, and then adapt the simulated 
environment to optimize training to user capabilities (Figure 1). 
The system relied on five components: Physiological Sensors, 
Context Assessment & Classification, Training Module, Adap-
tation Manager, and VR simulation.  
To effectively adapt the system to meet user needs, a per-
sonalized stress profile was established through continuous 
measurement of stress levels. Physiological sensors collected 
data in real-time, pre-processed to remove artifacts, and used to 
derive features that commonly measure autonomic system acti-
vation (Giannakakis et al., 2019). The Context Assessment 
component evaluates the state of the system, simulated environ-
ment, and user stress state. To develop a real-time measure of 
stress, data from physiological sensors were continuously 
streamed (125Hz), buffered in memory, used to derive hun-
dreds of features (e.g., mean, variance, linearity, stationarity, 
entropy, frequency features), and then reduced to a small subset 
of features that were most discriminant of the individual’s stress 
profile. The selected subset of features was then used by a novel 
machine learning algorithm, Approximate Bayes, to predict the 
individual's stress level continuously. 
 
 
Figure 1: Architecture of the Adaptive Stress Training System. 
 
 The Training Module determined the target level of stress 
by following the SET protocol to introduce stressors over mul-
tiple user sessions (Finseth et al., 2018). Three levels of stress-
ors were induced through a combination of environment 
changes (smoke, alarm noise, and interior lights) to create low, 
medium, and high stress levels (Figure 2). This manipulation of 
stress was validated using subjective stress and workload scales 
(Finseth et al., 2020).  
 
 
Figure 2: VR-ISS low, medium, high stressor levels (Finseth et al., 2020). 
 
The Adaptation Manager adapted the levels of the stressors 
in the VR environment based on a comparison of the target level 
of stressors from the Training Module to the measured level of 
stress from the Context Assessment Module. The Adaptation 
Manager triggered changes to the VR simulation (e.g., changes 
in smoke, alarm noise, lights). This type of change is known as 
implicit feedback, in which the user observes feedback in the 
form of changes to the environment (e.g., visual or auditory 
stressors; Gaume et al., 2016). Instead of explicitly showing the 
user sensor signals like biofeedback systems, the physiological 
state is assessed and used to implicitly modify the environment.  
The Adaptation Manager relied on a set of rules and trig-
gering mechanisms. Triggering adaptations at incorrect times 
can make the training ineffective, or even worsen the individ-
ual’s skills (Jones & Dechmerowski, 2016). Adaptations were 
designed to trigger only after the first minute and at 30-second 
increments thereafter; this was intended to allow adequate time 
for physiological responses to stabilize. Further, adaptations 
were not triggered until the stress had a conditional probability 
greater than 70% in two consecutive windows (60 sec). 
 
 
Copyright 2021 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved. 10.1177/1071181321651241
Proceedings of the 2021 HFES 65th International Annual Meeting
1542

 
 
METHODS 
 
Participants 
 
Fifty-seven healthy subjects with academic background 
similar to astronauts (N= 37 males and 20 females, mean age of 
28.7 years, SD=4.6) participated in the study. Inclusion criteria 
were age range of 25-60 years old and holding (or pursuing) 
advanced Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
(STEM) related expertise (i.e., graduate degree or relevant in-
dustry experience). Thirteen of the participants experienced cy-
bersickness; they withdrew, and their data was omitted. The 
protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board. 
 
Task Environment and Materials 
 
Participants conducted a simplified ISS emergency fire re-
sponse procedure in the VR-ISS with the goal of locating the 
source of the smoke. The simulation followed the NASA ISS 
emergency fire procedures, which contain instructions for crew 
responsibilities of measuring air contaminant levels, deciding 
on donning protective equipment, and identifying fireport sam-
pling (NASA, 2013). The VR simulation consisted of three 
modules of the ISS that were developed with the Unity 3D game 
engine (5.4.0f3, Unity Technologies, 2014). An HTC VIVE 
PRO head-mounted display and positioned-tracked controllers 
allowed for zero-gravity-like locomotion. Users were asked to 
use contaminant level readings to locate the fire's origin, don 
oxygen-masks, and use fire extinguishers to facilitate extin-
guishing the fire (see Finseth et al., 2020). Fire location was 
randomized within the trials.  
 
Experiment Design and Independent Variables 
 
The experimental design consisted of 3 (training condition: 
skill-only, graduated, adaptive) x 2 (criterion trials) mixed be-
tween-within subject procedure.  
 
Figure 3: Trial order and experimental conditions with stressor levels. Trial 3 
and trial 8 were used as criterion. 
 
The training condition had three levels: (1) constant low 
level of stress (skill-only; N=20), (2) gradually increase stress 
levels at a fixed rate (graduated; N=18), and (3) real-time adap-
tive training (adaptive; N=19). Trial had two levels: (1) trial 3 
criterion, and (2) trial 8 criterion (see Figure 3). The criterion 
are high-stressor simulations which were used to evaluate the 
within-subject pre-post change in stress response.  
 
Dependent Variables 
 
The autonomic nervous system stress response was meas-
ured using an electrocardiogram (ECG) sensor implemented in 
a Bioshirt and recorded with MP150 (Biopac System Inc., Santa 
Barbara, CA) equipped with an ECG100C module. The ECG 
signal was used to derive heart rate and a time-domain heart rate 
variability (HRV) metric of root mean squared of successive 
differences (RMSSD). Arousal and relaxation were indicated 
by changes in RMSSD, where relaxation was marked by in-
creasing values (vagal activation) and arousal as indicated by 
decreasing values (vagal inhibition). Spectral frequency analy-
sis was conducted on HRV in the low-frequency (LF; 0.04–0.15 
Hz) and high-frequency (HF; 0.15–0.4 Hz) bands. The sympa-
thovagal (LF/HF) ratio was calculated to indicate relative acti-
vation/inhibition of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerv-
ous systems. Data were recorded in 30 second epochs for statis-
tical analysis. Task performance was measured by the partici-
pants’ distance-from-fire (meters). A smaller distance-from-fire 
value suggested better performance. Data were recorded in 10 
second epochs. 
 
Procedure 
 
The experiment was conducted in a single laboratory visit 
that lasted approximately 2-3 hours; the visit had two main 
phases; (1) system calibration; and (2) experimental condition 
trials (Figure 3). Before participants arrived, they completed in-
formed consent, a demographics questionnaire, and watched a 
10-minute video documentary of the 1997 fire aboard the Mir 
space station for context on the severity of a fire in space. Dur-
ing the visit, participants were acclimated to VR and instru-
mented with physiological sensors. Participants were given a 
20-minute guided VR tutorial on the VR-ISS to practice con-
ducting the fire procedure, which was rehearsed a second time 
without guidance. Participants fully understood how to com-
plete the task before proceeding. Next, a 5-minute physiological 
baseline was taken. To calibrate the stress detection system to 
the participant, physiological sensor data were collected during 
three different trials, each with a different stressor level (i.e., 
low, medium, high). Each trial was limited to a 5-minute VR-
ISS emergency procedure to prevent stress confounding from 
endogenous reward between conditions if participants were to 
consistently extinguish a fire. The recorded data were used to 
train a machine learning classifier to recognize the participant's 
stress levels. Participants were then randomly assigned (via ran-
dom number generator) to one of three conditions: skill-only, 
graduated, or adaptive. Participants were blind to the condi-
tions. The participants then completed five separate 5-minute 
trials with approximately 5-mintues between each.  
 
Statistical Analysis 
 
Artifacts were removed from the physiological signals if 
they displayed non-physiologic deflections (i.e., signal drop-
ping to zero, spikes >6 SD from the total sample mean, or pro-
longed flat lines). The data were standardized for each partici-
pant using that participant’s baseline. Linear Mixed Models 
Copyright 2021 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved. 10.1177/1071181321651241
Proceedings of the 2021 HFES 65th International Annual Meeting
1543

 
 
were used for statistical analysis of heart rate, HRV, and per-
formance metrics. The model included a trial in a repeated 
measure structure with participants as a random effect. The re-
peated measure covariance structure for physiological metrics 
was 1st order autoregressive, whereas the task performance used 
compound symmetry. It was hypothesized that the skill-only 
would have no change between trials, whereas the graduated 
and adaptive would show decreases in stress; therefore, F-test 
for simple effects and t-tests from the pairwise comparison are 
reported with any main effects. Since the results are prelimi-
nary, significance range was determined before data collection 
to be significant for p ≤ 0.05 and were considered marginal for 
0.05 < p ≤ 0.1 (Gelman, 2013). Effect size calculations followed 
Cohen’s d guidelines reported as small for 0.2 < |d| < 0.5, me-
dium for 0.5 < |d|< 0.8, and large for |d| > 0.8 (Cohen, 1988). 
 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
 
Heart Rate 
 
The main effect of trial on heart rate was significant, 
F(1,106)=16.35, p<.001, d=0.79 (Figure 4). Analysis of simple 
effects between trials showed that heart rate was marginally 
lower during trial 8 compared to trial 3 for the skill-only, 
F(1,104)=2.76, p=.1, d=0.33, and significantly lower for grad-
uated F(1,106)=7.86, p=.006, d=0.55, and adaptive conditions, 
F(1,105)=6.23, p=.014, d=0.49. The main effect of condition 
on heart rate was not significant. Pairwise comparison found no 
significant differences among conditions during trial 3 or 
among conditions during trial 8. The interaction effect 
(trial*condition) was not significant.  
 
RMSSD 
 
The main effect of trial on RMSSD was significant, 
F(1,168)=41.6, p< .001, with a large effect size, d=1.00 (Figure 
5). Analysis of simple effects among trials found the RMSSD 
to be significantly higher during trial 8 compared to trial 3 for 
the skill-only, F(1,167)=6.27, p=.013, d=0.39, graduated 
F(1,168)=30.19, p<.001, d=0.85, and adaptive conditions, 
F(1,168)=9.54, p=.002, d=0.48. The main effect of the condi-
tion on RMSSD was not significant. Pairwise comparisons 
found no significant differences among conditions during trial 
3 or trial 8. The interaction effect (trial*condition) on RMSSD 
was significant, F(2,168)=2.85, p=.061, d=0.37. 
 
LF/HF Ratio 
 
The main effect of trial on LF/HF was significant, 
F(1,277)=8.71, p=.003, d=0.35 (Figure 6). Analysis of simple 
effects among trials found the LF/HF to be significantly lower 
during trial 8 compared to trial 3, for the adaptive condition, 
F(1,282)=4.63, p=.032, d=0.25, but only marginally lower for 
the graduated condition, F(1,277)=3.20, p=.075, d=0.21; The 
main effect of condition on LF/HF was not significant. Pairwise 
comparisons of conditions during trial 3 found marginal differ-
ence, F(2,74.9)=2.47, p=.091, d=0.51, showing adaptive was 
marginally higher than graduated (p=.057) and skill-only 
(p=.058). Pairwise comparisons of conditions during trial 8 
found adaptive was marginally higher than graduated (p=.089). 
The interaction effect (trial*condition) was not significant. 
 
 
Figure 4: Standardized heart rate changes between trials 3 and 8. Errors bars in 
95% confidence intervals (CI). 
 
Figure 5: Standardized RMSSD changes between trials 3 and 8. Errors bars in 
95% CI.  
 
Figure 6: Standardized LF/HF ratio changes between trials 3 and 8. Errors bars 
in 95% CI.  
 
Task Performance: Distance-From-Fire 
 
The main effect of trial on distance-from-fire was not sig-
nificant (Figure 7). Pairwise comparisons among trials found 
the distance-from-fire were marginally lower during trial 8 
compared to trial 3 for the adaptive condition, F(1,54)=3.45, 
p=0.069, d=0.51. The main effect of the condition was not sig-
nificant. Pairwise comparisons found no significant differences 
Copyright 2021 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved. 10.1177/1071181321651241
Proceedings of the 2021 HFES 65th International Annual Meeting
1544

 
 
among conditions during trial 3 or trial 8. The interaction effect 
(trial*condition) was not significant. 
 
 
Figure 7: Task performance. Errors bars in 95% CI.  
 
DISCUSSION 
 
This study evaluated whether an adaptive system could be 
more effective in training than either skill-only training or grad-
uated exposure. The results show all conditions reduced stress, 
but adaptive had stronger support along with marginal increase 
in task performance.  
In a physiological context, the adaptive system’s sympa-
thetic (LF/HF) withdrawal is more compelling evidence of 
stress inoculation than the parasympathetic (RMSSD) and heart 
rate changes, as the LF/HF reflects relative inhibition and acti-
vation of the autonomic nervous system (Shaffer & Ginsberg, 
2017). All three experimental conditions showed a reduction in 
heart rate and increase in RMSSD across trials, indicating a re-
duction in stress. Specifically, this suggests participants had in-
creased vagal control (i.e., parasympathetic activation), which 
helped relaxed and slowed heart rate. The LF/HF ratio showed 
that only the adaptive condition was significantly reduced be-
tween trial 3 and 8. As the LF/HF ratio represents sympathova-
gal balance, and there was no difference found in parasympa-
thetic magnitude (RMSSD) between conditions, this suggests 
that the sympathetic stress response was lower for the adaptive 
condition between trials. These measures together suggest the 
adaptive group had the largest inoculation, although the skill-
only and graduated training showed modest benefits. The adap-
tive group’s LF/HF starting value in in trial 3 was higher, but 
this is likely a participant random effect that would be negligi-
ble with a larger sample. Therefore, the principal interpretation 
is on the change from trial 3 to trial 8. 
The adaptive conditions showed a marginal increase in task 
performance across trials, in the form of a decrease in distance-
from-fire. In the last trial, the graduated condition did not im-
prove. A possible explanation is that the graduated condition 
represents a fixed schedule of stressor increases, of which some 
of the participants may not have been ready to handle. These 
changes in stressors may have been poorly timed and may ac-
count for the lack of change between trial 3 and 8 for this con-
dition. This further supports that the flexibility of an adaptive 
system for personalizing training is beneficial for stress inocu-
lation.  
CONCLUSION 
 
Stress training has shown benefits for building inoculation 
to high-stress situations. Preliminary results suggest that pre-
paring individuals for future stressors with an adaptive system 
can increase task performance. Further research is needed to 
validate these findings. Astronauts may someday use adaptive 
systems to train for emergency fires. These systems may also 
be used for other high-stress occupations such as military, po-
lice, firefighters, and aircraft pilots. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This work was funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion (grant number 80NSSC18K1572). Statements and opinions expressed in 
this text do not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the United States 
Government, and no official endorsement should be inferred. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Finseth, T., Dorneich, M. C., Keren, N., Franke, W. & Vardeman, S. (2020). 
Designing Training Scenarios for Stressful Spaceflight Emergency Proce-
dures. In 2020 IEEE/AIAA 39th Digital Avionics Systems Conference 
(DASC) (pp. 1-10). IEEE. 
Finseth, T., Keren, N., Franke, W.D., Dorneich, M.C., Anderson, C.C., & 
Shelly, M. (2018). Evaluating the Effectiveness of Graduated Stress Expo-
sure in Virtual Spaceflight Hazard Training, Journal of Cognitive Engineer-
ing and Decision Making. Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 248-268. 
Driskell, J. E., Salas, E., Johnston, J. H., & Wollert, T. N. (2008). Stress expo-
sure training: An event-based approach. Performance under stress, 271–286. 
London: Ashgate.  
Eysenck, M. W., Derakshan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G. (2007). Anxiety 
and cognitive performance: Attentional control theory. Emotion, 7(2). 
Feigh, K. M., Dorneich, M. C., & Hayes, C. C. (2012). Toward a characteriza-
tion of adaptive systems: a framework for researchers and system designers. 
Human Factors, Vol. 54, No.6, 1008-1024. 
Gaume, A., Vialatte, A., Mora-Sánchez, A., Ramdani, C., & Vialatte, F. (2016). 
A psychoengineering paradigm for the neurocognitive mechanisms of bio-
feedback and neurofeedback. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 
891-910. 
Gelman, A. (2013). P values and statistical practice. Epidemiology (Cambridge, 
Mass.), 24(1), 69–72. 
Giannakakis, G., Grigoriadis, D., Giannakaki, K., Simantiraki, O., Roniotis, A., 
& Tsiknakis, M. (2019). Review on psychological stress detection using bi-
osignals. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing. 
Johnston, J. H., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (1996). Training for stress exposure. 
In J. E. Driskell & E. Salas (Eds.), Series in applied psychology. Stress and 
human performance (p. 223–256). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.  
Jones, D., & Dechmerowski, S. (2016). Measuring Stress in an Augmented 
Training Environment: Approaches and Applications. In International Con-
ference on Augmented Cognition (pp. 23-33). Springer, Cham. 
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York, 
NY: Springer-Verlag. 
Meichenbaum, D. (1985). Stress Inoculation Training. New York: Pergamon. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). (2013). International 
Space Station, emergency procedures 1a (No. JSC-48566). Houston, TX: 
NASA Johnson Space Center. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). (2021). Human Re-
search Roadmap: Human Factors and Behavioral Performance: CBS-
BMed1. Retrieved from https://humanresearchroadmap.nasa.gov 
Pallavicini, F., Argenton, L., Toniazzi, N., Aceti, L., & Mantovani, F. (2016). 
Virtual reality applications for stress management training in the military. 
Aerospace medicine and human performance, 87(12), 1021-1030. 
Shaffer, F., & Ginsberg, J. P. (2017). An overview of heart rate variability met-
rics and norms. Frontiers in public health, 5, 258. 
Wachtel, P. L. (1968). Anxiety, attention, and coping with threat. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 73(2), 137. 
Copyright 2021 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved. 10.1177/1071181321651241
Proceedings of the 2021 HFES 65th International Annual Meeting
1545

