
Praise for Fixing the Game
“Roger Martin has written a book that is at once original, insightful, and
inspirational. With his ‘tell-it-as-it-is’ bluntness, he chronicles the failures of
modern day capitalism and offers clear and realistic policy recommendations for
‘fixing the game’ and building a better world for investors. If you enjoy wit and
seek wisdom, this is the book for you.”
—John C. Bogle
Founder and former chief of The Vanguard Group
“We’ve gone from an economy based on making things to one based on making
things up, with Wall Street remodeled as a casino in which the expectations
market, reflected in stock prices, has become more important than the real
market in which real factories are built, real products are developed and sold,
and real dollars show up on the bottom line. Roger Martin offers a riveting
account of how the expectations game is beginning to destroy the real game,
threatening the future of American capitalism. Through his brilliant analysis of
the NFL (which will entrance even those who don’t follow the market), he shows
us how we can get back to the real game of building for the present and the
future. Fixing the Game is a must-read for all who care about business being a
positive agent for change in the world. And that should be all of us.”
—Arianna Huffington
Co-founder and Editor-in-Chief, The Huffington Post
“Fixing the Game is an essential book, one that should be read by leaders in the
business community and financial regulators worldwide. Martin identifies the
insidious trap that can so easily seduce entrepreneurs and CEOs—the temptation
to simply trade value rather than create it—and provides clear, compelling
advice on how to keep focused on the real game—of creating and satisfying
customers, running a business legally and ethically, and staying true to a well
thought out ‘real world’ strategy.”
—Nandan Nilekani
Chairman, Unique Identification Authority of India and former CEO, Infosys

Technologies Limited
“Fixing the Game artfully links theory and practice, and reminds us that getting
both right is important if we are going to fix capitalism. Roger Martin asks
provocative questions about what constitutes good management, and forces the
reader to consider the ways in which elegant logic or a compelling theory
actually undermines commonsense business practice. And along the way he
identifies changes—in regulation, business, and governance— that will realign
private incentives with the public good.”
—Judith Samuelson
Executive Director, Business and Society
Program at the Aspen Institute
“Fixing the Game provocatively analyzes the fascinating intersection between
seemingly disparate American institutions—the NFL and Wall Street. Martin
brings together the worlds of finance and professional football in a richly
compelling story of investors, game changers, and the best ways to fix broken
markets. For football fans, business leaders, and policymakers alike, this
cautionary tale shows how easy it is to game a sports contest or a market, and
how the NFL’s structure and policies started by legendary Commissioner Pete
Rozelle can be the key to maximizing customer value and healing American
capitalism.”
—Paul Tagliabue
Commissioner of the NFL, 1989–2006
“At last, a gust of fresh air from one business school leader blowing away some
of the intellectual smoke supporting compensation and market practices that
have come to place American-style capitalism at risk. Roger Martin effectively
punctures the illusion that executive stock options, speculative hedge funds, and
the single-minded pursuit of stockholder value can build a strong, competitive
economy.”
—Paul Volcker
Former Chairman of the Federal Reserve


Copyright
Copyright 2011 Roger Martin All rights reserved No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior permission of the publisher. Requests for
permission should be directed to permissions@hbsp.harvard.edu, or mailed to Permissions, Harvard
Business School Publishing, 60 Harvard Way, Boston, Massachusetts 02163.
First eBook Edition: May 2011
ISBN: 978-1-4221-7164-6

To Jennifer Frances Martin...Always

CONTENTS
Copyright
Praise for Fixing the Game
1. FIXING A BROKEN GAME
2. MAXIMIZING CUSTOMER DELIGHT
3. RESTORING EXECUTIVE AUTHENTICITY
4. REPAIRING GOVERNANCE
5. THE INSANITY OF 2&20
6. A BOLD VISION FOR COMPANIES AND EXECUTIVES
Notes
Acknowledgments
About the Author

ONE
FIXING A BROKEN GAME
We would accomplish many more things if we did not think of them as
impossible.
—Vince Lombardi
When a financial bubble bursts, there’s a run on scapegoats. With hundreds of
billions of dollars in wealth wiped away in short order, it’s natural to look for
someone to blame. So, after each economy-shaking crash, the U.S. Congress
goes after the evildoers with determination and vigor. In 1929, it targeted the
brokers who fueled a speculative bubble with easy loans and abundant hype. In
2000, the villains were unscrupulous dot-com CEOs, peddlers of counterfeit
value that never existed. And in 2008, it was executives at big investment banks,
who created inscrutable derivatives from worthless mortgages.
In each case, Congress called the culprits to account at a series of
acrimonious hearings, the purpose of which was to sniff out the reasons for the
crash and to prevent a recurrence. Each time, once-cocky executives, now
suitably humbled, faced the censure of Congress inside committee rooms and
crushes of angry reporters outside them. In the aftermath, Congress worked to
change regulations to ensure that future players could not engage in the kind of
dangerously risky behavior that had led to each crash.
It happened after 1929, after 2000, and after 2008—and the aftershocks of the
2008 crash are still being felt. For a clearer view of the pattern, think back to the
year 2002. The economy was reeling. The NASDAQ, which sat at 5,132 on
March 10, 2000, had lost two-thirds of its value by the middle of 2001, and
finally bottomed out at 1,114 in October 2002—80 percent off its high. The
more stable and conservative Dow Jones Average, which had peaked at 11,723
on January 14, 2000, plummeted to 7,702 by July 2002.1 Overall, the dot-com
crash lopped an estimated $5 trillion of market capitalization from American
companies.2

As the economy cratered and scores of new-economy companies declared
bankruptcy, the search for scapegoats was on. It didn’t take long to identify those
charlatan senior executives and to vilify them en masse. But a few were singled
out for particular blame: No one company symbolized the excesses of the dot-
com era—and the disastrous effects of its end—like Enron. And so no executive
faced the anger of Congress quite like Ken Lay.
A loquacious and charming character, Lay had been chairman of Enron
Corporation for more than a decade and had become a central figure in its
undoing. Under Lay’s leadership, Enron had embraced all the opportunities of
the much-hyped “paradigm shift” to the Internet era, transforming from a boring,
old-economy energy company to a new-age, market-making, Web-enabled
powerhouse. By 2000, Enron was racking up $101 billion in annual revenue and
had a market capitalization of $66 billion. Fortune named it America’s most
innovative company six years running, and it was regularly selected as one of the
country’s best places to work.3 But, by the end of 2001, it was all over. That
December, Enron filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization and was, for all
intents and purposes, worth nothing.4
Billions of dollars of shareholder wealth had vanished. Thousands of laid-off
employees held now worthless pensions. Yet Lay, his CEO Jeff Skilling, and his
CFO Andrew Fastow had made away with hundreds of millions of dollars,
thanks to stock options cashed in during the precrash heyday. How could it have
happened? How had Enron’s board of directors and auditor Arthur Andersen let
things go so far wrong? Was it complicity or ineptitude? And, more important,
was Enron an isolated case of criminals run amok, or was its failure reflective of
much bigger issues? To answer these burning questions, Congress called a
multitude of hearings to grill everyone involved.
So it was that on February 12, 2002, after numerous delays, Lay found
himself sitting in the Senate Commerce Committee hearing room. Well aware of
the mood of the country, the senators used their introductory remarks to rip into
Lay, calling him “a confidence man” unworthy of the job of carnival barker.
After ninety minutes, Lay was given the floor and promptly refused to answer
any questions, invoking his Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination.5
Subsequent testimony did little to calm public or congressional outrage, as
members of the board and outside auditors claimed management had fooled
them and even Enron whistle-blower Sherron Watkins testified that Lay was “a
man of integrity” who had no idea what was going on in his own company.6

In the wake of the Enron hearings, the government determined that it needed
to take bold and tough action to make sure that there would be no repeat of this
kind of mess. The damning testimony suggested there were two particularly
murky problems to be dealt with: oversight and executive compensation.
On the oversight front, Congress and regulators saw a raft of compromises
and conflicts. In principle, a board of directors is elected by the shareholders to
represent their interests and hold those running the company to account.
Similarly, an auditor is retained to provide independent financial oversight. The
Enron debacle had exposed serious cracks in this structure. Board members
either didn’t take their jobs seriously or were unhelpfully partial to management,
allowing executives to enrich themselves to the detriment of the company.
Auditors weren’t sufficiently independent either; they made more money from
consulting to the company than from auditing its financial statements, which
meant that auditors too had very strong incentives to agree with management,
even to the point of overlooking financial statement fraud.
Then there was the issue of executive compensation. Companies were
increasingly providing incentives in the form of stock options, with the idea that
managers would be motivated to perform well and improve the business, thereby
increasing the value of their options. Because these options didn’t need to be
expensed by the company, they were essentially free to issue, making them a
very attractive and widely used compensation alternative—especially in Silicon
Valley, the epicenter of the tech bubble. But these options created a problem:
they gave management a huge upside reward for improved company
performance but no real downside punishment for weak performance. In other
words, stock option rewards gave managers the incentive to take risky actions: if
the risks worked out, the managers got rich; if they didn’t, the managers were
largely unaffected, regardless of the damage to the company. Even if the poor
performance didn’t reflect very well on their decisions, managers could always
argue 
that 
trends 
outside 
of 
their 
control—irrational 
competitors,
macroeconomic shifts, and so on—had caused the damage.
The consensus in Washington was that the dot-com crash was caused by lax
and conflicted oversight and by problematic compensation schemes, both of
which enabled those huckster CEOs to run amok. Given that diagnosis, a series
of new regulations could be introduced to fix the problems.
To address the oversight issue, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on
July 30, 2002. SOX, as it became known, had wide-reaching effects. It mandated
greater independence of boards, particularly their audit committees. It forced

companies and their auditors to engage in painstakingly thorough internal
controls assessment and certification. It intimidated the auditing firms (except
one) into divesting their consulting arms to rid themselves of inherent conflict. It
required CEOs and CFOs of public companies to sign and take personal liability
for the accuracy of their financial statements. Take that, Ken Lay!
Shortly after SOX became law, the Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB) took aim at the rampant use of stock options as executive compensation.
New rules mandated that stock option grants would now be expensed on
company income statements, meaning they were no longer quite so “free.”
Meanwhile, compensation experts piled on, advocating a move from all-upside
stock option incentives to phantom stock incentives (technically called deferred
share units or restricted share units), which gave the recipient a cash amount
equivalent to the price of the stock at a specified later time, typically at
retirement. These instruments were seen to correct the problem with stock
options, because the manager who received them would feel both the upside and
downside, just like the investor. Finally, board governance experts began to
encourage substantial stock ownership by independent board directors, so that
the directors’ interests would be more closely aligned with those of the
shareholders. Companies promptly and wholeheartedly followed the advice of
these experts, keen to avoid an Enron-like demise.
In the end, a whole series of regulatory changes were adopted to prevent a
future crash. Scapegoats were trotted out before Congress, root causes were
determined, and laws and corporate norms were changed to address those
causes. The stock market crash of 2000–2002 had been the most precipitous
since 1929, some seventy years before. With new regulations implemented to fix
the oversight and compensation problems that had created the dot-com market
bubble, the hope was that at least another seventy years would pass before
another such disaster.
Sadly, it would be less than a decade. Not only that, the next stock market
meltdown would be considerably worse than the 2000 version; the next crash
would threaten to bring down the entire global financial system. This time, rather
than a tech bubble, it was a mortgage bubble. This time, it wasn’t just the erosion
of a secondary market like NASDAQ; it was a meltdown in the broader index,
with the S&P 500 down 40 percent in the second half of 2008 alone. This time, it
didn’t mark the disappearance of a bunch of new and relatively unknown firms
like Freeinternet.com; rather, this time, venerable and prominent companies like
Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were wiped away. In fact, some of the largest

firms in the world, such as Citibank, AIG, and Bank of America, would have
disappeared in 2008 if not for massive government bailouts. This time, the U.S.
economy needed massive infusion of spending to recover, even as it led the
world into a deep recession.
ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTION
In the wake of such a spectacular crash, less than a decade after the last, one
might have expected that observers would ask, What did we do wrong the last
time? Why didn’t our fixes, put in place to prevent another devastating crash, do
what they were intended to do? How, with all of those independent and
motivated directors, empowered and unconflicted auditors, and massive control
procedure certifications, did this mess manage to happen again? Why didn’t the
CEO sign-offs and beautifully aligned incentive compensation structures work to
prevent undue risk-taking and malfeasance on the part of financial executives? Is
it possible that our changes addressed symptoms, rather than root causes? One
might have expected that we would ask these hard questions. Yet we really
haven’t.
We haven’t looked deeper into blameworthy CEO behavior to understand
what really caused it. We haven’t examined the broader theories that underpin
our economy and that informed all of those ineffective fixes after the last crash.
Instead, we’ve looked for a new scapegoat, chosen to operate from the same
fundamental theories, and doubled down on the same fixes. We’ve said, “Darn it;
we didn’t clamp down hard enough on these companies. They took risks they
simply should not have taken. Clearly, they still have oversight problems and
compensation problems. Regulations are too loose and it is time to clamp down
even harder.”
Consequently, following the 2008 crash, more new regulations and norms
have been (and will be) introduced to improve oversight and manage executive
compensation with the aim of preventing a future crash. And few of these efforts
will help. In fact, coming down harder on the financial services sector by
increasing capital adequacy ratios, imposing a clearer regulatory oversight
structure, and so on won’t decrease the chance of yet another market meltdown
in any meaningful way. It’s true that the next crash won’t be caused by irrational
exuberance over new-economy stocks or by the securitization of subprime
mortgages; we’ve fixed those particular triggers for now. But as long as we fail
to understand the real, fundamental reasons behind those crashes, and the

bubbles that preceded them, it is only a matter of time until we will have the next
crisis.
The only way we can avoid increasingly frequent stock market meltdowns—
and all the pain, suffering, and economic dislocation they cause—is to explore
the theories that underpin American capitalism. Our theories about the
fundamental goal of corporations and the optimal structure of executive
compensation are fatally flawed and have created stock market upheavals.
Acting on these theories, we have built structures into our capital markets system
that threaten the future of American capitalism.
THE ORIGINS OF OUR CURRENT THEORY
In 1976, finance professor Michael Jensen and Dean William Meckling of the
Simon School of Business at the University of Rochester published a seemingly
innocuous paper in the Journal of Financial Economics entitled “Theory of the
Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure.”7 The
authors likely had no idea that it would go on to be the single most frequently
cited article in business academia and that it would form the prevailing theory of
the role of the firm and proper compensation in our society today.
The article first defined the principal-agent problem and created agency
theory. In the authors’ construct, shareholders are the principals of the firm—
i.e., they own it and benefit from its prosperity. Executives are agents who are
hired by the principals to work on their behalf. The principal-agent problem
occurs because the agents have an inherent incentive to optimize activities and
resources for themselves rather than for their principals. For example, an
executive might declare her own time to be so valuable that she requires a
private jet to ferry her around. While this might be convenient for the executive,
and may even increase her productivity level, it may well hurt the owners of the
company, reducing earnings by more than the increase in productivity. Such a
choice puts an agent’s interests ahead of those of the principals and creates an
agency cost.
Jensen and Meckling argued that when executives squander firm resources to
feather their own nests, the result is both bad for shareholders and wasteful for
the economy. Instead, the theory goes, the singular goal of a company should be
to maximize the return to shareholders. To achieve that goal, the company must
give executives a compelling reason to place shareholder value maximization
ahead of their own nest-feathering. While it is not possible to entirely eliminate

the self-interest of executives, the authors posited that we could better align that
self-interest with the interests of shareholders; we could eliminate agency costs
by giving agents meaningful amounts of stock-based compensation, actually
making them shareholders as well as executives. Executives would then be very
interested in increasing shareholder value, because when it increased, so would
their own compensation.
Like all good theories, agency theory had limitations and unexpected side
effects, a fact its disciples have chosen to ignore (though Jensen himself has
acknowledged them).8 In particular, the theory had the unfortunate effect of
tightly tying together two markets: the real market and the expectations market.
The real market is the world in which factories are built, products are
designed and produced, real products and services are bought and sold, revenues
are earned, expenses are paid, and real dollars of profit show up on the bottom
line. That is the world that executives control—at least to some extent.
The expectations market is the world in which shares in companies are traded
between investors—in other words, the stock market. In this market, investors
assess the real market activities of a company today and, on the basis of that
assessment, form expectations as to how the company is likely to perform in the
future. The consensus view of all investors and potential investors as to
expectations of future performance shapes the stock price of the company.9
Historically, professional managers played entirely within a single market:
they were in charge of performance in the real market and were paid for
performance in that real market. That is, they were in charge of earning real
profits for their company and they were typically paid a base salary and bonus
for meeting real market performance targets.
Compensation rooted in the expectations market used to be rare. In 1970, for
example, stock-based incentives accounted for less than 1 percent of CEO
remuneration.10 But that all changed after the advent of agency theory.
Implicitly, Jensen and Meckling had argued that the way to spur executives to
best perform their duties in the real market was to make their pay significantly
dependent on the performance of the company in the expectations market. This
was a critical shift. After 1976, executive compensation became increasingly
stock based, so that when executives produced a stock price increase in the
expectations market, their compensation rose dramatically. In 2009, for instance
the highest-paid CEO in American was Larry Ellison of Oracle, and estimates
suggest that 97 percent of his paycheck came from realized gains on options.11

Ray Irani, CEO of Occidental Petroleum, earned $31 million in 2009, including
$1.17 million in base salary, a bonus of $1.2 million, and restricted stock awards
of just under $25 million.12 It has become an accepted premise of good
governance that, in order to properly align their incentives with those of the
shareholders, executives and board members must receive a substantial portion
of their pay in the form of stock-based compensation. The crashes of 2000–2002
and 2008–2009 did nothing to diminish this premise; in fact, they strengthened
it.
A SMARTER GAME WITH A BETTER THEORY
Few people conceive of the world of business in terms of real and expectations
markets. Yet, there is another world in which the distinction between a real
market and an expectations market is much more profoundly understood—the
National Football League (NFL). While it isn’t a perfect metaphor for business,
it is a highly instructive one.
The NFL is, far and away, the most successful sports league in America.
Regular season NFL games regularly garner higher ratings than the final round
of golf’s Masters, the Kentucky Derby, the Daytona 500, baseball’s all-star
game, the most watched National Basketball Association final game, and college
basketball’s Final Four title game.13 The 2010 Super Bowl was the most-
watched television event in history, with more than 106 million American
viewers.14 According to Forbes, of the twenty-five sports teams worth more
than $1 billion, nineteen are from the NFL. No sport comes close to the NFL’s
economic power.15
In the NFL, the real market operates when teams take to the field on Sunday
and play a game for sixty minutes, making real runs, passes, blocks, and tackles.
Real touchdowns and real field goals are scored. There is a real winner and a real
loser. Coaches and players are in full control of what happens in the real game
(referees notwithstanding).
Then there is the NFL’s associated expectations market: gambling. Gamblers
try to guess who will win a given game on a given Sunday and place bets based
on that expectation. If the game were to be played between two equally matched
opponents, we would expect that roughly half of the bettors would select one
team to win and half would select the other—creating a perfectly efficient
market with a balance of bets on each side.

Of course, that rarely happens. One team is playing on the road, one team has
a stronger quarterback or has a poor rush defense. So the Las Vegas bookmakers
—the folks who run the expectations market—dynamically balance the bets on
either side through the use of a point spread. If more people expect that the
Dallas Cowboys will beat the Detroit Lions, the bookies will give points to the
Lions. This means, if you’re betting, that instead of betting on Detroit to win the
game, you bet that Detroit will either win the game or, importantly, lose by less
than the point spread. Imagine that the point spread is Dallas by 4.5 points. If
you wager on Dallas to win, Dallas would need to win by 5 or more points for
the bet to pay off. If you bet on Detroit, the Lions would need to win or lose by 4
or fewer points for the bet to pay off. From the time betting opens until kick-off,
the point spread moves according to the bets placed, settling to a point of
equilibrium where roughly half the money is bet on Detroit and half on Dallas.
The point spread in football is the analog to a stock price in business. The
collective expectations of all participants in the market determine both a point
spread and a stock price. If more bettors put money on the favored team, the
point spread will increase; if more investors buy a stock at a given price, the
stock price will rise. In both the NFL and in business, as the real game grew in
stature and prominence, the expectations game became more and more
sophisticated. In both cases, dedicated individuals emerged to ply their trade in
the expectations market, becoming NFL bookies or bettors, capital markets
brokers or investors.
But unlike American capitalism, the NFL looked thoughtfully at the
relationship between the real game and the expectations game and identified a
serious danger. After the 1962 season, Paul Hornung, the Green Bay Packers
halfback and the league’s most valuable player (MVP), and Alex Karras, a star
defensive tackle for the Detroit Lions, were accused of betting on NFL games,
including games in which they played. Pete Rozelle, just a few years into his
thirty-year tenure as league commissioner, responded swiftly. He suspended
Hornung and Karras for a full season, and fined five Lions players who admitted
to placing $50 bets on that year’s Championship game between the Packers and
the Giants.16 Rozelle also created NFL Security—what is often called the NFL’s
FBI—to work with law enforcement agencies across the country to detect and
stamp out player involvement in betting on the NFL.
Why did Commissioner Rozelle take such a definitive stand against players
and coaches betting on football? He must have envisioned the consequences if
he didn’t. Let’s imagine that the Lions are playing against the Minnesota

Vikings, and the Lions are favored to win by 10 points. The Lions players know
their team is better than the Vikings and will almost certainly win the game. So,
one of them conspires with some unscrupulous bettors to wager millions of
dollars on the Vikings. The player then does all he can to ensure that the Lions
win the game, but by 9 or fewer points. He has engaged in the art of point
shaving, sacrificing a few points of advantage in order to win the game by a
lower margin than the prevailing point spread. And he’s made a lot of money for
his friends.
Executed with precision, point shaving doesn’t damage the team’s record in
the real game. But imagine if the culprit is willing to hurt his team’s record in the
real market for a short period; in that case, he could try to cause his team to lose
a couple of straight games—a practice colorfully known as tanking—so that the
subsequent point spread is relatively easy to beat. He could then bet on winning
that subsequent game and make a killing.
By altering the on-field dynamics, point shaving and tanking have the
potential to undermine the integrity of the league and dramatically diminish the
experience for fans. Rozelle recognized this, and so did all he could to prevent
them from taking root in his league.
Rozelle and the team owners observed that even though the expectations
game of betting on football sprang from the real game, it was played by very
different rules. They clearly saw that the pressures of the expectations game
could do serious damage to the real game. Like a parasite that eventually kills its
host, sports betting had the ability to destroy the sport. So Rozelle and his
successors, Paul Tagliabue and Roger Goodell, have enforced a strict separation
between the real market and the expectations market; everyone involved in the
real game of football—players, coaches, and officials alike—are forbidden to
have anything to do with betting on football—on their own games or on other
teams’ games. Even spending time with known gamblers and bookies is strongly
discouraged.
In other words, the NFL has managed the division between the real and
expectations market in a manner that is exactly the opposite of the way we have
managed it in business. American capitalism encourages, and in many cases
even mandates, the players in the real game to invest heavily in the expectations
game, and has built structures that bring the key players from the two markets
into almost constant contact. CEOs are given significant (if not overwhelming)
amounts of stock-based compensation to ensure that they focus first and
foremost on shareholder value maximization. Those same CEOs interact with

capital-market participants frequently, providing guidance to them about likely
future performance so that folks can place their bets—oops, that’s make their
trades—with appropriate information.
Imagine an NFL coach holding a press conference on Wednesday to
announce that he predicts a win by 9 points on Sunday, and that bettors should
recognize that the current spread of 6 points is too low. Or picture the team’s
quarterback standing up in the postgame press conference and apologizing for
having only won by 3 points when the final betting spread was 9 points in his
team’s favor. While it’s laughable to imagine coaches or quarterbacks doing so,
CEOs are expected to do both of these things. In fact if they don’t, the CEO and
company can be slapped on the wrist by regulators and even sued for not alerting
shareholders that their expectations for the quarter were off the mark. In
American capitalism, a tight connection between the real and expectations
markets is now ensconced in our legal framework.
Of course, one could argue that the games of football and business are
sufficiently different, that CEOs can’t engage in activities like point shaving and
tanking after placing bets. Or can they? With respect to point shaving, it is clear
that CEOs and CFOs do steer their companies to the consensus earnings forecast
of the Wall Street analysts. If shareholder value is what matters, then they will
deliver exactly what is expected of them in that arena, real performance be
damned. Consider the following trend: in the 1980s, CEOs met corporate
guidance about 50 percent of the time; by the mid-1990s, they did so 70 percent
of the time.17 Companies are getting better and better at meeting expectations
exactly. And rarely do companies surpass expectations by a significant measure.
Why? Because if a company beats expectations this quarter, the expectations will
be that much higher for the next quarter and that much harder to meet. The
capitalist incentive for point shaving is at least as strong as it would be in the
NFL, and there is good reason to believe that plenty of CEOs do it, and often.
Tanking happens in companies too. CEOs rarely miss their consensus
forecast by a small margin. They either hit the “number” or they fall short by a
long shot. In effect, they tank; they take a big fall in one quarter in order to reset
expectations at a much lower level, which allows them to perform wonderfully
against that low base of expectations.
THE PROBLEM WITH EXPECTATIONS
Point shaving and tanking in the capital markets are genuine issues, but they pale

in comparison with an even greater problem. Recall that modern capitalism
dictates that the job of executive leadership is to maximize shareholder value, as
measured by the market value of the company’s stock. To that end, the CEO
should always be working to increase the stock price, to raise expectations about
the company’s prospects ad infinitum. And just how does that play out?
To see, let’s return briefly to football. In 2007, the New England Patriots had
a remarkable year; the team went unbeaten in the regular season, racking up a
stellar 16-0 record. Eight of its starters went to the Pro Bowl. Quarterback Tom
Brady was named the league’s most valuable player, and head coach Bill
Belichick earned coach of the year honors. Brady threw more touchdown passes
than had ever been thrown in a season, and receiver Randy Moss set the record
for most touchdown catches in a year. The team scored more points that season
than any team in history. It was, in short, a superlative performance. In terms of
the real market, the Patriots were perfect.18
But the Patriots’ performance in the expectations game was mediocre in
comparison. In betting vernacular, a favored team covers the spread when it
wins the game by more than the point spread. In their sixteen-win regular
season, the Patriots covered the point spread only ten times. Why? Because
expectations ran away to unattainable levels. The Patriots had started the season
with sensible expectations and played, admittedly, exceptionally well. The
average point spread for the first eight weeks was 10.5, and the Patriots were
able to cover the spread in every game, winning by an average of 20.5 points.
But as they continued to perform very well, expectations rose; bettors expected
the Patriots to continue to be more and more exceptional each week. The point
spreads widened, and before long the Patriots were facing the largest spreads in
the history of the NFL.
They played very well in the second half of the season, though less
exceptionally than in the first half of the season. They still won each game, but
in the final eight weeks, the Patriots beat opponents by a comfortable but
somewhat lower 12.5 points on average, while point spreads had risen to an
average of 16.5. Against these heightened expectations, the Patriots covered the
point spread in only two of their eight games in the second half of the season.
Brady’s Patriots thrashed the Dolphins 28-7 in the second-to-last game of the
season, but still couldn’t meet bettors’ expectations for a win by 22 points or
more.19
The lesson is that no matter how good you are, you cannot beat expectations

forever. Expectations will get ahead of anything you can actually accomplish,
even with superhuman effort. Patriots quarterback Tom Brady had perhaps the
finest season of any quarterback in NFL history, but he couldn’t beat
expectations more than ten of sixteen times. And that is why quarterbacks aren’t
compensated on the basis of how they perform against the point spread. While
Tom Brady was leading his team to a perfect record but only beating
expectations ten times out of sixteen, his young counterpart on the Cleveland
Browns, Derek Anderson, was leading his team to a decent but unspectacular 10-
6 record on the field, but a superb 12-4 record against the spread.20 If the point
spread mattered more than the real game, Anderson, whose team missed the
playoffs, would have out-earned Brady, who took his team to the Super Bowl
championship game and set records doing so.
The problem is, in American capitalism, CEOs are compensated directly and
explicitly on how they perform against the point spread; that is, against
expectations. Imagine the following scenario: a company decides to pay its CEO
$10 million in total compensation for the year. It could pay that CEO $10 million
in salary or, alternatively, it could pay him $2 million in salary and $8 million
worth of phantom stock units (say 100,000 units with the stock at $80 per share).
The simple $10 million salary embodies no incentive to increase shareholder
value, while the $2 million salary plus phantom stock embodies a large incentive
to do so. If the CEO can double the price of the stock by the time he retires, he
will have earned $18 million in that year rather than $10 million.
Recall that the company’s stock price is $80 per share today because
expectations of the company’s future performance have coalesced there. Any
existing shareholder who had a more doubtful view of future expectations would
sell the stock, cease to be a shareholder, and in the process drive the stock price
lower. If anyone had a more optimistic view of future expectations, that person
would offer to buy the stock at more than $80 per share and drive the price up.
The CEO’s phantom stock units are valued at $80 per share because, in
aggregate, current expectations suggest that is exactly what the stock is worth.
The CEO now has a clear and simple incentive: to raise expectations of
future performance from the current level. There is no other way to increase the
value of his incentive compensation. One might imagine that improving
performance in the real market would increase the stock price, but this just isn’t
the case. The dot-com bubble taught us that stock price and real market
performance are not as closely linked as we would like to believe. Even setting
that fact aside, consider that investors already tend to believe that a company

will improve its performance in the real market over time and therefore build
that belief into the stock price. And if investors already believe that real
performance will improve over time, actually improving real performance
doesn’t exceed their expectations, it merely meets them. Sadly, improving real
performance doesn’t help much in creating shareholder value.
Microsoft provides a good illustration of this conundrum. Over the past
decade, Microsoft has performed quite spectacularly in the real market. It has
nearly tripled its revenue and profit (see figure 1-1). However, with a few brief
exceptions, Microsoft stock (adjusted properly for splits) has traded in a narrow
range between $20 and $30 a share for the entire decade of spectacular real-
market performance.21 The market expects Microsoft to perform pretty much
spectacularly in the real market, and so doesn’t reward it in the stock price for
doing so (see figure 1-2).
FIGURE 1-1
Microsoft Revenue 2000–2010
Source: Microsoft earnings releases.
FIGURE 1-2
Microsoft share price, 2000–2010

Source: Yahoo! Finance.
EXECUTIVE BEHAVIOR
The proponents of shareholder value maximization and stock-based executive
compensation must have imagined that these theories would focus executives on
improving the real performance of their companies and thus increasing
shareholder value over time. Yet, these goals have prompted nothing of the sort.
Let’s assume that an executive is indeed motivated by realizing a good return on
her stock-based incentive compensation (because if she’s not, it was a waste to
offer it in the first place). What would lead her to do the hard, long-term work of
substantially improving real-market performance when she can choose to work
on simply raising expectations instead? Even if she has a performance bonus tied
to real-market metrics, the size of that bonus now typically pales in comparison
with the size of her stock-based incentives. Expectations are where the money is.
And of course, improving real-market performance is the hardest and slowest
way to increase expectations from the existing level. The company has to build
facilities, hire employees, invest in advertising, and wait for these all to convert
to real sales and profits increases—at a level above what is already expected by
the stock market.
There are much easier ways to increase expectations. The easiest is to hype
your stock on Wall Street by providing aggressively high guidance on the
company’s projected earnings. Just slightly harder is switching to a more
aggressive accounting treatment to make the company’s real performance look
better than it is. Some such changes are simply aggressive, others are illegal.
And indeed, since 1976, the incidence of large-scale accounting fraud by public
companies has increased dramatically. Why? Because executives have millions

of reasons to do whatever they can to increase expectations of future earnings.
But even with the twin tools of earning guidance and accounting rule
changes, executives can’t keep expectations on the rise forever, nor can they
continue to meet them as they grow forever. Like Tom Brady in 2007, CEOs
may well see market expectations radically outpace what can be achieved by
even the best management team. Look at Cisco Systems and its star CEO John
Chambers. Chambers spent the first decade of the twenty-first century
consistently building share and increasing profits. And how did the stock price
react to this real-market performance? It fell from a high over $80 per share in
March 2000 to just $20 per share at the end of 2010, destroying hundreds of
billions of dollars of shareholder value. Expectations for Cisco in the year 2000,
when it set the record for the highest market capitalization in history (over $550
billion), were simply unachievable, no matter how well Cisco went on to
perform.22 Those expectations were fueled by an exuberance utterly outside
Cisco’s control.
In the face of expectations that can run wild, CEOs have increasingly focused
on what they can control: managing share price over the short run. Shareholders,
on the other hand, should want CEOs to focus on the long term, on increasing
share price more or less forever. So it turns out that rather than aligning the
interests of shareholders and executives, stock-based compensation has
reinforced the agency problem it was created to solve. What’s more, it has
destroyed long-term shareholder value by driving shorter and shorter horizons of
decision making, and even contributing to shorter CEO tenure. CEOs know that
expectations are likely to fall, so they have incentive to leave or retire in order to
cash in stock-based compensation instruments while expectations are high.
Even the best of CEOs can fall prey to the expectations game. Indisputably,
one of the most successful CEOs of the last century was Jack Welch, who ran
General Electric (GE) from 1981 to 2001. Welch became a poster boy for
shareholder value maximization when he gave a profoundly influential speech
on the subject at New York’s Pierre Hotel shortly after his appointment as CEO.
Though he didn’t use the term shareholder value explicitly, the speech marked a
clear shift to a profits-first focus. Welch went on to transform GE from a slow-
growth firm with a market capitalization of $13 billion into the most valuable
company in the world, worth $484 billion at his retirement, when he left with an
estimated $900 million worth of GE stock from his incentive compensation.23
Welch grew his company and made it more profitable—good, tough real-

market stuff. But he also retired at the very peak of his company’s stock price,
after a short-term run-up in value. GE has never come close to approaching the
market capitalization it had at Welch’s retirement. In fact, despite almost a
decade of hard work by his successor Jeff Immelt, GE’s market capitalization is
still not half the level it was when Welch left.
SO WHAT?
Focusing executives on shareholder value maximization using stock-based
compensation was supposed to give shareholders a better deal. The theory ran
that shareholders’ returns were diminished by agents and the agency costs they
impose. So we imposed a whole new set of rules to mitigate those agency costs
and increase the return to shareholders. Yet, it simply hasn’t worked out that
way. Total returns on the S&P 500 for the period from the end of the Great
Depression (1933) to the end of 1976, the beginning of the shareholder-value
era, were 7.5 percent (compound annual). From 1977 to the end of 2010, they
were 6.5 percent—suggesting that shareholders have little to celebrate, despite
having been made the clear priority.24
But it isn’t just about the money for shareholders, or even the dubious CEO
behavior that our theories encourage. It’s much bigger than that. Our theories of
shareholder value maximization and stock-based compensation have the ability
to destroy our economy and rot out the core of American capitalism. These
theories underpin the regulatory fixes instituted after each market bubble and
crash. Because the fixes begin from the wrong premise, they will be ineffectual;
until we change the theories, future crashes are inevitable. New theories that
recognize the important distinction between the real market and the expectations
market, and that return our focus to the real market, are needed.
The difference in outcomes between a real-market focused world and an
expectations-market dominated world is stark and critically important for the
economy. When the real market is dominant, customers are the focus and the
central task of companies is to find ever better ways of serving them.
Entrepreneurs who create customer value through innovations in products,
services, and business models, like Thomas Edison or Henry Ford, earn the
highest rewards. When the expectations market is dominant, traders are the focus
and gaming markets is the task; regardless of what happens, traders make
money. In our current, expectations-oriented world, market makers or specialists
are consistently among the most profitable businesses in America, earning

supernormal returns year after year, even when the markets plummet and the rest
of us lose. For instance, hedge fund managers James Simons and John Paulson
each made over $2 billion in personal compensation in 2008 while markets were
plummeting.25
The real market produces a positive-sum game for society. Everyone can be
better off as more and more value is created for customers. In contrast, the
expectations market produces a gigantic zero-sum game. In trading, by
definition, for every dollar won, there is a dollar lost. It therefore pits players
against one another to split up a defined, finite pie. In the expectations market,
the goal is to make a trade in which you have an upper hand, regardless of the
impact on the other party.
In the real market, there is opportunity to build for the long run rather than to
exploit short-term opportunities, so the real market has a chance to produce
sustainability. Because the real market is grounded in real people, real
companies, real employees, real factories, and so on, it shifts slowly without
huge volatile swings. A great year in the real market is 4 percent economic
growth, and a bad year—like 2008—is 3 percent shrinkage. But because
expectations have no bounds, the expectations market swings wildly with huge
volatility. While the economy shrank modestly in 2008, stock prices dropped 50
percent.
The real market produces meaning and motivation for organizations. The
organization can create bonds with customers, imagine great plans, and bring
them to fruition. The expectations market, on the other hand, generates little
meaning. It is all about gaining advantage over a trading partner or putting two
trading partners together, then tolling them for the service. This structure breeds
a kind of amorality in which information is withheld or manipulated and trading
partners are treated as vehicles from which to extract money in the short run, at
whatever the cost to the relationship. And over time, in trading businesses, since
there isn’t opportunity to build something positive for the world, the motivation
migrates to earning as much compensation as possible.
The real market contributes to a sense of authenticity for individuals. Because
individuals can find meaning in their jobs, in that they can build value for
customers while benefiting shareholders and generating sustainability, they can
feel that they are living authentic lives. They can be open about their motives
and plans, because they are not playing a zero-sum game but are doing
something real and positive for society. They can create meaning, for themselves
and others. The expectations market generates inauthenticity in its participants,

filling their world with encouragements to suspend moral judgment. Executives
are asked to dedicate themselves to doing that which they cannot do—that is, to
keep expectations rising forever. They receive incentive compensation to which
the rational response is to game the system. And since they spend most of their
time trading value around rather than building it, they lose perspective on how to
contribute to society through their work. Customers become marks to be
exploited, employees become disposable cogs, and relationships become only a
means to the end of winning a zero-sum game.
In short, a real-market orientation creates individual and societal good, while
an expectations orientation creates a downward spiral that threatens both
individual well-being and the health of our economy. American capitalism is in
danger, and the danger stems directly from the way we have linked the real
world to the expectations world, amplifying the influence of the expectations
market on the real market.
By tying together the real and expectations markets, we have created an
environment in which many companies focus more on their stock analysts than
on their customers. In this environment, executives are pressured to live
inauthentic business lives, pandering to a stock market that they know they
cannot please for long, even as they cut jobs and expenses to make this quarter’s
consensus earning numbers. It is a world in which employees feel ever less
loyalty to their company, knowing that their company has precious little loyalty
toward them. As employees see their peers laid off in the busts and new folks
hired in the boom, they become acutely aware that it is the transaction that
matters and the money behind it, rather than the relationship.
As the lives of corporate leaders grow ever more inauthentic, more and more
of our executives begin to disregard their moral compass entirely and engage in
scandalous, illegal behavior. The accounting scams of 2001–2002 as practiced
by Enron, WorldCom, Tyco International, Global Crossing, and Adelphia
amounted to the biggest business scandal in at least a generation. But rather than
marking the beginning of a period of calm in which executives learned from the
crisis and reset their moral compasses, the scandal served as a warning sign of
what was to come. Only a couple of years later, the options backdating scandal
erupted, in which hundreds of companies and executives engaged in utterly
reprehensible and illegal activity related to compensation schemes. And only
few years after that, the economy was engulfed by the subprime mortgage crisis,
in which numerous firms immorally and illegally skirted regulations and turned
a blind eye to the consequences of those actions.

In addition to bad behavior by real-market players, our short-term,
expectations focus also produces intense volatility in the expectations market.
Following seventy years of relative stock market stability, we have had two
extreme meltdowns in less than a decade. And all of that upheaval has created an
opportunity for a new kind of market player, one that exists solely to exploit
current volatility and to produce yet greater levels of it. These are the hedge
funds, which make billions in profits from volatility, taking advantage of less-
sophisticated investors while creating no net value for society.26
Overall, a pervasive emphasis on the expectations market has reduced
shareholder value, created misplaced and ill-advised incentives, generated
inauthenticity in our executives, and introduced parasitic market players. The
moral authority of business diminishes with each passing year, as customers,
employees, and average citizens grow increasingly appalled by the behavior of
business and the abundant greed of its leaders. At the same time, the period
between market meltdowns is shrinking, and regular investors are growing ever
more skittish. Meanwhile, more capital and more talent are flowing into hedge
funds, which continue to exploit and even cause volatility in individual stocks
and broader indices. It is a pretty sorry picture and one that has little chance of
getting better with the current theories in place.
The capital markets—and the whole of the American capitalist system—hang
in the balance. The expectations game is beginning to destroy the real game,
slowly from within. But it isn’t too late. American capitalism can get back to the
real game, back to funding and building companies to create meaningful
products and services that customers care about. It can switch its attention from
the zero-sum expectations market to the positive-sum real market.
FIXING THE GAME: FIVE POSITIVE STEPS
There are five major things we need to do to heal American capitalism, to fix the
game and get real again:
1. We must shift the focus of companies back to the customer and away from
shareholder value. In other words, we must turn our attention back to the
real market and away from the expectations market. This shift necessitates a
fundamental change in our prevailing theory of the firm. The current theory
holds that the singular goal of the corporation should be shareholder value
maximization. Instead, companies should place customers at the center of

the firm and focus on delighting them, while earning an acceptable return
for shareholders.
Our current capital markets regulatory approach focuses on
shareholders, not customers, and stresses the importance of letting free
market forces prevail, even if some of those forces threaten to destroy the
market. On this front, we can take an important page from the NFL
playbook. The NFL manages and regulates the league with a focus on the
fans, putting a product on the field that is maximally enjoyable and
stimulating for its customers. And it understands that the game must be
tweaked continuously to keep ahead of those who would seek to game it.
We would do well to emulate the NFL’s approach here. This shift in mind-
set and regulatory approach will be pursued in chapter 2.
2. We must restore authenticity to the lives of our executives. A focus on
customers rather than shareholders will be a move in the right direction—it
creates meaning and deep intrinsic motivations. But in addition to shifting
our theory of the firm, we must rethink our models of executive
compensation. Stock-based compensation creates a powerful incentive to
do something that executives have come to understand is undoable—keep
expectations rising continuously. The result is that executives are pushed
toward managing expectations more so than real performance. To do so
effectively, they end up leading inauthentic lives and doing work devoid of
deeper meaning, which is bad for their companies and themselves. We must
eliminate stock-based incentive compensation and create new models that
focus executives on real and meaningful goals, goals that enable those
executive to live and work in a balanced, authentic manner. This challenge
will be the subject of chapter 3.
3. We need to address board governance. Boards of directors profoundly
influence the performance of a company and its executives, and we need to
recognize that current theory concerning boards of directors is
fundamentally flawed. These days, we treat the board as a vehicle to
overcome the principal-agent problem. In fact, in the wake of the 2000–
2002 crash, Congress invested boards with much more responsibility for
ensuring that executives are managing for the benefit of shareholders. But
even a cursory examination shows that, like executive management, boards
are composed of agents. And if executives are agents, creating agency
costs, how does the employment of another group of agents—called the

board of directors—discipline the first group of agents and reduce agency
costs? There is no good answer to the question, which means it is time to
fundamentally rethink the role and structure of boards. Transforming board
governance will be the subject of chapter 4.
4. We need to regulate and manage expectations market players more
effectively, most notably hedge funds. Net, hedge funds create no value for
society. They have huge incentives to promote volatility in the expectations
market, which is dangerous for us but lucrative for them. So, we need to
rein in the power of hedge funds to damage real markets. We need to better
regulate the relationships between hedge funds and pension funds, and
ensure that our huge pension funds don’t create incentive structures for
hedge funds that damage pensioners. Regulating expectations market
players, including hedge funds and pension funds, will be the subject of
chapter 5.
5. Business executives need to take on a more expansive and positive view of
the role of for-profit companies in society. The prevailing shareholder value
maximization theory isn’t terribly helpful; it creates a narrow view of the
role of business and minimizes the contribution of business to society. A
new framework, one that better enables executives to think about the
greater role of business in society, is needed. In chapter 6, such a
framework will be introduced to provide a theory and a tool for
management executives to contribute positively to society while serving
their shareholders well.
American capitalism is at a critical juncture. Our leaders have embraced a
persuasive but ultimately flawed theory to construct their understanding of the
economy, the model of executive compensation and the role of business. This
theory leads us inexorably down a path to greater volatility, less value creation,
and minimal authenticity. But it is by no means impossible to turn things around.
In 1976, the business world embraced a new theory of the firm that transformed
the game. It can do so again. It can embrace a different conception of business. It
can devise a new model for executive compensation. It can create new structures
that support, rather than fight against, authenticity and meaning. It is a matter of
devising a new theory of the firm, and shifting our focus and behavior toward
that understanding. In doing so, we can fix the game.

TWO
MAXIMIZING CUSTOMER DELIGHT
There is only one valid definition of a business purpose: to create a
customer.
—Peter Drucker, The Practice of Management
On April 20, 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil well, under lease to BP, exploded
in the Gulf of Mexico, killing eleven workers and spewing crude oil into the
water. BP quickly went into damage-control mode, blaming the rig owners,
Transocean, for safety lapses. BP then went on to attempt to minimize the scope
of the damage, as CEO Tony Hayward explained: “The Gulf of Mexico is a very
big ocean. The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is
tiny in relation to the total water volume.”1 By the end of May, Hayward, clearly
tired of being pilloried by the media and the U.S. government, finally
apologized. Asked what he would say to the Gulf residents who had seen their
livelihoods affected by the spill, Hayward responded: “The first thing to say is
I’m sorry. We’re sorry for the massive disruption it’s caused their lives. There’s
no one who wants this over more than I do. I would like my life back.”2
Unsurprisingly, the apology was overshadowed by Hayward’s astonishing tin
ear—complaining about his own hardships even as he attempted to acknowledge
BP’s regret to those in the Gulf region. It would take months to finally cap the
blown-out well, by which time it had released the equivalent of almost 5 million
barrels of oil into the Gulf. Not just a disaster for the environment, the
Deepwater spill proved to be one for BP as well. It’s become a case study of how
not to handle a public relations crisis.
Thankfully, we have long had a case study of how we should handle even the
most unimaginable crisis, courtesy of Johnson & Johnson (J&J). On September
29, 1982, a twelve-year-old girl in Chicago died after taking a capsule of J&J’s
Extra-Strength Tylenol. Six other deaths followed shortly thereafter, and police
soon linked all seven deaths to Tylenol, hypothesizing that a single murderer had

placed bottles of cyanide-laced Tylenol on the shelves of Chicago-area drug
stores and supermarkets. It appeared that the tampering was limited to Chicago,
but no one knew how many bottles were affected, who had done the tampering,
or why it had happened.
J&J was in a terrible bind. Tylenol represented almost a fifth of the
company’s profits, and any decline in its market share would be difficult to
reclaim, especially in the face of rampant fear and rumor. Yet, rather than
attempt to downplay the crisis—it was after all, likely the work of an individual
madman in one tiny part of the country—J&J did just the opposite. Chairman
James Burke immediately ordered a halt to all Tylenol production and
advertising, distributed warnings to hospitals across the country, and within a
week of the first death, announced a nationwide recall of every single bottle of
Tylenol on the market. J&J went on to develop tamper-proof packaging for its
products; an innovation that would soon become the industry standard.
Burke’s response is often touted as a show of great personal integrity, one
that led the company to make the right, albeit profoundly difficult, choice in the
face of terrible uncertainty. So the question is: how was Burke able to navigate
through the worst crisis of his career and emerge unscathed—celebrated, even—
while BP’s Hayward was transitioned out of a battered, weakened company with
his reputation in tatters? What led Burke to respond in one way and Hayward so
dramatically in another? Was Burke simply a moral paragon, able to see what
others could not and bravely act on his own conviction? Or, was something else
at play?
It is too easy to say that Burke was a saint and Hayward was not. Rather,
Burke and Hayward acted as they did because each was directed to do so by his
company’s abiding purpose. In the wake of the Deepwater Horizon spill,
Hayward’s actions suggest that BP’s profits were at the heart of its crisis
response plan. The company’s values statement, as articulated on its public Web
site, begins, “BP wants to be recognized as a great company—competitively
successful and a force for progress.” It goes on to describe BP as “progressive,
responsible, innovative, and performance driven.”3 Competitively successful and
performance-driven are typically code for shareholder value–oriented priorities,
so it stands to reason that protecting the company’s share price and financial
viability was paramount. Hayward acted as he did because shareholder value
theory told him to do so. All of his actions—limiting liability, distributing blame
elsewhere, and attempting to minimize the scope of the problem—were an
attempt to protect his shareholders. Yet, despite all of Hayward’s efforts, BP lost

more than half of its market capitalization between April and July of 2010.
At J&J, Burke’s actions were also deeply informed by his company’s vision,
a vision he saw literally every time he walked through the lobby of his
headquarters. There, engraved in granite, are the words of legendary J&J
chairman Robert Wood Johnson, articulated in 1943 in preparation for the
company’s initial public offering and enshrined as the company’s credo ever
since:
We believe our first responsibility is to the doctors, nurses and patients, to
mothers and fathers and all others who use our products and services . . .
We are responsible to our employees, the men and women who work with
us throughout the world . . . We are responsible to the communities in
which we live and work and to the world community as well . . . Our final
responsibility is to our stockholders. When we operate according to these
principles, the stockholders should realize a fair return.
The pecking order is clear and unambiguous: customers come first,
employees are second, communities third, and shareholders absolutely last.
Given the prevalence of shareholder value theory in our modern economy,
J&J’s credo is a shocking articulation of very different priorities. With those
priorities in mind, Burke had no choice but to do all he could to protect J&J’s
customers—even if those actions might put profits at risk. He forged ahead with
an unprecedented recall, long before all the facts were clear or careful planning
could be done, knowing that the capital markets might see it as an extreme and
costly overreaction. He proceeded, well aware that the recall might be an implied
admission of guilt, putting the company in legal harm’s way and exposing its
shareholders to substantial losses. Yet Burke followed the credo regardless.
Customers came first and stockholders came fourth—and he acted accordingly.
He didn’t put “meet quarterly profit expectations” at the top of his list. In fact, he
put it squarely at the bottom. And how did his shareholders do in the end?
Although sales of Tylenol took a huge hit in the months immediately after the
recall, J&J’s share price was largely unaffected by the crisis. And, as the new
tamper-proof Tylenol packages hit the shelves, market share quickly rebounded.
As it happens, J&J’s investors seem to do just fine, crisis or no. J&J is one of
the fifteen most valuable companies in the world, as measured by market
capitalization, meaning that it has created as much shareholder value as virtually

any company in the world.4 In fact, it created the tenth-highest value of any
company that chose to set up shop in anything other than energy or banking.
The world tends to believe that shareholders will benefit only if they hold
first place, at the very core of the business. Yet, that prevailing theory simply
does not hold in the case of J&J. J&J not only puts shareholders last, it doesn’t
even talk about maximizing their value. It only states that they “should earn a
fair return.” Notice it isn’t “will earn a great return,” but “should earn a fair
return.”
Of course, one example isn’t enough to prove that putting the shareholder
behind the customer (and others) turns out to be good for shareholders. But J&J
demonstrates that a company can be very explicit about putting customers first,
yet still be able to create enormous value for shareholders. Interestingly, two
more of the most valuable companies in the world are also quite explicit about
putting shareholders behind customers, though they do so in a slightly less
pointed manner than does J&J.
Procter & Gamble (P&G) declares in its purpose statement: “We will provide
branded products and services of superior quality and value that improve the
lives of the world’s consumers, now and for generations to come. As a result,
consumers will reward us with leadership sales, profit and value creation,
allowing our people, our shareholders and the communities in which we live and
work to prosper.”5 For P&G, consumers come first and shareholder value
naturally follows. Per the statement of purpose, if P&G gets things right for
consumers, shareholders will be rewarded as a result.
Then there’s Apple. Its CEO, Steve Jobs, seems to delight in signaling to
shareholders that they don’t matter much and that they certainly won’t interfere
with Apple’s pursuit of its original customer-focused purpose: “to make a
contribution to the world by making tools for the mind that advance
humankind.”6 Jobs’s feisty, almost combative demeanor at shareholder meetings
is legendary. At the meeting in February 2010, one shareholder asked Jobs,
“What keeps you up at night?” Jobs quickly responded, “Shareholder
meetings.”7
Of course, Apple, P&G, and J&J are not paragons of virtue. All three
companies have stumbled from time to time. Apple was investigated for
backdating options.8 P&G faced hundreds of lawsuits after the Rely tampon was
linked to toxic shock syndrome.9 In 2010, J&J was criticized for being slow to

act in issuing a series of recalls related to product quality.10 People are fallible,
even when guided by meaningful statements of purpose. But when three of the
fifteen most valuable companies in the world—companies that have clearly
outpaced their peers on the creation of value for shareholders—are explicit about
not seeking to maximize shareholder value, something interesting is happening.
THE MAXIMIZATION CHALLENGE
The purpose of a company, as articulated by shareholder value devotees, is
shareholder value maximization. Yet Apple, P&G, and J&J all successfully focus
on customers instead of shareholders. This suggests that there is a choice to be
made: maximize return to shareholders or maximize some customer measure.
But is it a choice? Couldn’t a company focus on both? Couldn’t a company place
equal emphasis on shareholders and customers, making them both the top
priority? Wouldn’t that deliver even better returns?
It sounds wonderfully appealing, but such an approach is undone by the
notion at the heart of shareholder value theory. It states that a company must
maximize the value it creates for shareholders. A company can’t make customers
and shareholders equal top priorities in this construct, because it can only
maximize one thing at a time. It is exceedingly difficult and maybe entirely
impossible for a human being, organization, or even computer to maximize two
separate and distinct outcomes at the same time.11
Think of an oil refinery that wants to maximize the dollar value of the
products (such as unleaded gasoline, heating oil, and jet fuel) it produces from
an incoming barrel of oil. The refinery would like to get the greatest revenue out
of each barrel that it runs. Yet, there are constraints on what it can produce,
including the mix of products its customers demand, the quality and quantity of
crude supply, its own economic resources, its capacity, and so on. Given the
constraints, determining the optimal mix requires a massive computational
effort. And that’s only for any one decision, not taking into account the hundreds
of optimization decisions that need to be made in a large company every day. It’s
more complexity than our puny human brains can typically manage. So a
mathematical technique called linear programming was developed to quickly
and efficiently optimize a given output, subject to other constraints.
The very nature of constraints dictates that we can only maximize one thing
at a time—for example, the total volume of the output, or the profitability of the
output, but not both. Perhaps heating oil is the fastest and easiest output to

produce. So, if we want to maximize volume, we produce only heating oil. But
heating oil offers a lower profit margin than jet fuel, so if we care more about
profits than volume, we would produce jet fuel instead. Heating oil produces the
greatest volume, jet fuel the greatest profit; but we can’t concurrently produce
100 percent heating oil and 100 percent jet fuel, so we can’t maximize both
profit and volume at the same time, no matter how sophisticated our linear
program is. We have to pick one main objective function and treat the others as
minimal constraints.
The only exception to this rule is when one of the variables is a subset of
another. For example, if I ask you to take a 16-gram ball of clay and maximize
both the number of 1-gram spheres and the number of 1-gram cubes you create
with it, it will be impossible for you to do it. The more spheres, the fewer cubes;
it is as simple as that. If instead I ask you to maximize the number of both
objects and spheres, this you can do, because sphere is a subset of object. You
can make sixteen spheres and in doing so also produce sixteen objects (see
figure 2-1).
FIGURE 2-1
Clay object optimization

THE PRIMARY OBJECTIVE OF BUSINESS
Just as a business must choose how to optimize its production resources, it must
also choose its primary objective, its ultimate purpose. It has to choose between
making shareholder value its primary goal, subject to meeting a basic customer
value hurdle, and making customer value its main goal, subject to creating a
minimally acceptable level of shareholder value.
Shareholder value theory is unambiguous in this regard: it states that a
company’s obligation is to put shareholder value maximization first. At a bare
minimum, the company must deliver to its customers a rate of return on the

market value of the equity (i.e., on the prevailing stock price) that is above the
risk-adjusted cost of equity. In other words, if a stock is trading at $100 on
January 1 and the risk-adjusted cost of equity is 15 percent, the company must
increase the share price by $15 over the course of the year in order to have
achieved its minimum acceptable return for shareholders. If the stock is worth
less than $115 on December 31 (assuming no dividends were paid), observers
(and those who compile total shareholder return statistics) will declare that the
executive team hasn’t increased shareholder value sufficiently.
This framework has even entered the regulatory environment, through U.S.
rules governing financial reporting. In June 2001, the Financial Accounting and
Standards Board (FASB) issued Statement 142, which changed the way auditors
treat intangible assets (like intellectual property and trade secrets) and goodwill
(like a company’s reputation with its clients). Previously, companies had to write
down intangible assets and goodwill over time on a fixed amortization schedule.
FASB 142 ended this practice and mandated that auditors would instead have to
declare annually whether intangible assets and goodwill were “impaired” or had
retained their value. If they were impaired, the auditors would have to write the
assets down to reflect current market value.
Given the new regulations, auditing firms have had to develop a procedure to
determine whether an asset is or is not impaired. The most straightforward
approach would be to stay grounded in the real market, making an estimate of
the company’s discounted future cash flows and comparing that with the net
book value of the company’s assets. If the discounted cash flows were lower
than their book value, then a write-off would be necessary. However, perhaps
lured by the siren song of shareholder value, auditing firms have mixed the
expectations market into the equation. Auditors compare the discounted future
cash flows with the current shareholder value—as determined by the current
stock price. If they deem shareholder value to be too low relative to the
estimated discounted cash flows, the auditors would have cause to mandate a
write-down of the firm’s assets to a level consistent with shareholder value.
As a consequence, CEOs who fail to manage upward the expectations of
shareholders risk being forced to take a sizable write-down on their company’s
assets—the announcement of which could very well set off a downward spiral of
yet lower expectations and further write-downs. So firms have clear incentives to
place shareholder value front and center as the primary objective of the
organization.
And, to be fair, the argument for shareholder value maximization has a clear

logical elegance. Common shareholders take on risk by investing in the
company. Everyone else gets paid first. By legal construct, the shareholders are
residual claimants—they get paid only after all other claimants are satisfied.
Thus, shareholders deserve to have the company work to maximize the value of
their residual claim. It is as simple and elegant as that. And this logic is
buttressed by the compensation model that flows out of agency theory. We use
stock-based compensation to align the interests of executives with those of the
shareholders so that the executives will actually seek to maximize shareholder
value rather than to maximize their own rewards.
Interestingly, the shareholder value maximization argument is entirely
theoretical rather than empirical. There is no clear data supporting the notion that
making shareholder value maximization the objective of the firm actually does
maximize shareholder value over the long term. However, on the basis of the
elegance of the logic, it has become the prevailing theory that governs our
capital markets and business community.
The argument against shareholder value maximization works from the same
critical assumption as does the theory itself: agents are self-interested and will
maximize their own outcomes over and above that of shareholders. Jensen and
Meckling argue that changing the rules of the game can overcome this self-
interest. But they may have underestimated how hard the new rules would be for
executives, and how much easier it would be for executives to “game the game”
instead.
Consider the logic. Expectations race far ahead of reality, and it is not
possible to beat them forever (or, really, for very long at all). The world’s very
best companies, whether Cisco, Microsoft, Google, Citigroup, or GE, have
expectations placed on them that vastly exceed what is achievable. As a
consequence, the goal of maximizing shareholder value takes on a problematic
dimension for the executives charged with accomplishing it. Since they are
increasingly aware that they can’t keep expectations rising (let alone rising
forever), executives start to play games, none of which are at all good for
shareholders.
Stock-based compensation, rather than aligning their interests with
shareholders, gives executives the incentive to work on causing expectations to
rise in the short-term and then get out quickly in order to exploit the
unsustainably high expectations. It also makes it worthwhile for executives to
cause expectations to crater shortly after their appointment, giving them a long
runway from which to rebuild expectations (and allowing the stock-based

compensation that they receive at the bottom of the trough to soar).
Since shareholder value enhancement occurs entirely in the expectations
market, executives have a powerful incentive to spend their time, energy, and
efforts playing there rather than in the real market. Rather than ask, “How can I
make my performance in the real market better?” they will ask, “What’s best for
the expectations market?” They will do so because their incentive compensation
scheme demands it.
But executives have a profoundly difficult task in the expectations market.
Recall that the stock price is the sum of all investors’ expectations about the
future performance of the company, and that those expectations are only partly
tied to the company’s real activities. Consider, too, how money actually flows
through the capital markets. Imagine that a company went public at a price of
$20 a share. At the time of that initial public offering (IPO), the company
actually received and put to use all of the money that it raised in the offering—
$20 times however many shares it issued. Subsequently, the company performed
so well that investors’ expectations increased and the company’s share price rose
to $100.
Now imagine further that an investor in the initial public offering decides to
sell her shares to a third party at the prevailing rate of $100 a share. The
company is not party to this transaction; it entirely concerns two external parties
and occurs without the company’s approval or consent. The company receives
no benefit from the exchange, no additional capital with which to build plants,
expand markets, and the like. The initial investor pockets $80 of profit, thanks to
the high expectations. And where does the company find itself relative to the
new investor? According to the prevailing theory, it now owes that new investor
a return above the cost of equity (which we will again assume is 15 percent) on
the $100 share price, even though the company only received the original $20 of
equity capital. The means of producing earnings derives from the real market
(the $20 per share of real investment made by the original investor), while the
target for those earnings comes from the expectations market (the $100 per share
stock price), a market that operates without real constraints. So now the
company needs to earn 15 percent on $100 per share of expectations capital,
even though it has only $20 of real capital with which to do it. Rather than a 15
percent return on its real equity (or $3/share), it has to earn a 75 percent return
on its real equity (or $15/share), a deeply challenging task and one that even the
best companies are unlikely to achieve over time.
The biggest downside of this real-versus-expectations split is the length

executives can and will go to attempt to produce returns that will satisfy
expectations. They will take excessive risks in order to attempt to meet these
unattainable targets, as technology companies proved in 2000 and banks did in
2008. This pressure shortens the competitive cycles of far too many companies,
as they chase market expectations while financed by much lower levels of real
equity.
THE CASE AGAINST SHAREHOLDER VALUE
MAXIMIZATION
The data behind the case against shareholder value maximization as the proper
objective of the company are not entirely persuasive, but they are telling. To
examine the data, let’s compare the periods before and after the beginning of the
shareholder value era.
The decades that preceded the shareholder value era were notable in that they
marked the rise of the professional manager. Until the 1930s, American
commerce was dominated by CEO-owners like the Rockefellers, Mellons,
Carnegies, and Morgans. But during the middle of the twentieth century, firms
increasingly came to be run by the hired help, a new class of professional CEOs.
It was this shift that in 1976 Jensen and Meckling found so troublesome. In
particular, they argued that owners were getting short shrift from these
professional managers, who enhanced their own financial well-being at the
expense of the shareholders in a way that an owner-manager would not have
done. The result, they maintained, was that shareholders were earning a
suboptimally low return on their investment because professional managers were
wasting resources by padding their own bank accounts.
Were these managers extracting unreasonable sums from their companies in
the period just before the rise of shareholder value theory? Interestingly, despite
the intuitive appeal of this nest-feathering hypothesis, the data do not suggest
that they were. One way to calibrate CEO compensation is to determine the total
compensation dollars earned per dollar of net income earned by the company.
The higher the resulting amount, the greater the “take” of management
(represented here by the CEO) versus shareholders. Between 1960 and 1980,
CEO compensation per dollar of net income earned for the 365 biggest publicly
traded American companies fell by 33 percent.12 CEOs earned more for their
shareholders for steadily less and less relative compensation. These CEOs may
well have been squandering company resources in other ways, but they certainly

weren’t utilizing their positions to extract resources out of the company and pour
them into their own compensation.
But this all changed in 1980, just as Jack Welch took over GE and Roberto
Goizueta became CEO of Coca-Cola. After falling steadily by one-third over the
prior two decades, CEO compensation per dollar of net earnings produced
doubled in the decade from 1980 to 1990. And if that wasn’t enough, CEO
compensation per dollar of net earnings produced quadrupled between 1990 and
2000—up eightfold in the two decades after shareholders supposedly wrested
back the upper hand from management.13
On the basis of this data, it could be fairly argued that shareholders had it
pretty good before the age of shareholder value capitalism, and that the advent of
the shareholder value era was a boon for executives rather than for shareholders.
However, if shareholders also did much better in the 1980–2000 period, the
growth in CEO compensation may have been perfectly reasonable. Perhaps both
boats were lifted, as the prevailing theory suggests.
Unfortunately, as pointed out in chapter 1, nothing of this sort happened.
Returns to shareholders were better in the period before the shift to shareholder
value capitalism than after. From the beginning of the shift to professional
management, which can be marked from the publication of a seminal book by
Adolf A. Berle and Gardiner C. Means called The Modern Corporation and
Private Property in 1933, to the publication of Jensen and Meckling’s article in
1976, total real compound annual return on the S&P 500 was 7.5 percent.14
Since 1976, the total real return on the S&P 500 was 6.5 percent (compound
annual).15
It is hard to argue that the age of shareholder value maximization worked out
well for shareholders, but it is also difficult to make the case that shareholders
have done definitively worse. While the difference between 7.5 percent and 6.5
percent is meaningful, especially when compounded over more than three
decades, the rates of return change depending on what years and indices are
measured. For instance, parity for the shareholder value age and the period
before it can be achieved if the start and end dates are sufficiently manipulated.
What cannot be delivered with any degree of credibility, however, is evidence
that shareholders have done better after 1976 than they did before. The data just
aren’t there.
Looking at narrower, company-level data, one might ask: how do companies
that explicitly put shareholder value theory at the heart of the strategy do relative

to those who do not? As we saw earlier in this chapter, J&J clearly puts
shareholders fourth in its list of priorities, well behind customers, and tells
shareholders it is interested in earning only a “fair” return for them. Despite that,
J&J actually beat Jack Welch at creating shareholder value, growing it at 14.5
percent compound annually versus 12.3 percent for GE over Welch’s two
decades as CEO.16 Compared with another shareholder value–creation legend,
Roberto Goizueta, who ran Coca-Cola from 1980 until his death in 1997, J&J
did just fine too. It created value at a 15.0 percent clip versus Coca-Cola’s 15.1
percent during Goizueta’s 17-year tenure. Procter & Gamble, with its own clear
focus on customers first, outperformed Welch 15.2 percent to 12.3 percent and,
at 14.6 percent, almost equaled Goizueta’s numbers.17
Apple Corporation provides another interesting exemplar. By happenstance,
Apple was founded in 1976, the very beginning of the shareholder value era. The
company had a brilliant first five years, including its 1980 IPO, which was the
biggest since that of the Ford Motor Company in 1956.18 But by 1983,
prevailing wisdom dictated that the aggressive young entrepreneurs who had
founded the company needed the wisdom, marketing acumen, and financial
discipline of a professional manager; thus, Apple’s board brought in as CEO
John Sculley, the world-class marketer who had created the Pepsi Challenge
while at PepsiCo. Almost immediately, there was friction between Sculley and
cofounder Steve Jobs, who was subsequently sent packing.
Though Sculley was able to keep market expectations high for a number of
years, he struggled to produce returns in the real market. By 1993, with Apple
facing declining margins, diminishing sales and an eroding stock price, Sculley
was out. And in 1997, prodigal son Jobs returned as CEO.
When Jobs returned, he had to deal with a market capitalization that had
fallen to $2.1 billion, less than a quarter of its high in 1992 and almost back to
the level of its IPO. Yet, within the space of thirteen years, Jobs accomplished
the unthinkable. On May 26, 2010, Apple overtook Microsoft to become the
most valuable technology company in the world and the second-most-valuable
company—of any kind—after Exxon Mobil. It was a stunning reversal of the
position of the two rivals in 1997, when Microsoft was worth forty times as
much as Apple.19 Based on Apple’s market capitalization of $222 billion on
May 26, 2010, Jobs had provided his 1997 shareholders with a hundred-times
return on their investment, or a 43 percent compound annual growth in
shareholder value over thirteen years.

A key feature of Jobs’ approach as CEO has been to make clear to the
shareholders where they stand: they will do well if Apple serves its customers
well, and they should otherwise stay out of his face. If we are to deduce anything
from his actions, his view seems to be that shareholders had no right to even be
informed, let alone given details or reassurances, even when he suffered a life-
threatening ailment. Shareholders objected strongly to being treated with such
apparent disdain, but Jobs made no gesture in their direction other than to tell
them, through the media, that his health was his business and no one else’s.
Clearly, there are several ways to put shareholders behind customers on the
priority list. It can be done frankly but respectfully as it is at J&J; it can be done
with subtlety as it is at P&G, or it can be with seeming impudence as it is at
Apple. Regardless of the approach, each company puts customers ahead of
shareholders, yet each still manages to deliver strong, if not outstanding, returns
to its shareholders. And each stands apart, an outlier from the mass of its
competitors, all of whom embrace the prevailing theory of shareholder value
maximization.
In sum, there are no obvious data to support the logic of shareholder value
maximization and alignment of executive/investor interests through stock-based
compensation. There are, however, some data that would argue against the
adoption of the shareholder value schema: In general, shareholders did worse,
not better, in the shareholder value era, and several prominent companies
demonstrate that an effective route to genuinely increasing shareholder value lies
in rejecting rather than embracing the prevailing theory.
THE POWERFUL OBJECTIVE
If we accept that the data as to the value of a shareholder-value orientation are at
least somewhat equivocal, we must consider another way to determine which
objective to optimize. To do so, it is important to consider the varied powers of
different objectives. Imagine your company has a primary objective and a
number of important but subordinate objectives. Ideally, your pursuit of the
primary objective would help you simultaneously achieve a number of
subordinate objectives. In effect, the secondary objectives turn out to be subsets
of the primary objective, as if the primary objective is clay objects and the
secondary objective is clay spheres. We can maximize both, because sphere is a
subset of object. Such an objective is a powerful one.
A weak objective, on the other hand, is one that is at odds with other

desirable outcomes—for example, where the primary objective is spheres and
the secondary objective is cubes (see figure 2-2). Every time you make a cube,
you are giving up the opportunity to make a sphere. The allure of the powerful
objective rests on the fact that it incorporates other important goals as subsets
rather than fighting against them.
FIGURE 2-2
Differing objectives
Let’s consider a specific example. Suppose that I am considering the
following two objectives for my work life: objective one is to get ahead in my
career as quickly as possible, and objective two is to be regarded as the best
possible colleague at work.
If I decide to maximize the first objective, it is likely that I will seek
individual credit and trample over others or simply elbow them out of the way.
There is a good chance, then, that I will be seen not as a good colleague but
rather as a detestable one. So the first objective does a poor job of helping me

simultaneously accomplish the second; it does not draw the second goal along in
its wake.
But if I decide instead to maximize the second goal, I will be inclined to
share credit, befriend my peers, and genuinely seek out the opinions of others. I
will be well liked by my colleagues and, in all likelihood, still advance in the
organization relatively quickly as my superiors recognize my strong
interpersonal skills and identify me as someone with whom they are eager to
work.
Now imagine a corporate-level choice between two goals: increasing market
share over the next five years versus increasing current-year profitability. The
latter goal, when placed as the overarching objective, is substantially at odds
with the former. Often, the very best way to increase this year’s profits is to
sacrifice market share by increasing prices—and to do the same for the next year
and the next. So if the company seeks to maximize annual profit repeatedly over
the next five years, it will probably harvest share in each of the five years. At the
end of five years, it will have significantly lower market share—although in each
individual year, it will have maximized the profitability available in that
particular year.
If, instead, the company seeks to maximize market share over five years, it
will behave differently. It may sacrifice some profit in a given year and price
aggressively to build share. But over the longer haul, as the size of the business
grows with the acquisition of each new point of market share, the profit has a
good chance of increasing as well, even if profit per point of share is lower. The
more powerful objective helps to achieve subordinate goals as well, while the
weaker objective does not. In this example, five-year share maximization is
likely to be a more powerful objective than current-year profitability.
So which is the most powerful maximizing objective—placing shareholders
first or placing customers first? Is the maximization of shareholder value the
most powerful goal, one that draws along with it many other objectives we’d
wish to achieve, or a weaker one that actually works against our other
objectives?
To assess that question, it is important to understand what we want of our
executives. One could argue that we want them to make money for their
investors, but also to treat their employees well (especially if we are among
them), to play fair with their customers, to compete in their industry with
integrity, and to manage our environment with respect and care. Among these
subordinate goals, none are particularly well aligned with the goal of

maximizing shareholder value. To maximize shareholder value, an executive
would be inclined to do all he can to keep employee wages and benefits low,
take advantage of naive customers, collude with the competition to exploit the
consumer, and think little of the environment, if at all. In a short-run, zero-sum
game, self-interest would prevail.
Consider, on the other hand, placing the customer’s interests at the heart of
the company’s goals. Then, employees—who are often customers, too—become
far more important. An executive would be more inclined to treat employees as
he wants them to treat his customers. Fair competition would be encouraged,
insofar as it creates greater choice and happier consumers. The environment
would be protected, again insofar as it matters to customers. Finally, with happy
customers come greater profits and greater returns for shareholders. In each case,
the subordinate goals are far more closely aligned to the primacy of customers
than of shareholders.
THE NFL OUTPERFORMS AGAIN
Once again, the NFL provides a sterling example of the success of a powerful
objective. We have already seen that the NFL completely sequesters the
expectations and real markets by prohibiting any insider involvement in sports
betting. But in addition, the league has made it consistently clear that the
singular focus of the real game is on the fans, rather than the owners. Job
number one has been to put a product on the field that is maximally enjoyable
and stimulating for its customers. The logic is that if the NFL accomplishes that
goal on an ongoing basis, the owners will be just fine.
The job of an individual owner is to develop a local fan base over time by
building a team, connecting with the community, providing an enjoyable stadium
experience, and winning football games (rather than beating the point spread).
At the macro level, the NFL commissioner’s office, as the moral equivalent of
the league’s primary regulator, is responsible for creating a structure that enables
all of the teams to thrive, and it does so through a relentless focus on the fan
experience.
The NFL has engaged in a continuous, decades-long effort to tweak the
economics off the field and competitive play on the field to steadily build the
game. This effort is in stark contrast to American capitalism, where there is a
prevailing view that the capital markets represent the last bastion of economic
freedom in America and so shouldn’t be meddled with. Capital markets cowboys

are allowed to roam free and game the system for their own benefit—until a
massive crash leads to dramatic, wholesale regulatory change, which the
cowboys then work to their own advantage again, leading to the next big crash.
In contrast, the NFL watches and listens—and tweaks, and tweaks, and tweaks.
As the NFL grew into a truly big-money sport in the late 1970s and early
1980s, it withstood a series of damaging fights with its players, including a 1982
strike that reduced the season from sixteen games to nine and a 1987 lockout,
when the league used replacement players for three games and cancelled one
game. The league endured the labor strife and fought hard for a salary cap,
revenue sharing, and a free-agency system that would enable small-market
franchises like the Green Bay Packers to compete with big-city clubs in New
York, Dallas, and Miami.20
The salary cap puts a ceiling on the amount each team is allowed to spend on
its roster of players. Combined with revenue sharing from lucrative television
contracts, which gives each team enough money to spend up to its salary cap,
this creates economic parity among teams. The NFL’s is by no means either the
first or only salary cap. The National Basketball Association had a cap in place
in 1984, a decade before the NFL (1994). But the NBA cap is a “soft” cap, with
all sorts of exceptions that enable the rich teams, like the New York Knicks and
Los Angeles Lakers, to outspend poorer teams. The NFL’s cap is rigid and
rigorously enforced, which gives all teams the capacity to compete. Major
League Baseball, on the other hand, has no salary cap, which makes the big-
spending New York Yankees the perennial favorite to win the World Series.21
The NFL also tweaked the free-agency system to make sure that teams losing
free-agent players to another team would be compensated with valuable draft
picks, mitigating the effect of the talent loss. It is the most meaningful and
impactful free-agent compensation system among the major professional sports.
Together, the salary cap, revenue sharing (including new stadium
opportunities), and the free-agent compensation system are fan-focused
measures designed to ensure that every team has a chance of building a winner.
These three measures represent a clear focus on the customer, rather than on the
individual owner, and impressive commitment to the fan experience. Relative
parity of teams is important because teams that lose consistently do little for fan
excitement or engagement. A team can lose in the short term, but there must be
some possibility that, under good management, it can win in the future. It is a
tribute to the management of parity by the league that teams like the New

England Patriots and New Orleans Saints have been able to go from perennial
doormats to Super Bowl Champions.
But more impressive still has been the NFL’s continuous tweaking of the
rules of competition to ensure a balance between offense and defense, with the
aim of giving fans exciting and unpredictable games. This balance is critical: if
the team on the offense will almost surely be trumped by the defense every time,
fans will lose interest; if it is a foregone conclusion that the offense will triumph
over the defense, fans will again tune out.
In sports, as strategies change and the skills of players increase over time,
advantage can tilt one way or the other. Men’s soccer is dangerously close to the
utter dominance of defense over offense, which has almost certainly constrained
the growth of professional soccer in America. In six-man hard-court volleyball,
offenses now have the clear upper hand on defenses, which has contributed to
the sport’s decline in popularity, fan interest, and commercial viability relative to
its fast-growing sister sport, two-man beach volleyball, in which offense is more
balanced with defense.
The NFL’s competition committee recognizes this pattern. It sees that a smart
head coach will attempt to game the game to his advantage; while that kind of
advance can bring change and excitement to the sport for a time, it can also
unbalance it and damage the fan experience over a longer timeframe. As a result,
the league has played a cat-and-mouse game whereby advantages are given to
the offense when defensive innovation threatens it and vice versa.
A case in point: in 1979, a college football coach named Bill Walsh took over
the hapless San Francisco 49ers, whose record of two wins and fourteen losses in
1978 made it the laughingstock of the NFL. In his first year as head coach, as
Walsh took stock of the miserable team he had inherited, the team again racked
up fourteen losses. But at the end of the 1979 season, he decided to implement
an entirely new offensive regime. In the third round of that year’s college draft,
Walsh selected from Notre Dame a weak-armed but quick-thinking quarterback
named Joe Montana to run his new offense.
Walsh’s scheme, which is now famously called the West Coast Offense,
involved marching down the field throwing short passes—three-or four-yard
passes to receivers crossing the field in front of the quarterback—rather than
using the traditional mix of running the ball and throwing long passes of ten
yards or more downfield. Ten-yard passes are inherently attractive because each
team has only four attempts to move the ball ten yards down field. If the team
succeeds, it retains possession of the ball and gets another four attempts for the

next ten yards and so on until it eventually scores (or fails and turns the ball over
to the other team). Teams had traditionally focused on long passes, because they
held the promise of “moving the sticks” (or getting first down yardage) in a
single play. In contrast, Walsh’s short passes were high-percentage plays, more
likely to be completed successfully than riskier long passes, and when strung
together were more likely to earn successive first downs and march his team
down the field to score. The strategy was tremendously productive.
On the back of his new West Coast Offense, Walsh turned a 2-and-14 team
into a Super Bowl champion in just two years. The 49ers won the Super Bowl in
1981, 1984, and again in 1988. Walsh retired after the 1988 Super Bowl victory
and turned over the team to George Seifert, his second-in-command, who led the
team to another Super Bowl victory in 1989—an amazing total of four
championships in nine years in a parity-obsessed league. The “weak-armed”
Montana is now in the NFL Hall of Fame and is considered by many to be the
greatest quarterback to ever play the game.22
Meanwhile, Commissioner Pete Rozelle watched what the West Coast
Offense was doing to the balance between offense and defense, waiting to see
what would unfold as the rest of the league reacted to the innovation. Walsh had
found a clever way for offense to get the upper hand. As is often the case, there
was soon a competitive reaction to Walsh’s new strategy: Defensive backs, the
players primarily tasked with defending against passes, got bigger and stronger
(and richer) as defensive coordinators tried to do whatever they could to stop the
offense from completing a succession of short passes. These bigger, stronger
defensive backs attempted to jostle, intimidate, and out-position the receivers to
break up the rhythm of the offense. The market reaction was helpful, but it was
not enough to rebalance things sufficiently, so Rozelle decided to act. To restore
balance, the NFL tweaked both the rules and the official interpretation of them.
Previously, defensive backs were not allowed to contact the receiver prior to the
receiver catching the ball. The rules changed to allow defensive backs to hit (or
“chuck,” in NFL vernacular) the receivers once in the first five yards from the
line of scrimmage, making it less likely that the quarterback would find the
receiver where he expected him to be and thus make it more difficult to complete
the quick, short passes. Perhaps more importantly, over the 1980s and early
1990s, referees became ever more liberal in allowing defensive backs to impede
the receivers—all in an effort to limit the effectiveness of the West Coast
Offense.
Just as these changes were being implemented, innovative coaches were

creating new ways to game the game. A new form of linebacker (the
intermediate-sized defenders who work between the giant defensive linemen and
the smaller and quicker defensive backs) was emerging, and defensive coaching
genius Bill Parcells, who might be called the anti-Walsh, put them to very good
use. Utilizing players who were big, brutish, and out for blood, Parcells
pioneered a linebacker-centric defense that created chaos for offenses by
relentlessly “blitzing” the quarterback (that is, crossing the line of scrimmage to
attempt to tackle to quarterback). This new scheme interrupted the offensive
passing game and turned the tide in favor of the defense. Led by Lawrence
Taylor—whose game-changing career serves as the opening note to the Oscar-
winning movie The Blind Side—Parcells’s defensive-powerhouse New York
Giants won Super Bowl Championships in 1987 and 1991.23
Between Rozelle’s rule changes and Parcells’s innovations, defense now had
the upper hand. So, Rozelle’s successor Paul Tagliabue went to his mentor’s
playbook and started tweaking. Defensive backs were reined in to free up
receivers to run their routes. Offensive linemen were given more freedom to use
their arms to slow blitzing defenders. Quarterbacks were protected from blows to
head, leg shots, and hits after they released the ball on passing plays. As a result,
balance was restored.
By keeping the NFL entrenched in the real game, Rozelle and his successors
kept the league focused first and foremost on the fans; they continually tweaked
the game so as to delight their customers and build the league slowly but surely.
The NFL does not seek to make life wonderful for bettors and bookmakers,
especially when doing so negatively influences the fan experience. Yet it doesn’t
ignore the gamblers entirely, recognizing that they are a reality of football life
and important to some fans. The league forces teams to disclose player injuries
and categorize those with injuries as either out, doubtful, questionable, or
probable to play, which is largely for the utility of football’s expectations
market.
The NFL leadership has always understood that if it focuses on the fans and
tweaks the product with the customer in mind, it will produce lots of value for
the owners—the J&J model as applied to professional sports. Forbes values the
teams in the NFL at $33 billion, collectively, up almost three times from $12
billion a decade ago. With fans and the real game as the focus, owners have
indeed done just fine.24

LESSONS FOR AMERICAN CAPITALISM
American capitalism should learn an important lesson from the NFL. We’ve
already seen that it would be wise to echo the NFL’s isolation of the game played
on the field—the real game—from the unhelpful entanglements of betting on
that game—the expectations market. Now the lesson is to put customers clearly
and unambiguously first—maximize their delight in the real game—and trust
that owners will still make a tidy return.
The prevailing theory holds that it is the obligation of a business to maximize
its return to shareholders rather than to focus on delivering customer value. But
the example of the NFL, in addition to the examples of J&J, P&G, and Apple,
suggests another choice, one that goes beyond even customer value; a company
can choose to attempt to maximize customer delight through the creation of
products, services, and experiences that exceed basic expectations and deliver
genuine joy. Maximizing customer delight is a powerful objective that embodies
many other worthwhile goals, including employee happiness and shareholder
value. In this way, it is an integrative solution that actually obviates the need to
choose between customers and shareholders. Choosing customer delight enables
an organization to satisfy them both.
In order to maximize customer delight, those responsible for regulating
American capitalism must recognize that we will have to keep tweaking the
game; otherwise, savvy players will inevitably game the game in ways that
diminish the customer experience. It is not possible to “get it right and leave it
alone.” In particular, there will always be attempts by capital markets
intermediaries and their friends to enable the expectations market to penetrate
the real market. In this regard, tweaks are already necessary.
An example is the 1995 Private Securities Litigation Reform Act, which
contains what has become known to anyone who has participated in an earnings
release presentation as the safe harbor provision. This provision protects
company executives who offer earnings guidance to investors, enabling them to
provide that guidance without fear of getting into trouble or being held
accountable for it. Citing the safe harbor provision before making their
presentation authorizes them to use “forward-looking” weasel-words such as
anticipating, projecting, expecting, and estimating to make predictions of future
performance, and to be protected from lawsuits when their predictions are found
to be off base. This provision plainly encourages and facilitates the penetration
of the expectations market into the real market by giving executives a powerful

tool for expectations manipulation. To move ahead productively, the safe harbor
provision should simply be repealed. Executives and their companies should be
legally liable for any attempt to manage expectations. Without the safe harbor
provisions, there would be no earnings guidance and that would be a great thing.
Similarly, the application of FASB 142 to determine goodwill impairment
represents another incursion by the expectations market into the real market.
Because auditors can force the real write-downs of real assets based on the
company’s share price in the expectations market, executives must concern
themselves unhelpfully with managing expectations in order to avoid write-
downs. FASB should mandate that impairment calculations use only real-market
measures—such as estimated discounted cash flow relative to real assets rather
than to share price.
American capitalism needs the moral equivalent of an NFL commissioner to
weed out existing incursions of the expectations market into the real market—
like the safe harbor provision and FASB 142—and to guard against any new
attempted incursions. And, as with the NFL, customers should be the
commissioner’s dominant concern, because it is real-market customers who need
protection. When the expectations market infiltrates the real market, customers
suffer. As with the NFL, investors (bettors) and capital market intermediaries
(bookies) don’t need to be coddled and treated as if they are the center of the
universe. If executives focus on the real market, investors will do just fine.
Capital market intermediaries will, as they always have, look after themselves
and so don’t need special protection and care. They will attempt to game the
game for their own purposes and thus the rules will need to be tweaked, as in the
NFL, to make sure the game isn’t gamed to death.
To help companies focus on maximizing customer delight rather than
shareholder value, we should fundamentally redefine the obligation of the
company relative to its shareholders. Currently, the obligation is to maximize
shareholder value, defined as increasing the share price from its current level to
the maximum extent possible. This obligation should be changed to one
consistent with the J&J credo, which is that shareholders should realize a “fair
return.”
Further, a company should feel obligated only to earn a return on the equity
that shareholders actually gave to the company, plus the real earnings that the
company chooses to reinvest, rather than pay out to shareholders by way of
dividends. The goal should be to earn a return that is above investors’ risk-
adjusted cost of equity, not a return at the highest level possible. This shift is

critically important because every company needs capital to invest in
maintaining its competitive position. The fundamental problem for highly
successful companies is that their success sends their expectations soaring. As
expectations rise, investors sell shares between themselves, enriching each other
but not providing an additional cent of capital to the company. When
expectations get sufficiently high, the company’s ability to invest in maintaining
or growing the competitive advantage that fed those high expectations in the first
place is massively constrained.
As of July 2010, Google was trading at a market-to-book ratio of its equity of
four times. Imagine we were to argue that its required rate of return on equity is
10 percent. Using book equity, Google looks pretty good, making a 20 percent
return. However, a market-to-book ratio of four times means that Google needs
to make a return of 40 percent on book equity to achieve a 10 percent return on
market equity. Google, despite being one of the most dynamic and admired
companies on the planet, is failing its shareholders according to the prevailing
theory.
The theory must be changed, and companies must be under no legal or
regulatory obligation to earn a return on anything but the equity they have been
given and the earnings they have retained—that is, capital from the real market
to be used in the real market.25 Only if they are freed from expectations market–
generated return targets will successful companies be able to invest for the long
term in delighting customers.
In the end, the goal of achieving customer delight is to turn companies from
attending in vain to the expectations market to attending to the real market and to
customers in that market. Tending to the real market will provide a greater
ability to extend and expand a company’s competitive position and enable the
investments necessary to do so. The message is clear: customer delight is a more
powerful objective than shareholder value. As J&J, P&G, Apple, and the NFL so
aptly demonstrate, if you take care of customers, shareholders will be drawn
along for a very nice ride. The opposite is simply not true: if you try to take care
of shareholders, customers don’t benefit and, ironically, shareholders don’t get
very far either.

THREE
RESTORING EXECUTIVE AUTHENTICITY
To thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou
cans’t not then be false to any man.
—William Shakespeare, Hamlet
Management Science is a prestigious top-tier academic journal, the kind in
which business academics strive to be published, especially as they work toward
gaining tenure. A typical issue might feature original research in behavioral
economics, competitive dynamics, or game theory. As with other top-tier
journals, the articles tend to be written in dense “academese,” and require a rich
background in statistics and mathematics to be understood. With a paid
circulation of just five thousand, its publication doesn’t typically cause much of
a stir outside the walls of business academia.1
Minuscule circulation notwithstanding, the May 2005 issue of Management
Science included an article that would go on to have wide-reaching and dramatic
effects on our world. “On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards” was written
by Erik Lie, an associate professor of finance at the Tippie College of Business
at the University of Iowa.2 Lie was then a relatively unknown young academic,
in the first decade of his career and with only two prior top-tier journal articles to
his name. But that was about to change.
THE OPTIONS BACKDATING SAGA
Erik Lie’s article summarized his study of CEO stock option awards from 1992
through 2002. In particular, it analyzed a large data set of 1,668 “unscheduled”
awards during that period. Lie had studied options awarded by boards of
directors to CEOs outside of structured, contractual agreements, so excluded
options that were awarded on a regular schedule, such as those made annually on
January 1. In essence, Lie looked only at those instances when the board patted

the CEO on the head and said, “Here are some stock options for your good
work.”
Such options are typically granted at market price on the day of the award.
That’s because if options were awarded below the market price, they would be
deemed to contain a capital gain and the CEO would face an immediate tax bill.
If, alternatively, they were granted above market price, the stock price would
have to rise just to make them worth anything at all. So the norm was, and
remains, to issue stock options at the market price on the day the award is made.
This was putatively the case for every one of the 1,668 awards Lie examined.
In 1997, David Yermack at the Stern School at NYU had published a paper in
the Journal of Finance (another prestigious academic journal) showing that
stock prices tend to increase shortly after option grants—a suspicious finding but
not one that created much of a stir.3 Lie wanted to dig deeper, and so set out to
look at the period both before and after the grant date to see whether there was a
suspicious drop prior to the option date and further evidence of Yermack’s
suspicious rise afterward. Across a data set as big as Lie’s, one would expect to
find no particular pattern, but rather a random distribution in which some stock
prices went up before issue and down after, some went down before the issue
and up after, some continued on a downward path irrespective of the issue, and
some went up before the issue and up again after. Lie wanted to examine
whether movements of the stock were indeed random or, as Yermack’s paper had
suggested, abnormal.
Lie’s results were nothing short of stunning. Across his sample, prices
seemed to mysteriously fall just before unscheduled CEO stock option grants. In
the thirty days leading up to the option grant, there was a 3 percent abnormal
decline, most of which happened in the final ten days before the award. But
rather than continue to fall, prices miraculously reversed course after the grant
award, showing an abnormal gain of 2 percent in the first ten days and another 2
percent in the following twenty days. Think of a V-shaped curve in a stock price
chart over time; Lie found that stock options were consistently granted right at
the bottom of the V (see figure 3-1).
FIGURE 3-1
V-shaped patterns on a stock chart

Source: This chart uses six months of daily returns for the S&P 500.
Note the series of V-shaped patterns as the index changes direction.
The likelihood of finding V-shaped patterns on a historical stock chart is
almost 100 percent; such a pattern emerges whenever a stock changes direction,
stopping a downward decline and heading back up. However, the chance of
options consistently being granted at the very bottom of the V randomly,
naturally, or as the result of an eerily prescient board is infinitesimally small, not
to mention wonderfully beneficial for the recipient of the option. In fact, Lie’s
work shows beyond a shadow of a doubt that the pattern of awards could not be
random.
How was it, then, that options grants were made consistently at the lowest
stock price in the sixty-day period beginning thirty days before the award? It
turns out that the options were backdated. A board would decide to award
options to a well-performing executive on, for example, March 17. Then
somebody, whether CEO, CFO, EVP-HR, or corporate secretary, would pore
over the stock movements for the previous several months and find the day the
stock price was at its lowest point, say February 24. The company would then
enter into the corporate records that the options award was made on February 24,
the bottom-of-the-V day, rather than on March 17; in other words, the award
would be backdated from March 17 to February 24. At the time, Lie estimated
that a full 23 percent of the unscheduled grants were backdated. The problem?
While options backdating was technically legal (if the executive in question
declared and paid tax on the capital gain that occurred upon the award of an “in-
the-money” option), lying about it most assuredly was not. In essence, though he
was careful not to say so explicitly, Lie had found 384 acts of securities and

accounting fraud.
Despite Management Science’s relative obscurity outside business schools,
Lie’s article soon came to the attention of authorities at the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC). Within his overall data set, Lie could pinpoint the
specific companies and grants that were most abnormal, so it was a treasure
trove for SEC investigators. Within six months, the Wall Street Journal broke the
story of the SEC investigation.4
Suddenly, options backdating was front-page news and Erik Lie very famous.
In 2007, Time magazine named him one of the world’s one hundred most
influential people, along with Barack Obama, Oprah Winfrey, Richard Branson,
and Steve Jobs.5 In the same year, BusinessWeek named him one of the ten most
influential business professors in the world.6 And in 2008, the Tippie School
promoted him to a full, chaired professorship.
Lie deserved the acclaim; he had uncovered a significant scandal, the
meaning and scope of which was truly stunning. A subsequent Lie study,
published in 2009, showed that some 29 percent of American businesses that
made stock option grants to executives from 1995 to 2006 had manipulated
them. That’s two thousand companies engaging in suspect behavior.7
Backdating options was dubious at many levels: options backdating defrauds
shareholders by enriching executives at the investors’ expense; it constitutes
unambiguous corporate accounting fraud; and it aids and abets personal tax
fraud for the individual executives. Malfeasance on this scale does not happen
accidentally; you don’t find the precise bottom of the V without crystal clear
intent. It takes a conspiracy—a CEO and CFO and sometimes others working
together. In the end, more than one hundred companies, including dozens from
Silicon Valley and leading firms like Dell, Apple, Broadcom, and United Health,
were scrutinized by the SEC. Eventually, some 150 companies issued
restatements related to options backdating. Numerous executives were fired,
many were banned from serving as corporate officers, some were fined, and at
least five went to prison.8
It was one more case of executives behaving badly. The options backdating
scandal was not the only corporate scandal of the first decade of the new century.
The accounting scandal that ensnared Enron, WorldCom, and others also sent
senior executives to prison for long sentences. In fact, within an eight-year
period we witnessed three massive, blowout scandals involving hundreds of
executives each: the accounting scandals (2001–2002), the options backdating

scandal (2005–2006), and the subprime mortgage scandal (2008–2009). As a
result, the reputation of corporate executives took a pounding. In a 2010 Gallup
poll rating of the perceived ethical standards of people in different professions,
business executives ranked just a few notches above car salesmen and below
lawyers. Just 15 percent of respondents rated the honesty and ethical standards
of business executives as high or very high; by contrast, nurses were well
regarded by 81 percent of respondents.9
The illegal and unethical behavior of business executives over the past few
decades suggests that something is seriously out of whack in the corporate
world. Assuming that people would rather be ethical than unethical, how did we
wind up with such pervasive unethical and illegal behavior? How is it that
executives have come to act in ways that are so much at odds with what we
would expect of them—and of what they should expect of themselves? They
have fallen down the proverbial slippery slope, pushed by perverse incentives to
behave in ways that are less and less ethical, more and more inauthentic.
Admittedly, not all executives deserve to be tarred for the failings of a few, or
even a few thousand. Not all executives engaged in the activities that led to the
scandals of the past decade. But many do engage in a practice that exists right at
the precipice of the slippery slope, one that skates very close to the line of
illegality and betrays the spirit of securities laws and accounting regulations:
earnings management.
THE DAWN OF EARNINGS MANAGEMENT
In an article in the Journal of Accounting and Economics—yet another top-tier
journal—Eli Bartov, Dan Givoly, and Carla Hayn showed that, regardless of the
level of performance, a company’s stock performs better if the company meets
or beats analyst earnings expectations.10 That is, a company is likely to see its
stock perform better if it earns $1.10 per share when its consensus estimate was
$1.08 per share than if it earns $1.12 per share when the consensus estimate was
$1.15 per share. Superior relative performance in the expectations market (+2¢
versus –3¢) trumps absolutely better performance in the real market ($1.12
versus $1.10).
The motivation to meet the numbers by any means necessary is clear, and the
means, increasingly, is earnings management. Earnings management, in this
context, means tailoring returns to meet market expectations rather than to
reflect actual performance. This approach takes two primary forms: accounting

manipulations and expectations management.
In accounting manipulations, a firm fudges its financial statements to adjust
earnings artificially, typically inflating them, to meet expectations. This might
take the form of accounting for sales in the current quarter that really should go
into the next, shifting expenses in the opposite direction, or finding a way to hide
those expenses entirely. Such earnings manipulation through accounting is a
risky game, one that recently got Dell into trouble. Dell was accused of
manipulating the way in which it accounted for the payments it received from
Intel to buy Intel chips instead of Advanced Micro Devices chips. Putting aside
whether it was morally dubious to accept the payments in the first place, the key
allegation was that Dell recorded the payments in such a way as to produce the
quarterly earnings analysts expected between 2002 and 2006. Although it denied
any wrongdoing, Dell agreed to pay a $100 million fine, and Michael Dell,
former CEO Kevin Rollins, and former CFO James Schneider all paid
multimillion dollar personal fines as part of the settlement.11 Yet, despite the
risk, companies continue to engage in accounting manipulations because the
rewards of meeting expectations are so clear.
The other way to manipulate earnings is to attempt to directly alter analyst
expectations—that is, to “talk the analysts down” to earnings forecast levels that
the company can realistically achieve. In essence, the company attempts to
convince analysts that the company will not be as successful as the analysts
currently believe it will be, stopping just short of actually declaring that the
company will not meet the targets. As long as the information provided is shared
equally with everyone, such a practice is not illegal. However, it is hardly in the
category of activities designed to improve company competitiveness over time.
Bartov, Givoly, and Hayn found that as executives became more aware of
stock price dynamics, they became more proficient at earnings management. In
the period from 1983 to 1993, companies met or beat earnings expectations 50
percent of the time—what one might expect from a random system. But by the
1994–1997 period, companies were able to meet or exceed expectations almost
70 percent of the time, a dramatic improvement and the outcome of extreme
determination, greater skill in earnings manipulation, or both.12
In the shareholder value era, some very prominent companies have done even
better than their peers at meeting or beating expectations. As Michael Jensen has
pointed out, during the heart of the Jack Welch era, GE met or beat analysts’
forecasts in forty-six of forty-eight quarters between December 31, 1989, and

September 30, 2001—a 96 percent hit rate. Even more impressively, in forty-one
of those forty-six quarters, GE hit the analyst forecast to the exact penny—89
percent perfection. And in the remaining seven imperfect quarters, the tolerance
was startlingly narrow: four times GE beat the projection by 2 cents, once it beat
it by 1 cent, once it missed by 1 cent, and once by 2 cents. Looking at these
twelve years of unnatural precision, Jensen asks rhetorically: “What is the
chance that could happen if earnings were not being ‘managed’?”13 Another
expectations-meeting star, Microsoft, met or beat expectations for forty-one of
the first forty-two quarters after it went public in 1986—its only glitch being a
miss by one penny in 1988. Justin Fox, author of the Fortune article that noted
this trend, argued that Microsoft managed this near-perfect record by accounting
for revenue in a way that “virtually no other software company does.”14 In
short, the likelihood of real performance driving the kind of precision seen at GE
and Microsoft is infinitesimal.
Both Microsoft and GE are capable of performing very well in the real
market; but the unnatural precision of their earnings suggests that the
expectations market came to loom large in their boardrooms and executive suites
and that expectations management became just as important, if not more so, than
real performance. So, they became expert at gaming the game.
Over time, regulators have attempted to decrease the ability of companies to
use games (especially accounting games) to manage earnings, through
legislation, including Sarbanes-Oxley. And, indeed when John Graham,
Campbell Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal explored (again in the Journal of
Accounting and Economics) how four hundred financial executives from major
American public companies operated in the new tightened accounting
environment, they found that the executives were loath to use accounting
measures to smooth earnings. However, the authors also made the following
worrisome discovery: “The majority of managers would avoid initiating a
positive NPV [net present value] project if it meant falling short of the current
quarter’s consensus earnings. Similarly, more than three-fourths of the surveyed
executives would give up economic value in exchange for smooth earnings.”15
That is to say, these financial executives would damage the future prospects of
their company—to the clear detriment of shareholders—in order to please those
same shareholders by ensuring that they unfailingly meet or beat analyst
expectations. Not only have executives used accounting manipulations and
talked down their own stock to meet expectations, they are willing to sacrifice

the long-term financial performance of their companies in the real market in
order to satisfy the vagaries of the expectations market in the short term.
In summary, then, three decades into the age of shareholder value, we have
reached the point where a majority of executives freely admit to sacrificing the
future of their companies in order to meet the whims of the expectations market,
and in which we have suffered successive business scandals wherein hundreds of
executives engaged in entirely illegal activities. In both cases, shareholders are
substantially hurt rather than helped.
Earnings management is the first step down a dangerous path, yet it has
become an almost universally accepted practice. That being the case, CEOs (and
other executives, to be fair) now live in an unhealthy community, one that causes
them to lead an inauthentic life and lose touch with their moral compass. And so
we see CEOs using their talents and corporate resources to smooth earnings
rather than to build their companies. And, over time, accounting and securities
fraud, even on the largest scale, is no longer off limits.
THE ROLE OF COMMUNITY
Community is incredibly important in our lives. At our core, we are all social
creatures who derive pleasure from the company, love, and recognition of others.
Mother Teresa once said that one of humanity’s greatest diseases was “to be
nobody to anybody.” We strive to make our mark on the world and to feel that
our lives are worthwhile. The work we do is a critical component of our legacy.
If we believe that our work has meaning and that we are valued by others for
what we do, we are encouraged and motivated. We persevere. Even when
humans engage in profoundly antisocial activities, they often do so in tightly knit
social groups, whether they happen to be called Crips, Yakuza, or Al Qaeda. As
social creatures, much of our happiness is derived from our relationship with a
community, however that community is defined.
There are three elements to our relationship with a community that centrally
determine our level of happiness: (1) our perceived value in the eyes of the
community in question; (2) how much we value that community; and (3) the
degree to which that community is valued by those outside it. These three
elements work together to reinforce or diminish our happiness.
How does this work? Imagine that a person feels valued and appreciated by
her community. That makes her happy. However, her degree of happiness will be
a function of how much she cares about that community. Just as Groucho Marx

slyly opined that he would never want to be a member of a club that would have
him as a member, it follows that, if a person puts low value on a particular
community, the esteem of that community would have less effect on her
happiness than would the esteem of a community she highly values. Finally, if
she is valued by the community and values it back, but the rest of the world has
little regard for that community, her happiness similarly is constrained (see
figure 3-2).
FIGURE 3-2
The happiness equation
To return once again to the NFL for an example, when it comes to
community, quarterback Drew Brees has reasons to be happy. He is valued by
his community: as the starting quarterback of the New Orleans Saints, he’s paid
roughly $10 million per season and respected by his fellow players and his
coaches. Among the many superlatives thrown at Brees by his Saints peers was
defensive back Darren Sharper’s observation that Brees is “the best leader I’ve
ever been around.”16 Brees also values his community: he chose to play for the
Saints rather than the Miami Dolphins or elsewhere when he signed as a free
agent in 2006, and he’s seen firsthand the resurrection of New Orleans post-
Katrina, which coincided with the dramatic rise in the Saints’ fortunes. Coming
back from a devastating shoulder injury the year before he joined the Saints,
Brees knows all too well how easily it could all be taken away. Finally, he knows
just how much others value his organization: He faces a crush of rabid and
devoted fans before, during, and after every game. Fans and media across the
country think the New Orleans Saints are a fantastic football team—and they are
right: the Saints won the Super Bowl in February 2010, and Brees was named
the game’s MVP. He was subsequently named Sports Illustrated magazine’s
2010 sportsman of the year. For Brees, the three drivers of happiness reinforce
one another perfectly.17

Unlike Brees and other star athletes, Crips, Yakuza, and Al Qaeda members
don’t have a perfectly reinforcing happiness equation. Consider them medium-
happy, because they only have two aspects of the happiness trinity working for
them: while they are valued members of a community, and they value that
community deeply, most people outside their community think they should be
hunted down and jailed or executed. Total potential happiness is therefore
reduced.
This happiness equation can change over time. For instance, our value in a
community is not static. We can take actions to improve or diminish our
standing. Think back to high school and recall the lengths people will go to
improve their standing in a group. People will change what they do, how they do
it, who they interact with, and even their whole worldview. But such change is
often an unhealthy one; it may lead to greater acceptance by the community but
also to dramatically reduced authenticity on the part of the individual.
AUTHENTICITY
Authenticity is the degree to which one stays true to one’s own character and
morals while dealing with external forces. In an ideal world, we can find
communities that value us for who we are and thus allow us to act authentically
and honestly within them. And, where we interact with a number of communities
at once, those communities would ideally be mutually reinforcing rather than at
odds with one another, enabling us to be true to ourselves and consistent across
contexts.
If, as was suggested earlier, we can assume that people in general would
rather be good than bad, honest than dishonest, and authentic rather than
inauthentic, we would want the communities in which we live to foster these
instincts. Such a community could be described as a healthy one. While there are
many ways to describe a healthy community, most would agree that a healthy
community would:
Believe in long-term relationships rather than one-off transactions
Seek reciprocity rather than exploitation
Protect its weakest members rather than gouging them
Worry about the externalities that it creates rather than turning a blind eye
to them

Discourage member actions that endanger the community rather than
encouraging them
Before the advent of shareholder value theory, the CEO’s community was
relatively healthy. Customers, employees, the home city of his company, and his
long-term shareholders loomed large in the typical CEO community of the 1950s
and 1960s. The intimacy of these relationships was aided by the scale of the
enterprises of the day. GM, the only real behemoth of 1960, pulled in revenues
that, even when converted to today’s dollars (approximately $66 billion), would
be dwarfed by Walmart’s $408 billion and would barely rank in the top one
hundred companies by revenues.18
This smaller scale meant that customers tended to be concentrated in a
company’s home region (or, for the largest companies, home country). So, it was
relatively easy for a CEO to get to know customers, figure out how to serve
them, and continuously improve products or services with those customers in
mind. It was also possible to connect directly with employees, because there
weren’t all that many of them and they mainly lived nearby, with roots in the
same home city. The executive typically lived in and had a network of friends in
that city too, creating a deep link between his corporate role and his personal
life. That is to say, doing things to benefit the city made sense both corporately
and personally. On top of that, shareholders were likely to encourage, or at least
tolerate, long-term planning as opposed to very short-term results, because
shareholders planned to be around for the long term too. The relationship
between corporation and shareholder was like a marriage—a partnership not
without its bumps, but one in which both parties were willing to commit for the
long haul.
Picture an executive of Boeing Corporation in post–World War II America.
He (and they were all he’s then) would be pretty happy, according to our three-
pronged happiness equation. He would, by dint if his status and rewards, feel
that he was a valuable member of the Boeing senior management team. Since
Boeing was a highly successful corporation that had materially helped the Allies
win the war, he would feel pride at being part of that team. Finally, he would
bask in the glory of Americans writ large, feeling that Boeing was a great
company, a technology leader, and one of the country’s biggest exporters. He
would likely be a pillar of the Seattle community, known throughout his city as a
successful Boeing executive. And even though William Boeing, the beloved
founder, had sold his stake in 1934, the executive still would likely feel a sense

of community with the long-standing shareholders of Boeing. When he went to
work, he could feel pride in doing a great job for his team, his city, his
customers, and his shareholders—together, these stakeholders created a
community of which he could genuinely feel a valued part.
While not perfect, this structure enabled the executive to live a reasonably
authentic life; the way he wanted to live personally was largely aligned with his
corporate responsibilities. He wanted to make the customers—whom he was
likely to know personally—happy. He wanted to support the well-being of his
employees—many of whom he and his family knew well. He wanted to be a
respected figure in the city—a city that was important to his company and his
family. And he wanted to make his shareholders happy because he knew that
those shareholders had placed a long-term bet behind his company. If he worked
hard on all those aspects of his community, he could be successful and happy,
and the corporation was likely to continue to prosper too.
Since the 1970s, as companies have ballooned in size, the CEO’s traditional
community has become far more distant and impersonal. Customers and
employees are more dispersed (and anonymous), and the home city is far less
central—even expendable. With the rise of institutional investors and mutual
fund companies, a veil has been placed between the company and its
shareholders. CEOs don’t even know, generally, who their shareholders really
are; they see only the entity that is investing the shareholders’ money. All of this
has weakened the bonds between the traditional community and the CEO.
Moreover, the rise of shareholder capitalism has pushed another community
to the fore—the expectations market. Institutional investors, equity analysts,
investment bankers, hedge funds, and the financial press have emerged as the
central figures in the CEO’s community. Unlike the traditional, positively
reinforcing community of yore, this new community is less than healthy. Instead,
it is a community rife with transactional relationships, exploitation, and distrust.
Its members prey on one another, ignoring the ill effects of their actions and
encouraging each other’s bad behavior.
The modern institutional investor is a rational, coldhearted (and even
computerized) beast, in and out of a given stock at a whim. Yes, some investors
still engage in relationship investing, but that is not the norm. But institutional
investors can and do sell without warning or explanation, looking for short-term
advantage and maximum profits right now. Rather than a healthy marriage, the
investor-company relationship is now more akin to anonymous sex.
Equity analysts are paid to play the game of helping create a convergence

between their estimates and company performance. They and everybody else
involved know that if they were capable of discerning whether a stock is
overvalued or undervalued even 51 percent of the time, they would be principal
investors, not equity analysts, and they would be wildly rich. Instead, most
analysts merely attempt to avoid looking bad, relying closely on company
guidance and rewarding those companies that make them look good by meeting
the agreed-upon predictions. They coo with approval when companies put
shareholder value first and spank them when they don’t. They dance the dance
described and documented empirically by Bartov, Givoly, and Hayn, whereby
they set expectations high at the beginning of a quarter and then lower them later
in the quarter under pressure from the company and in a desire not to look
silly.19 It is all a game.
Wall Street investment bankers, ever on the hunt for fees, tout “value-
accretive merger and acquisition ideas” sure to “enhance shareholder value.” Yet
they don’t share in the outcome of these mergers; they take an upfront fee and
walk away, unaffected by the success or failure of the enterprise. It turns out that
most mergers and acquisitions destroy real value. In the year 2000, for instance,
AOL merged with Time Warner in a huge $350 billion deal. Meant to create an
integrated new-media powerhouse, the merger went downhill almost
immediately. A decade later, the unmerged companies are now worth just one-
seventh of their premerger selves.20 Yet investment firms Salomon Smith
Barney and Morgan Stanley each collected $60 million in fees just the same.21
Then there are the hedge funds, which work to exploit volatility—and will
actually work to produce it, if necessary—seeking to arbitrage any weakness
they see. In essence, these fund managers attempt to find the most naive
fiduciary institution to gouge, regardless of what the gouging will do to the
beneficiaries of that pension fund or charitable cause. And they will continue to
arbitrage merrily away, even if such actions help to bring the whole market to the
edge of destruction, as they did in the 2008–2009 financial crisis. In late 2008,
the SEC went so far as to ban short selling on some eight hundred financial
products companies after claims were made that hedge funds and other market
makers were targeting the firms (and others have claimed that naked short
selling may have accelerated the declines of Bear Sterns and Lehman
Brothers).22
And the final member of the expectations community is the financial press.
Ultimately, the financial press wants a good story. So reporters will pump

executives for details and quotes, eager to fill inches of column space. This can
create a sinister compact—preferential access for positive coverage—in which
the media serves as accessory to the executives, publicizing the party line to
pump up or minimize expectations as the firm requires. But the relationship can
have a dramatic downside for executives as well. Just as executives are able to
exploit the financial media for their own ends, the media can turn on a company
quickly and savagely, gleefully tearing down icons and highlighting stories of
unmet expectations. Dashed hopes make excellent stories; they are full of angst
and anguish—and sell lots of papers. Witness the feeding frenzies around former
media darlings like Lehman’s Dick Fuld (once one of Barron’s Top 30 CEOs)
and Hewlett-Packard’s Mark Hurd (one of Fortune’s Power 25).23
To be a valued member of the expectations community, a CEO has to give
guidance to analysts on things she can’t actually predict—and then make the
predictions come true; she must undertake transactions that provide the
investment bankers with fees but return little to the firm; she must provide
arbitrage opportunities for the hedge funds and offer stories for the financial
press, all the while keeping shareholder value rising perpetually for institutional
investors. Little of this produces anything good for the company, and most CEOs
know it. That the community causes them to act without authenticity is
unfortunate, but the allure of belonging to a community, even an unhealthy one,
is strong indeed.
The modern CEO has been told in no uncertain terms that increasing
shareholder value is her core purpose. But, other than herself and her executive
team, those shareholders are faceless, nameless people represented by fiduciary
institutions, like Fidelity and CalPERS, who can and will terminate the
relationship for any reason, at any time, without warning or explanation.24 Are
these the people to whom the CEO really wants to dedicate her life? It means
spending the majority of each day attempting to maximize the wealth of
anonymous people with whom she has the shallowest of possible relationships. It
is hardly deeply motivating. In fact, it is alienating.
So too is game playing with analysts. In the current structure, the CEO
spends oodles of time trying to talk analysts’ expectations into line with what the
company can really do, instead of talking to customers in the real market. The
task is painful, time-consuming, and difficult, made more so because it has to be
accomplished without contravening Regulation Fair Disclosure (the SEC
mandate that all publicly traded companies must disclose material information to

all investors at the same time); every analyst, no matter how idiosyncratic his or
her viewpoint, must be told the same things as everyone else. And, in the end,
the task may be fruitless anyway. No matter how persuasive the CEO is with
analysts, she always runs the risk that the market will run far ahead of reality
anyway. Expectations swing wildly—more so than real returns.
The CEO’s compensation package is chock-full of stock-based incentive
compensation, so she has clear reasons to do all she can to increase the stock
price. Yet she understands just as clearly that she can’t do so forever—especially
in the face of market overreactions. She has been set up to play a game she can’t
win, in concert with players she can’t trust or doesn’t really know. No wonder
she games the game. She maximizes her own self-interest because it is a
meaningful goal she can accomplish and because maximizing an anonymous
shareholder’s interests is both impossible over the long term and ultimately
meaningless. In the midst of an unhealthy community, the CEO leads an
inauthentic life, doing whatever it takes to feed the expectations beast—
sacrificing healthy relationships with customers, employees, hometowns, and
long-term investors along the way.
The CEO behaves, in other words, as Philip Condit, former CEO of Boeing,
did. In 2001, in the interest of maximizing value for his multitude of anonymous
owners, Condit essentially put the location of Boeing’s headquarters out to
tender. He announced that Boeing would leave its longtime headquarters in
Seattle for whichever city could deliver the best package of incentives and
credits. Chicago won, offering the biggest municipal bribe (oops, I meant
“incentive”). Boeing forsook Seattle, its home for eighty-five years, for an offer
from the highest bidder. But even that mercenary move wasn’t enough for the
expectations beast. Short-term shareholders kept pressuring Boeing for ever
higher earnings increases. In its efforts to satisfy them, Boeing engaged in
procurement corruption and industrial espionage, which resulted in huge fines,
jail terms, and the forced resignation of Condit (and, in due course, of his
successor as well).
Undoubtedly, there is no one reason for the fall of Boeing. But certainly a
contributing factor was the replacement of a community of real, long-term
investors with anonymous, short-term, shareholders, and a shift in the purpose of
the firm from producing great products and great jobs to producing shareholder
value. As a result of these changes, longtime Seattle jobs could be destroyed to
create shareholder-value-friendly jobs in Chicago. Rules could be bent—or
broken outright—to increase earnings for a community of transitory

shareholders.
Boeing was an iconic, great American firm, a stalwart of the Pacific
Northwest. That it fell prey to the siren call of shareholder value so dramatically,
leading to corruption and espionage, is both heartbreaking and hard to fathom.
So, too, is the pervasiveness of the flat-out fraud of options backdating and the
dangerous expansion of NINJA (no-income, no-job, no-assets) mortgages,
repackaged in elegant slices and sold to hopelessly naive investors. In each case,
values and ethics fell by the wayside.
Why?
Bruce Springsteen explained the phenomenon in his 1973 classic “It’s Hard
to Be a Saint in the City”:
The devil appeared like Jesus through the steam in the street
Showin’ me a hand I knew even the cops couldn’t beat.”25
The criminal behavior that drove both stock option backdating and NINJA
mortgages can be understood through the nature of the communities in which
executives now live; like the devil in Springsteen’s city, these communities show
their members’ hands that the cops find hard to beat.
In Silicon Valley, it made good sense to backdate options because it helped
the companies win the war for talent and to maximize shareholder value (or at
least value for some shareholders). Companies wanted to be valued members of
the Silicon Valley corporate community, and backdating options was what it took
to be a player there. Similarly, it made sense for Wall Street bankers to slice,
dice, and repackage mortgages, and to foist the new securities on investors who
didn’t understand them, because that was what it took to succeed in the Wall
Street community—and being a valued member of that community was
important, because, until late 2008, Wall Street was flying high.
Again, everyone wants to be part of a community, however unhealthy that
community may be. So CEOs drink the Kool-Aid of shareholder value and
dedicate themselves to the community of shareholder value maximizers. They
become inauthentic as their jobs are stripped of the real meaning they once held.
J&J harks back to an earlier, more authentic era when it touts its commitment to
its customers, its employees, and the communities in which it operates. In
contrast, when shareholder value moves to the front of the queue, the rest of the
community suffers: CEOs will dupe customers to meet expectations; they will
sack employees to meet expectations; and they will spoil the environment to

meet expectations. These actions are not taken for the purpose of earning a
satisfactory return on the money provided to the company by shareholders; they
are taken to chase expectations that are entirely ethereal.
This is what it means to be inauthentic: it is to become someone you are not
in order to satisfy those outside you—the members of your unhealthy
community. In short order, the moral compass breaks down and immoral, illegal
behavior runs rampant. But inauthentic behavior is not inevitable. If we refocus
the CEOs on communities that are both healthy and meaningful, we have a hope
of returning authenticity to the C-suite.
RESTORING HEALTH AND AUTHENTICITY
In 1978, Václav Havel wrote an essay called The Power of the Powerless,
addressed to Lech Wał sa and his comrades in the Gdansk shipyards in
Poland.26 In it, Havel explored how the Soviet Union was able to maintain
control of its subjects at home and in the Warsaw Pact countries—including in
Havel’s own Czechoslovakia and Wał sa’s Poland (the Gdansk shipyards
excepted). The essay, in support of Wał sa’s strike, was about the power of
authenticity and the cost of its absence.
The Soviet Union, Havel argued, was able to maintain control by forcing its
subjects to live a lie—in essence, to be inauthentic. Havel illustrated the nature
of this lie through the story of a shopkeeper told to keep a sign emblazoned with
“Workers of the World Unite” in his store window. The shopkeeper knew that
the Soviet Union had long ceased to be about uniting the workers of the world
and was now about a brutal ruling class subjugating its people. So he knew that
to put the sign in the window would be to live a lie. But he complied because he
was afraid of the consequences of insubordination. And in acquiescing to the
sign, the shopkeeper publicly gave control to the authorities who had forced the
lie on him.
In Havel’s view, Wał sa and the strikers were renouncing the lie and refusing
to live within it. By organizing a labor strike against the rulers of the supposed
workers’ paradise, Wał sa and his fellows were being authentic and also
exposing the lack of authenticity of their Communist rulers. Havel predicted that
such acts would bring down the Soviet Union—and history bears him out. The
strikers prevailed and delivered a crucial blow to the Soviet empire, which
crumbled within a decade.
By allowing an unhealthy community to surround our CEOs and senior

executives, we are encouraging them to live an inauthentic life—like so many
Soviet-era shopkeepers. This saps the moral authority of the business community
and causes many talented young people to avoid it in order to retain their own
authenticity. For that reason, for the future of business itself, it is imperative that
we improve the health and authenticity of our business community and its
leaders.
The straightforward answer is to simply tell CEOs to ignore the expectations
market. And indeed, some argue that this is the right approach. Michael Jensen,
for instance, paired with consultant Joe Fuller to pen Just Say No to Wall Street:
Putting a Stop to the Earnings Game.27 The Aspen Institute’s Corporate Values
Strategy Group has been working since 2003 on “promoting changes in
corporate and investment practice, as well as in public policy, to support long-
term orientation in business decision making and investing.” In 2009, it issued
Overcoming Short-termism: A Call for a More Responsible Approach to
Investment and Business Management, a paper encouraging both investors and
executives to think longer term.28
But admonishing CEOs (and investors) to ignore the expectations market is
about as effective as admonishing frat boys to stop chasing girls. For CEOs,
there is little support in resisting the pull of the expectations market and great
rewards for staying attuned to it. Investors, analysts, and hedge funds are all
creatures of the expectations market and they continue to reward firms that meet
expectations and punish those that do not. Bartov, Givoly, and Hayn
demonstrated empirically that there are clear consequences to failing to meet or
beat expectations.29 What’s more, accountants are waiting in the wings to force
write-downs of real assets if the stock price falls. Missing expectations, a
dropping stock-price, and real-asset write-downs can together create an
unstoppable downward spiral. In the current environment, to simply ignore the
expectations market is to court disaster.
The other fundamental problem with admonishing CEOs to ignore the
expectations market is that it means asking them to be insubordinate. Incentive
compensation systems are designed with a purpose: to encourage the person
covered by the incentive plan to produce the outcomes targeted by the incentive
structure. If a saleswoman is given an incentive structure with a substantial
bonus for achieving a specified sales quota, and she makes no attempt to achieve
the quota and earn the bonus, she is being insubordinate. The incentive was put
in place to encourage the behavior desired. If the company wanted her to take

long lunches rather than sell products, it would have created an incentive plan
that set a quota for long lunches and a bonus for achieving that quota.
When a board gives its CEO stock-based incentive compensation, whether
stock options, stock, or phantom stock, it is issuing an incentive to do one thing
and one thing only: raise expectations from the current level to a higher level. If
expectations are not raised from the current level, incentive compensation will
not be earned. If the CEO doesn’t attempt to raise expectations, he is showing no
regard for the incentive structure that was put in place. He is being
insubordinate. We can’t expect CEOs en masse to be fundamentally
insubordinate in order to follow our admonitions to ignore Wall Street.
Many, including Michael Jensen, argue that we shouldn’t throw out stock-
based incentive compensation entirely, but that we must instead fix its structure
and use. If stock options are the problem, they argue, options should be replaced
with deferred stock units set out over a much longer term. They go on to argue
that we need to rein in the out-of-control compensation consultants and to
develop more knowledge and discipline on the compensation committees that
design stock-based incentive systems.30 Indeed, compensation structures,
compensation consultants, and compensation committees all present problems.
But they are problematic because of the theory they employ, not in and of
themselves: when an unsustainable game is being played, game structures are
going to be awfully hard to manage, consultants are going push the boundaries
of the rules, and committees are going to be confused. But that hardly implies
that the structures, consultants, and committees are the root of the problem.
The fundamental problem with stock-based incentives is that they direct the
recipient to try to raise expectations from the current expectation level. Though
Jack Welch and Bill Gates showed that, if one is clever and determined, one can
do that for a long time, it can’t be done forever. So there will be bad behavior.
There will be earnings guidance, earnings management, accounting fraud, and
crazy bubbles. The focus will be on covert manipulation of results and
expectations rather than on building for the future. These aren’t random
happenings; these are the direct consequences of the core theory.
The only way to restore the focus of the executive on the real market and on
an authentic life is to eliminate the use of stock-based compensation as an
incentive. This doesn’t mean that executives shouldn’t own shares. If an
executive wants to buy stock as some sort of bonding with the shareholders or
for whatever other reasons, that’s just fine. However, executives should be
prevented from selling any stock, for any reason, while serving in that capacity

—and indeed for several years after leaving their posts.
While this may seem radical, let’s remember, it worked very well for the
majority of the history of modern business. As late as the early 1970s, stock-
based compensation was rare and made up a minuscule fraction of the
compensation for CEOs of S&P 500 firms. In 1970, CEOs earned an average of
$850,000 (in constant dollars), a tidy sum at the time, and less than 1 percent of
that was earned through stock-based compensation. By 2000, CEOs averaged
$14 million in compensation, with 50 percent coming from stock options.31 And
recall that shareholders actually did better in the earlier period. Stock-based
compensation is a very recent phenomenon, one associated with lower
shareholder returns, bubbles and crashes, and huge corporate scandals.
Of course, CEOs may well balk at this prescription, because stock-based
compensation has been instrumental in dramatically increasing their average
compensation. It will take the concerted efforts of boards and investors to
eliminate the scourge of stock-based incentive compensation. The only form of
stock-based incentive compensation that should be used is stock-based
compensation that vests after the recipient’s retirement—preferably three or
more years after retirement.
Stock-based compensation of this sort would discourage executives from
driving a wedge between expectations and reality, then exploiting it at the
expense of shareholders. It would also eliminate the popular practice of
executives driving up expectations to a crescendo and then retiring to cash in
stock-based compensation as expectations collapse on the head of their
successors. Finally, it would enforce discipline on CEOs (and their boards),
directing them to spend the necessary time and energy on selecting and
preparing a successor. If a CEO focused on the real market, worked toward long-
term profitability, and groomed the next CEO for success, three years after
retirement she would receive a very big bonus—one that would be good for her,
for the shareholders, and for the economy.
We also need to break executives of the guidance habit. As suggested in
chapter 2, we can start by undoing the safe harbor provision of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act, turning guidance back into a dangerous act.
There is simply no societal value to earnings guidance. The market will know
exactly what earnings are going to be at the end of the quarter, in just three or
fewer months. Society is not better off to have an executive publicly guess at
what that number is going to be. We need to turn executives from the useless,
vapid task of managing expectations to the psychologically rewarding business

of creating value.
Analysts will continue to estimate earnings and the media will continue to
use consensus estimates as a benchmark against which real performance of a
company is measured. Putting a stop to the conversation between companies,
analysts, and the media is unlikely, so it is up to the CEO to change the nature of
the conversation. The CEO should aim to establish the widest possible range of
potential outcomes on the narrowest set of measures when speaking about the
future of the company, so that the company has the freedom to make smart, long-
term investment decisions that might otherwise cause it to miss a narrowly
defined target in a specific quarter. Beyond that, as the CFO of one of America’s
largest and most successful companies recently told me, the company should “let
the results speak for themselves, and let them speak over time.”
USEFUL INCENTIVE COMPENSATION
If stock-based compensation doesn’t work, what then is the nature of useful
incentive compensation? Before diving into an answer, we must observe one
important caveat: while we tend to assume that there is a causal link between
incentive compensation and corporate performance, none has yet been found.32
It seems to make logical sense that there would be a correlation, but there isn’t.
Companies with heavy monetary incentive compensation have not been shown
to outperform companies without.
However, we do know that individuals are motivated by financial incentives.
A classic study by sociologist Donald Roy demonstrated that even uneducated
machine-shop workers would bend their work patterns into a metaphorical
pretzel to optimize their daily compensation. On certain days, that meant
working efficiently and effectively, but for only a few hours, while on other
days, it meant working inefficiently and ineffectively for the full shift. Given the
patterns and type of work available, the workers figured out how to game the
system with one goal in mind: maximizing piecework-based daily pay.33
Roy’s study provided a very important insight: monetary incentives result in
extremes of behavior. The machine-shop workers pushed their piecework
earnings to the maximum possible on the days they were assigned “gravy” jobs
and the minimum possible without getting fired on days they were assigned
“stinker” jobs. There were almost no outcomes between the extremes.
On one hand, monetary incentives can produce genuinely helpful results, as
did the completion-time incentives offered to construction firms after the 1994

Northridge California earthquake. Roads and bridges were rebuilt in a fraction of
the predicted time, using a 24/7 work model instead of the usual 9-to-5 clock-
punching mode. But on the other hand, monetary incentives generated massive
fraud when Sears decided to give its Auto Center employees compensation
based on the average revenue per customer visit. Suddenly, its employees began
to convince customers that lots of things needed fixing that actually didn’t. The
result: $400 million in overcharges to 30 million customers over the years from
1989 to 1999 and a tattered reputation for the retail icon.34 Even the best of
companies find it enormously challenging to design a monetary incentive system
that is meaningfully balanced.
The other fundamental problem with monetary incentive compensation is
that, if it works, it tends to focus the recipient on maximizing his own incentive
compensation at the expense of other tasks. If the executive ignores the incentive
compensation system and goes about his work as if it didn’t exist, then the
incentive payments were completely wasted; the executive did what he would
have done regardless of the incentive. If, on the other hand, an executive is
motivated by the incentive, he will attempt to maximize that incentive
compensation, making decisions for personal benefit but not necessarily that of
the company. In due course, colleagues and customers will figure out exactly
where they stand in the pecking order: behind the personal profit-maximizing of
the executive.
In this respect, the executive mirrors the firm. The firm attempts to maximize
shareholder value and the executive attempts to maximize personal incentive
compensation. In such a context, there is no incentive to maximize customer
delight. Rather, customers simply impose a minimum constraint; as long as the
company and its employees don’t treat the customer too badly, they will stick
around. This is a recipe for guaranteeing customers that are devoid of delight,
ripe for poaching by competitors.
More useful incentives encourage the executive to become a valued member
of a company community dedicated to delighting the customer. Such incentives
include a mix of monetary and psychological compensation, both extrinsic and
intrinsic motivation. To return to the NFL metaphor, the running back doesn’t
stretch another yard to try to make the first down because doing so will earn him
a bonus check; he does it to help win, to excite the fans, and to be seen by his
colleagues as working his hardest on the task. If he does stretch that extra yard,
will the outcome be devoid of monetary reward? Not at all. If he does it
consistently, the next contract he signs will be for more money. But that reward

comes further down the line.
Net, we would do well to replace the pursuit of personal monetary goals with
the pursuit of a broader set of goals, which includes delighting one’s customers.
Monetary incentives are not to be ignored by any means, but nonmonetary
incentives—the feeling of pride in contributing to a company’s goal, in offering
the best product or service to customers—should compete closely. If a firm is
more than simply a moneymaking machine, its executives are better able to see
their role as being more than a personal moneymaking machine.
With respect to monetary incentives, one rule is crystal clear: they should be
grounded entirely in the real market. They should provide motivations to
produce real outcomes, not expectations market outcomes. The particular real
measure will depend entirely on the industry and its particular context; it may be
return on invested capital, market share, cash management, turnover/retention,
project management, or another measure; regardless, it should ultimately
encourage the provision of better value to the customer.
Shifting from expectations measures to real ones is possible for even the
largest companies. Like many of its peers, Procter & Gamble once used total
shareholder return (TSR) as a key measure in its compensation system. TSR was
defined as the increase in share price plus dividends (as if reinvested in stock)
over a three-year period. Under that system, P&G’s TSR was benchmarked
against that of a peer group; if P&G was in the upper half of the group, its
executives received bonuses. In the early 2000s, P&G moved to a real-market
system, creating something called operating TSR, which is a combination of
three real operating performance measures—sales growth, profit margin
improvement, and increase in capital efficiency. This is now the basis on which
it compensates its executives, and it lets the share price take care of itself.
The usual argument against such real measures, as opposed to expectations-
based stock measures, is that the former fail to reward executives for long-term
value creation. The argument goes that, since the stock price incorporates all
likely future cash flows attributable to current initiatives, a CEO who improves
long-term cash flows would be rewarded for that properly with stock-based
compensation and under-rewarded with real-market-based compensation. While
this critique has merit, the problem is not a function of a reality-based
compensation system, but rather of the lack of creativity in the design of
compensation systems. To capture long-term value creation in a reality-based
incentive compensation system, the reward can be structured as a royalty, an
approach that works well in many industries today. When Herman Miller

launched the Aeron chair, which became the most successful chair in the history
of the planet, its designers, outsiders Bill Stumpf and Don Chadwick were
granted royalty checks, rewards that have kept coming as the Aeron has kept
selling and selling. As a result, every furniture designer in the world would like
to design the next Aeron for Herman Miller. Similarly, musicians and actors get
residuals; patent holders get licensing fees. These are all methodologies for
capturing rewards from the creation of long-term value in the real market.
There really is no problem in creating sensible and productive incentives for
long-term value creation without going anywhere near the expectations market.
It is merely the desire to try and the insight to find a creative answer connected
to the real market. With such creativity, we can create more authentic
compensation systems and, ultimately, more authentic executives.

FOUR
REPAIRING GOVERNANCE
A “no” uttered from deepest conviction is better and greater than a “yes”
merely uttered to please, or what is worse, to avoid trouble.
—Mahatma Gandhi
Baseball is the American pastime. As Annie Savoy, Susan Sarandon’s baseball-
obsessed character in Bull Durham tells us, even the great poet Walt Whitman
was beguiled by it. Annie quotes Whitman: “I see great things in baseball. It’s
our game, the American game. It will repair our losses and be a blessing to us.”
Indeed, for more than a hundred years, every year from April to October,
baseball was a cornerstone of what it meant to be American, up there, famously,
with Mom and apple pie. Kids played sandlot ball, dreamed of making it to the
big leagues, and shared in the heroics of their favorite professional players,
legends like Babe Ruth, Joe DiMaggio, Ted Williams, Mickey Mantle, and Cal
Ripken Jr. Baseball even informed American life, as the integration of Major
League Baseball (MLB), beginning with Jackie Robinson in the 1940s, presaged
the civil rights movement. Such was baseball’s allure that, throughout much of
the twentieth century, MLB was able to grow and expand across the continent,
from sixteen teams to thirty by 1998.
But by the late 1990s, and certainly by the 2000s, something had changed.
Americans grew less interested in their pastime. In 1980, when the Philadelphia
Phillies played the Kansas City Royals in the World Series, an average of more
than 40 million people watched on television.1 By contrast, the 2010 series
between the San Francisco Giants and the Texas Rangers drew an average of
fewer than 15 million viewers.2 The 2010 numbers weren’t an anomaly. Ratings
for baseball overall, and for the World Series in particular, have declined
dramatically over the past thirty years. In fact, the average nationally broadcast
regular-season NFL game now earns a higher television audience than do World
Series games.3 No wonder the NFL’s current broadcasting agreement at $4

billion per year dwarfs baseball’s agreement at $670 million a year over many
more games.4
And it isn’t just television; professional football has outperformed baseball
on the financial dimension too. In the past decade, the total value of the NFL
teams has risen from $11.6 billion to $33.3 billion: over $1 billion for each of the
thirty-two teams. MLB has grown in value too, from $6.6 billion to $14.1 billion
($470 million on average per team), but its relative value has shrunk from 57
percent of the NFL to 42 percent in a mere decade.5
What’s more, football has won the hearts and minds of Americans. When
Americans are asked to name their favorite sport, 30 percent of them cite
professional football, compared to 15 percent for baseball and 12 percent for
college football.6 On almost every dimension, football has overtaken baseball as
America’s game.
How can we explain the change? Some would make sense of baseball’s
relative decline by pointing to the dampening effect of MLB’s labor unrest in the
1990s. Some would argue that MLB expanded too far, too fast. Still others
would cite the fan disillusionment that followed revelations about baseball’s
steroids era. But these are merely symptoms of a larger systemic problem:
governance is critical to organizational success, and it is on this dimension that
the NFL truly outperforms MLB. At a governance level, the NFL has
demonstrated continuity, purpose, and diligence, while MLB has demonstrated
none of these.
Baseball has had seven different commissioners in the last fifty years. Most
had either no previous experience in baseball management (Spike Eckert and
Peter Ueberroth) or minimal experience (Bart Giamatti and Fay Vincent). The
current commissioner came to the job in a circular and sinister way: in 1992,
Bud Selig was the leader of a group of owners who forced the ouster of his
predecessor, Fay Vincent. The same group then installed Selig as acting
commissioner as they searched for a replacement. Almost incomprehensibly, a
six-year search for a new commissioner netted no one, and Selig was eventually
appointed on a permanent basis. A system that facilitates such a power grab is
rarely indicative of good governance.
Arguably, MLB is run for the benefit of the owners and players, rather than
for the fans. At the insistence of the players’ union, there is no salary cap—just
an ineffectual luxury tax—and little attempt at parity. The New York Yankees,
who earn the most revenue, can afford to have a payroll that is 50 percent higher

than any other team, making them the presumptive favorites to win the World
Series every season. And while Selig demonstrated some willingness to take on
the players—locking them out and cancelling the World Series in 1994—he has
shown no such resolve to take on the owners. And no wonder: he has long been
one of them. He retained ownership of his team, the Milwaukee Brewers, until
2005—despite the inherent conflict of interest in the league commissioner also
being a team owner (even if the team was held in trust for most of his term).
When it comes to managing the game on the field, baseball takes a hands-off
approach. There has been only one significant league-wide rule change since
1921: in 1968, it became clear that pitchers had gained a strong advantage over
batters (that year, in 21 percent of all games, one of the two teams failed to score
a single run and players hit for the lowest batting average in baseball history—a
paltry .237), so the league responded by lowering the pitcher’s mound by five
inches, lessening the pitchers’ advantage.7 The addition of the designated hitter,
a player who bats in place of the pitcher, was the second major rule change in the
past ninety years; but tellingly, only the American League was willing to adopt
it. The National League preferred to maintain one of the least fan-friendly
aspects of baseball: the pitcher pathetically attempting to hit. Net, baseball saw
two major rule changes over almost a century. In fact, for an entire decade
between 1996 and 2006, there were no rule changes of any sort at all.8
In the NFL, by contrast, there has been stable leadership that has been elected
in an open and forthright manner, and an ongoing commitment to the customer.
There have been only three commissioners in fifty years: Pete Rozelle (a former
team executive) from 1960–1989; Paul Tagliabue (longtime NFL outside
counsel) from 1989–2006; and Roger Goodell (who started as league office
intern) since 2006. Unlike the shady, behind-the-scenes process in baseball, the
procedure for electing a commissioner of the NFL is thorough, careful, and
inclusive. When Goodell was elected, he won the job over four other strong
candidates, each of whom had been carefully selected by a Tagliabue-appointed
committee (headed by two respected team owners: Dan Rooney and Jimmy
Richardson). To get the job, which he did only on the fifth ballot, Goodell was
required to gain a two-thirds majority of the thirty-two voting team owners.
From the time of Rozelle’s term, the NFL commissioner’s office has
governed football with a laserlike focus on the fan experience. Every year, the
NFL competition committee pores over the stats and film, and tweaks the rules
in order to maintain a balance between offense and defense and to protect the

players that the fans come to watch—especially the quarterbacks and wide
receivers. Rarely a year goes by without a significant rule tweak, visible to the
fans and put in place to enhance their experience. The commissioner’s office
also periodically battles to preserve the salary cap and the free-agency rules,
fighting the union and rogue owners to keep them from undermining the parity
that has produced twelve different winners over the past twenty Super Bowls.9
The NFL takes governance, from the election of its officers to the continued
evolution of its rules, very seriously. Baseball, on the other hand, has a
governance structure that is ineffectual at best. MLB is geared toward
maintaining the status quo and delivering value to owners, while the NFL
governance is forward looking and fan-centric—which just so happens to deliver
plenty of value to its owners. This dichotomy helps explain how and why
football has so dramatically outpaced baseball over the past thirty years.
THE NATURE OF BOARDS
Governance structures look considerably different in business than they do in the
NFL, and rightly so. Contexts differ, and so should governance structures. But
there is much to be learned from the twin examples of MLB and the NFL, not
least the dramatic effects on long-term financial performance of thoughtful
oversight, careful succession planning, and genuine customer-centricity. The
approach a company takes to governance—the theories it holds and the
structures it builds—can create or destroy real value.
For public companies, boards have a particularly tricky task. In many
respects, boards lie right at the intersection between the expectations market and
the real market. From that position, over time, boards have come to govern
operations in the real market to the benefit of actors in the expectations market.
How? Boards attempt to ensure that employees in the real market show proper
accountability for their decisions and the operations of the firm; they also
attempt to ensure that shareholders in the expectations market have visibility into
operations in the real market. In particular, the board’s job is to protect
shareholders, ensuring that executives are engaged in maximizing the return to
the shareholders rather than to the executives themselves.
By and large, it is the independent directors who have been tasked with being
the voice and protector of outside shareholders. Most boards are made up of
independent, outside directors (individuals who have no connection to the
company other than through their board seat) and a few inside directors

(executive-owners, like the CEO). Within this structure, the role of shareholder
white knight falls to the independent directors because inside directors are
considered ill-equipped to perform it, especially to the extent that the inside
directors have meaningful stock-based compensation. As actors in both the real
and expectations markets, inside directors have a powerful incentive to focus on
raising expectations, whether or not doing so is in service of the company’s long-
term, real-market performance. An inside director may attempt to show self-
control and not act in accordance with this incentive, but it is a Herculean task.
Therefore, inside directors are not at all well positioned to protect the interests of
the outside shareholders, so the burden falls on independent directors, who,
unfortunately, aren’t well positioned to do it either.
THE PROBLEM WITH DIRECTORS
A board of directors is asked to span a wide (and widening) gulf, resolving the
tension between two very different markets with very different actors. On the
one hand, boards are intended to act on behalf of outside shareholders, who want
the greatest possible return for their investment in the expectations market. On
the other hand, the board must deal closely with executives, who work in the real
market yet are tied by incentives to the expectations market and motivated to
maximize their own returns, even at the expense of shareholders. And those
executives are in fact in an ideal position to exploit outside shareholders; with
deep insider knowledge, they know much better than any outsider could when to
buy or sell the company’s stock based on the greatest possible differential
between expectations and reality. So, ultimately, the job of directors is to ensure
that insiders do not use their preferential access to information to exploit outside
shareholders. Unfortunately, it is a job directors can’t perform effectively, owing
to problems with capabilities, incentives, and selection.
Many jobs are difficult but can be accomplished by dedicated people with the
right set of skills and capabilities. One problem with the role we have given to
outside directors is that no matter how dedicated the individuals involved, they
will be largely incapable of achieving what we have asked of them. Independent
directors can’t know as much as management does about the operations of the
firm. Their very independence puts them at a distinct information disadvantage
relative to the inside directors. Executive management is in a position to provide
independent directors with whatever information it sees fit and has the capacity
to restrict access to information it doesn’t want independent directors to see. No

matter how smart and diligent the independent directors, they will never match
the knowledge of executives, who, by definition, spend much more time engaged
on the business than directors do. The best an independent director can do is to
bring to bear broad expertise and insight from other markets that management
can utilize if it so desires. But that isn’t the task we set out for them; we don’t
ask them to make use of those capabilities. We ask them to be all-knowing, even
when that is impossible.
Many assume that the knowledge deficit can be overcome through the hiring
of professionals, principally auditors, by the independent committee of the
board. Again, this simply is not the case. In the end, the important audit
decisions come down to judgment, and management is always in a better
position to argue its case than the auditors are to argue theirs. WorldCom
provides an excellent object lesson on this. Its auditors did not discern that
management had classified $3.8 billion in expenses as assets in order to inflate
earnings.10 Because the “assets” in question were various sorts of complicated
switching gear in the WorldCom network, management was able to convince the
auditors that this equipment would be used as an asset for years to come when,
in fact, it was equipment that had been purchased and installed to serve a single
client, and had no obvious further use. The equipment should properly have been
expensed against the profitability of the client contract, not capitalized and put
on the books of WorldCom as an asset. The insiders knew this, yet were able to
use the information asymmetry to convince the outsiders otherwise. Increased
scrutiny and regulatory changes in the wake of the recent scandals has
emboldened auditors, but none of the changes will help them overcome this
inherent knowledge deficit.
The capabilities challenge is stiff. When the outside shareholders of Enron
needed the independent directors to stop illegal accounting, blatant self-dealing,
and stunning market exploitation by CEO Jeff Skilling and CFO Andrew
Fastow, the independent directors were incapable of doing so. When the outside
shareholders of Qwest Communications needed the independent directors to
alert them to the fact that insiders were exploiting the mismatch between the
expectations market and the real market (unloading $2 billion in stock before the
bottom dropped out of the share price), the directors were unable to do so.
Independent directors—even bright, capable, and dedicated ones—simply don’t
have a chance against executives committed to their own self-interest.11
But the capability issue is only part of the problem. Not only do independent

directors lack the capability to effectively serve the interests of outside
shareholders, they also lack the incentive to do so. We know that people respond
to incentives. And recall that agency theory tells us that people have self-
interested motivations that cause them to maximize their own welfare instead of
the welfare of the organization for which they work. So, the argument goes,
executives (the agents) will maximize their own rewards at the expense of
shareholders (the principals) unless given incentives to do otherwise. The theory
suggests that we can deal with the principal-agent problem by having the board
of directors discipline the agents and incent them effectively. But do boards not
have exactly the same principal-agent problem? After all, the members of the
board of directors are not principals either. They are agents too—hired and paid
for by the shareholders—and, as agents, directors have every bit as much interest
in maximizing their own welfare as do executives.
It raises the question: why would we imagine that the directorial agents
would act any differently than the executive agents? After all, directors and
executives are drawn largely from the same pool: current and former senior
executives are highly sought as directors. Yet we choose to apply agency theory
to executives and not to directors. We assume that executives will maximize
their self-interest, but that directors will not. This is a failure of logic. Either the
motivational schism between principals and agents is real and is a problem, or
it’s not. If it is not a problem, then we don’t need directors to keep managers in
line. But if it is a problem, then directors will be susceptible to the same
incentive issues as executives, and having a board of directors won’t do a
company a bit of good.
Finally, in addition to problems of capabilities and incentives, boards of
directors suffer from a profound selection problem that further prevents them
from protecting outside shareholders effectively. Put simply, good governance is
something companies tend to have when they don’t need it and lack when they
do.
At some companies, shareholders have little need for protection. These are
the companies, like P&G and J&J, who put customers first, focus on the long
term, and grow value consistently over time. They have nothing to hide from
their shareholders, so have no reason not to have great, thoughtful directors;
open communication between executives and the board; and full disclosure to
directors. Their directors are therefore in the best possible position to keep tabs
on wayward executives and to clamp down on them. But since such companies
had nothing to hide in the first place, their directors rarely need to discipline the

executives; the culture of the company already provides that discipline.
Ultimately, while these companies have directors and board relationships that
could overcome agency problems, there aren’t agency problems to overcome.
Executives of companies with something to hide, on the other hand, will look
for weak directors and will seek to obscure the truth. In these companies,
executives don’t want to enlighten directors or disclose the truth to them. They
hide information, obscure facts, and do all they can to keep the directors ignorant
of the company’s real activities. At Enron and Qwest, for example, directors
weren’t up to the task of protecting shareholders precisely because they were at a
company that so desperately needed them to be up to it. Executives made sure
that directors weren’t up to the task out of pure self-interest.
So the great irony is that where stellar performance by independent directors
is most needed, it is least likely to happen and where great performance is least
needed, it is most likely to happen. Essentially, board governance works like a
driver’s education course. Careful, dutiful new drivers take driver’s education
courses. Impulsive, bad new drivers don’t, and so never improve. This is what
economists call an adverse selection bias. Circumstances cause exactly the
wrong drivers to select the option of taking a driver’s education course. If we
accept that boards exist to protect shareholders, then exactly the wrong
companies have great, functioning boards.
MOTIVATIONS FOR JOINING A BOARD
Selection bias is a big issue for boards. People choose to become directors—they
aren’t forced to show up at the table—and they must have some reason, some
motivation, for doing so. Unfortunately, most reasons to join a board are
problematic from a governance point of view. In fact, there is a set of five such
plausible motivations to join a board, each of which is unhelpful to the
shareholders and to the company. From most to least concerning, they are:
Personal or company favors
Attractive compensation
Personal prestige
Social enjoyment
Personal growth

Personal or Company Favors
One might join a board in order to attain favors for either one’s company or for
oneself. Though it might seem far-fetched, not too long ago it was common
practice for a CEO to sit on the board of his company’s biggest lender. The CEO
would serve as director for his lead bank in part to ensure that his company
wouldn’t get cut off in a future credit crunch. More recently, as disclosure rules
have made such arrangements less common, the practice has taken a more
personal turn. Now, board membership can lead to consulting contracts or other
nonmonetary benefits, such as prime seats to sporting or cultural events, for
directors. While access to such small-time swag may not be a big piece of the
motivation puzzle, it is an unalloyed negative for the company and its outside
shareholders; directors motivated by personal or company considerations have
incentive to trade votes in exchange for the desired favors, approving actions
that enrich executives and other insiders at the expense of shareholders. Such
directors are de facto bad for shareholders and bad for the company.
Attractive Compensation
Some directors join a board for the financial remuneration; that is, they view
board membership as an attractive way to make money relative to other
opportunities. However, if this is the motivation for joining the board, the
director will be inclined to act in whatever way is necessary to maintain a place
on the board, since removal on the grounds of noncooperation would eliminate
the compensation. Some companies attempt to make their boards more appealing
by including significant stock-based compensation in the directors’ pay package.
But in this case, the compensation structure converts the individual from
independent director into the moral equivalent of an executive-owner, with all
the attendant problems and the selfsame incentive to focus on raising
expectations instead of on real results. If compensation is the key motivator for
an individual to join a board as an independent director, it is a bad thing for
corporate governance.
Personal Prestige
Another potential motivation for joining a board is the status that accrues to a
director of a publicly traded company. Indeed, directors are showered with
positive attention. However, as with compensation, if this is the motivation for

joining the board, the director will be inclined to act in whatever way is
necessary to maintain a place on the board, in this case because removal from
the board would diminish rather than add personal prestige. So net, the motivator
of personal prestige is also an unhelpful thing for good governance.
Social Enjoyment
Yet another potential motivator is to become a valued member of an enjoyable
and stimulating social community—the board in question. Given the earlier
discussion of the drivers of happiness, it would be unsurprising if an individual
were to seek to become a respected member of the community represented by a
given board, especially if she respected that community and it was respected by
the world at large. However, if community is the primary motivator for joining a
board, the director in question will be inclined to strictly obey the cultural norms
of the board in order to earn and maintain the respect of her fellow board
members. This motivation is yet another incentive to not rock the boat.
The exact nature of the outcomes from this motivation depends on the
dominant culture of the board. But whether the dominant culture favors
executives over outside shareholders or protects outside shareholders from
exploitation by management, the community-motivated director will simply
acquiesce to the rest of the board. Thus, if the culture is bad, this independent
director will not be motivated to improve it and if the culture is good, this
independent director will be superfluous. So again, this is not a motivation that
ends up increasing good governance.
Personal Growth
Many directors cite growth opportunities as their reason for joining a board. By
that, they generally mean that they want to learn about a particular industry or
about governance in general. This is a pretty benign motive compared with the
reasons above. However, a director motivated by personal growth is unlikely to
possess the knowledge and skills to provide meaningful governance protection
for the outside shareholders, especially if doing so gets in the way of personal
learning. Hence personal growth is another unhelpful motivation for serving as
an independent director.

These five reasons comprise, I believe, the dominant reasons individuals join the
boards of publicly traded companies as independent directors. And none of them
make it likely that an individual will take a stand against executive management
or fellow directors, even to stop them from doing something that would hurt the
shareholders and the company long-term. Of course, things may turn out to be
just fine. If executive management wants to do things that are in the best
interests of the shareholders and company, directors motivated by some
combination of these five factors will happily go along with the proposed
direction. But in that case, the concurrence is of limited utility: the action would
have happened anyway.
There is only one motivation for joining a board as an independent director
that is actually good for the company long-term and good for the outside
shareholders: public service.
Public Service
In this best-case scenario, independent directors are motivated by a desire to
provide an important service to the public at large; for directors, that service is
the safeguarding of an essential foundation of democratic capitalism—the belief
that individuals can provide their capital to a company and have it treated with
fairness and respect. Operating under this motivation, the director wouldn’t
demand that shareholder returns be maximized but, rather, he or she would work
with executives to ensure that the company is sound and that a fair return on
investment is earned. Such a director would seek to provide insight and guidance
to the company and would be inclined to stand up for customers, employees, the
community, and shareholders, regardless of the reaction of the rest of the board.
It is not clear that public-service-motivated directors are plentiful.
Governance as public service is a hard job, one that requires deep knowledge
and expertise, coupled with a willingness to accept a high opportunity cost and
the likelihood of being consistently at odds with the immediate board
community, all for the benefit of others. This is hardly an inherently attractive
proposition. Plus, seeing independent directorship as public service goes against
the grain of public opinion. If anything, the public sees directors as highly paid
fat cats who smoke cigars, drink martinis, and line their own pockets with
indulgent pay packages. So, even if individuals were willing to take on the task
of being an independent director for public service reasons, it is unlikely, at least
in the current environment, that their motivations would be seen in that light by

others.
Yet the goal must be to have directors who have both the capabilities and the
incentives to serve the shareholders. Under the current structure, adverse
selection means the wrong people end up in the wrong jobs, and motivations
drive the wrong kind of director behavior. Instead, we must reshape the meaning
of board membership and redefine it as highly valued public service. To do so, it
is important to reinforce the notion that good governance is essential not just to
the protection of shareholders but to the functioning of our entire economy and
our shared prosperity.
GOVERNANCE AND TRUST
In Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, Francis Fukuyama
highlights a critically important aspect of governance: the generation of trust.12
Fukuyama makes the central point that the prosperity of entire nations is a
function of the broad institutionalization of trust in their economies. Economies
like Nigeria, in which you can only trust your immediate family, have the lowest
prosperity. Economies, such as Russia, in which you can trust the broad,
extended family or clan, are more prosperous. In economies like Thailand,
relatively established stock markets and commercial legal institutions engender
trust outside the family, and these countries are the next most prosperous.
Finally, economies in which there are robust legal institutions, an independent
judiciary, advanced contract law, and well-regulated capital markets (for
example, the major highly developed countries) are the most prosperous.
The most prosperous countries have become that way because capital
formation can take place at a broad level. Individuals can trust their capital to
people they don’t even know because institutions such as securities commissions
and commercial courts provide protection and recourse for individual investors
and their capital. Where trust is low, capital cannot be gathered and deployed,
and poverty is the result.
Fukuyama wasn’t dealing directly with corporate governance (in fact, he was
writing before the recent wave of governance scandals). But his work holds a
powerful message: weak governance undermines trust, and anytime trust is
undermined, prosperity suffers fundamentally. The institutions that underpin
trust in our economy are essential to our standard of living. They are the
difference between prosperity and poverty.

FIXING CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
If, because of capability and incentive problems, boards are unlikely to be useful
just when they are most needed, the trust necessary for a prosperous economy
will be eroded. Insurance policies that are in force all the time, except when
something goes wrong, don’t build trust. But if we can reframe the discussion
and make it clear that to serve as a director is to protect the institutions that
underpin our mutual trust and prosperity, being a director will be a noble calling.
The fix won’t be at all easy; it will require directors to behave differently and for
the public to see directors in a different light, so that the public and directors
become two sides that can reinforce one another.
To begin, the job description for directors needs to change. Like the folks
who run the NFL, boards should be focused on governing with continuity,
purpose, and diligence, not on delivering supernormal returns to shareholders.
The problems with asking people to work hard to protect nameless, transient
investors have been discussed at length. But so too have the positive effects of
concentrating the firm on building meaningful relationships with customers. If
directors were to frame their role as public service—protecting the institutions of
business by auditing the operations of the firm, keeping management fixed on
customers and on long-term, real-market goals—we would all be better off. In
this case, boards would be seen as advisers and wise counselors, independent
experts from whom management could seek guidance and insight on strategic
choices. At board meetings, rather than looking to sell bulletproof ideas,
executives would be able to improve their ideas through thoughtful discussion.
Executive-board interactions would become far more productive, and actual
value could be created.
Spend any length of time with directors of public companies under the
current construct and you’re likely to hear a legion of complaints:
“It is getting so hard.”
“The liability is getting greater.”
“With Sarbanes-Oxley, the meetings are getting longer and longer.”
The problem with these complaints is that they accept a version of board
directorship that is dictated by others. When directors complain that Sarbanes-
Oxley and liability concerns are turning the board meeting into a long,
bureaucratic, check-the-boxes exercise, they are blaming external pressures for

an unpleasant experience. But these board members have a choice. They can
choose to accept a check-the-box meeting, or they can rise above it and focus on
doing their important public-service job: helping their company to perform well.
Whether about the nature of board work or about the level of associated fees,
complaints such as those listed above diminish directors in the eyes of the
public. If we want to reframe the role of directors, we need to attract more
public-service-minded people to the job. And to do this effectively, public
perception of what it means to be a director must shift. When current directors
choose to complain about fees and regulations, the public sees them as greedy
whiners who don’t take pride in doing their job or as double-dealers who find
regulations confining. What public-service-minded individual would want to
join such a club?
Changing the way that boards frame their role, including stopping the
complaints about fees and Sarbanes-Oxley, won’t fix the inherent problems in
corporate governance overnight. But it will start it moving in the right direction.
Admitting that there are fundamental, structural challenges to good governance,
rather than assuming away the principal-agent problem in respect to boards, is
likely to help as well. It is hard to solve a problem if most argue it doesn’t exist.
It will take time to shift the motivation of directors away from some
combination of favors, compensation, prestige, social interaction, and personal
growth to public service. In fact, it is possible that the job is too big and the point
too esoteric; it may be that the majority of directors will never see it as their job
to keep the focus on prospering in the real market—rather than manipulating the
expectations market—in the service of democratic capitalism. But perhaps we
can convert a smaller and more important subset of directors: board chairs.
Board chairs are critically important, because they set the tone for the entire
board. If board chairs are motivated by public service, many other board
members will be drawn along with them in the right direction.
To make the shift to a public-service framework, board chairs need to be
much more like judges. On the whole, judges are paid less than they could be
paid as lawyers and face a largely thankless task that offers more hardship than
exhilaration. But they do it because, in the legal profession, there is a strong
sense that to become a judge is the highest form of public service—one that
allows them to apply their wisdom and judgment to ensure that the judicial
institution serves its country well. By and large—at least at the higher levels—
judges take the bench out of a desire to serve the public, and the public
recognizes this fact. If we could begin to see board chairs as we see judges, and

if they could increasingly act in the public interest as judges do, even when it
means taking unpleasant actions, we would improve the quality of governance of
our publicly traded companies.

FIVE
THE INSANITY OF 2&20
I am a speculator. It accelerates the trend. It gets you closer to the truth
faster.
—James Simons
For most of human history, the power has belonged to those who own the means
of production. The owners of the fiefdom, the estate, or the factory had the
ability to set the terms and conditions that governed all those who toiled for
them. No matter how harsh the conditions, how low the pay, or how demeaning
the work, owners could find someone willing to do it, and thus commanded the
balance of power. Yet by the end of the twentieth century, the power had shifted
so dramatically for a particular class of employees—corporate executives—that
we devised agency theory, stock-based incentive compensation, and board
governance to prevent the owners (now called shareholders) from being
exploited by these newly emboldened executives.
How did the balance of power shift so decisively? Trade unions can claim a
small percentage of the credit; they got the ball rolling in America after the
passage of the National Labor Relations Act in 1935, using collective bargaining
to achieve higher wages and healthier conditions. But the most important cause
was the shift from active owner-managers to professional managers. As the last
century wore on, owners increasingly and willingly handed control of the means
of production to CEOs and senior executives. As this shift took place, executives
discovered that they had the broad ability to divert the resources of the firm into
their own pockets, making themselves exceedingly rich. And they weren’t alone:
the last quarter of the twentieth century also saw a dramatic shift in the fortunes
of professional athletes, who became very wealthy indeed, and a change in the
way that creative artists, like filmmakers, were compensated for their work. In
business, sports, and the film industry alike, workers have found a way to extract
a greater and greater share of the wealth generated from their efforts.

TALENT GAINS THE UPPER HAND
As detailed in chapter 2, executives earned enormously greater incomes toward
the end of the twentieth century, as the age of shareholder capitalism advanced—
eight times more per dollar of profit generated for their shareholders on average
for CEOs in 2000 versus 1980. But this was part of a wider trend. Like CEOs,
professional athletes earned good but not huge incomes prior to the 1970s.
Mickey Mantle, the New York Yankees legend, for instance, earned about
$100,000 per season in the late 1960s.1 The average baseball player salary at the
time? Under $25,000.2 Adjusted for inflation, that’s about $600,000 a year for
Mantle and $150,000 for the average player. Today, the Yankees’ Alex
Rodriguez earns $33 million a season and the average major leaguer gets almost
$3.3 million.3
In Mantle’s day, players weren’t able to extract a high percentage of the
money earned from their efforts because the owners kept the revenue for
themselves. In each sport, a single league represented the pinnacle of
achievement, offered the most desirable jobs, and so dictated the terms of
employment. Run by a close-knit coalition of team owners, these leagues held all
of the power—they had the stadiums, the money, the fans—whereas the athletes,
no matter how talented, were ultimately disposable. Another talented youngster
would take any given player’s place in an instant. So, for the most part, athletes
lived in indentured servitude to the club that “owned” them, whether that was in
the NFL, MLB, or NBA.
Every so often, rival leagues formed as a challenge to the monopolies, like
the American Football League in 1960, the American Basketball Association in
1967, or the World Hockey Association (WHA) in 1972. These new leagues
provided players with an alternative venue in which to peddle their wares and in
doing so, handed them bargaining power in the original league. The upstart
leagues would also offer higher salaries and more perks to lure players away
from the incumbents. For instance, star college quarterback Joe Namath was
drafted on the same day by the St. Louis Cardinals of the NFL and the New York
Jets of the nascent AFL. Namath chose to sign with the Jets for a then-record
salary of $427,000.4 The Winnipeg Jets of the WHA were able to lure Bobby
Hull away from the NHL’s Chicago Blackhawks in a record-setting, ten-year,
$2.7 million deal.5 These deals gave the new leagues credibility and put upward
pressure on the salaries in the original leagues.

In due course, owners in the senior leagues figured this out and saw just how
unattractive the economics of competing for talent were. So, they bought out and
absorbed the rival leagues. Competition for talent declined and owner-friendly
equilibrium returned. In each case, after the league mergers, the players returned
to a largely powerless state in which there was only one legitimate buyer for
their services, and the owners breathed a collective sigh of relief.
But all of that would soon change. The cracks first began to show in baseball,
and soon spread. It started in 1970, when veteran outfielder Curt Flood, angry
about being traded from the championship-contending St. Louis Cardinals to the
cellar-dwelling Philadelphia Phillies, refused to report to his new team and
launched a court battle to overturn the reserve clause in the standard baseball
contract.
The reserve clause allowed a team to retain the rights to a player for a full
year after a contract had expired. In essence, a player at the end of his contract
had two options: sign a new contract with his current team or hold out, refusing
to play (and receiving no pay), in hopes that the club might release or trade him.
If he were released, which was frankly unlikely unless he was no longer a useful
player, he might entertain new contract offers from other teams on the open
market. If he were traded, the choice of his new team was entirely up to his
owners. Once traded, the player could negotiate a contract with the new team but
could not sign with anyone else. And because the reserve clause showed up in
contract after contract (and the owners were steadfast in their collective
insistence on it), for all intents and purposes players were bound to their original
team until such time as the team no longer wanted them.
Flood argued that baseball’s reserve clause violated federal antitrust laws and
was akin to slavery. Flood’s case went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court,
with MLB fighting it tooth and nail on behalf of the owners. In the end, Flood
lost the case. He had missed the entire 1970 season and played the last few
lackluster games of his career the following year. But Flood’s failed attempt had
set the wheels in motion, opening up the possibility for other players, and the
union and agents that represented them, to take on the reserve clause in other
ways.
The reserve clause had a powerful, punitive mechanism. A player would need
to work a full season without pay in order to leave a team on his own terms; it
was a very high hurdle, regardless of the potential reward at the end of that year.
Thus, players simply chose to accept their fate. That is, until Los Angeles
Dodgers star pitcher Andy Messersmith became so disenchanted with his team

and his contract that he did indeed pitch the entire 1975 season without a
contract in order to challenge the reserve clause after season’s end. He played
out the season and filed a grievance, along with Montreal Expos pitcher Dave
McNally, who was injured during the season as he tried to play out his reserve
year. At the end of the year, Messersmith and McNally, supported by the player’s
union president Marvin Miller, met league representatives in arbitration to settle
the dispute.
The arbitrator assigned to the case decided in favor of the players, famously
declaring them free agents—and in a flash, the world changed for professional
sports. Once released, the genie of free agency could never be put back in the
bottle. Each league scrambled to negotiate limits to total free agency with its
unions, but ultimately players had gained the upper hand. Players were now able
to sell themselves to the highest bidder, typically after a certain number of years
of service to their initial owner, changing what it meant economically to be a
professional athlete.
Instead of earning a comfortable living, the best players began to get
massively rich, with eight-figure annual salaries and nine-figure long-term
contracts becoming the norm. In 2007, Alex Rodriguez signed a ten-year
contract with the New York Yankees worth $275 million.6 In 2010, the New
England Patriots’ Tom Brady signed a new four-year deal worth $78 million.7
Each is the highest-paid player in his sport (for now). Free agency has given
talent much more control than it ever had before.
TALENT OVERTAKES CAPITAL AT THE BOX
OFFICE
Athletes were soon joined in their good fortune by creative artists in the film
industry. Just a few years after the introduction of the free agent in baseball,
super-agent Tom Pollock walked into the offices of Paramount Pictures to
negotiate a deal for his client’s next movie. His client was director, screenwriter,
and special-effects genius George Lucas, flush with the success of the 1977 Star
Wars, one of the most influential and successful films of all time. Earning over
$300 million in its original release, Star Wars is still the second-highest-grossing
film of all time when box office revenues are adjusted for inflation.8 The next
project on Lucas’ docket was called Raiders of the Lost Ark.
In Hollywood, since the days of legendary studio heads Louis B. Mayer and

Jack Warner, studios garnered the majority of profits for a film. In fact, in the
early days, artists were treated much like pre-free-agency athletes—they signed
long-term contracts with a single studio and made whatever movies that studio
demanded of them.9 That structure, known as the studio system, had broken
down by the 1960s, as actors, in particular, began to recognize the power that
their visibility and popularity with the audience gave them.
By the 1970s, typically, a screenwriter, director, or actor was paid a flat salary
in advance of a film’s release, signing individual contracts per film and no longer
tied to any one studio. Though some of the most successful artists were able to
negotiate percentage-of-the-profit deals, beginning with Jimmy Stewart for the
movie Winchester ’73 in 1950, this approach was still rare. Lucas and Pollock
wanted to change all that. The deal they proposed to Paramount was stunning. It
called for Lucas to receive 50 percent of gross operating profits (that is, profits
before studio overhead and marketing and distribution costs) for Raiders of the
Lost Ark for no financial investment on his part whatsoever. Playing five studios
against one another for the rights to the film, Pollock managed to convince
Paramount president Michael Eisner and chairman Barry Diller to agree to his
terms. In doing so, he helped Lucas jump-start his journey toward
multibillionaire status and changed the game for the rest of Hollywood. With the
Raiders deal, Hollywood economics turned decisively in favor of talent
(employees) over capital (studio owners), and it wasn’t long until the price for an
A-list leading actor hit $25 million per picture. In 2010, it went yet further:
Leonardo DiCaprio elected to forgo a traditional salary for his film Inception,
taking a percentage of the gross instead. The deal is said to have earned
DiCaprio a cool $50 million.10
By the 1970s, across fields, talent was using whatever mechanisms it had to
gain control over owners, and individuals were able extract greater and greater
proportions of the fruits of their labor. This in itself isn’t a bad thing. Since talent
drives the creation of new ideas and the actual productivity of an economy, it
should be rewarded for its efforts. But the extent of the shift in power was
remarkable, and it created an environment in which the extraction of value for
personal gain—at the expense of owners and other stakeholders—was the norm.
This new normal enabled the emergence of the most effective value-extraction
machine yet: the 2&20 formula.
TALENT OVER CAPITAL IN THE FINANCIAL

MARKETS
Until the final quarter of the twentieth century, the business of investment
management was relatively stable, straightforward, and boring. Professionals
managed the assets of capital holders under fairly simple arrangements.
Stockbrokers got paid by the transaction, receiving a standard commission on the
trades they performed for their clients. Their more upscale brethren, the
investment managers, charged a fixed fee—typically 1 percent but sometimes as
much as 2 percent—of assets under management. There was terrific leverage in
such a model: One percent doesn’t sound like much, but consider an investment
firm with $10 billion in assets under management. That’s $100 million in fees
per year—enough to pay for a lot of support staff, plus some swanky offices, and
still have plenty in the till for the principals themselves. So, investment
management talent made a perfectly good living under these arrangements (and
a great living if the pools of capital were sufficiently large). But the real winners
in this structure were the investors—they paid a modest fixed fee for the
expertise of investment managers and in return reaped almost all of the upside of
the investments, which could be enormous.
In 1978, as Lucas was extracting his reward from Paramount, investment
manager Theodore Forstmann decided that investors were getting too easy a
ride. He felt that his track record of earning attractive returns for his clients
justified charging a higher fee under a brand-new structure. He formed
Forstmann Little and Company and announced that it would keep a 2 percent fee
on assets under management, as many firms did, but that it would also charge
investors 20 percent of the upside generated on their capital. This 20 percent
surcharge became known as the carried interest or simply the carry.
Forstmann’s new structure was highly consistent with the emerging thinking
of the day. Michael Jensen and William Meckling had just introduced the
concept of aligned interests to the world. While they focused on creating
alignment between public company shareholders and the executives who
managed their firm, it was an easy mental step to analogize to investors and the
professionals who managed their investments. Surely their interests needed to be
aligned too! Forstmann’s formula was intended to do just that: if Forstmann did
well for the investors, he did well for himself. The structure therefore had
profound moral authority.
The 2&20 formula, as it soon became called, spread far and wide to all forms
of nonpublic investments, including leveraged buyouts (LBOs), venture capital

(VC), and hedge funds. The LBO market was really emerging at around the
same time—in fact, Forstmann Little and Company was a pioneer in that
particular form of investment. It bought companies, turned them around, and
sold them for a profit, taking 2 percent of the value of the firm per year and 20
percent of the profit it earned for the limited partners (that is, investors) of its
fund. As venture capital grew from a tiny industry to a giant investment category
through the 1980s and 1990s, 2&20 became the exclusive formula for venture
funds too. The hedge fund industry, which had been around since 1949 but grew
explosively from a $100 billion industry in the mid-1990s to a trillion dollar
industry only a decade later, enthusiastically adopted 2&20 as well.
All these forms of investment came to be called private equity. All were
vehicles that were not sold to the public at large and that therefore didn’t require
a disclosure prospectus approved by regulators. Thus, the principals of the
investment firms behind these vehicles didn’t even have to argue for the formula.
It was simply and clearly the standard, one that was seen to be entirely virtuous.
The 2&20 model aligned the interests of investment firms with their clients, and
who was to argue with that? So pervasive was the 2&20 approach that any firm
that didn’t use this structure suffered in the eyes of investors and the media; if a
firm proposed to charge you less than 2&20, the theory went, that firm was
probably no good—and investors should stay away from it. Better to give away a
2 percent flat fee and 20 percent of a huge upside surge to a great investment
firm than to give considerably less to a mediocre firm that would generate weak
returns. In the public’s view, all of the real players in the market charged
2&20.11
Forstmann’s innovation gained rapid acceptance because it aligned so well
with the prevailing theories of the day and due to its own elegant logical
consistency. Soon, an unimagined magnitude of riches poured into the pockets of
private equity investment managers. It is doubtful that Forstmann had any idea
how many men and women would get monumentally rich on his innovative
formula; had he known, he might have charged them a 2&20 licensing fee for
using his formula!
The level of wealth creation driven by 2&20 has been nothing short of awe-
inspiring. We tend to believe that entrepreneurship is the way to get superrich in
America, whether in technology, like Bill Gates; oil, like John D. Rockefeller;
retailing, like Sam Walton; or media, like William Randolph Hearst. And that
might have been the case at one time, but not anymore. The Forbes 400 list
identifies and ranks the richest Americans. Within thirty years of Forstmann’s

creation, it was clear that the best way to achieve a place on the list was to invest
other people’s money and get paid on the basis of the 2&20 formula. Of the
richest four hundred Americans on the 2010 list, fifty got there thanks to 2&20,
versus forty for technology, thirty-nine for media, thirty-eight for oil and gas,
and twenty-eight for retailing.12
Flat out, 2&20 is the greatest wealth producer of our lifetime. And for some,
even 2&20 isn’t enough. The most successful hedge funds have argued that their
very success should allow them to extract yet a greater percentage of the upside
of their investments. James Simons, for instance, founder and controlling
shareholder of hedge fund Renaissance Technologies, isn’t satisfied with 2&20;
at latest check, Renaissance charges its clients 5 percent per year for assets under
management plus 36 percent carried interest. It is nothing short of breathtaking.
AN INNOCENT BEGINNING
While 2&20 had an innocent beginning with a tantalizingly logical proposition
of aligning managers with investors, its utter pervasiveness raises the question:
does it actually do what it purports to do? We’ve already seen that stock-based
incentive compensation to executives, intended to align their interests with the
interests of shareholders, does nothing of the sort. It instead provides a clear
incentive and an explicit mechanism for executives to damage the interests of
investors. Does 2&20 work any better?
It doesn’t take terribly sophisticated analysis to determine that it most
certainly does not. The 2&20 formula fails to align the interests of investment
managers and their clients for the same fundamental reason that stock option
incentives fail to align the interests of executives and shareholders—both
structures align interests only on the upside and so encourage rampant risk-
taking on the part of agents at the expense of principals.
Giving stock options to executives aligns the upside nicely—if the stock goes
up, shareholders and option holders get rich. But if the share price goes down,
the shareholders take it in the teeth and the option holders, who got their options
for free in the first place, don’t lose a thing. The possibility of huge upside
rewards and no downside real losses means that executives are incented to
undertake highly risky actions in hopes of making their options worth a fortune.
If the plans don’t work out so well, the executive won’t be heartbroken as the
existing tranche of options expires worthless. Thanks to a dropping stock price
in the wake of the failed initiative, the executive will soon get a new allotment of

options at a much lower price.
During the options-granting boom in the 1990s, an executive would typically
earn an attractive base salary with stock options on top (plus perhaps a cash
bonus plan). So the executive had a guaranteed salary income to count on, even
if the options were to expire without value. But if the stock price went up,
putting the options in the money, the executive would earn an unlimited,
equitylike upside. Investment managers following the 2&20 formula have a
strikingly similar compensation structure: they are guaranteed a 2 percent fee for
assets under management—a stable sum that can pay all the bills, which they
receive even if they don’t produce a penny of upside for the investors. And, in
addition, if they manage to earn a return for the investors, they, too, will earn an
unlimited, equitylike upside. Like executives with options, these managers have
clear incentive to undertake high-risk, high-reward strategies to drive upside
with no need to worry about downside. The use of stock options as executive
compensation fell out of favor after 2001, as boards recognized the inherent
danger they posed to the firm. Yet 2&20 is still going strong.
FEEDING THE PARASITE
It is clear that 2&20 provides the wrong kind of incentive to investment
managers and should be eliminated on that basis alone. But the real and truly
insidious problem with 2&20 is that it provides sustenance to an industry that
has no upside for the economy and has a parasitic relationship with the public
capital markets—the hedge fund business.
The 2&20 formula is relatively innocuous in two big segments of the private
equity world: VC and LBOs. While the 2&20 formula doesn’t align the interests
of investors and managers, for VC and LBO funds, the upside on the carried
interest comes only with an increase in real value. The 2&20 incentive structure
may cause managers of VC and LBO funds to take high risks, but managers do
have to build something of value in order to reap rewards. VC fund managers
need to build a start-up into a company that is real enough to take public or sell
to a larger company. Those driving LBOs have to buy an asset and improve its
performance enough to unload it for a profit, whether by way of sale to a larger
company or through an initial public offering. At least initially, both VC and
LBO firms have to build value in the real market, not the expectations market,
because they mainly invest in nontraded assets. These firms have no incentive
whatsoever to diminish the value of an investment asset: their incentive is the

opposite.
Hedge funds are entirely different—and dangerously so. They invest in
publicly traded instruments or derivatives thereof, so they are entirely creatures
of the expectations market rather than the real market. They can and will invest
in any financial instrument. In fact, hedge funds have gotten so sophisticated that
when there isn’t an available security tailored to their investing interests, they
hire investment banks to create custom investment vehicles for them. Hedge
funds can invest in instruments that produce value for the fund if they go up in
price, but they can also engineer investments that produce value for the fund if
they go down in price. That is, they can place a bet against investments
—shorting them. John Paulson, for example, made billions by shorting subprime
mortgages (with the help of investment bankers at Goldman Sachs, which
created the now-notorious Abacus mortgage-derivative vehicles purely to help
Paulson bet against the mortgage market). George Soros similarly made his first
billion-dollar score by shorting the British pound in 1992.
What all of this means is that hedge funds are not interested in stability or
steady growth. They are interested only in short-term changes in expectations; in
other words, in volatility. The more a hedge fund investment moves in the
direction of its bet, the greater the fund’s carried interest. Because the 2&20
formula dictates that the bigger the price movement, the bigger the potential
payoff, it means that no amount of market upheaval is either enough or too
much.
Their exploitation of variability in the capital markets has made the leading
hedge fund managers very, very rich. Of the sixteen billionaires in the top
hundred of the Forbes list who made their fortunes through the 2&20 formula,
twelve are hedge-fund managers. Every year for the past several years, the
highest-earning Americans were hedge fund managers. Renaissance’s James
Simons earned $5 billion in personal compensation in 2008 and 2009
combined.13 These were two terrible years for the economy and the stock
market, but no problem for Simons. He doesn’t need growth or prosperity; he
just needs volatility.
THE MANUFACTURING OF VOLATILITY
In the early days of the hedge fund industry, its managers seemed content to
merely exploit the variability already inherent in the capital markets. But it
didn’t take terribly long for hedge funds to figure out that they could make still

more money by actually producing volatility. For instance, hedge funds wishing
to place a bet that a stock (or derivative thereof) will lose value can band
together with other funds to launch a short attack on the target stock, driving
expectations down and producing the desired downward movement in the stock.
The band of hedge funds creates price fluctuations that didn’t have to exist,
hurting other companies and investors and reaping huge rewards.
This conduct happens to be strictly illegal, but that certainly doesn’t stop the
hedge funds. According to court documents, in 2003, hedge fund manager
Steven Cohen of SAC Capital and a group of associates are alleged to have hired
a shady operative (Spyro Contogouris) to spread negative rumors about the CEO
of insurer Fairfax Financial in an attempt to create downward pressure on its
stock. Cohen, Contogouris, and a number of their associates are under Securities
& Exchange Commission investigation and face the prospect of legal sanctions
because they got caught trying to create and exploit volatility in this manner.14
The confluence of stock-based compensation, the 2&20 formula, and hedge
fund–generated variability has created a highly unstable situation, one that
creates ever spiraling volatility. Executives are learning that they too can
maximize their incentive compensation through market fluctuations—and the
bloody-minded ones are doing it in spades. They inflate expectations to
maximize the value of their stock-based compensation, which benefits the
executive, but also benefits the hedge funds, which have yet more variability to
exploit. This vicious cycle has produced a volatility machine that threatens the
fundamentals of American stock markets—and, in turn, the world’s capital
markets.
Volatility is not entirely straightforward to measure—which index, what time
period, what quantitative measure? But, if the S&P 500, the broadest index of
American large capitalization stocks, is used, the thirty-year periods before and
after 1980, a very long time-frame, are analyzed, and the measurement used is
the standard deviation of monthly returns, volatility is approximately 15 percent
higher in the later period than the earlier period. Hence, in the era of shareholder
value maximization, stock-based compensation, and hedge funds, investors have
experienced the double whammy of lower returns and greater instability.
The negative effects of volatility are most obvious in a stock market crash.
Consider the dot-com meltdown: technology company executives compensated
with stock options worked with 2&20 venture capital firms to hype their start-up
Internet companies, setting stratospheric expectations that shot the NASDAQ up
through the 5,000 barrier and ultimately produced the crash. This was a primitive

form of expectations manipulation—exploiting naive analysts, naive first-time
investors, and naive Internet day-traders.
The subprime meltdown was a more mature, evolved case of the forces of
stock-based compensation and 2&20 incentive compensation working together.
In the end, they created a discontinuity that threatened to bring down the entire
U.S. financial system. Executives with stock-based compensation chased
heightening expectations farther and farther out the slender tree branch; then,
hedge funds and investment dealers got together to produce derivative structures
that had no other purpose but to facilitate multibillion-dollar bets on whether
those expectations would rise or fall—helping to snap those slender branches.
The hedge funds didn’t much care which way the expectations went, so long as
they did so in a big way, producing the kind of volatility that generates huge
upside for their carried interests.
This is the future. All the fixes put in place in the wake of the 2000–2002
meltdown did nothing to prevent the 2008–2009 meltdown. Clever people found
new ways to game the game, and the regulators didn’t see it coming. Federal
regulators, the markets’ version of the “competition committee,” acted like
Major League Baseball, waiting until a crisis was irrefutable to implement a few
big fixes. We would be far better off if our regulators were to act more like the
National Football League, tweaking the rules almost constantly in reaction to
small shifts in power that throw the state of play out of balance.
Without ongoing good governance, the players in our capital markets will
grow more and more sophisticated in their ability to game the system. None of
the fixes already put in place or being contemplated will forestall the next
meltdown. The hedge fund industry can and will continue to generate the
volatility it needs. The parasite will threaten the host once again. If the host
succumbs this time, the parasites won’t much care. They have billions of dollars
garnered over the past decade to comfort them.
REINING IN THE HEDGE FUNDS
While it is easy to see how hedging against macro changes in exchange rates and
the like can be helpful to businesses, it is hard to see how hedge funds in their
current market-making form create any kind of broader societal benefit. They
earn huge returns while threatening to materially damage the capital markets
system that feeds them. Hedge funds are unlike VC and LBO funds in this
respect: these firms can create net societal value. VC funds help small firms with

entrepreneurial ideas fund their growth and without them, we might not have
Apple, Genentech, eBay, Amazon, Google, and many others. While it is true that
many dollars are lost when ventures fail, the world benefits when VCs help start-
ups become big companies with millions of happy consumers. Similarly, LBO
firms can create societal value by taking over poorly performing companies and
improving them, saving real jobs in the process (for example, Snapple and
Continental Airlines). As with VC funded-companies, the goal (if not always the
actual outcome) is real growth and stronger performance.
Hedge funds have no such goal. They are simply and clearly traders, not
builders. Hedge funds play entirely, completely, and utterly in a zero-sum game.
For James Simons to make $5 billion, Renaissance Technologies had to make
profits on the order of $15–$20 billion for its clients. But that means that other
investors— pensioners, high-net-worth individuals, widows, and orphans, or
ordinary working Americans—had to lose $15–$20 billion.
In the expectations market, for every dollar made, there is a dollar lost,
whether that’s from betting on NFL football games or on the collapse of the
subprime mortgage industry. Nobody is better off—except Simons and his
investors—and lots and lots and lots of people are worse off. Hedge funds
haven’t created value; they’ve just transferred it to their friends. James Simons
does so in the cleverest possible way, making tiny profits across millions of
trades, so investors don’t know when they are on the losing side of a
Renaissance trade. John Paulson does it in a much more obvious way, which is
to cause massive pain and suffering to just a few investors.
One might argue that James Simons and John Paulson are no different than
Bill Gates; after all, each is exceedingly rich thanks to a company he started. But
there are fundamental differences. Gates, like him or not, is rich because he
created net value for a broad swath of society. His products are worth as much or
more to each customer than that customer paid for them. His products make
customers’ lives better and more efficient. And since Microsoft can produce its
software for less money than it sells for, Microsoft is highly profitable. As its
biggest shareholder, Gates became wealthy by providing a valued product to his
customers. His wealth is thus derived from his creation of a positive-sum game.
Microsoft is better off and its customers are too; no one needed to lose value in
order for Bill Gates to get rich. Simons and Paulson, on the other hand, had to
take their money from someone else. For them to get rich, their trading partners
had to lose vast sums. And of course, the more naive the trading partner, the
better for Simons, Paulson, and their investors.

In football as in business, the real game is a positive-sum affair—fans enjoy
the pleasure of the game, players and stadium workers get paid, and owners
make a profit—while the expectations game is a zero-sum affair—bettors win
and bettors lose and both have to give the bookies a cut. Hedge-fund
management has the same structure as bookmaking, except that the returns are
higher and it is currently legal in more states!
On one side of the ledger, hedge fund managers provide zero benefit to
society; on the other side, the costs are substantial. Hedge funds have contributed
to the higher systematic volatility in our equity markets and have helped create
one-time meltdown events in those same markets, particularly with respect to the
subprime mortgage-induced crash. And worse, it is clear that some hedge funds
have engaged in criminal activities to further their goals. Like the incentive-
compromised CEO, these fund managers have lost their moral compass.
While the ultimate redress for hedge funds would be to ban them outright,
such a course of action seems unlikely given the size and power of the industry.
But, if they are going to callously damage the capital markets for their own
private interests, at least we could tax them to compensate for the damage and
take some of the excess profitability out of the industry.
Hedge fund taxation is almost impossibly complex because the structures of
the firms are so convoluted; there are many permutations and combinations of
general partners (that is, the fund managers) and limited partners (that is, the
fund investors). For instance, investors may be foreign or domestic, individuals
or nontaxable entities (for example, pension funds) or taxable entities (for
example, corporations). However, most commonly, the fund is structured as a
partnership, which means that taxation takes place at the level of the individual
general partners and limited partners. The general partners are individuals for
whom the annual fee is earned as ordinary income and for whom carried interest
is earned most commonly as a short-term capital gain. The limited partners are
typically a combination of high-net-worth individuals, who pay taxes on the
increases as short-term capital gains, and nontaxable entities that pay no taxes
when the income flows to them (especially if they are clever and structure their
holdings to avoid the tax on unrelated taxable business income).
The U.S. tax code has long recognized that the level of taxation on capital
gains has an impact on entrepreneurial and business-building activities. Hence,
for most of the twentieth century and for the twenty-first century thus far, capital
gains have enjoyed more favorable tax treatment than ordinary income—that is,
wages. This is particularly the case for long-term capital gains, which are at this

point defined as investments with a holding period of greater than one year.
Currently, individual capital gains on assets held for a period of less than one
year are taxed at a rate equal to that of ordinary income—35 percent at the
highest rate—while long-term capital gains are taxed at no higher than 15
percent. For corporations, capital gains are taxed at the same rates as ordinary
corporate income.
Neither hedge fund investors nor managers take much advantage of the
discounted long-term capital gains tax rate because their investments are
weighted toward the short term. There should be no quibble with them gaining
the benefit of the discounted rate for investments that are truly long term; long-
term investing is good for the economy and should be encouraged.
The bigger question concerns the taxation of short-term capital gains. In
contrast to longer-term capital gains, the tax code treats such gains as equivalent
to other income-generating activity such as ordinary wage income. But what if
the activities undertaken to produce short-term trading gains are actually
demonstrably bad for the economy? What if these activities cause greater
volatility in our expectations market, variability that undermines the ability of
executives to create value in the real market or causes executives to attempt to
manage the expectations market rather than the real market? Then, our tax
system should discourage these activities by making them less economically
attractive.
To protect the capital markets from parasites that would destroy their host,
short-term capital gains (on holding periods of less than one year) should be
taxed at a punitive rate—say 70 percent, or about double the ordinary income
rate. Similarly, only 30 percent of capital losses on holding periods of less than
one year should be deductible for income tax purposes. In order to ensure that
the hedge funds don’t simply create synthetic products or multiparty deals to
circumvent the holding-period rule, it should be a criminal (not civil) offense to
structure a short-term holding as a faux long-term holding for tax avoidance
purposes.
In order to protect the average investor, there should be a $1 million lifetime
exemption from this higher tax (and lower loss inclusion). For the first $1
million of short-term gains and losses, the ordinary income tax rate would apply.
Such an exemption would ensure that the vast majority of Americans would
never have to worry about short-term capital gains taxation (because only a tiny
fraction of Americans accumulate more than $1 million of short-term gains or
losses in their lifetime).15 Only those who make their living on playing the

short-term expectations market will feel the sting of the tax structure, and
hopefully, it will make such activity less economically rewarding than building
enterprises for the future.
SAVING PENSION FUNDS FROM THEMSELVES
It’s all well and good to come down hard on hedge funds, but the fact is that they
have plenty of willing customers, customers who enable the zero-sum game and
encourage the proliferation of 2&20. Most particularly, the impact of hedge
fund–driven volatility has been deepened by the legitimization of the risky
investments by our major pension funds. As pension funds have chased higher
and higher returns, they have branched out from the public capital markets and
into the world of private investments (euphemistically called alternative
investments in the pension fund world).
Of course, pension funds have long participated in a form of alternative
investment that is actually quite well suited to them: real estate, which offers
moderate-level, stable, long-term returns perfect for stable, long-term pension
liabilities. VC funds, LBO funds, and hedge funds, the growing segments of the
alternative investments industry, are precisely the opposite. As short-term
investments—typically self-liquidating in five years or less—they offer
exceedingly variable returns ranging all the way from complete loss of capital to
a home-run win. What’s more, the incentive structure of private equity is
dreadful for pension funds. As discussed, once they’ve collected their 2 percent
annual fee, fund managers have the incentive to swing for the fences with the
pensioners’ money. If they are successful, both the fund and the pensioners do
well. If they strike out, the fund still has its annual fee to pay the bills, but the
pensioners have lost their retirement nest egg.
Worse even than the perverse investing incentives of hedge funds are the very
real temptations that unscrupulous hedge fund managers offer to pension funds.
Hedge funds live and die by the volume of assets under management, so massive
pension funds, with all of those assets to invest, are deeply attractive to them.
Hence, hedge funds spare no expense in encouraging pension fund managers to
allocate capital to them—whether it is taking pension managers on expensive
education off-sites (or more accurately, junkets), showering them with tokens of
appreciation, or, in the worst of cases, actually paying these managers personal
bribes to allocate their beneficiaries’ capital to the hedge fund in question.
In early 2010, thirteen private equity funds, including the impeccably

connected Washington, D.C.–based Carlyle Group, reached a settlement that
allowed the U.S. government to collect from them some $130 million in fines
related to accusations that the firms paid New York State Common Retirement
Fund managers to allocate funds to them.16 Quadrangle Group, in paying $7
million of the above settlement, admitted openly that its senior partner at the
time, Steve Rattner (later the Obama administration’s “car czar”), was
responsible for improprieties: “We wholly disavow the conduct engaged in by
Steve Rattner, who hired the New York State Comptroller’s political consultant,
Hank Morris, to arrange an investment from the New York State Common
Retirement Fund . . . That conduct was inappropriate, wrong, and unethical.” (It
is worth noting that Rattner disagrees with Quadrangle’s characterization of his
actions.)17
Despite the mismatch of private equity funds and their incentive structure
with the needs of pensioners, pension fund managers have increased their
allocation to private equity funds, including the insidious hedge funds, over the
past two decades. They have even engaged in clear illegality along with their
hedge fund friends. Some leading pension funds are fighting back against the
2&20 formula, which is terrific to see. However, many pension funds need to be
saved from themselves.
In part, pension funds need to be saved from themselves because many of
them are monopolies. In most states, public employees have no choice as to who
manages their pension account; their deductions and employer matches go
directly into the hands of a monopoly provider of pension services. And, while
being a monopoly often feels comfortable and secure to the monopolist, in the
longer term, it is rarely good for either its customers or the monopoly itself. Over
time, monopolists can’t help but evolve toward serving themselves rather than
serving their customers. It isn’t easy to keep up a high level of effort and
diligence for a customer whose contributions you will receive regardless of how
hard you work.
Having a few pension fund and hedge fund managers face substantial fines or
jail terms will provide some helpful discipline to the industry, but since a number
of these monopoly providers seem incapable of thinking more about their
pensioners than themselves, the way they are allowed to invest with private
equity funds needs to be more carefully controlled.
Pension funds and fiduciary institutions generally should not be allowed to
invest their beneficiaries’ assets with a manager who charges them both an asset-

based fee and a carried interest. They (and their manager) need to choose: asset
fee or carried interest, but not both. If the pension fund manager chooses no fee,
then the private equity manager experiences a downside; it will end up working
for absolutely nothing if it doesn’t earn a positive return for the pension fund. In
such a structure, there will automatically be less swinging for the fences because
funds don’t have a fixed-fee safety net. If instead the pension fund manager
chooses all fees and no carried interest, then we return to the era in which
investment managers worked for 1 to 2 percent of assets under management and
performed just fine. Either option—all carried interest or all fixed fee—is
massively preferable to the twisted incentive effects of 2&20.
Perhaps a more imaginative option would be to use fulcrum fees rather than
2&20. In the mutual fund world, investment advisers are forbidden by
Investment Company Act 205(a)(1) from charging performance-based fees.
Fulcrum fees were permitted under subsequent regulations for qualified clients
(that is, clients whose net worth exceeds $1.5 million and with $750,000 or more
under management). These fees operate in the following manner: Fund
performance is matched to a specific external benchmark. When the fund
outperforms that benchmark, the management fee increases at a specified rate.
However, if the fund underperforms the benchmark, the fee decreases at the
same rate. Miss the benchmark by enough, and the fund managers could earn no
fee at all. Such a structure provides clear upside and downside incentives that
much more clearly align interests than does 2&20.18
PULLING BACK FROM THE BRINK
The 2&20 formula, like stock-based incentive compensation, is a bad idea
hidden in the guise of compelling logic. Its origin was part of the progression of
talent wresting control from capital. But, because 2&20 disaligns where it should
align, its pervasiveness and power need to be curbed to protect the real markets
from its deleterious effects. Curbing the pension funds’ ability to feed the 2&20
beast will help out. And sucking some of the excess profitability out of the hedge
fund model through taxation will also further limit the damage done by 2&20. In
due course, 2&20 should go the way of executive stock options and the dodo,
but that will take some time. Hence, interim steps are needed to prevent 2&20-
possessed hedge funds from bringing the capital markets fully to their knees.
Yet, more even than reining in the hedge funds, what our economy needs is a
more holistic framework for talent. Solely seeking to extract as much reward as

possible is a weak and inauthentic goal. Unfortunately, we have created
structures that make it the only logical outcome for talent, whether they be
knowledge workers, executives, athletes, or actors.
The goal of maximal extraction of financial rewards has no greater meaning
and serves no higher purpose. It is a goal that transfers wealth, rather than
creating value. As such, we need to create a new structure that enables talent to
be fairly compensated for their efforts in pursuit of truly value-creating goals.
That is the challenge of the final chapter.

SIX
A 
BOLD 
VISION 
FOR 
COMPANIES 
AND
EXECUTIVES
Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can
change the world. Indeed it is the only thing that ever has.
—Margaret Mead
In his best-selling novel Bonfire of the Vanities, novelist Tom Wolfe paints a
touching but disturbing picture of his hero—or perhaps more properly antihero
—Sherman McCoy. Sherman is a millionaire bond trader, a Manhattan Master of
the Universe. A blue-blooded, thirty-eight-year old Yale graduate, he already has
a co-op flat on Park Avenue with twelve-foot ceilings, a socialite wife named
Judy, a perfect six-year-old daughter named Campbell, and a mistress named
Maria.
Wolfe writes that one day, Campbell runs up to Sherman and earnestly asks:
“Daddy . . . what do you do?” She has learned that the father of her best friend
MacKenzie “makes books, and he has eighty people working for him.”
Campbell is anxious to report back what her daddy does: and she hopes that it is
as, or more, impressive! Sherman tries to explain: “Well, I deal in bonds,
sweetheart. I buy them, I sell them, I—” Campbell interrupts, less than satisfied:
“What are bonds? What is deal?” Sherman struggles vainly to explain until Judy
leaps into the breach with her own answer. She tells Campbell to imagine that
bonds are like slices of golden cake, cakes Sherman didn’t bake, but that he
passes from one person to another. And every time he passes a slice, some tiny
golden crumbs fall off. He collects them together and when he has collected
enough crumbs, he can make a golden cake for himself.
The analogy doesn’t sit well with Sherman (little crumbs!); he and Judy
argue, and before long, Campbell is in tears. Campbell is distressed, it seems, not
just because of the argument but because she sees that her father’s profession is
meaningless. He doesn’t make books, he doesn’t even bake cakes. He doesn’t

make anything.
Herein lies the challenge for the modern corporate executive (or bond trader
or hedge fund manager) in the era of shareholder value maximization. The
shareholder value framework, bolstered by stock-based compensation (or the
2&20 formula), focuses executives on creating perceived value in the
expectations market rather than on creating concrete value in the real market.
This shareholder value–focused framework has distressing flaws.
First, it gives executives a task that is ultimately unachievable, in that it
requires that they raise other people’s expectations continuously and forever.
Executives either pursue an impossible goal or game the game—that is, drive
expectations up or down in the short term to extract value for themselves at the
expense of shareholders. Boards of directors, who are meant to protect
shareholders from this kind of exploitation by executives, turn out to be largely
incapable of doing so.
Second, it saps executives of their sense of authenticity. Executives know that
they are playing a game they cannot win on behalf of faceless, nameless
shareholders who behave unilaterally and capriciously. Like Sherman McCoy,
modern executives have difficulty explaining to themselves, let alone an
impressionable youngster, how it is that what they do creates value for humanity.
Shareholder value theory generates inauthentic behavior, reduces long-term
returns, and increases volatility in the capital markets. Plus, it speeds the
emergence of a class of firms—hedge funds—that exist solely to prey on that
volatility and that create no actual value for the economy. Shareholder value
simply fails as a unifying theory to produce value in business.
If the theory that has underpinned our capitalist approach for the past three
decades has failed, we need a replacement—a theory that encourages authentic
action, turns attention to the real market, drives long-term growth, and produces
less volatility.
A first step is to pursue the goal of creating value for customers. But merely
placing customers at the fore does not in itself produce authenticity in business.
There is a more expansive goal executives can pursue, one that is more
consistent with an authentic life and at least equally consistent with building
shareholder value: They should earnestly seek to make their business a force that
improves the society in which they live and work.
THE CIVIL FOUNDATION

The quality of a society is in large part a function of the laws and the norms that
guide the behaviors of its members, whether individuals or constructed entities,
like for-profit companies (see figure 6-1). These rules, at their best, are designed
to improve the society as a whole as well as the lives of those who belong to it.
For example, the law against stealing frees citizens from spending large
quantities of time and other resources protecting their own property from theft.
Laws are explicitly expressed and enforced by regulatory bodies. Members of
a society who do not obey its laws are sanctioned in some fashion. Typically,
individuals who break laws are fined or jailed, while entities that transgress are
fined or even disbanded. For instance, our society has laws that forbid
discrimination on the basis of age, gender, religion, or sexual preference. A
company that chooses to ignore those laws and to discriminate against
individuals risks being fined or otherwise punished.
FIGURE 6-1
The civil foundation
In addition to formal regulations, every society has shared customs and
norms to which its members are expected to adhere. These norms differ from
laws in that they are not codified and are largely tacit. They are also intended to
make life more pleasant for society as a whole. For instance, our society has a
norm that discourages taking or making phone calls during movies. Those who
contravene that norm are subject to disapproval (and shushing), not to mention
possible ejection by an usher.
As with regulations, there tend to be sanctions for those who do not adhere to
norms. Rather than imprisonment or financial penalties, the punishment tends to
be exclusion. For example, in some cities and industries, it is the norm for
companies to give 1 percent of pretax profits to charity. Companies that don’t
contribute are excluded from activities of a formal “1 percent club” and are held
in lower esteem by the community. Generally, if a company contravenes customs
and norms, it may experience lower customer loyalty or have greater difficulty

attracting and retaining employees.
Both laws and norms exist to make a society a better place to live. Together,
they create a foundation of civility on which the society can build a spectrum of
beneficial activities, including commerce, education, and the arts.
The civil foundation of any given society is not static. It evolves over time
both in positive and negative directions. Often, as an economy advances, its civil
foundation of laws and norms builds up. The American civil foundation, for
instance, has deepened considerably over time, with huge advances in areas from
stronger occupational health and safety laws for workers, to same-sex benefits
for employees, to Medicare/Medicaid health care, to accounting standards, to
corporate philanthropy, to name a few. Meanwhile, in numerous developing
countries, the shallow and fragile civil foundation has not advanced appreciably.
There, the prevailing experience is of war, use of force, dangerous working
conditions, and the absence of health care. The civil foundation thus varies
widely across societies—both between particular communities within a given
legal jurisdiction and across jurisdictions.
Unfortunately, even in the most advanced of economies, the civil foundation
does not inexorably grow stronger. Disruptions like recessions, natural disasters,
terrorist attacks, or even shifting population patterns can reduce prosperity and
diminish the civil foundation over time. One might argue that aspects of the civil
foundations of developed countries are currently crumbling as competition from
low-cost jurisdictions chips away at both employment laws and company norms
for treatment of workers. For instance, a global company might choose, for the
benefit of its shareholders, to locate more of its work in low-labor-cost
economies. These low-cost economies tend to have a shallower civil foundation,
meaning the company is shifting jobs away from a country that has a deep and
robust civil foundation toward one that does not. The country with the deep
foundation, facing job losses and globalization panic, might be inclined to loosen
its regulations and standards—to chip away at the foundation—in order to keep
jobs at home.
The civil foundation can also weaken in a climate of fear. One particularly
dark moment for America’s civil foundation was the internment of ethnic
Japanese during World War II. America backed away from its laws and norms
regarding civil liberties to target a group of American citizens, the overwhelming
majority of whom had done nothing wrong and posed no threat.
This was not an isolated or unprecedented phenomenon. John Stuart Mill
commented on the influence of war on freedom in his seminal essay On Liberty:

war, he said, fosters “a mode of thinking which may have been admissible in
small republics surrounded by powerful enemies, in constant peril of being
subverted by foreign attack or internal commotion, and to which even a short
interval of relaxed energy and self-command might so easily be fatal that they
could not afford to wait for the salutary permanent effects of freedom.”1 In
general, the civil foundation strengthens during periods of calm, optimism, or
prosperity and weakens during times of fear or economic contraction.
THE EVOLUTION OF THE CIVIL FOUNDATION
As major actors in modern society, companies can have a negative, neutral, or
positive impact on the evolution of the civil foundation. The people who run
these companies have a choice: they can chip away at the bricks of the civil
foundation; they can benefit from the existing foundation but not contribute to it;
or they can work to add bricks to and strengthen the robustness of the
foundation. The choice executives make for their companies determines how
companies are seen by society as a whole.
Executives at AIG made the civil foundation less robust through their
involvement in credit default swaps. Credit derivatives aren’t inherently a bad
thing; they hold the promise of helping financial companies more effectively
manage the risk of their portfolios. But AIG embraced credit derivatives in a
dangerous and ultimately disastrous manner—taking an approach that clearly
placed corporate and executive wealth ahead of our collective well-being.
Chasing supernatural profits, AIG hired a group of derivatives specialists and set
them up in London, where the regulatory structures happened to be less
restrictive than in New York. Under U.S. laws, AIG was able to select its own
regulator for the new division and, rather than the highly experienced Securities
& Exchange Commission, AIG opted for the Office for Thrift Supervision,
which had virtually no expertise in the credit default swap arena. The result, as
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner would later testify before Congress, was that
AIG’s Financial Products Group was largely unregulated. In creating this new
division, AIG ventured into a business far outside its core insurance expertise
and went on to leverage the trusted AIG name to lend credibility to these little-
understood financial vehicles.
Rather than embrace appropriate regulatory oversight, executives at AIG did
everything in their power to skirt regulations, staying within the letter of the law
—even if not the spirit—while exposing AIG and its partners to colossal, little-

understood risks in pursuit of massive profits. By the time the U.S. mortgage
market crashed in 2008, AIG’s London-based Financial Products group had
entered into almost $500 billion of credit default swap agreements. The losses
associated with its defaults led to the largest government bailout in U.S. history
and contributed meaningfully to the worst financial crisis since the Great
Depression.
In similar fashion, the executives of Enron, WorldCom, and the hundreds of
options-backdating companies bent or broke rules meant to build trust between
investors and companies. Thankfully, such rule breakers are a small minority
among executives. Few executives go so far as to engage in criminal activity,
because such behavior creates dissonance with how they see themselves and
with who they want to be in the rest of their lives. No parent wants to be
Sherman McCoy and have their child burst into tears when they have explained
to them what their parent actually does for a living.
Unfortunately, even a small number of executives who get up every morning,
chisel in hand and ready to start chipping away, can do serious damage to the
civil foundation. It takes a long time to rebuild, and society can’t afford to stand
by idly while important bricks are broken down.
Much more common than the foundation chippers are executives who seek to
neither augment nor diminish the civil foundation. They subscribe to Milton
Friedman’s famous adage that the business of business is business. In a seminal
1970 article in the New York Times Magazine entitled “The Social Responsibility
of a Business Is to Increase Its Profits,” Friedman argued that the sole
responsibility of a business is to return its profits to shareholders and that to do
otherwise—to spend shareholders’ money to improve social welfare, for instance
—would be presumptuous, inefficient, and ineffectual. Return profits to
shareholders, Freidman said, and let them spend their money as they wish.
Friedman closed his article definitively, by quoting from his book Capitalism
and Freedom: “There is one and only one social responsibility of business—to
use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits so long
as it stays within the rules of the game, which is to say, engages in open and free
competition without deception or fraud.”2
Executives who hold to Friedman’s philosophy work assiduously to ensure
that their companies are in strict compliance with all the laws and regulations
governing their operation, and they keep fully in line with the norms and
conventions of their industry or region. If companies in their industry or region
engage in corporate philanthropy, so do they—at approximately the same level

of investment as their peers. If other companies adopt same-sex benefits, so do
they. This kind of toeing the line is indeed helpful to society. Widespread
adherence to laws and adoption of norms protects and reinforces the existing
civil foundation, and that is a very good thing. It gives everyone greater
confidence in the legal foundations of the society, and it spreads beneficial
norms across entire industries and regions.
However, this approach does nothing to enhance the civil foundation; it
simply relies on the efforts of those who established the laws and norms in the
first place. At the end of one’s career, who would want to say: “I ensured that my
company obeyed all relevant laws and whenever other companies started doing
something good for society that they didn’t have to do, we followed. I did what
was obvious and expected—and nothing more—for my entire career”? Many
may end up in that place; but few consciously choose it from the beginning.
A SUPERIOR OPTION
There is a superior option, one that only a fraction of senior executives choose to
embrace. It is to contribute to strengthening the civil foundation, going beyond
the laws and regulations already in place and the norms and conventions already
prevailing. This means venturing into the frontier territory of initiatives that have
not yet been attempted but that hold the promise of making the world a better
place. It means truly taking the lead on initiatives that mean more than profits.
Interestingly, there is a long history of companies and individuals that acted
to build up the civil foundation:
In 1914, Henry Ford, believing that he ought to pay his workers enough to
afford to buy the cars they produced, more than doubled the hourly wages
Ford Motor Company paid, from $2.34 to $5. He was roundly criticized by
other industrialists and appeared to place himself at a disadvantage, since
the wages at his plants were well in excess of the norms in the auto industry
at the time. But his decision ultimately benefited his company, making it an
attractive employer, reducing turnover to almost zero, and stimulating
demand for its products. At the same time, Ford’s move benefited society
by raising the bar for pay and labor practices across the auto industry.3
In 1976, Anita Roddick opened The Body Shop and demonstrated that
beauty-care products could be developed without animal testing. Her
approach resonated with consumers and caused competitors to fall into line

or suffer the embarrassment of continuing in an unseemly and unpopular
practice.
In 1990, Prudential Insurance introduced viatical settlements—contracts
that allowed AIDS sufferers to tap into the death benefits in their life
insurance policies to pay for medical and related expenses. Favorable media
reaction to this innovation convinced rival insurers that the risk of
introducing similar products was negligible, and the policy became business
as usual throughout the insurance industry.
In 2009, Walmart announced its Sustainable Product Index project, a plan to
create a common index for assessing the sustainability of all of its suppliers,
with the intent of purchasing in part on the basis of sustainability
performance.4 Given Walmart’s purchasing clout, the belief is that suppliers
will have to comply with the index. If consumers respond, as well, other
retailers will be inclined to follow Walmart’s example, applying pressure to
the retailing industry’s whole supply chain and dramatically improving its
sustainability.
These cases, and the others like them, have a common structure. First, an
executive believes that some segment of society—whether customers,
employees, or the populace in general—would be better off after a given
initiative. Second, the executive believes that the initiative wouldn’t hurt the
company’s competitiveness or shareholder value in the long run. Based on
intrinsic motivation, balanced with thoughtful attention to the bottom line, the
executive puts the initiative into action and, sure enough, it makes the world a
better place. More than that, the initiative turns out to be not profit-neutral, but
actually good for competitiveness and shareholder value. Finally, the initiative is
copied by other companies, making it an industry or regional norm—that is, part
of a newly enhanced civil foundation.
This is how the robustness of the civil foundation is enhanced over time
through company action. To begin, an individual company undertakes an activity
in the frontier. Sometimes, as that practice yields success, it is imitated until it
becomes a widely adopted norm, as with Prudential’s aforementioned viatical
settlements. Prudential’s competitors all adopted a similar practice because it
made the world a better place and was competitively successful. Over the course
of twenty years, something beneficial for society went from a glimmer of an idea
to an industry norm, all because one person in one company ventured into the

frontier of things that had not yet been done.
Sometimes the frontier innovation is so significant and wide-reaching that it
becomes ensconced in laws or regulations. For example, only one year after
Walmart introduced its Sustainable Product Index initiative, the U.S. government
put in place a regulation requiring the same type of supply chain environmental
disclosure from all of its suppliers.5
THE LIMITS OF INDIVIDUAL ACTION
However, this kind of success is anything but a sure thing. Some initiatives in the
frontier do not help the company (or anyone else) and fail utterly to strengthen
the civil foundation. The venerable Massachusetts textile firm Malden Mills
provides the prototypical tale. A fire destroyed its primary manufacturing plant
in 1995. The $300 million insurance settlement from the fire represented an
opportunity for owner Aaron Feuerstein either to rebuild his plant in Mexico or
to outsource his production to China. The vast bulk of the once-thriving New
England textile industry had already decamped to lower-cost jurisdictions or had
gone out of business. But Feuerstein refused to follow suit, maintaining that he
had a responsibility to his workers and his community. So he used the insurance
proceeds to rebuild the plant in northern Massachusetts and to pay his workers
while it was under construction. For the workers, this was a wonderful gesture of
support. Sadly, no one except the workers really cared. Feuerstein rebuilt his
plant in one of the highest-cost jurisdictions on the planet and his customers,
distribution channel, and government provided no reward for doing so. In short
order, Malden Mills went into Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, as its high-cost
structure rendered it completely uncompetitive.
Though Feuerstein ventured boldly into the frontier, he produced only a
short-term benefit for society and did great harm to his company. By continuing
to pay his employees, he spared his workers considerable hardship and relieved
the state of the costs associated with increased unemployment, including
unemployment insurance and welfare payments. But his generosity directly
diminished his own wealth and hurt his fellow shareholders. Unlike Ford, Body
Shop, and Prudential, Malden Mills’ initiative was unsuccessful, and so it was
not imitated. It didn’t establish a new norm for American business, and in the
end provided a cautionary tale about adventures in the frontier.
Malden Mills was unable to turn the proverbial tide. While some customers
rued the loss of American jobs, this sentiment alone didn’t motivate them to

reward Malden Mills for bucking the trend toward production in low-cost
jurisdictions. Customers were unwilling to pay more money for products of
equal quality simply because they were produced in New England. Ford, Body
Shop, and Prudential each captured substantial benefits from their initiatives for
themselves, through decreased employee turnover, higher customer loyalty, or
greater customer appeal. In contrast, none of the benefits created by Malden
Mills accrued to its shareholders.
A more recent example of the challenges of attempting to produce change by
venturing alone into the frontier is BP. In 2000, CEO John Browne announced
that the new positioning for BP PLC would be “Beyond Petroleum.” The new
BP used a stylized flower as its logo, signaling that its intent was to move
beyond dependence on petroleum into a world of alternative fuels. BP backed up
this positioning in 2005 with the establishment of an Alternative Energy
Division to invest in nonpetroleum-based energy sources. However, the division
was put up for sale just three years later, having invested only $1.5 billion in
alternative energy projects, a small fraction of BP’s total investment in energy
production.6 In 2008, under new CEO Tony Hayward, the Beyond Petroleum
tagline disappeared and BP made a large investment in the Alberta tar sands,
whose development is considered by many environmentalists to be an ecological
disaster. Long before the 2010 Deepwater Horizon debacle, BP was in full-scale
retreat from the frontier. It had nothing to show for its efforts except a reputation
for being disingenuous.
Moving from a focus on oil to one on alternative energy was a huge
challenge for a single company—even a large energy company. To be successful,
BP would have had to change the course of energy investment and production
across the industry. The costs were enormous and the returns simply too
uncertain. It was unclear how much of the benefit of the shift to renewable fuel
sources would accrue to BP and how much to those external to BP.
A fundamentally different approach is required when not enough of the
benefits of individual action can be captured to make up for the costs incurred,
as was the case for Malden Mills and BP. When the benefits to innovative action
in the frontier accrue to actors outside the initiating company—whether to
competitors in general or society as a whole—and don’t benefit the company at a
level in excess of the costs of innovation, the company would be foolhardy to act
alone. In such an instance, joint action is required.

FIGURE 6-2
The frontier
JOINT ACTION IN THE FRONTIER
Fortunately, there is precedent for joint company action in the frontier. In 2002,
the global cement industry had reached a crossroads. The industry had come to
understand that, even though it was tiny in terms of assets and revenues, it was
generating approximately 5 percent of the world’s man-made carbon dioxide. No
single cement company could make a big dent in the situation alone and, even if
one could, the level of investment required was likely to make that company
uncompetitive—it would have substantially higher costs, and it was unlikely that
customers would reward it for its actions. Sadly, for customers, cement is
cement!
Yet, at the same time, if companies took no action, the industry would
continue to be a disproportionate contributor to environmental degradation,
which was unappealing on its face, but also increased the possibility that the
government would step in with potentially draconian regulations to enforce
change. So ten of the world’s largest cement manufacturers joined together,
facilitated by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development
(WBCSD), to create the Cement Sustainability Initiative.7 The joint initiative
provided three major benefits that individual action could not. First, the ten
companies together had the resources necessary to tackle the problem at the
scale required, in contrast to Malden Mills and BP. Second, none of the
participating companies was disadvantaged in relation to the others, because all
of their major competitors were making proportionate investments. And third,
while the benefits internal to any one company might not be clearly identifiable,
the benefits to the industry as a whole were potentially great.
A more recent example of joint action in the frontier is the Eco-Patent

Commons, which was established in January of 2008 by IBM, Nokia, Pitney
Bowes, and Sony, once again with the WBCSD facilitating. The founding
companies agreed to contribute their patents relating to environmental
innovations to an open patent pool that could be used by any company or
individual. Their hope in creating the pool is that other companies will follow,
enriching the pool and enabling increased innovation in environmental
sustainability.8
AN INSPIRING AND AUTHENTIC LIFE
The civil foundation and the frontier are both critical elements to the creation of
meaning in business. Together, they form a matrix—what might be called the
virtue matrix—that can be used to parse the broader social meaning of
business.9 Using this framework, business executives can think about acting in a
way that is conducive to an inspiring and authentic life and wholly consistent
with creating value for shareholders.
The first task is to protect the civil foundation as it currently exists. With
respect to laws and regulations pertinent to the company, committed executives
ensure that mechanisms are in place to guarantee that their company is in
absolute compliance with both the letter and the spirit of each law and every
regulation. With respect to norms and conventions pertinent to a company’s
industry or region, committed executives ensure that their company takes a
leading rather than laggardly position in adopting those norms and conventions.
By complying thoroughly with laws and regulations and fully embracing norms
and conventions, a company contributes to maintaining the strength of the civil
foundation—which is an important contribution to its society. By contributing to
society in this way, executives create a personal sense of authenticity; they stand
along with the community, not in opposition or indifferent to it.
The second and most aspirational task is to contribute meaningfully to
ratcheting up the strength of the civil foundation. This can come about through
either individual action or joint action, depending on the circumstances.
Some potential individual activities hold promise to make the world a better
place and contribute to shareholder value by generating positive reactions from
customers, employees, and/or legal authorities. These activities have potential
for high impact because, if they are successful, other companies tend to imitate
the innovator until the practice becomes a norm. In other words, successful
individual action in the frontier can eventually become part of the civil

foundation. This shift to the civil foundation provides the greatest benefit to
society, in that it dramatically magnifies the impact of a single company’s
actions.
Executives committed to adding bricks to the civil foundation ensure that at
all times their company has at least one strategic project under way that
represents bold and pioneering social action. Because innovation is always risky,
some such projects will fail and some will succeed. Customers will respond to
some and not to others. The key is to relentlessly pursue projects in the frontier
to develop a track record there. Over time, executives and companies that
establish a record of success in the frontier become known in their industry and
beyond as innovative and responsible. They garner reputations for making
periodic breakthroughs that lead to the establishment of new conventions. For
example, through concerted, ongoing initiatives, the Body Shop is recognized as
a leader in sustainability and social responsibility, attracting loyal customers who
shop there as much because of its reputation as because of its products.
Not all issues respond well to individual action; some are too big or costly to
yield to a single company’s efforts without damaging that company, creating a
fundamental structural barrier to corporate action. In these cases, joint action is
required. In addition to individual strategic initiatives, executives committed to
shoring up the civil foundation ensure that at all times their company is pursuing
at least one project jointly with other companies where the benefits of the
initiative accrue principally to society rather than to the innovating company. In
such situations, executives can play an initiating role in creating a coalition for
action. As these initiatives succeed, the lead companies and executives become
known in their industry and beyond as collaborative and cooperative. They
garner reputations for leading breakthroughs in areas that foil individual
company initiatives. In the case of the Cement Sustainability Initiative, the
leading role of Dutch cement giant Holcim is recognized, as is its CEO of the
day, Thomas Schmidheiny.
Over time, joint initiatives to pursue structural problems can become part of
the civil foundation too; as jurisdictions recognize the value of the initiatives,
they may enshrine the new rules as laws that apply to all firms, not just those
that undertook the joint action. Here, too, the civil foundation is strengthened.
To return briefly to the example of the NFL, we can see both strategic and
structural initiatives in action. At a company level, every team engages in
individual strategic initiatives, the kind of community engagement and
philanthropic activity that fosters loyalty and creates a hometown fan base.

Individual players host fundraising events, the front office donates merchandise
and tickets to worthy causes, and the team works with community groups in a
variety of other ways. The Indianapolis Colts, for instance, have a program
called Colts Community Tuesdays, in which players and personnel participate in
worthy events every Tuesday of the season. Events include an annual Bleed Blue
Blood Drive at Lucas Oil Stadium, hospital visits, Christmas caroling, and so on.
But the league takes collective action as well to generate the kind of national
impact that it would be too costly and logistically complex for any one team to
undertake. The flagship program of this type is NFL Play60. Created in
partnership with the United Way, Play60 targets the problem of childhood
obesity. Designed to promote healthier lives for kids, the program encourages
children to be active at least sixty minutes each day. The league leads the
initiative, and asks players and teams to support it with public service
announcements, playground-building projects, and fitness camps. In this way,
the NFL engages both strategic and structural initiatives in the frontier.
It is through such individual and joint innovations that the civil foundation of
a society is strengthened and that society advances as a result; what were once
dreams become possibilities and, eventually, reality.
If there is no innovation by executives and companies, the civil foundation
will grow slowly. Governments will build the foundation up by creating new
laws and regulations. Social entrepreneurs will explore the frontier and start
trends that eventually end up in the foundation. But this will produce a society
that can’t count on business to do anything other than conduct business. While
this is not a disaster, it is hardly an inspiring vision for business corporately or its
executive leaders personally.
If all companies engaged in both protection and enhancement of the civil
foundation, business would be (and would be seen to be) a positive agent for
change in the world. Business would become skilled at strengthening the civil
foundation, while earning an attractive return for shareholders, instead of
becoming skilled at sacrificing everything necessary to make this quarter’s
earnings forecast.
If executives engaged in both protecting and strengthening the civil
foundation, they would lead more authentic lives and contribute meaningfully to
their communities. In the current construct, executives have a business life that is
substantially detached from and at odds with their home life. This divide is
untenable. People don’t want to be indifferent to their community; they want to
be valuable members of a community that they value and that is valued by

others. Executives can make their business life consistent with their nonbusiness
life and be authentic to their true selves if they set a personal goal of contributing
to the strength and stability of the civil foundation.
Imagine if all executives sought to contribute in their own small way, while
earning the shareholders who provided capital to their company a return above
their cost of capital. That would be a worthy goal. That would bring true
meaning to the firm. If executives and companies set that as their goal, they
would contribute to making the world a better place—one little step at a time. It
may not look or feel massively heroic, but such action would be sustainable for
them, their companies, and the world.
LOOKING AHEAD
The world is a crowded, politically unstable, and econmically inequitable place.
The prosperity of its inhabitants depends in considerable part on the rational and
responsible creation of wealth through the operation of successful businesses.
Sadly, the advent of shareholder value theory and the structures that have taken
shape in its wake—including stock-based incentive compensation, the 2&20
formula, and hedge funds—have delegitimized capital markets and cast a
shadow over capitalism itself. This, in turn, makes it difficult for creative and
entrepreneurial people to find their meaning in business. But productive action is
possible, individually and communally. In part, we can learn from the NFL just
what to do. We can begin by keeping our players from betting on the games they
play. We can provide the right incentives to our executives—returning the focus
to the real market and away from the expectations market. Like Pete Rozelle and
his successors, we can endeavor to consistently tweak the rules to keep our fans
happy, focusing our executives on customer delight rather than shareholder
value.
Beyond the lessons of the NFL, we can make significant changes to rules that
govern the players who bridge between the real and expectations markets. We
can rethink the role of boards, and create the right incentives there too. We can
change our attitude toward expectations market players that exist only to extract
value from the world, by taxing the profits from short-term trading to all of our
benefit. Finally, we can provide a framework that enables companies and
executives to think about their responsibilities beyond shareholders.
In so doing, we can restore the core of business and capitalism. We can fix
the game—until the next time we need to tweak it!

NOTES
Chapter One
1. Robert Shiller’s online data: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm.
2. Chris Gaither and Dawn C. Chmielewski, “Fears of Dot-Com Crash,
Version 2.0,” Los Angeles Times, July 16, 2006.
3. Bethany McLeand and Peter Elkind, “The Guiltiest Guys in the Room,”
CNNMoney, 
July 
5, 
2006,
http://money.cnn.com/2006/05/29/news/enron_guiltyest/index.htm;
http://www.newsweek.com/2002/01/21/who-killed-enron.html#.
4. J. Michael Anderson, Enron: A Select Chronology of Congressional,
Corporate, and Government Activities (Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service, Library of Congress, April 9, 2003).
5. Bob Dart, “Enron Chief Vilified Amid Senate Scorn, Lay Takes the 5th,”
Atlanta Journal-Constitution, February 13, 2002.
6. Laura Goldberg, “Being ‘in the Dark’ Could Be Asset to Former Enron
Chairman’s Case,” Houston Chronicle, February 15, 2002.
7. Michael C. Jensen and William H. Meckling, “Theory of the Firm:
Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of
Financial Economics 3, no. 4 (1976): 305–360.
8. My criticism of the application of the theory is not intended to be a critique
of Jensen and Meckling as scholars or to diminish their contributions. Jensen and
Meckling identified a real and pervasive problem—that the incentives of
shareholders and executives are not naturally aligned. Unfortunately, as the
theory was put into practice, especially as concerns the best way to align those
interests, it has served to exacerbate rather than cure the problems its authors
identified. Sadly, Meckling passed away in 1998. However, Jensen has continued
to be a prolific researcher and writer. His recent work highlights the role of
authentic leadership in overcoming the management behavior problems
identified in his original agency theory work.
9. How do we know that a stock price is much more about future
expectations than it is about current real market performance? Since the

inception of the S&P 500 index in 1871, it has traded on average at a price-
earnings multiple of approximately sixteen times (see Robert Shiller’s online
data: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm). That means that an investor in
the S&P 500 pays 6 percent (that is, one-sixteenth) of the price of the stock for
what is happening now—current real earnings—and 94 percent for what stock
investors collectively expect the company to do in the future.
10. Michael C. Jensen, Kevin J. Murphy, and Eric G. Wruck, “Remuneration:
Where We’ve Been, How We Got to Here, What Are the Problems, and How to
Fix Them,” working paper, Social Science Research Network, July 12, 2004,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=561305.
11. Scott Thurm, “Oracle’s Ellison: Pay King,” Wall Street Journal, July 27,
2010,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405274870372410457537968048472629
12. http://people.forbes.com/profile/ray-r-irani/46931.
13. Michael Hiestand, “NFL Getting Fortunate Bounces,” USA Today,
October 30, 2009.
14.
http://www.associatedcontent.com/article/2681255/2010_super_bowl_becomes_m
15. Tom Van Riper, “Valuations: The Most Valuable Teams in Sports,”
Forbes.com: http://forbes.com/2010/01/12/manchester-united-yankees-cowboys-
business-sports-valuable-teams.html.
16. Again in 1983, Rozelle indefinitely suspended an NFL player (Baltimore
Colts quarterback Art Schlichter) for gambling on sports events, though
apparently not on NFL games. After another incident, Rozelle banned Schlichter
permanently from the NFL.
17. Eli Bartov, Dan Givoly, and Carla Hayn, “The Rewards to Meeting or
Beating Earnings Expectations,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 33
(2002): 173–204.
18. Or almost perfect, anyway: while the Patriots went undefeated in the
regular season, they lost to the New York Giants in the Super Bowl. Only the
1972 Miami Dolphins have a perfect record, including both regular season (then
fourteen games) and playoffs (two games).
19. http://www.goldsheet.com/gs_new/histnfl.php.
20. Ibid.
21. Roger Martin, “Reward Real Growth, Not Expectations,” Financial

Times, August 2, 2010.
22. http://www.finance.yahoo.com/q/hp?s=CSCO+Historical+Prices.
23. Paul Brent, “The Real Cost of the House That Jack Built,” National Post,
September 7, 2002.
24. CAGR calculated on S&P returns adjusted for inflation and dividends,
using Bloomberg LP terminal data in January 2010.
25. “2008 Hedge Fund Rich List,” Absolute Return + Alpha magazine,
http://www.marketfolly.com/2009/03/top-25-highest-paid-hedge-fund-
managers.html
26. Of course, hedging can be a sensible and prudent investment strategy, one
that makes a good deal of sense for handling foreign exchange risk and other
macro-economic factors. In this book, I’m referring not to the practice of
hedging against risk, but to the majority of the modern hedge funds, which do
not exist to hedge risk but rather to make naked bets on price movements.

Chapter Two
1. Tim Webb, “BP’s Boss Admits Job on the Line over Gulf Oil Spill,”
Guardian, May 14, 2010, http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/may/13/bp-
boss-admits-mistakes-gulf-oil-spill.
2. “Embattled BP Chief: I Want My Life Back,” TimesOnline.com,
http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/natural_resources/
3. 
http://www.bp.com/sectiongenericarticle.do?
categoryId=9002630&contentId=7005204.
4. “FT Global 500 2010,” http://media.ft.com/cms/66ce3362-68b9-11df-
96f1-00144feab49a.pdf.
5. http://www.pg.com/en_US/company/purpose_people/index.shtml.
6. James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, “Organizational Vision and Visionary
Organizations,” California Management Review 34, no. 1 (1991): 30–52.
7. Liam Cassidy, “Apple Shareholder’s Meeting Roundup,” gigacom,
February 
26, 
2010, 
http://gigaom.com/apple/apple-shareholders-meeting-
roundup/.
8. Peter Burrows, “Options Expert Erik Lie, on Apple’s Backdating
Disclosures,” 
BusinessWeek, 
December 
30, 
2006,
http://www.businessweek.com/technology/ByteOfTheApple/blog/archives/2006/1
9. “Procter & Gamble Settles a Toxic Shock Suit,” New York Times, August
25, 
1982, 
http://www.nytimes.com/1982/08/25/us/procter-gamble-settles-a-
toxic-shock-suit.html.
10. “J&J Recalls More Products After Unusual Odor,” Reuters,
http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE60E2L420100115.
11. My colleague Mihnea Moldoveanu, who understands optimization theory
as well as anyone I know, points out that it is technically possible to optimize
two things at once, though to do so is both computationally complex and
organizationally impractical on an ongoing basis.
12. Roger Martin and Mihnea Moldoveanu, “Capital Versus Talent: The
Battle That’s Reshaping Business,” Harvard Business Review, July 2003, 36–41.
13. Ibid.
14. Adolf A. Berle and Gardiner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and
Private Property (New York: Macmillan Co., 1933).

15. CAGR calculated on S&P returns adjusted for inflation and dividends,
using Bloomberg LP terminal data in January 2010.
16. Roger Martin, “The Age of Customer Capitalism,” Harvard Business
Review, January–February 2010, 58–65. Calculated from Bloomberg data.
17. Ibid.
18. Owen Linzmayer and Brian Chaffin, “Apple Goes Public, 1984 Airs,”
December 
16, 
2004,
http://www.macobserver.com/columns/thisweek/2004/20041218.shtml.
19. In fact, Microsoft had thrown Apple a $150 million lifeline to keep the
company afloat in the early days of Jobs’s return.
20. A battle is brewing in 2011 as well. If the league takes a consistent
approach, it will fight hard to avoid giving up the gains of the past three decades.
21. In the late 1990s, the NFL tweaked its agreement for the equal sharing of
television revenue, creating a pool of capital to be invested in the construction of
new stadiums. In coordination with team owners, the league was able to help
produce new (or dramatically reconstructed) stadiums in Chicago, Denver,
Green Bay, New Oleans, New England, Philadelphia, and Seattle. This change to
the revenue sharing rules helped spur the largest infusion of private investment
in stadium construction in the league’s history.
22. http://www.databasefootball.com/.
23. In fact, Parcells’ former assistants, including Bill Belichick, Tom
Coughlin, and Sean Payton, have gone on to win five additional Super Bowls as
head coaches through 2010.
24. Tom Van Riper, “The Most Valuable Teams in Sports,” Forbes. com,
http://www.forbes.com/2009/01/13/nfl-cowboys-yankees-biz-media-
cx_tvr_0113values.html.
25. Of course, not all capital is raised in a company’s initial public offering.
Successful companies typically issue further equity at higher prices based on
success in the real market, which in turn fuels higher prices in the expectations
market. For example, a company goes public at $10 per share and experiences
success that pushes the stock to $30 per share. That company then decides it
needs more capital and issues equity at $30 per share. In that case, management
should feel the feel the obligation to earn a return for all shareholders at or above
the cost of equity on the $30 per share price. There is only one class of common
shares, and the company can’t distinguish between one common shareholder and

the next, so it needs to earn a return on the $30 per share level for all
shareholders. Such a rule provides good discipline for management; it has to
want additional capital badly enough to ratchet up its return requirement
substantially (in this case, three times) on its original capital. This model would
give management pause to consider whether it really needs and wants additional
capital.

Chapter Three
1. For comparison’s sake, the paid circulation of Harvard Business Review is
235,000, according to data from the Audit Bureau of Circulations, June 2008.
2. Erik Lie, “On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards,” Management
Science 51, no. 5 (2005): 802–812.
3. David Yermack, “Good Timing: CEO Stock Option Awards and Company
News Announcements,” Journal of Finance 52, no. 2 (1997): 449–476.
4. Mark Maremont, “Authorities Probe Improper Backdating of Options,”
Wall Street Journal, November 11, 2005.
5. “The Time 100,” Time, May 3, 2007.
6. Dan Macsai, “Powerful Profs,” BusinessWeek, August 22, 2007.
7. Peter Lattman, “Prosecutions in Backdating Scandal Bring Mixed
Results,” New York Times, November 12, 2010.
8. Ibid.
9. http://www.gallup.com/poll/1654/Honesty-Ethics-Professions.aspx.
10. Eli Bartov, Dan Givoly, and Carla Hayn, “The Rewards to Meeting or
Beating Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts,” Journal of Accounting and Economics
33, no. 2 (2002): 173–204.
11. Matt Krantz and Jon Swartz, “Dell Settles SEC Charges of Playing
Accounting Rules,” USA Today, July 23, 2010.
12. Bartov, Givoly, and Hayn, “The Rewards to Meeting or Beating Analysts’
Earnings Forecasts.”
13. Michael C. Jensen, “The Agency Costs of Overvalued Equity and the
Current State of Corporate Finance,” European Financial Management 10, no. 4
(2004): 549–565.
14. Justin Fox, “Learn to Play the Earnings Game (and Wall Street Will Love
You),” Fortune, March 31, 1997.
15. John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, “The
Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics 40, nos. 1–3 (2005): 3–73.
16. Michael Wilbon, “Follow the Leader,” Washington Post, February 3,
2010.

17. Given how well the happiness equation can work for a star athlete, it’s
easy to see how painful it can be for that athlete upon retirement: He abruptly
ceases to be a valued member of his community (his team), feels marginalized
from the community that he valued, and finds himself the member of a much
less valued community—retired athletes, rather than current stars. His happiness
equation is likely to fall apart entirely.
18. 
“The 
Fortune 
500, 
2010, 
and 
1960,”
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/global500/2010/full_list/ 
and
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500_archive/full/1960/.
19. Bartov, Givoly, and Hayn, “The Rewards to Meeting or Beating Analysts’
Earnings Forecasts.”
20. Tim Arango, “How the AOL-Time Warner Merger Went So Wrong,” New
York 
Times, 
January 
10, 
2010,
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/11/business/media/11merger.html.
21. http://www.secinfo.com/dSm4r.5Aq.htm.
22. Alastair Barr, “Short-Sale Ban Disrupts Trades for Hedge Funds,”
MarketWatch, September 26, 2008,http://www.marketwatch.com/story/hedge-
funds-suffer-as-short-selling-ban-disrupts-strategies; and “Naked Short Sales
Hint 
Fraud 
in 
Bringing 
Down 
Lehman,” 
Bloomberg,
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aB1jlqmFOTCA.
23.
http://money.cnn.com/galleries/2007/fortune/0711/gallery.power_25.fortune/16.ht
24. Except in the case of family-owned or closely controlled companies.
25. Bruce Springsteen, “It’s Hard to Be a Saint in the City,” from Greetings
from Asbury Park, N.J., Columbia Records, 1973.
26. This letter can be found in Václav Havel, Open Letters: Selected Writings
1965–1990 (New York: Vintage Books, 1992).
27. Joseph Fuller and Michael C. Jensen, “Just Say No to Wall Street: Putting
a Stop to the Earnings Game,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 14, no. 4
(2002): 41–46.
28. Aspen Institute Corporate Values Strategy Group, Overcoming Short-
termism: A Call for a More Responsible Approach to Investment and Business
Management (Queenstown, MD: Aspen Institute, 2009).
29. Bartov, Givoly, and Hayn, “The Rewards to Meeting or Beating Analysts’
Earnings Forecasts.”

30. Michael C. Jensen, Kevin J. Murphy, and Eric G. Wruck, “Remuneration:
Where We’ve Been, How We Got to Here, What Are the Problems, and How to
Fix 
Them,” 
working 
paper 
(Rochester, 
NY: 
SSRN, 
2004),
http://ssrn.com/abstract=561305.
31. Ibid.
32. Michael Beer and Nancy Katz, “Do Incentives Work? The Perceptions of
a Worldwide Sample of Senior Executives,” Human Resource Planning 26
(2003): 30–44.
33. Donald Roy, “Quota Restriction and Goldbricking in a Machine Shop,”
American Journal of Sociology 57, no. 5 (1952): 427–442.
34. “Sears, Roebuck Faces Lawsuit Contending Fraud by Tire Unit,” New
York Times, June 17, 1999.

Chapter Four
1. 
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/media_entertainment/mlb-world-
series-preview-historical-us-tv-ratings/.
2. 
http://www.sportsmediawatch.net/2010/11/2010-world-series-tied-as-
lowest-rated.html.
3. Michael Hiestand, “NFL Getting Fortunate Bounces,” USA Today, October
30, 2009.
4. Mark Maske, “With Television Ratings on the Rise and Attendance
Flagging, NFL Faces a Business Dilemma,” Washington Post, September 19,
2010, 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2010/09/18/AR2010091803691.html; 
and
http://www.sportsbusinessnews.com/_news/news_347260.php.
5. Tom Van Riper, “The Most Valuable Teams in Sports,” Forbes. com:
http://www.forbes.com/2009/01/13/nfl-cowboys-yankees-biz-media-
cx_tvr_0113values.html.
6. Bryan Curtis, “The National Pastime(s),” New York Times, January 31,
2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/01/weekinreview/01curtis.html.
7. Dennis Tuttle, “Leveling the Playing Field: Moaning About Pitcher’s
Mounds Is in Vogue This Season,” The Sporting News, June 30, 2003.
8. Mark Newman, “This Year in Baseball Awards Unveiled Tonight,”
MLB.com, December 17, 2010, http://mlb.mlb.com/index.jsp.
9. http://www.databasefootball.com/.
10. “WorldCom Fraud Centered on Connection Charges,” TheStreet.com,
June 
27, 
2002, 
http://www.thestreet.com/story/10029290/worldcom-fraud-
centered-on-connection-costs.html.
11. Roger Martin, “The Coming Corporate Revolt,” John F. Kennedy School
of Government Compass Journal (Fall 2003).
12. Francis Fukuyama, Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of
Prosperity (New York: The Free Press, 1995).

Chapter Five
1. Dave Anderson, “Sports of the Times: Being Mickey Mantle,” New York
Times, 
March 
16, 
1994, 
http://select.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?
res=FA0714FF35590C758DDDAA0894DC494D81&ref=mickey_mantle.
2. Ronald Blum, “Salaries Soared, According to Annual Survey,”
http://www.usatoday.com/sports/baseball/mlbfs90.htm.
3. 
http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/salaries/top50;
http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/salaries/avgsalaries.
4. http://nbcsports.msnbc.com/id/36604848/ns/sports-nfl/.
5. Adrian Dater, “Free-Agent Contract Skyrocket, but What’s the Payoff?”
Denver Post, July 7, 2010, http://www.denverpost.com/nuggets/ci_15453693.
6. 
“Rodriguez 
Finalizes 
$275M 
Deal 
with 
Yankees,”
http://sports.espn.go.com/mlb/news/story?id=3153171.
7. http://content.usatoday.com/communities/thehuddle/post/2010/09/patriots-
owner-robert-kraft-pleased-contract-with-tom-brady-finally-done/1.
8. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=releases&id=starwars4.htm;
http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/adjusted.htm.
9. Geoffrey McNab, “100 Years of Movie Stars: 1910–1929,” The
Independent, 
http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-
entertainment/films/features/100-years-of-movie-stars-19101929-1876290.html.
10. Dorothy Pomerantz, “DiCaprio to Bank Dreamy Paycheck from
‘Inception’,” 
Forbes, 
August 
10, 
2010,
http://www.forbes.com/2010/08/10/leonardo-dicaprio-inception-business-
entertainment-dicaprio.html.
11. Then there are the managers of “Funds of Funds.” These managers invest
in a suite of funds, all of which extract 2&20 fees from their investors. The fund
of funds managers then charge their own investors 1 percent of assets under
management and 10 percent carried interest. Thus, while at first blush it appears
that they charge less than 2&20, the two layers of “aligned” managers actually
charge the client more—a fee of 3&30.
12. “The 400 Richest Americans 2010,” Forbes, September 2010.
13. “2008 Hedge Fund Rich List and 2009 Hedge Fund Rich List,” Absolute
Return + Alpha magazine, http://www.marketfolly.com/2009/03/top-25-highest-

paid-hedge-fund-managers.html 
and
http://news.hereisthecity.com/news/business_news/10304.cntns.
14. Third Amended Complaint, Superior Court of New Jersey Law Division,
Docket No. MRS-L-2032-06; and Tom McGinty and Kara Scannel, “SEC Looks
at Hedge Funds’ Trades,” Wall Street Journal, February 13, 2009.
15. Of course, the exact amounts of the tax rates and threshold could be
debated at length, and in any case would be subject to adjustment by government
over time.
16. Tomoeh Murakami Tse, “New York Reaches $7 Million Settlement in
Alleged Pension-fund Scandal,” Washington Post, April 16, 2010.
17. Ibid.
18. Thanks to my Rotman School of Management colleague, Susan
Christofferson, for introducing me to fulcrum fees.

Chapter Six
1. John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (London: Longman, Roberts & Green, 1869).
2. Milton Friedman, “The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its
Profits,” New York Times Magazine, September 13, 1970.
3. Ford wasn’t all corporate virtue, unfortunately. Among other things, he
used lethal tactics in breaking the 1937 strike at the Rouge River plant in
Dearborn, Michigan, and he was reported to be intensely anti-Semitic.
4. http://walmartstores.com/pressroom/news/9277.aspx.
5. Tom Spoth, “GSA to Vendors: Go Green or Else,” FederalTimes. com, July
12, 
2010,
http://www.federaltimes.com/article/20100712/ACQUISITION01/7120301/1001
6. Robert Lea, “BP May Sell Off Green Energy Interests,” Evening Standard,
February 
27, 
2008, 
http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/markets/article.html?
in_article_id=431272&in_page_id=3.
7. The Cement Sustainability Initiative: Our Agenda for Action, World
Business Council for Sustainable Development, July 2002.
8. Mary Tripsas, “Everybody in the Pool of Green Innovation,” New York
Times, November 1, 2009.
9. For further reading on the virtue matrix, see Roger L. Martin, “The Virtue
Matrix: Calculating the Return on Corporate Responsibility,” Harvard Business
Review, March 2002, 68–75.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
As always, I am deeply indebted to many people for their contributions to this
book. All of my books are labors of love, and it is wonderful to have the help of
many colleagues, friends, and supporters along the journey.
In the case of Fixing the Game, the greatest thanks go to my friend,
colleague, and editor-in-chief of the book, Jennifer Riel. Jennifer edits most of
my work these days, coauthors some of it, and was the primary editor for this
book. She and I share a passion for NFL football (although her wild enthusiasm
for Peyton Manning and under appreciation of Tom Brady is problematic—but
we won’t go there), so it was a pleasure to work with her on fleshing out the
NFL metaphor that is woven throughout the book. She is a wonderful thinker
and writer and is able to keep my logic flowing without the repetition, detours,
and general inelegance that would otherwise creep in. Thanks so much, Jennifer.
A number of researchers supported Jennifer’s work. First among them was
Darren Karn, who among other things fact-checked the whole book. Arup
Ganguly provided comparative total shareholder returns data. My business
school friend Jamie Anderson helped with data on investment bank fees. Rotman
School chief librarian Sean Forbes was there for me any time I needed to track
down data or sources, as he has been for each of my books—thanks for the long-
term support, Sean. Two of our wonderful finance professors at the Rotman
School helped out: I asked Tom McCurdy for help analyzing changes in market
volatility over time, and he provided that research for me; and a hallway
conversation with Susan Christofferson led her to provide me with an insight
regarding fulcrum fees in mutual funds—a very interesting regulatory twist
about which I would not have otherwise been aware. It is wonderful to have
colleagues like Tom and Susan at the Rotman School.
The ideas behind Fixing the Game have been percolating for some time and
have been helped along immensely by the encouragement of folks in the press
and other thinking partners. The central idea of the book first saw the light of
day in a 2003 Barron’s editorial called “The Wrong Incentive: Executives Taking
Stock Will Behave Like Athletes Placing Bets.” Barron’s editor Tom Donlon
heard me talk about these ideas at a conference and invited me to write a piece
for the magazine, which he edited and published.
My thinking on this front went underground for a while but resurfaced in the

form of a January 2010 Harvard Business Review article, “The Age of Customer
Capitalism,” which contained a précis of the overarching argument of this book.
Thanks to editor-in-chief Adi Ignatius for publishing the article in the
magazine’s Big Idea slot and to David Champion and Susan Donovan, the HBR
editors who helped bash the article into shape. I got lots of help thinking about
that article from my friends A. G. Lafley and Craig Wynett at Procter & Gamble.
The HBR article and the reactions to it got my juices flowing, and David
Champion, who edits my blog series at hbr.org, encouraged and helped me to
write a series of follow-up blogs on the subject. Then in the summer, Chrystia
Freeland (now at Thomson Reuters), Ravi Mattu, and Stefan Stern of the
Financial Times asked me for and helped me edit a piece for their paper called
“Reward Real Growth, Not Expectations,” which I really liked and which
pushed my thinking further.
As my thoughts on the book progressed, I realized that there were strong
links to some of my earlier work. The core of chapter 6 stems from an article
that I wrote in 2002 for Harvard Business Review entitled “The Virtue Matrix:
Calculating the Return on Corporate Responsibility.” Tom Stewart (then editor-
in-chief) published and Harris Collingwood (then senior editor) assisted on that
one. Chapter 5 contains thinking that flows from a 2003 Harvard Business
Review article that I cowrote with my long-time thinking partner and coauthor
Mihnea Moldoveanu entitled “Capital vs. Talent: The Battle That’s Reshaping
Business.” Tom Stewart published the article and senior editor Anand Raman
ably brought it into its final form.
Without that brainy and creative group of magazine and newspaper editors,
the ideas in the book wouldn’t have taken their current shape, nor would I have
had the benefit of all the terrific feedback I received from readers of the various
pieces. So my sincere thanks go out to all of them.
There have also been prominent investors who have encouraged me in this
work. John Bogle, the founder of mutual fund giant Vanguard and author of
numerous books on investing, writes me encouraging notes and quotes me in his
books. Tony Arrell, founder of Burgundy Asset Management, one of Canada’s
leading investment management companies, and his colleague Anne Mette de
Place provided encouragement and even asked me to present at the firm’s annual
client day. I am not an investment expert, so it was nice to receive confirmation
from leaders in the field that I wasn’t way off the mark!
I always send out my manuscripts to numerous friends, colleagues, and
associates, and I am deeply indebted to them for their comments, corrections,

watch-outs, and ideas. Thank you to Lesya Baylch-Cooper (two reviews!),
Sandra Blevins, Steven Brant, David Champion, Elizabeth Edelsheim (also two
reviews), Jim Fisher, Jim Hackett, Alison Kemper, Rod Lohin, Pat Meredith, Jim
Milway, Robert Morris, David Naylor, Rob Pew, Joseph Rotman, David Smith,
and Suzanne Spragge.
I get absolutely essential moral and managerial support from colleagues and
supporters at the Rotman School. I simply couldn’t write these books without
taking the summers off to put fingers to the keyboard for long stretches of time.
Vice deans Jim Fisher and Peter Pauly, COO Mary-Ellen Yeomans, chief of staff
Suzanne Spragge, and executive assistant Kathryn Davis run the School while I
am gone—and run it so well that I don’t feel so guilty that I can’t write. Steve
Arenburg, our events guru, ran events around the world that enabled me to test
out the ideas in the book with knowledgeable audiences. Ken McGuffin, our
head of media relations, helped place the articles mentioned above (and
numerous others). Karen Christensen, editor and publisher of Rotman Magazine,
chipped in her sage editorial advice on my various articles.
A wonderful businessman and philanthropist named Michael Lee-Chin
provided the funding to create our Institute for Corporate Citizenship, supporting
the work that inspired chapter 6. Michael, thank you so very much for your
foresight and generosity.
Two wonderful long-term supporters of my work at the Rotman School are
Joseph Rotman, naming benefactor of the School, and Marcel Desautels, naming
benefactor of the Desautels Centre for Integrative Thinking. The financial
generosity of both men has made possible much of the work that I have been
able to do at the Rotman School. But perhaps even more important has been
their steadfast support for my writing work. Most business school deans stop
writing entirely during their time in this position. Joe and Marcel have always
encouraged me to follow my writing passion, and that support has been
instrumental to the generation of this book. Thank you, Joe and Marcel.
This is the third book that I have had the pleasure of writing in partnership
with Harvard Business Review Press senior editor Jeff Kehoe. Jeff was the
catalyst who helped me shape the proposal, championed this book internally to
his colleagues, provided detailed and helpful editorial advice, and nursed the
project through the entire process. He is a pleasure to work with, and it feels
good to have a multibook partner in Jeff and Harvard Business Review Press.
And speaking of multibook partners, a huge hug goes to my incomparable
agent Tina Bennett of Janklow & Nesbit. She has been with me for each of my

four sole-authored books and has been everything one could ever hope for in an
agent. She shapes my proposals, places each project at the right publisher, and
manages through the treacherous and changing waters of publishing contracts. I
couldn’t do it without you, Tina. Thanks much!
Last but not least is my partner Sandra Blevins. She has listened to me
speechify on this subject more times than I care to count, read and edited
numerous iterations of the manuscript, and provided valuable support
throughout. Moreover, she was willing to accompany me to a remote northern
cottage for my writing sabbatical in the summer of 2010, where she battled
through tenacious spiders, a wandering bear, and power outages to provide
companionship and loving support to me. Thanks and big hugs for everything
you do, Sandra.
My closing thought is that this book represents a departure from my previous
three books (The Responsibility Virus, The Opposable Mind, and The Design of
Business) in that they were largely devoid of criticism. In this book, I am critical
of some institutions (for example, hedge funds). However, I want to be clear that
I bear no ill will to the people inside them. I criticize not the people but the rules
of the game that have been designed, largely inadvertently, to give these
institutions—and by extension the people in them—roles that fall short of
helping the broader economy. My ardent belief is that if we take steps that result
in fixing the game, the people in those institutions will be able to contribute
more to society and experience the greater fulfillment and enjoyment of a game
well-played.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
A best-selling author, Roger Martin is Dean of and Director of the Lee-Chin
Family Institute for Corporate Citizenship at the Rotman School of
Management, University of Toronto, as well as a senior adviser to CEOs of large
global companies. He is a frequent contributor to Harvard Business Review, the
Financial Times, BusinessWeek, and the Washington Post. In 2007,
BusinessWeek named him one of the ten most influential business professors in
the world, and in 2009, The Times (London) placed him thirty-second on its list
of the top fifty management thinkers in the world.

