Flexibility in young second-language
learners: examining the language
speciﬁcity of orthographic processing
S. He´le`ne Deacon
Dalhousie University, Canada
Lesly Wade-Woolley
Queen’s University, Canada
John R. Kirby
Queen’s University, Canada
This study examines whether orthographic processing transfers across languages to
reading when the writing systems under acquisition are sufﬁciently related. We
conducted a study with 76 7-year-old English-ﬁrst-language children in French
immersion. Measures of English and French orthographic processing (orthographic
choice tasks) and standardised measures of English and French word reading
(Woodcock and FIAT) were taken, in addition to verbal and nonverbal ability,
and phonological and morphological awareness. Analyses reveal signiﬁcant
contributions of orthographic processing to reading both within and across the two
languages, despite the inclusion of control variables. Findings of the transfer of
orthographic processing skills to reading across languages suggest that orthographic
processing may not be as language speciﬁc as previously hypothesised. We discuss
the several similarities between English and French, such as a shared alphabet and
cognates, that may drive transfer across languages in the context of current theories
of second-language reading development.
Bilinguals are now in the majority worldwide (UNESCO, 2003), and many of these
individuals learn to read and write in two languages. The existence of general cognitive
mechanisms that operate across the boundaries between languages enables bilingual
children to move quickly towards the goal of biliteracy. Phonological awareness, or the
understanding of the sound structure of words, has been widely advocated as one such
language-general skill that can facilitate reading across languages. And yet not all
reading-related skills are ubiquitous in their impacts; some skills may need to be acquired
separately for each of the scripts that bilingual children master. Orthographic processing,
or the ‘ability to form, store and access orthographic representations’ (Stanovich & West,
1989, p. 404), has been nominated as one such ‘language-speciﬁc’ skill (Abu-Rabia,
Journal of Research in Reading, ISSN 0141-0423
DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9817.2009.01392.x
Volume 32, Issue 2, 2009, pp 215–229
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road,
Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA

2001, p. 451) in that it does not appear to transfer to reading across languages. The
question of which skills are language speciﬁc and which are language general is a critical
one as it delineates the challenges that young learners of two orthographies are likely to
face and the ways in which these hurdles might be overcome.
The direct evidence that phonological awareness is a language-general skill comes
from ﬁndings that it is related to reading across languages. This ﬁnding has been termed
‘cross-linguistic transfer’, and it has been revealed in studies of bilingual children
learning to read pairs of languages sharing the same alphabet, such as Spanish and
English (e.g. Durgunoglu, Nagy & Hancin-Bhatt, 1993) and French and English (e.g.
Comeau, Cormier, Grandmaison & Lacroix, 1999), as well as language duos that are
represented with different alphabets, such as Korean and English (e.g. Cho & McBride-
Chang, 2005). The greatest degree of abstraction is demonstrated in the evidence of
transfer when children are learning to read languages that use entirely different
orthographic systems, as is the case for children biliterate in logographic Chinese and
alphabetic English (Gottardo, Yan, Siegel & Wade-Woolley, 2001). The relationship
seems to work in both directions; in Comeau et al., there was a contribution of
phonological awareness to reading from the ﬁrst language to the second and vice versa in
young English learners of French. These ﬁndings of a bidirectional relationship lead to
the conclusion that ‘phonological awareness is a general (not language-speciﬁc) cognitive
mechanism’ (Comeau et al., 1999, p. 39).
In contrast, orthographic processing is widely advocated as language speciﬁc (e.g.
Abu-Rabia, 2001). Orthographic processing tasks have traditionally tapped individual
word-speciﬁc representations (e.g. choosing between rain and rane; Barker, Torgesen &
Wagner, 1992; Cunningham & Stanovich, 1990; Cunningham, Perry & Stanovich, 2001)
or letter patterns that occur across many words (e.g. ﬁlk vs ﬁlv or yb vs ib; Cassar &
Treiman, 1997; Siegel, Share & Geva, 1995; see Castles & Nation, 2006; Burt, 2006 for a
description and critique of these tasks). Research with monolingual learners has shown
that orthographic processing is related to reading outcomes (e.g. Cunningham
et al., 2001; Martinet, Valdois & Fayol, 2004; Roman, Kirby, Parrila, Wade-Woolley
& Deacon, 2009; Stanovich, West & Cunningham, 1991; Wagner & Barker, 1994). A
growing body of research with bilingual children has found that orthographic skills
predict reading in the language in which they are measured, but not across languages.
These ﬁndings of language speciﬁcity have emerged in studies of bilingual learners of
languages with entirely different bases, such as logographic Chinese and alphabetic
English (Gottardo et al., 2001; Leong, Hau, Cheng & Tan, 2005). They have also
appeared in studies of learners of languages that are both represented with alphabets,
albeit different ones. This is the case for studies of learners of English with ﬁrst languages
of Korean (Wang, Park & Lee, 2006), Russian (Abu-Rabia, 2001), Persian (Arab-
Moghaddam & Se´ne´chal, 2001) and Hebrew (Abu-Rabia, 1997). The consistent pattern
of within- but not across-language relationships between orthographic processing and
reading has led to the prevailing conclusion that children need extensive experience with
a speciﬁc orthography to work out how that speciﬁc language is represented on the page
(e.g. Abu-Rabia, 2001). There is an intuitive appeal to the argument of language
speciﬁcity; it seems logical that children learning to read both alphabetic and logographic
scripts might have to work out how letters can be combined separately from the ways in
which the radicals within characters are put together.
And yet there is a critical piece of support for the language speciﬁcity of orthographic
processing in reading development that is missing currently. The language generality of
216
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

phonological awareness has been demonstrated at three levels of relationship between the
script pairings under acquisition: those that share the same alphabet and share many similar
words (e.g. English and French), those that both use alphabets but not the same one (e.g.
English is represented with the Latin alphabet and Russian with the Cyrillic alphabet) and
those with entirely different orthographic bases (e.g. English and Chinese with their
alphabetic and logographic scripts, respectively). The studies that have demonstrated the
language speciﬁcity of orthographic processing have examined the latter two of these three
pairings. None of the studies, to our knowledge, has examined developing learners of
language duos that share the same alphabet. This is the key piece of evidence that would be
required to demonstrate that orthographic processing is, in fact, language speciﬁc.
The possibility that orthographic processing might transfer when two languages share
the same alphabet requires serious consideration. In their discussion of the language-
general cognitive mechanism of phonological awareness, Comeau et al. (1999) suggested
that this language-general skill might ‘develop as a result of one being exposed to
auditory input and analyzing the phonological properties of this input’ (p. 39). A
relatively abstract orthographic skill might accrue in a similar fashion. Children likely
develop orthographic processing skills through exposure to print input and analysis of the
orthographic properties of the input. Such a possibility was suggested by Ehri (1994) in
her discussion of the development of orthographic knowledge through the amalgamation
of letter–sound patterns that occur again and again in the words that children decode.
There are at least two plausible conceptualisations of orthographic processing that would
permit development in a relatively generalisable manner when the languages are
sufﬁciently related. The ﬁrst is based on the general abilities that young readers develop
and the second lies in the speciﬁc knowledge that they acquire.
At the most general level, orthographic competence may be a relatively stable
cognitive ability (like phonological awareness; Comeau et al., 1999); its incorporation
into the individual differences approach to reading suggests that this is plausible (e.g.
Stanovich & West, 1989; Olson, Forsberg, Wise & Rack, 1994). Here we are considering
orthographic processing as a process underpinning reading achievement. Those with
greater ability might recognise or amalgamate orthographic regularities (such as which
and where consonants double) more quickly, and this, in turn, might support orthographic
representations that could be accessed more quickly and reliably. Such a learning process
might occur through repeated phonological recoding (see e.g. Ehri, 1994) or through
statistical learning (see e.g. Deacon, Conrad & Pacton, 2008; Perruchet & Pacton, 2006,
for reviews). Given the results reviewed above (e.g. Gottardo et al., 2001), it may be
that transfer at this most general level is unlikely across very different scripts (e.g.
English and Chinese) because the units upon which the processing occurs are dissimilar.
Transfer may become more likely as the distance between scripts decreases (e.g. each
with different alphabets, both with the same alphabet and both with the same alphabet
with similar letter sequences) because of the increasing similarity in the units from which
information is being extracted (e.g. Latin letters for English and French).
At the other end of generality, orthographic competence may transfer at the level of
speciﬁc knowledge that is accrued over the course of orthographic learning, such as
sensitivity to the frequency and location of particular letter sequences (see e.g. Pacton,
Perruchet, Fayol & Cleeremans, 2001). This cannot happen across different writing
systems or even across different alphabets because the very units of representation are
different. The use of the same alphabet to represent two different languages means that it
is possible that there are similar letter patterns. And for languages sharing an alphabet,
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
217
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

transfer would become increasingly likely as the letter sequences in the two languages
become more similar. This is an issue worth considering, given that even scripts as
different as Finnish and English or Czech and English have some letter sequences in
common (e.g. nn in Finnish and English).
There is no reason for the process and knowledge explanations to be mutually
exclusive; both may operate. These explanations give cause to reconsider the idea that
orthographic skills are language speciﬁc. Orthographic processing might not be so
constrained in its operation should one test the possibility of transfer with learners of
languages that share the same alphabet and many similar letter sequences, such as
English and French. Both English and French are represented with the Latin alphabet, and
they use the same letters, with the exception of the diacritical marks (e.g. the grave accent
in French, but not in English). These letters are combined in similar ways (such as
consonant doublets occurring most frequently in the middle, rather than at the beginning
of words), although there are, of course, some differences (such as the legality of
consonant doublets at the ends of words in English, but not in French; see e.g. Cassar &
Treiman, 1997; Pacton et al., 2001). Further, these two languages contain many of the
same sounds; this is especially the case for consonants, and even many vowel sounds are
shared. There are even many shared words (e.g. table) and many historical links between
words (e.g. mansion and maison). These many levels of similarities between the
representation of these two distinctive languages make them an intriguing pairing
between which to examine the language speciﬁcity of orthographic processing. This is the
goal of the analyses presented here.
All studies attempting to demonstrate the relationship between any factor and reading
must limit the possibility that any uncovered link is due to some spurious third variable.
Given that discussions of language-general skills are at the heart of the matter here, verbal
and nonverbal abilities are vital controls because they are likely to be language general to
some extent. They serve to limit the possibility that any relationships uncovered are due to
some general ‘g’ factor. Secondly, the evidence of the language generality of phonological
awareness nominates it as a further critical control variable. Another, perhaps less well-
known, variable lies in morphological awareness, or the ability to manipulate the smallest
units of meaning in words, which has been linked to reading outcomes in both monolingual
(e.g. Carlisle, 2000; Casalis & Louis-Alexandre, 2000; Ku & Anderson, 2003) and
bilingual children (Deacon, Wade-Woolley & Kirby, 2007). Finally, the most stringent
tests of cross-linguistic transfer need to include controls for within-language abilities; for
example, English orthographic processing must be controlled in assessing the impact of
French orthographic processing on reading in English (based on studies of phonological
awareness, e.g. Comeau et al., 1999). This statistical control was added to the cross-
linguistic examinations, in addition to controls for verbal and nonverbal ability, and
phonological and morphological awareness.
The analyses reported here examine the language speciﬁcity of orthographic processing
(e.g. Abu-Rabia, 1997). We conducted this study with children with English as a ﬁrst
language undertaking their early elementary school learning entirely in French. The data
were collected as part of a larger study on reading-related skills in French immersion
children. This study included additional measures designed to permit us to conduct a
preliminary investigation of the possibility of transfer of orthographic processing to reading
between English and French as a test of the language-speciﬁcity hypothesis.
We tested the children’s reading and reading-related skills at Grade 2, a point at which
phonological awareness, orthographic processing and morphological awareness should
218
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

inﬂuence reading development. We included the control measures of phonological and
morphological awareness and verbal and nonverbal intelligence in the analyses. The
measures of verbal and nonverbal ability come from an earlier testing point, and these
data were included in the present analyses in an effort to control for general ‘g’ factor
explanations of any uncovered relationships between variables. Given the extensive
evidence of the transfer of phonological awareness across languages in prior studies (e.g.
Comeau et al., 1999), we limited its measurement to English in the current study. The
morphological awareness measure focused on past-tense manipulations in each language,
which are similar in meaning, but different in form between the two languages.1 Past-
tense analogy tasks have been successful in predicting reading and spelling outcomes in
monolingual and bilingual children (e.g. Deacon & Kirby, 2004; Deacon et al., 2007;
Nunes, Bryant & Bindman, 1997). Similarly, orthographic processing was assessed with
a classic task with established construct validity (Cunningham et al., 2001): the identiﬁca-
tion of correct irregular word spellings in each language (Olson et al., 1994). Finally,
to ensure that cross-linguistic effects are independent of within-language factors, we
control for key within-language variables in all analyses. The inclusion of this wide
range of control variables helps to eliminate several alternative explanations for any
relationships uncovered.
Method
Participants and procedure
We tested 76 native English-speaking typically developing children enrolled in a French
immersion programme who participated as part of a longitudinal study of reading
development. These children came from a variety of economic and social backgrounds
and all lived in English-speaking communities. The majority of the children were
learning to speak and read entirely in French during school hours from Kindergarten to
the end of Grade 2 (a few began French only in Grade 1). Vocabulary and nonverbal
reasoning were assessed in the fall of Grade 1, when the children were a mean age of 6
years and 5 months (standard deviations [SDs] of 3.3 months). This provides a measure of
verbal and nonverbal ability at school entry in the child’s ﬁrst language. All other
measures were administered in the spring of Grade 2, when the children were an average
age of 7 years and 10 months. The tests were given in the same order in each language,
as is the standard in studies examining individual differences. The order was chosen
with an eye to maintaining children’s interest by varying the types of tasks presented.
The English and French batteries were given in separate sessions on different days.
The experimenters spoke the language of the tests during administration of the test
items.
Measures
Orthographic processing. Participants chose between alternative spellings for a word
(e.g. brain and brane in English and livre and lyvre in French). This task was based on the
classic work by Olson et al. (1994), and the 20 items for the English task were chosen
from the original task. The 20 French items were selected after consultation with French
immersion teachers as to which words were likely to be in the reading vocabulary of early
elementary school French immersion children. Reliability for the task was reasonable at
.71 for the English and surprisingly low for the French task at .19. Reduction to the most
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
219
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

reliable 12 items increased reliability to .48. These more reliable scores were used in all
correlational and regression analyses.
Reading. English isolated word reading was assessed using the Woodcock Word
Identiﬁcation Test (Woodcock, 1987), which tested reading of single isolated words
aloud in English (e.g. is, beautiful). The French Immersion Achievement Test assessed
French reading. It is standardised for French immersion students (e.g. vite, demandait;
Wormeli & Ardanaz, 1987). Each of these tests has reliability coefﬁcients above .9 at
Grade 2, and each has a stop rule after six errors.
Vocabulary. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test – Third Edition (Dunn & Dunn, 1997)
measures English receptive vocabulary and it has a test–retest reliability above .9. Children
are told a word and they are asked to choose which one of four pictures best depicts that word.
Nonverbal reasoning. The Matrix Analogies Test – Short Form (Naglieri, 1985) involves
36 coloured plates of design elements from which a portion is removed. Children choose
the best option from a set of possible completions for the pattern. Testing was stopped after
three mistakes within ﬁve responses. Grade 1 reliability of this task is reported at .82 (a).
Phonological awareness. Given the extensive evidence of cross-linguistic transfer of
phonological awareness (e.g. Comeau et al., 1999), we assessed phonological awareness
only in English. We used a phoneme deletion task with 10 items (e.g. ‘Say cat without
saying /k/’). This task has good reliability (a 5 .75).
Morphological awareness. Based on the sentence analogy task developed by Nunes et al.
(1997), participants were given a pair of example sentences that reﬂected a tense change,
such as ‘Peter walks to school’ to ‘Peter walked to school’. Children were asked to make
the same kind of change to another sentence, such as ‘Sylvie jumps around,’ for which
the correct manipulation is ‘Sylvie jumped around’. There were eight items in each
language that all involved past-tense manipulations. Reliability for the task was
reasonable at .71 for the English and .64 for the French items.
Results
The means and SDs for all of the measures are presented in Table 1. Examination of scores
from this table suggests that the children were typically developing. Their reading vocabulary
and matrix analogy scores hovered around 100 in standard scores, as did their English and
French reading. Scores for the orthographic choice task are statistically better than chance for
both the English and the French versions, t(75) 5 9.46 and 22.21, pso.001, respectively.
The data were prepared for analysis through investigation of normality and
completeness. Scores for each task were examined for skew. Positive skew on the
scores for the matrix analogies task was corrected with square root transformations, as
recommended by Tabachnik and Fidell (2001). The remaining analyses were conducted
with the transformed scores. There were four missing data points (o1%) in the entire
data set; these were completed with means for the entire group for that measure. The
results for the data set with completed means are reported here. The same pattern of
results emerges when the data are analysed without the completed means. Further,
220
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

as reported earlier, the French orthographic processing task had low reliability. All
correlational and linear regression analyses reported were conducted with the more
reliable version of the French orthographic processing task and with the transformed
matrix analogies score. Analyses with the non-adjusted values result in the same pattern
of signiﬁcant ﬁndings.
The correlations reported in Table 2 reveal signiﬁcant cross-linguistic relationships
between the measures of orthographic processing in the two languages, as well as
between the reading measures in the two languages. Further, there are correlations
between all measures of orthographic processing and reading, including that of French
orthographic processing. This supports the validity of this measure, despite low
reliability. All the variables are related to the English reading outcomes and all, with the
exception of English vocabulary, are related to the French reading measures.
We turn now to the linear regression analyses designed to examine the language
speciﬁcity of the contribution of orthographic processing to reading. The analyses that we
present here are relatively conservative, in that they include controls for verbal and non-
verbal ability as well as several reading-related variables. Perhaps most notably, the
cross-linguistic analyses include within-language controls for the variable in question
(e.g. controlling for English orthographic processing in assessing the contribution of
French orthographic processing to English reading), reﬂecting an extremely conservative
approach to analyses that removes any joint variance shared by the two scores.
Table 1. Mean number correct (and standard deviations) for raw scores of English phonological awareness,
English and French orthographic processing, morphological awareness, and mean standard scores (SS) for
the verbal and nonverbal intelligence and word reading measures.
Measure
English
French
Matrix analogies
94.42 (11.57)
_
Peabody picture vocabulary
110.34 (6.83)
_
Word identiﬁcation
105.84 (17.50)
101.55 (22.81)
Phonological awareness
7.06 (2.18)
_
Morphological awareness
4.67 (2.14)
2.16 (1.77)
Orthographic processing
13.56 (3.28)
14.10 (1.61)a
aScores for the more reliable version of the French orthographic task (with 12 items) were an average of 9.13
and standard deviation of 1.84.
Table 2. Correlations between all measures.
Variable
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
1. Vocabulary
2. Matrix Analogies
.367**
3. English PA
.268*
.216
4. English MA
.211
.302*
.320*
5. French MA
.114
.196
.091
.182
6. English OP
.229*
.345*
.363**
.369**
.293*
7. French OP
.172
.189
.382**
.238*
.250*
.248*
8. English Reading
.345*
.436**
.456**
.515**
.421**
.729**
.550**
9. French Reading
.126
.299*
.409**
.435**
.419**
.529**
.536**
.751**
Note: PA 5 phonological awareness; MA 5 morphological awareness; OP 5 orthographic processing.
*po.05; **po.001.
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
221
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

The ﬁrst linear regression analyses examined the contribution of orthographic
processing to English reading (Table 3). The within-language control variables of
phonological and morphological awareness, as well as verbal and nonverbal ability
control variables accounted for approximately 44% of the variance. The within-language
contribution of English orthographic processing to English reading was quantiﬁed at 21%
(Step 4). This serves to conﬁrm the importance of orthographic processing to reading
within a single language.
The next step in the equation serves as the critical test of the language speciﬁcity of
orthographic processing. French orthographic processing was entered as the ﬁfth step in
the equation, accounting for an additional 9% of variance in English reading. The
inclusion of the within-language control of orthographic processing nominates any
additional variance as speciﬁcally cross-linguistic, thereby, at least to some extent,
nominating orthographic processing as language general.
Similar analyses were conducted with French orthographic processing (Table 4), in
which we entered verbal and nonverbal ability, phonological awareness and then French
morphological awareness. The signiﬁcance of these control variables at each of Steps 1
through 3 attest to the importance of their inclusion (accounting for  34% of variance).
Further, the ﬁnding that the measure of English phonological awareness accounted for
13% of the variance in French reading validates the inclusion of a single language
measure of this variable. French orthographic processing explained 10% of the variance
in reading ability within that language.
Table 3. Hierarchical regression analyses of the independent contributions of orthographic processing to
English word identiﬁcation.
Step, predictor
Outcome: English word identiﬁcation
SRC
R2 change
1. Nonverbal ability
.101
.229***
Verbal ability
.084
2. Phonological awareness
.040
.113**
3. English morphological awareness within-language contribution
.188**
.094**
4. English orthographic processing across-language contribution
.509***
.214***
5. French orthographic processing
.330***
.090***
Note: Values reported are standardised regression coefﬁcients from the ﬁnal step (SRC) and changes in R2.
*po.05; **po.01; ***po.001.
Table 4. Hierarchical regression analyses of the independent contributions of orthographic processing to
French word identiﬁcation.
Step, predictor
Outcome: French word identiﬁcation
SRC
R2 change
1. Nonverbal ability
.087
.090*
Verbal ability
 .103
2. Phonological awareness
.150
.127**
3. French morphological awareness within-language contribution
.221*
.124**
4. French orthographic processing across-language contribution
.345***
.104**
5. English orthographic processing
.318**
.075**
Note: Values reported are standardised regression coefﬁcients from the ﬁnal step (SRC) and changes in R2.
*po.05; **po.01; ***po.001.
222
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

English orthographic processing entered as the critical ﬁfth step tests the cross-
linguistic transfer of orthographic processing. At this point, it accounted for 8% of
variance in reading cross-linguistically, even after the within-language control for French
orthographic processing, and several other reading-related variables. A summary of these
results is presented in Figure 1.
Discussion
This research shows the ﬁrst evidence of cross-language transfer of orthographic processing
to reading of which we are aware. Orthographic processing measured in English made a
signiﬁcant contribution to reading in French, and French orthographic processing made a
signiﬁcant contribution to reading in English. This ﬁnding of bidirectional contributions of
orthographic processing to reading is similar to that uncovered by Comeau et al. (1999) for
phonological awareness. The relationships between orthographic processing and cross-
language reading withstood controls for several reading-related variables, including within-
language orthographic processing. These ﬁndings offer the ﬁrst tentative support that
orthographic processing transfers across languages, at least when the languages share
several features, including the same alphabetic basis. These ﬁndings provide the ﬁrst
evidence that orthographic processing might not be as language speciﬁc as may have been
previously thought.
We clearly need to consider why we have uncovered transfer in the present study,
particularly in light of the substantial body of evidence of language speciﬁcity of
orthographic processing (e.g. Abu-Rabia, 2001). Perhaps the most important variable to
consider lies in the nature of the languages under investigation. Unlike all other language
pairings that have been investigated to date, English and French share the same alphabet.
We think that this is one critical dimension that must be in common to drive transfer
across languages. And yet English and French also share other features, such as
similarities in sounds, letter patterns, speciﬁc cognate words and some historically related
words. As a preliminary step in examining which features might be critical in driving
transfer, we re-analysed our own data by excluding the few cognate words in each of the
orthographic processing tasks. The same pattern of results emerged, suggesting that the
present results are not due to the presence of cognate forms within the tasks analysed.
New studies could include tasks designed to isolate each of the orthographic features that
are shared between target languages to deﬁne the features required for transfer to appear.
Given the ﬁndings here of transfer between closely related languages, it would also be
useful for such studies to examine intermediate language contrasts, such as English and
English Reading 
French Reading 
English Orthographic Processing
French Orthographic Processing 
0.214***
0.075**
0.105**
0.090***
Figure 1. Figure indicates the independent contributions of orthographic processing (R2 change) in each
language to reading after controlling for verbal and nonverbal ability, phonological awareness and
morphological awareness for the within-language relationships and after controlling for the additional
variable of within-language orthographic processing for the cross-language relationships.
Note. ***po.001, **po.01.
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
223
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

Finnish. Such combinations might be especially helpful in isolating the features that drive
transfer; as an example, English and Finnish share some letter patterns, but not word
forms. Regardless of the speciﬁc features required to drive transfer, the ﬁndings reported
here lead us to reconsider the conclusion that orthographic processing is language
speciﬁc. It might, at the very least, be alphabet speciﬁc or, at an even more ﬁne-grained
level, be speciﬁc to language pairs with shared alphabets that share speciﬁc features.
We need to consider another feature of English and French scripts that is likely a
critical factor in determining whether children will use orthographic processing in
reading these orthographies. Both are considered to be deep orthographies in that they are
relatively opaque in the ways in which they represent sound in print (Seymour, Aro &
Erskine, 2003). This may explain why we see use of orthographic processing within each
of these scripts, in that English orthographic processing contributes to English reading
and the same pattern is found for French (as in studies of monolingual learners of these
two orthographies; e.g. Stanovich et al., 1991; Martinet et al., 2004). The examination of
learners of two relatively transparent scripts that are represented with the same alphabet
(such as Italian and Spanish) is less likely to result in transfer of orthographic processing
to reading across languages, as orthographic processing is typically not drawn on by
readers of purely transparent scripts (see e.g. Mumtaz & Humphreys, 2001). We would
add some degree of opacity of the script to the sharing of the same alphabet as one of the
features required for the transfer of orthographic processing.
Clearly, these ﬁndings of transfer leave us wondering as to how children build up
orthographic processing that is abstracted, at least to some degree, from a speciﬁc script. As
we suggested in the introduction, there are at least two ways in which orthographic
processing might develop in a relatively generalisable manner. The ﬁrst relied on children’s
general ability to extract regularities, whether this is through a process such as phonological
recoding (e.g. Ehri, 1994) or statistical learning (e.g. Perruchet & Pacton, 2006).
Speciﬁcally, there might be some commonality in the mechanism by which grapheme
patterns are extracted across different scripts when the scripts use the same units of
representation. This similar basis in the underlying process is less likely to occur when the
scripts do not rely on the same graphemic units for representation, as occurs when they use
different alphabets. The second was based on commonality in the speciﬁc knowledge
accrued, with a greater likelihood of transfer when the languages share letter patterns. In
both these (non-mutually exclusive) cases, the likelihood of transfer increases as the
distance between the written representation of the languages decreases. Clearly, further
research is required to examine which features are likely to drive transfer and how such
transfer occurs. This research could beneﬁt, for example, from the work on differing visual
skills used in reading scripts with different bases (e.g. Ho & Bryant, 1999). Such visual
skills might serve as one component of an orthographic processing ability that might
transfer to reading languages that share several features, including the same alphabet.
All work on orthographic processing beneﬁts from careful attention to recent
discussions of the validity of the orthographic processing framework. Perhaps the most
powerful criticism lies in the observation that orthographic processing tasks, particularly
those requiring the identiﬁcation of correct spellings of words, are similar to single word
reading tasks. Researchers such as Burt (2006) and Castles and Nation (2006) argue that
this creates a circular relationship between dependent and independent variables in the
evaluation of variables contributing to reading outcomes. It is noteworthy that Stanovich
et al. (1991) foresaw this concern some time ago. In response, they demonstrated that
orthographic processing (measured with an orthographic choice task) predicts word
224
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

reading after controlling for phonological awareness and, most importantly, print
exposure. Stanovich et al.’s inclusion of print exposure as a control measure goes a long
way towards allaying concerns that orthographic processing is redundant with experience
in word reading.
In our own work, we were motivated by queries from a reviewer to include reading
skill in the other language in analyses, given that, for example, French orthographic
processing might be considered to be a measure of French word reading. In these
analyses, French orthographic processing still made a signiﬁcant contribution (in the range
of 3%) to English word reading, when entered after the controls of verbal and nonverbal
ability, English phonological and morphological awareness, English orthographic processing
and French word reading. Parallel analyses were conducted for the contributions of English
orthographic processing to French reading, but these did not reveal signiﬁcant contributions.
The sustained contribution of French orthographic processing to English reading after
controls for French reading is remarkable, given the number of controls in the equation, and
it suggests some dissociation between orthographic processing and word reading. And yet
we are wary of drawing too heavily on these results. Firstly, they are not replicated in the
English to French analyses, and, perhaps more importantly, it is debatable as to whether
such controls are warranted. The inclusion of reading as a control variable in the regression
equation is not possible in monolingual research where it is a standard outcome variable.
Such analyses also suffer from multicollinearity concerns, given the high correlations
between reading in each language. In our view, the most important control in dual language
research lies in the inclusion of within-language measures of orthographic processing
(following on Comeau et al., 1999), accounting for the correlation between these two
variables. New research with both monolingual and bilingual samples could address this
issue perhaps most fruitfully by including broader measures of orthographic processing and
by examining orthographic learning (e.g. Castles & Nation, 2006).
We need to remain wary of the possibility that the transfer of orthographic processing
to reading across languages simply reﬂects general relationships between abilities; a
general ‘g’ factor could account for similarities in performance across the linguistic tasks.
This interpretation seems unlikely for several reasons. First, the relationships remained
after the initial control variables of verbal and nonverbal ability. Of course, such tests can
never account for the entire construct of intelligence, but the inclusion of measures of
both verbal and nonverbal ability goes some way towards this end. Secondly, the cross-
linguistic relationships between orthographic processing and reading observed in the
present study are in sharp contrast to the earlier studies in which no such relationship was
observed (e.g. Abu-Rabia, 2001). It would seem unlikely that a general ‘g’ factor could
account for the results in the present study, and not drive such ﬁndings in the numerous
prior investigations. Certainly, this raises the question of how one should demonstrate
transfer. Within the literature on reading development, the model advocated by Comeau
et al. (1999) of bidirectional transfer within a correlational study with the requisite
control variables is taken as a stringent test of cross-linguistic relationships. It is a
standard that the present results have achieved. Of course, it would be important to
provide other demonstrations of transfer, perhaps using experimental designs. The results
of the present study suggest that orthographic processing is not as language speciﬁc as
has been previously thought.
These results have clear implications for theories of second-language reading
development, which have focused primarily on the skills used within reading each of
the bilingual learners’ languages. The script-dependent hypothesis advocates that the
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
225
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

nature of the scripts under acquisition by bilinguals is a vital piece of information in
determining which skills will be used (Geva, Wade-Woolley & Shany, 1997). This
explains the relationship between orthographic processing and reading uncovered within
languages for English and French; these are opaque scripts that are likely to draw at least
in part on individuals’ abilities in extracting letter patterns. This model also suggested
that more advanced skills would be used in ﬁrst- than in second-language reading because
the ﬁrst language should progress more quickly through the phases of reading
development (e.g. Ehri, 1999). The relatively greater contribution of orthographic
processing to the ﬁrst language than to the second (e.g.  21% within English and 12%
within French) is accounted for well within this prediction. Alternatively, it is possible
that this pattern reﬂects the relatively greater number of irregularities in English than in
French (see Ziegler, Jacobs & Stone, 1996; Ziegler, Stone & Jacobs, 1996).
And yet the ﬁndings presented here move us beyond the initial parameters of this
model in that they force us to consider the skills that might operate across languages. In
this line of thinking, we need to consider the nature of the scripts (as advocated by Geva
et al., 1997 for within-language relationships). The nature of the scripts under acquisition
might be a more important consideration for orthographic processing (as we uncovered
here) than for other reading-related skills, such as phonological awareness.
Although not the primary focus of the analyses reported here, this research also adds to
the large body of evidence demonstrating a relationship between both phonological and
morphological awareness and reading ability across languages (e.g. Comeau et al., 1999;
Deacon et al., 2007). Phonological awareness made a signiﬁcant within-language
contribution to reading in English and across languages to reading in French, as did
morphological awareness. This research conﬁrms phonological awareness’ status as a
language-general skill in reading development, and it supports the decision here to
include a measure in one language alone. The substantial amount of variance in reading
taken up by verbal and nonverbal abilities in English (between 9% and 23%) and by
morphological awareness within each language (between 9% and 12%) also speaks to the
importance of the inclusion of these control variables.
There are several key steps for future research, reﬂecting in part the limitations of the
present study. One lies in longitudinal evaluations to establish developmental origins and
end points. The contributions of orthographic processing across languages may be
dependent on some degree of written and/or oral language proﬁciency (as suggested by,
e.g. Deacon et al., 2007 for morphological awareness). The individual differences
approach adopted here could also be linked to the cognitive research on the adult
bilingual lexicon (e.g. Kroll & Dijkstra, 2002), permitting an investigation of the varying
outcomes of development. A second issue lies in examining the range of orthographic
skills needed in reading, investigating, for example, how it is that children work out both
the commonalities and the differences between scripts. Certainly, the correlations
between the orthographic processing measures in the two languages suggest parallels in
the development of orthographic processing in the two orthographies. Nevertheless, the
ﬁnding of independent cross-linguistic contributions further nominates orthographic
processing as an abstract skill that can be used in reading across languages in certain
situations. A third limitation lies in the reliability of the French orthographic processing
measure, which was just below standard limits for reasonable reliability. The low
reliability reﬂects, at least in part, the challenge of developing measures appropriate for
testing second-language learning samples. This is especially difﬁcult when the children
have differing levels and types of exposure to print in the two languages, as is the case
226
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

with French immersion children who are learning French formally at school, but who are
exposed informally to massive amounts of English print media. It is important to
remember that low reliabilities only serve to lower the possibility of ﬁnding relationships
between variables, acting against the hypothesis under investigation. Further, and perhaps
most convincing, the results for the lower-reliability French measure paralleled those for
the English measure for which reliability was within standard limits. Nevertheless, the
conclusions for analyses with the French orthographic task need to be considered
tentative. New studies clearly need to establish new measures for working with highly
diverse second-language learning populations such as the one under investigation here.
The results of the study reported here suggest that developing bilingual readers appear to
be remarkably adaptive in their use of information regarding the orthographic structure of
the script that they encounter. These ﬁndings challenge us to reconceptualise orthographic
processing; it does not appear to be as language speciﬁc as previously hypothesised in that
it operates across languages when these share features, including a common alphabet.
Critical next steps lie in working out which features need to be shared for transfer to be
uncovered; such investigations will inform us about how children build up ﬂexible
processing abilities that permit them to access the meaning that is represented on the page.
Note
1. The past tense in English involves the addition of a /t/ or /d/ sound at the end of verbs (as in the addition of
-ed at the end of the regular past tense verb studied). In French, it requires an auxilliary avoir or eˆtre and the
word-ﬁnal e´ added, as in a e´tudie´. Recent research indicates that 4–6-year-old monolingual English and
French children have similar abilities in the generation of regular and irregular past-tense forms (Nicoladis,
Palmer & Marentette, 2007).
References
Abu-Rabia, S. (1997). Verbal and working memory skills of bilingual Hebrew-English speaking children.
International Journal of Psycholinguistics, 13, 25–40.
Abu-Rabia, S. (2001). Testing the interdependence hypothesis among native adult bilingual Russian-English
students. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30, 437–455.
Arab-Moghaddam, N. & Se´ne´chal, M. (2001). Orthographic and phonological processing skills in reading and
spelling in Persian/English bilinguals. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 25, 140–147.
Barker, T.A., Torgesen, J.K. & Wagner, R.K. (1992). The role of orthographic processing skills on ﬁve different
reading tasks. Reading Research Quarterly, 27, 334–345.
Burt, J.S. (2006). What is orthographic processing skill and how does it relate to word identiﬁcation in reading?
Journal of Research in Reading, 29(4), 1–18.
Carlisle, J.F. (2000). Awareness of the structure and meaning of morphologically complex words: Impact on
reading. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 12, 169–190.
Casalis, S. & Louis-Alexandre, M.-F. (2000). Morphological analysis, phonological analysis and learning to
read French: A longitudinal study. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 12, 303–335.
Cassar, M.T. & Treiman, R. (1997). The beginnings of orthographic knowledge: Children’s knowledge of
double letters in words. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 631–644.
Castles, A. & Nation, K. (2006). How does orthographic learning happen? In S. Andrews (Ed.), From inkmarks to
ideas: Challenges and controversies about word recognition and reading. (pp. 151–179). London:
Psychology Press.
Cho, J.-R. & McBride-Chang, C. (2005). Levels of phonological awareness in Korean and English: A 1-year
longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 564–571.
Comeau, L., Cormier, P., Grandmaison, E. & Lacroix, D. (1999). A longitudinal study of phonological processing
skills in children learning to read in a second language. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 29–43.
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
227
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

Cunningham, A.E., Perry, K.E. & Stanovich, K.E. (2001). Converging evidence for the construct of
orthographic processing. Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 14, 549–568.
Cunningham, A.E. & Stanovich, K.E. (1990). Assessing print exposure and orthographic processing skill in
children: A quick measure of reading experience. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 264–274.
Deacon, S.H., Conrad, N. & Pacton, S. (2008). A statistical learning perspective on children’s learning about
graphotactic and morphological regularities in spelling. Canadian Psychology, 49(2), 118–124.
Deacon, S.H. & Kirby, J. (2004). Morphological awareness: Just ‘more phonological’? The roles
of morphological and phonological awareness in reading development. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25,
223–238.
Deacon, S.H., Wade-Woolley, L. & Kirby, J.R. (2007). Cross-over: The role of morphological awareness in
French immersion children’s reading. Developmental Psychology, 43, 732–746.
Dunn, L.M. & Dunn, L.M. (1997). Peabody picture vocabulary test–third edition: Manual. Circle Pines, MN:
American Guidance Services.
Durgunoglu, A.Y., Nagy, W.E. & Hancin-Bhatt, B.J. (1993). Cross-language transfer of phonological
awareness. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 453–465.
Ehri, L. (1999). Phases of development in learning to read words. In J. Oakhill & R. Beard (Eds.), Reading
development and the teaching of reading. (pp. 79–108). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Ehri, L.C. (1994). Development of the ability to read words: Update. In R. Ruddell, M. Ruddell & H. Singer (Eds.),
Theoretical models and processes of reading. (pp. 323–358). Newark, DE: International Reading Association.
Geva, E., Wade-Woolley, L. & Shany, M. (1997). Development of reading efﬁciency in ﬁrst and second
language. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 1, 119–144.
Gottardo, A., Yan, B., Siegel, L. & Wade-Woolley, L. (2001). Factors related to English reading performance in
children with Chinese as a ﬁrst language: More evidence of cross-language transfer of phonological
processing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 530–542.
Ho, C. & Bryant, P.E. (1999). Different visual skills are important in learning to read English and Chinese.
Educational and Child Psychology, 16, 4–14.
Kroll, J.F. & Dijkstra, A. (2002). The bilingual lexicon. In R. Kaplan (Ed.), Handbook of applied linguistics.
(pp. 301–321). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ku, Y.M. & Anderson, R.C. (2003). Development of morphological awareness in Chinese and English. Reading
and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 16, 399–422.
Leong, C.K., Hau, K.T., Cheng, P.W. & Tan, L.H. (2005). Exploring two-wave reciprocal structural relations
among orthographic knowledge, phonological sensitivity, and reading and spelling of English words by
Chinese students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 591–600.
Martinet, C., Valdois, S. & Fayol, M. (2004). Lexical orthographic knowledge develops from the beginning of
literacy acquisition. Cognition, 91(2), B11–B22.
Mumtaz, S. & Humphreys, G.W. (2001). The effects of bilingualism on learning to read English: Evidence from
the contrast between Urdu-English bilingual and English monolingual children. Journal of Research in
Reading, 24(2), 113–134.
Naglieri, J.A. (1985). Matrix analogies test (short form). San Antonio: TXL Psychological Corporation.
Nicoladis, E., Palmer, A. & Marentette, P. (2007). The role of type and token frequency in using past tense
morphemes correctly. Developmental Science, 10, 237–254.
Nunes, T., Bryant, P. & Bindman, M. (1997). Morphological spelling strategies: Developmental stages and
processes. Developmental Psychology, 33, 637–649.
Olson, R., Forsberg, H., Wise, B. & Rack, J. (1994). Measurement of word recognition, orthographic and
phonological skills. In G.R. Lyon (Ed.), Frames of reference for the assessment of learning disabilities: New
views on measurement issues. (pp. 243–277). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
Pacton, S., Perruchet, P., Fayol, M. & Cleeremans, A. (2001). Implicit learning out of the lab: The case of
orthographic regularities. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 401–426.
Perruchet, P. & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and statistical learning: Two approaches, one phenomenon.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 233–238.
Roman, A.A., Kirby, J.R., Parrila, R.K., Wade-Woolley, L. & Deacon, S.H. (2009). Towards a comprehensive
view of the skills involved in word reading in Grades 4, 6 and 8. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
102, 96–113.
Seymour, P.H.K., Aro, M. & Erskine, J.M. (2003). Foundation literacy acquisition in European orthographies.
British Journal of Psychology, 94, 143–174.
Siegel, L.S., Share, D. & Geva, E. (1995). Evidence for superior orthographic skills in dyslexics. Psychological
Science, 6, 250–254.
228
DEACON, WADE-WOOLLEY and KIRBY
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

Stanovich, K. & West, R. (1989). Exposure to print and orthographic processing. Reading Research Quarterly,
24, 402–414.
Stanovich, K.E., West, R.F. & Cunningham, A.E. (1991). Beyond phonological processes: Print exposure and
orthographic processing. In S. Brady & D. Shankweiler (Eds.), Phonological processes in literacy: A tribute
to Isabelle Y. Liberman. (pp. 219–235). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tabachnik, B.G. & Fidell, L.S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics. (4th edn). New York: Harper & Row.
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc, and Cultural Organisation (2003). Education in a multilingual world
(ED-2003/WS/2). France: UNESCO.
Wagner, R.K. & Barker, T.A. (1994). The development of orthographic processing ability. In V.W. Berninger
(Ed.), The varieties of orthographic knowledge, 1: Theoretical and developmental issues. (pp. 243–276).
New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wang, M., Park, Y. & Lee, K.R. (2006). Korean-English biliteracy acquisition: Cross-language phonological
and orthographic transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 148–158.
Woodcock, R.W. (1987). Woodcock reading mastery test – revised. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance
Service.
Wormeli, C.T. & Ardanaz, N. (1987). Canadian French immersion achievement test. Vancouver: Faculty of
Education, University of British Columbia.
Ziegler, J.C., Jacobs, A. & Stone, G.O. (1996). Statistical analysis of the bidirectional inconsistency of spelling
and sound in French. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 28, 504–513.
Ziegler, J.C., Stone, G.O. & Jacobs, A. (1996). What is the pronunciation for – ough and the spelling for /u/?
A database for computing feedforward and feedback consistency in English. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 29, 600–618.
Received 6 June 2008; revised version received 10 September 2008.
FLEXIBILITY IN SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNERS
229
r United Kingdom Literacy Association 2009

