FEATURES
Available in a variety of depths to match 
conventional or engineered lumber products.
Manufactured to precise engineering 
specifications, for a strong, rigid truss system.
Delivers reliable performance.
The MiTek Wood FLOOR-TRUSS System is easy 
to handle and install. Plus, its wide nailing surface 
speeds up installation of floor sheathing. The top 
chord bearing detail allows support beams to be 
hidden without the extra cost of installing joist 
hangers. Our Intertek Listed one hour, single-
layer drywall fire rating simplifies compliance 
with building codes. MiTek’s locally manufactured 
floor system makes good use of the environmental 
advantages of wood by using this renewable 
resource to fight climate change by reducing 
greenhouse gases.
MiTek Canada Inc.’s FLOOR-TRUSS 
System offers the ultimate in design 
flexibility! 
With longer clear spans than conventional 
lumber, architects and engineers can now 
enjoy clear span flexibility and building 
design freedom. Its open web design 
eliminates the need for cutting and drilling; 
so plumbing, electrical and ventilation 
services are installed quickly, saving time 
and money. MiTek floor trusses also permit 
the installation of strongback bridging 
which reduces vibration.
FLOOR-TRUSS
ENGINEERED FLOOR SYSTEM

© 2018 MiTek Canada, Inc. All Rights reserved  1046 - OCT 18
1-800-268-3434
MiTek.ca
FLOOR-TRUSS SYSTEM
ADVANTAGES
LIGHTWEIGHT
Mainly produced with 2x3 or 2x4 chords, 
in combination with our connector plates, 
it results in a light and reliable engineered 
wood floor system.
PRECISELY ENGINEERED
MiTek’s open web FLOOR-TRUSS system is 
designed and manufactured to precise engineer­
ing specifications. Since it is custom-built for 
your project, there is no need to cut the structural 
elements onsite. Ingenious assembly details 
minimize the usage of other costly materials. 
Floor-Truss is designed and produced to your 
specific needs and delivers reliable performance.
OPEN WEB DESIGN
Its open web design eliminates the need for 
cutting and drilling; plumbing, electrical and 
ventilation services are quickly installed, saving 
time and money. Main ventilation distribution 
duck work can also be easily concealed in 
the floor thickness. This feature eliminates 
the concern of modifying structural elements and/
or the time and materials of costly repair details.
STRONGBACK BRIDGING
FLOOR-TRUSS’s open concept allows the installa­
tion of strongback bridging, which actively 
contributes to reduce floor vibration. The addition 
of this important structural component allows 
the individual joist to work together as a “floor 
system.” The quantity, size, location and nailing 
details will be indicated on the provided shop 
drawings and layout.
FIRE RATINGS
MiTek’s FLOOR-TRUSS system has different 
fire-rated assemblies to suite your project needs 
and building codes compliance. Intertek Listed 
fire-rated assemblies meet CAN/ULC-S101 and 
ASTM-E119 standards (1 hour / single-layer 
drywall). If you need a 45 minutes or 60 minutes 
fire protection, we have a list of certified assem­
blies that will meet/exceed your project needs 
and/or building code requirements. 
LONGER CLEAR SPANS
With longer clear spans than conventional lumber, 
architects and engineers can now enjoy clear span 
flexibility and building design freedom. MiTek’s 
open web FLOOR-TRUSS system design flexibility 
allows a multitude of prefabricated details that 
substantially speed up installation onsite.
TOP CHORD BEARING
Probably one of the most appreciated features 
of the MiTek open web FLOOR-TRUSS system 
is the ability to hide beams in the floor by using 
a top chord bearing condition. No joist hangers 
are necessary and substantial material 
and labour savings can be achieved.
WIDE NAILING SURFACE
MiTek open web FLOOR-TRUSS system’s 
wide nailing surface speeds up installation 
of the structural elements and floor sheathing. 
The wide flange width (2.5” or 3.5”) ensures 
a large surface to apply the subfloor adhesive 
and contributes to a better subfloor 
sheathing support.
TRIMMABLE ENDS ENSURE A PERFECT FIT
Ultimate in design flexibility: using the same 
engineering support that has become the 
standard in the structural component industry, 
our onsite trimmable detail eliminates headaches 
due to bearing location discrepancies or design 
changes. Since MiTek FLOOR-TRUSS system 
allows precise customer design and trimmable 
conditions, you know that you can count on 
a highly polyvalent and effective floor system.
SOUND RATINGS
MiTek open web FLOOR-TRUSS system also has 
different certified assemblies for different sound 
transmission requirements. Please refer to the 
available Intertek certified assemblies for details 
or contact us and we will gladly help you. MiTek’s 
open web FLOOR-TRUSS system has all the 
necessary code approvals to suit your needs.

