REVIEW
published: 13 January 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2020.601939
Edited by:
Juan M. Dominguez,
University of Texas at Austin,
United States
Reviewed by:
Tomoko Soga,
Monash University Malaysia, Malaysia
Onno Meijer,
Leiden University, Netherlands
*Correspondence:
Robert J. Handa
bhanda@colostate.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Behavioral Endocrinology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience
Received: 02 September 2020
Accepted: 10 December 2020
Published: 13 January 2021
Citation:
Sheng JA, Bales NJ, Myers SA,
Bautista AI, Roueinfar M, Hale TM
and Handa RJ (2021) The
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis:
Development, Programming Actions
of Hormones, and
Maternal-Fetal Interactions.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 14:601939.
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2020.601939
The Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal
Axis: Development, Programming
Actions of Hormones, and
Maternal-Fetal Interactions
Julietta A. Sheng 1, Natalie J. Bales 1, Sage A. Myers 1, Anna I. Bautista 1, Mina Roueinfar 1,
Taben M. Hale 2 and Robert J. Handa 1,2*
1Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, United States, 2Department of Basic
Medical Sciences, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, AZ, United States
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is a complex system of neuroendocrine
pathways and feedback loops that function to maintain physiological homeostasis.
Abnormal development of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis can further result
in long-term alterations in neuropeptide and neurotransmitter synthesis in the central
nervous system, as well as glucocorticoid hormone synthesis in the periphery. Together,
these changes can potentially lead to a disruption in neuroendocrine, behavioral,
autonomic, and metabolic functions in adulthood. In this review, we will discuss the
regulation of the HPA axis and its development. We will also examine the maternal-fetal
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and disruption of the normal fetal environment which
becomes a major risk factor for many neurodevelopmental pathologies in adulthood,
such as major depressive disorder, anxiety, schizophrenia, and others.
Keywords: estrogen, androgens, glucocorticoid, sex differences, hypothalamus, development, homeostasis,
HPA axis
Abbreviations: 11β-HSD2, 11-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2; 5-HT, Serotonin; ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic
hormone; AMY, Amygdala; ANS, Autonomic nervous system; AR, Androgen receptor; ARC, Arcuate n.; ARNT2, Aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2; AVP, Arginine Vasopressin; BNST, Bed n. of the stria terminalis; CAH,
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CBG, Corticosteroid-binding globulin; CeA,
Central n. of the amygdala; CNS, Central nervous system; CRH, Corticotropin releasing hormone; CRH-BP, Corticotropin
releasing hormone binding protein; DEX, Dexamethasone; DHEA, Dehydroepiandrosterone; DOHaD, Developmental
Origins of Health and Disease; ER, Estrogen Receptor; ERE, Estrogen response element; ERα, Estrogen receptor alpha; ERβ,
Estrogen receptor beta; FSH, Follicle stimulating hormone; GC, Glucocorticoid; GH, Growth hormone; GR, Glucocorticoid
receptor; GnRH, Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone; HC, Hippocampus; HPA, Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal; HPG,
Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal; LH, Luteinizing hormone; MeA, Medial Amygdala; MPOA, Medial Preoptic Area; MR,
Mineralocorticoid receptor; MSH, Melanocyte stimulating hormone; NGFI-A, Nerve growth factor-inducible protein A;
NTS, Nucleus of Solitary Tract; OT, Oxytocin; PFC, Prefrontal Cortex; PND, Postnatal day; POMC, Proopiomelanocortin;
PVN, Paraventricular nucleus; SCN, Suprachiasmatic nucleus; SHRP, Stress hypo-responsive period; SON, Supraoptic
nucleus; TRH, Thyrotropin releasing hormone; TSH, Thyroid stimulating hormone; VMN, Ventromedial n.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
INTRODUCTION
Humans and animals respond to environmental perturbations
with a stress response that allows physiological adaptation to
the stressor to maintain homeostasis. A major component of
the homeostatic response is the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis, an intricate, yet robust, neuroendocrine mechanism
that mediates the effects of stressors by regulating numerous
physiological processes, such as metabolism, immune responses,
and the autonomic nervous system (ANS). The HPA axis consists
of a cascade of endocrine pathways that respond to specific
negative feedback loops involving the hypothalamus, anterior
pituitary gland, and adrenal gland.
There are several critical developmental stages must be
attained to ensure proper functionality of the HPA axis and
appropriate behavioral and physiological stress-responses in
adulthood. The HPA axis begins to develop as early as fetal
life and becomes sexually dimorphic during puberty due to
differing levels of gonadal hormones. Early life exposure of
the offspring to excess fetal glucocorticoid (GC) hormones or
environmental perturbations, such as maternal stressors, can
alter normal neuropeptide synthesis and lead to a disruption
in the development of the HPA axis. This may become
detrimental to the fetus later in life as it leads to abnormal
physiological function in adulthood, thereby increasing the risk
for adult disease.
In this review, we discuss the HPA axis as the central
regulator of various physiological responses to stressors. We
also examine the activational and organizational effects of
hormones during critical periods of development that result in
the sexually dimorphic responses of the HPA axis in adults. The
effect of environmental perturbations, such as prenatal stress or
prenatal exposure to synthetic GC hormones, and the associated
susceptibility to stress-related neuropathologies in adulthood are
also addressed.
COMPONENTS OF THE HPA AXIS
Morphology and Development of the
Paraventricular Nucleus (PVN)
The paraventricular nucleus (PVN) houses three functional
neuronal types that act as central regulators of the stress
response: parvocellular, neurosecretory magnocellular, and
long-projecting neurons. These neurons are characterized
by their unique electrophysiological properties (Tasker and
Dudek, 1991). Parvocellular neurons display small low threshold
depolarizations, while long-projecting neurons generate large
low-threshold
depolarizations.
In
contrast,
magnocellular
neurons do not display low-threshold potentials but are
characterized by a distinct return to baseline after depolarizing
stimuli (Hernandez et al., 2015; Israel et al., 2016). Further
investigation is necessary to identify specific mechanisms that
lead to these unique properties.
Neurosecretory parvocellular neurons send their axons to
the external zone of the median eminence to regulate the
secretion of releasing factors [e.g., corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)] into
the hypothalamohypophyseal portal vasculature to control the
secretion of corresponding anterior pituitary hormones. An
anterior parvocellular division extends from the rostral boundary
of the PVN to the rostral boundary of the medial magnocellular
division, just lateral to the periventricular area. The medial
parvocellular division lies lateral to the periventricular area and
medial to the medial magnocellular division. Neurons in the
anterior and medial parvocellular groups project to the median
eminence or other hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic regions.
Neurosecretory
magnocellular
neurons
project
to
the
neurohypophysis to regulate the secretion of oxytocin (OT)
and arginine vasopressin (AVP) directly into the general
circulation (Vandesande and Dierickx, 1975; Rhodes et al., 1981;
Swanson and Sawchenko, 1983). The rat is the most studied
species for characterizing PVN morphology and in the rat PVN,
magnocellular neurons distribute into two distinct areas. The
medial magnocellular division lies anteromedially within the
PVN and contains mostly OT expressing neurons. The lateral
magnocellular division is largely comprised of AVP-expressing
neurons that are surrounded by a loop of OT neurons. Long-
projecting neurons send their axons to the brainstem and spinal
cord regions to control autonomic and somatosensory function.
The
hypothalamus
is
derived
from
the
anteroventral
neuroectoderm during early development (Takata et al., 2017).
Mapping of gene expression along the rostral-caudal axis shows
that the early hypothalamic primordium differentiates into the
floor plate, basal plate, and alar plate. The dorsal-most portion
of the alar plate gives rise to the PVN and supraoptic nucleus
(SON) and is identified by the expression of Brn-2, Otp, and
Sim1 genes and the absence of Dlx, Arx, Gad67, Isl1, and Vax1
genes that are found in the subregion immediately below the
PVN (Morales-Delgado et al., 2014).
The transcription factor, Brn-2 (POU-homeodomain protein
BRIN-2), is endogenously expressed in both parvocellular and
magnocellular neurons (He et al., 1989). Brn-2 null mutations
in rodents demonstrate a failure to differentiate between CRH
parvocellular neurons and OT and AVP magnocellular neurons,
suggesting it is necessary for terminal differentiation of these
hypothalamic cells (Schonemann et al., 1995).
The homeobox gene, Otp, transcribes a transcription factor
that helps regulate differentiation and maturation of the
neurosecretory PVN neurons expressing TRH, AVP, and OT.
In mice, the induction of a missense mutation in the Otp gene
causes acute onset obesity and increased anxiety, phenotypes
that have similarly been shown to be modulated by AVP and
OT. Moreover, Otp seems to be necessary for regulating the
transcriptional activity of PVN neurons (Moir et al., 2017).
The Sim1 transcription factor acts as another key regulatory
gene of the PVN, encoding a protein that also regulates AVP,
TRH, and OT expression, as well as CRH and somatostatin
(Michaud et al., 1998). Sim1 knock-out mice show severe
loss of AVP, TRH, CRH, OT, and somatostatin neurons and
rarely survive to adulthood (Michaud, 2001), while heterozygous
mice display early obesity, hyperinsulinemia, hyperphagia, and
hyperleptinemia, phenotypes that are associated with PVN
neurosecretory neurons (Michaud, 2001). The Sim1 protein
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
has been shown to dimerize with Aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2), which is thought to differentiate
PVN and SON neurons. Brn2, a downstream target of
the Sim1/ARNT2 dimer, also mediates Sim1 function. Brn2
promotes the expression of AVP, OT, and CRH in the PVN,
and decreased numbers of these cell phenotypes are seen in Brn2
knock-out mice (Schonemann et al., 1995).
Morphology and Development of the
Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland functions largely in response to releasing
factors from the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland is divided
into two structures: the adenohypophysis (anterior pituitary)
and the neurohypophysis (posterior pituitary; Dorton, 2000).
The adenohypophysis constitutes 80% of the pituitary gland
and houses specialized hormone-producing cells that synthesize
and secrete several hormones, including, but not limited to,
growth hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH),
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH),
prolactin and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). These
hormones target various types of tissues to mediate several
physiological processes in response to stress (Scanes, 2015).
Annexin-1 (formerly known as lipocortin 1) is another protein
that exists in the anterior pituitary. While it is not directly
involved in the synthesis of hormones discussed above, it is
an important regulator of their secretion through inhibitory
pathways (for a more detailed description of the actions of
annexin-1, see reviews by John et al., 2004; Denef, 2008).
The adenohypophysis can be further divided into the pars
distalis, pars intermedia, and the pars tuberalis. The pars distalis
is composed of chromaffin and chromophobe cells and is
where most hormone synthesis occurs. The pars tuberalis is an
extension of the pars distalis and houses epithelial cells and the
hypophyseal portal vessels that connect the anterior pituitary to
the hypothalamus. The pars intermedia, located between the pars
distalis and neurohypophysis, secretes products produced by the
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, particularly melanocyte-
stimulating hormone (MSH; Ilahi and Ilahi, 2020).
In contrast to the adenohypophysis, the neurohypophysis is
directly connected to the hypothalamus by axonal projections
of magnocellular neurons originating from either the PVN or
SON. The posterior pituitary stores OT and AVP synthesized
by these neurons and secretes them into the general circulation
in response to various hypothalamic releasing factors. OT is
required for lactation, while AVP is involved in the regulation
of osmotic balance (Borrow et al., 2019). Peptide hormones
synthesized in the SON and PVN travel along axons to their
terminals in the posterior pituitary where they are released
into the general circulation in response to signals from their
hypothalamic cell bodies (Ohbuchi et al., 2015).
The development of the pituitary gland is complex, yet unique
because of its dual origin.
In humans, during the fourth week of gestation, cells of
the oral portion of the ectoderm begin to thicken to form the
hypophyseal placode (Ericson et al., 1998). The hypophyseal
placode elongates to form Rathke’s pouch. At 6–8 weeks of
development, the base of Rathke’s pouch is separated from the
oral epithelium. The rapid proliferation of cells of the anterior
wall of the pouch forms the anterior lobe of the pituitary (pars
distalis) and the slower proliferation of cells of the posterior
wall give rise to the intermediate lobe or pars intermedia. By
contrast, a specific portion of the ventral diencephalon located
dorsal to Rathke’s pouch gives rise to the infundibulum from
which posterior pituitary originates (Amar and Weiss, 2003; Zhu
et al., 2007).
The development of the pituitary gland is mediated by
several cellular transcription factors. Sonic hedgehog, expressed
in the oral ectoderm, and bone morphogenic protein 4, and
fibroblast growth factor 8, found in the ventral diencephalon, are
all important signaling genes that initiate cellular proliferation
of pituitary cells. These genes have also been shown to
affect the expression of transcription factors that contribute
to the differentiation of specific pituitary lineages, however
specific mechanisms are not yet known (Ericson et al.,
1998). Furthermore, the transcription factor, Tpit, is critical
for the expression of the POMC gene. POMC is expressed
in corticotrophs, the first pituitary cell type to terminally
differentiate (about gestation day 12.5 in the mouse; Pulichino
et al., 2003). A deficiency of Tpit blocks terminal differentiation,
but not a commitment to the corticotroph lineage (Pulichino
et al., 2003). Somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs are
differentiated through the influence of transcription factors,
Prop1 and Pit-1 whereas gonadotrophs require GATA-2 and
SF1 signaling molecules for terminal differentiation. Although
these terminal cell lineages are found in the pituitary gland, the
existence of a common ancestral precursor pool is unclear (Zhao
et al., 2001).
Morphology and Development of the
Adrenal Gland
The adrenal gland of adult mammals is surrounded by a
fibrous capsule and is composed of two regions with differing
embryological origins (Bornstein et al., 1991). While the adrenal
medulla, responsible for catecholamine production, derives from
neuroectoderm, the steroid-hormone producing adrenal cortex
has an embryonic origin from the adrenogonadal primordium
(Sun et al., 2018).
The adrenal medulla is composed of chromaffin cells that
secrete epinephrine and norepinephrine following sympathetic
stimulation.
They
can
be
considered
as
a
grouping
of
modified postganglionic neurons that are directly innervated by
preganglionic neurons from the central nervous system (CNS;
McCorry, 2007). Thus, the adrenal medulla is an important
component of the ANS and responds very rapidly to stressors,
releasing epinephrine and norepinephrine into the bloodstream
to affect heart rate, blood pressure, metabolism, and others
(Vinson et al., 1994). These hormones are classically involved
in the ‘‘fight or flight’’ response. The effects of epinephrine and
norepinephrine on various physiological systems are emphasized
by changes noted in patients with pheochromocytoma, a
catecholamine secreting neuroendocrine tumor of the adrenal
chromaffin cells (Pacak, 2011). Symptoms include sweating,
heart palpitations, markedly elevated blood pressure, nausea,
tremors, and weight loss (Parenti et al., 2012).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
Histologically, the adrenal cortex is composed of three zones.
The outer zona glomerulosa produces aldosterone, which is
involved in water and mineral balance through its actions on
the kidney and colon (Rakova et al., 2017). The intermediate
zona fasciculata is the thickest region of the adrenal cortex
and synthesizes corticosteroids (primarily cortisol in the human,
corticosterone in most rodents) and androgens. Similarly, the
innermost zona reticularis also synthesizes adrenal androgens
(Longcope, 1986). Of note, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
is the most abundant circulating adrenal androgen in adult
humans, whereas these are very low in adult rats and mice
(Dumontet et al., 2019). Both the zona reticularis and fasciculata
are regulated by ACTH and in the absence of ACTH, these zones
atrophy, whereas following chronic ACTH stimulation, these
zones hypertrophy (Gallo-Payet et al., 2017).
The adrenal cortex is derived from mesoderm and is
dependent upon several transcription factors such as SF-1
(steroidogenic factor-1) and DAX-1 (dosage-sensitive sex reversal-
adrenal hypoplasia). Deletion of either of these genes results in
the absence of adrenocortical development in mice (Hammer
et al., 2005). During human gestation, an inner fetal adrenal
zone makes up the bulk of the adrenal gland, and an adult-like
‘‘definitive’’ zone, a group of small tightly packed cells is also
present (Coulter, 2004). The human fetal adrenal responds to
ACTH, but because of the absence of the 3-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase enzyme, the fetal adrenal mainly produces DHEA
and DHEA sulfate (Ishimoto and Jaffe, 2011). These fetal adrenal
steroids serve as precursors of maternal placental estrogens. The
definitive zone is the major producer of fetal cortisol in response
to ACTH stimulation.
By contrast, the developing rodent adrenal is quiescent.
It is questionable whether the rodent adrenal contains a
fetal adrenal zone per se, although some studies indicate a
transient fetal adrenal zone based on the presence of fetal
adrenal enhancer elements (Zubair et al., 2006). While the
adult cortex of rodents increases in size from late gestation
through puberty, the fetal zone cells disappear gradually and
accumulate along the boundary with the adrenal medulla
(Morohashi and Zubair, 2011). However, even after the adult
zones are developed, the adrenal gland of the rodent fetus does
not yet express aldosterone synthase nor does it respond to
stimulation by increasing mineralocorticoid or GC synthesis
(Ehrhart-Bornstein et al., 1998).
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS AND
CENTRAL REGULATION OF THE HPA AXIS
It is well established that animals and humans respond to
threats to their welfare by activating neurons that control
neuroendocrine and autonomic responses. For the HPA axis,
the endocrine response is characterized by the secretion of
GCs from the adrenal cortex. Circulating GCs act on a
variety of tissues to mobilize energy stores, induce lipolysis
and proteolysis, potentiate vasoconstriction driven by the ANS,
suppress reproduction, and alter stress-related behaviors, to
allow homeostasis (Papadimitriou and Priftis, 2009). Most of the
physiological responses to acute elevations in GCs that occur
following stressors, such as enhanced cognition and metabolism
and inhibition of immune function must be beneficial, as they
permit the ‘‘fight or flight’’ response. By contrast, although some
benefits to chronic stress exist, chronic activation of the HPA axis
has deleterious effects on immune, cardiovascular, metabolic,
and neural functions and may decrease the resilience of neurons
and glia to subsequent insults (McEwen, 1998; Jauregui-Huerta
et al., 2010; Heck et al., 2020), resulting in increased risk for
several diseases (see Figure 1 for summary describing effects of
chronic stress on health conditions). Whether these are direct or
indirect effects of glucocorticoids remains to be determined.
Negative Feedback Circuitry
The HPA axis is governed by a closed-loop GC-dependent
negative feedback system that is essential for the termination of
the stress response. Normal HPA function is highly influenced by
the dose and duration of GC exposure (Abe and Critchlow, 1980;
Sapolsky et al., 2000). For example, adrenalectomy decreases GC
secretion, which increases PVN neuropeptide expression and
secretion in both basal and stress-induced states (Sawchenko,
1987; Imaki et al., 1991). Negative feedback can also act at
the level of the PVN, the anterior pituitary, and indirectly via
brain regions that project to the PVN (Akana et al., 1986;
Sawchenko, 1987; Bradbury et al., 1994). Notably, primary sites
of negative feedback differ between endogenous and synthetic
GC. Endogenous GCs, such as corticosterone, primarily induce
negative feedback at the level of the PVN, while the synthetic GC,
dexamethasone (DEX), functions as a glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) agonist to inhibit GC release at the level of the anterior
pituitary gland (Spiga et al., 2017).
GC-dependent negative feedback has further been shown to
rely on the rhythmic release of GC in diurnal and ultradian
patterns that are fundamental to the termination of the stress
response (Sapolsky et al., 2000; Gjerstad et al., 2018). In all
vertebrates, a peak of circulating corticosterone occurs just
before the onset of daily activity. The diurnal rhythm of HPA
axis activity is driven by the central circadian pacemaker, the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which has major inputs to
the PVN to regulate daily rhythms of GC output (Lightman
and Conway-Campbell, 2010). An ultradian variation in GC
secretion is composed of the pulsatile release of corticosterone
and ACTH that occur in response to differential timing of the
stimulus and feedback signals within the HPA axis (Walker
et al., 2012). In contrast to the circadian rhythm, the ultradian
rhythm is not under central regulation of the SCN but is likely
generated by a pituitary-adrenal feed-forward—feedback loop
under constant CRH infusion. Moreover, when high levels of
CRH were infused, the ultradian pattern was disrupted and
corticosterone oscillations were dampened, further suggesting a
dose-dependent effect of CRH on the patterns of GC secretion
(Rankin et al., 2012).
Since
circulating
GCs
can
bind
to
both
GR
and
mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), both receptors are involved
in
the
negative
feedback
regulation
of
the
HPA
axis.
MRs have a greater affinity for corticosterone (cortisol in
humans; Reul and de Kloet, 1985) and consequently, they
are predominantly bound during low or basal secretion
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
FIGURE 1 | Chronic stress leads to reduced sensitivity of the negative feedback system that governs the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The loss of this
negative feedback system is due to an increased level of circulating glucocorticoids (GCs). HPA axis dysregulation results in downstream physiological
consequences, increasing risk for immune system dysfunction, mood disorders, metabolic disease, and cardiovascular disease.
of
corticosteroid
(Reul and de Kloet, 1985).
Adrenalectomy
increases basal CRH and ACTH levels, suggesting that a decrease
in circulating corticosterone removes the negative feedback
signal (Dallman et al., 1985, 1987; Rabadan-Diehl et al., 1997)
whereas corticosterone replacement at doses that bind MR
selectively, returns ACTH levels to baseline (Bradbury et al.,
1994). Moreover, the hippocampus (HC), a primary site for
HPA regulation during basal states, expresses MR at high
levels. MR antagonists administered directly to the rat HC
elevate basal ACTH and corticosterone levels like those seen
after adrenalectomy (Van Haarst et al., 1997). Studies using
transgenic mice that overexpress forebrain MR show reductions
in the corticosterone response to restraint and decreases in
anxiety-like behaviors (Rozeboom et al., 2007). Together, such
data suggest that the ratio of MR:GR are as influential as absolute
levels for regulating stress-induced HPA axis activity and
stress-related behaviors.
In contrast to MR, GR has a lesser affinity for corticosterone
and is thought to be the primary target for negative feedback
when GC levels are elevated (Ruel and de Kloet, 1985). GRs
remain mostly unoccupied during the basal state but are
quickly occupied after a stress-induced increase in circulating
GCs (Reul and de Kloet, 1985). This supports the hypothesis
that GR activation the return of HPA activity to baseline
following high amplitude secretion of corticosteroids after an
acute stressor. Like MR, GR is highly expressed in the HC,
as well as in the PVN and adenohypophysis (Ahima and
Harlan, 1990; Morimoto et al., 1996). Initiation of HPA axis
negative feedback occurs via GR expressing neurons in the HC
(Sapolsky et al., 1984) and the hypothalamus (Weidenfeld et al.,
2002), following stress-induced elevations in corticosterone. At
the PVN, this first acts upon AVP neurons (Kovács et al.,
2000). The importance of GR in negative feedback regulation is
further demonstrated using a transgenic mouse model. Selective
knockout of forebrain GR causes an increase in basal and stress-
induced corticosterone levels (Kolber and Muglia, 2009), further
implicating GC binding sites in the forebrain. In comparison,
Wei et al. (2004) showed that the overexpression of forebrain GR
does not alter basal ACTH or corticosterone levels, indicating
that the forebrain GR is not the only player in regulating the
baseline activity of the HPA axis. Selective disruption of GR
in the PVN increased CRH immunoreactivity in the PVN,
with corresponding increases in levels of plasma ACTH and
corticosterone, supporting the hypothesis that GR is involved in
negative feedback (Solomon et al., 2015). Furthermore, GR has
been reported to be absent in the SCN, suggesting an alternate
circadian-like feedback mechanism where GC influences HPA
axis activity as discussed previously.
Regulation of CRH in the Brain and
Pituitary
CRH is abundantly produced in neurons of the PVN as well
as other brain areas and is highly conserved between humans,
rats, and mice (Wamsteeker-Cusulin et al., 2013). While the
predominant site of CRH expression is the PVN, CRH is
expressed in other brain areas including the central n. of the
amygdala (AMY; CeA), the bed n. of the stria terminalis (BNST),
and the cortex and HC. It is well-known that stressors can
similarly increase crh expression in the PVN and CeA (Herman
and Tasker, 2016) with increases in the primary transcript
(heterologous nuclear RNA) for crh, rising within minutes
following the application of a stressor (Evans et al., 2013). This
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
is followed by subtler increases in crh mRNA (Vazquez et al.,
2006). Following enhanced cellular activity such as following a
kainic acid-induced seizure, crh expression also increases and
numerous CRH-ir neurons can be visualized in brain areas that
normally express modest levels of CRH, including the HC, BNST,
and globus pallidus (Foradori et al., 2007). Within the PVN, CRH
is expressed by both pre-autonomic neurons that project to the
brainstem and spinal cord (Swanson and Kuypers, 1980), as well
as neuroendocrine neurons that project to the median eminence.
The actions of CRH are mediated by two receptor types,
CRF-R1 and CRF-R2. The cloning and characterization of the
CRH receptor were originally reported by Chen et al. (1993).
This receptor-bound CRH with high affinity and selectivity and
was coupled to adenylate cyclase to increase intracellular cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Subsequently, a second
CRH receptor, CRF-R2, was found to possess approximately 70%
homology to CRF-R1. CRF-R2 had a different distribution in
the brain, being found in subcortical regions, with the greatest
expression in the lateral septum and ventromedial n. (VMN), in
contrast to the CRF-R1 which was found to be highly expressed
in neocortical and cerebellar regions. In the adenohypophysis,
CRF-R1 was expressed at very high levels whereas CRF-R2 was
expressed at much lower levels (Chalmers et al., 1995). Such
studies indicate widespread effects of CRH with physiological
responses selectively mediated by two different receptors.
CRH action at the pituitary is primarily mediated by CRF-
R1, yet, its actions can be modified by a CRH binding protein
(CRH-BP) which is highly expressed by both pituitary and
hypothalamus, although only at low levels in the PVN (Chalmers
et al., 1995). CRH-BP is found in cells expressing CRH receptors
and in plasma and rapidly binds CRH with high affinity, thereby
acting as a competitive inhibitor of CRH actions (Kalin, 2018).
A sex difference in CRH-BP mRNA has been shown in the
mouse pituitary with females having much greater levels than
males (Speert et al., 2002). Moreover, stress increased CRH-BP
mRNA and protein expression in POMC neurons in females
more than males. Whereas data show that CRH-BP deficient
mice exhibit elevated corticosterone levels (Speert et al., 2002),
indicating that CRH-BP is functionally involved in preventing
the actions of CRH to reduce the HPA response to stress, this
is inconsistent with the greater basal and stress-induced levels of
plasma corticosterone in females, suggesting other mechanisms
are also involved in setting up sex differences in HPA function.
CRH as a Regulator of ACTH
ACTH is synthesized from high molecular weight (266 amino
acids) precursor protein, POMC, in the anterior pituitary (Harno
et al., 2018). The POMC gene consists of three exons and
two introns. All functional peptide products of the POMC
gene are encoded in exon 3 including N-terminal glycopeptide,
ϒ-MSH, ACTH, α-MSH, CLIP, β-lipoprotein, ϒ-lipoprotein,
β-MSH, and β-endorphin. Their evolutionary importance is
indicated by the fact that the regions encoding α-MSH, ACTH,
and β−endorphin are highly homologous between mammalian
species including humans. Consistent with the important role of
ACTH in mediating the neuroendocrine stress response, POMC
mRNA levels in the anterior pituitary are upregulated by CRH
and inhibited by GCs (Deng et al., 2015, 2017). By contrast, in
the intermediate lobe, there is no effect of GCs on POMC mRNA
levels due to the very low expression of GR (Wang et al., 2015).
AVP and OT as a Regulator of ACTH
While CRH is the primary regulator of ACTH secretion
by the adenohypophysis, supporting roles of AVP and OT
as co-secretagogues have also been shown (Herman et al.,
1992). Although AVP has been described as regulating osmotic
balance, and OT as a principal hormone for parturition, both
neuropeptides are co-expressed in about half of the parvocellular
CRH-expressing neurons of the PVN after adrenalectomy
(Sawchenko et al., 1984). Both are thought to be co-released with
CRH (Bondy et al., 1989; Raadsheer et al., 1993) to potentiate
CRH’s secretagogue activity at the corticotroph (Rivier and Vale,
1983; Schlosser et al., 1994). Moreover, both AVP and OT
can stimulate ACTH secretion even in the absence of CRH
(Gillies et al., 1982; Schlosser et al., 1994) by activating the V1b
receptor on corticotrophs (Schlosser et al., 1994). In contrast,
when applied to the PVN, or following intracerebroventricular
injection, OT and AVP inhibit HPA axis responses (Neumann,
2007; Landgraf and Neumann, 2004). It has also been shown that
these neuropeptides modify PVN function in a paracrine fashion
through local dendritic release within the PVN (Neumann,
2007), the net result being regulatory effects on the PVN that are
very different from actions on the adenohypophysis.
In the adenohypophysis, AVP is hypothesized to also
arise by collateral projections to the median eminence from
magnocellular neurons that target the posterior pituitary, or
through vessels from the posterior pituitary that connect to the
adenohypophysis. Interestingly, the mouse does not seem to
co-express AVP in CRH neurons to the same extent as the rat
(Biag et al., 2012) suggesting that co-release with crh may be
minimal in the mouse. Nonetheless, AVP drives the rapid release
of ACTH from anterior pituitary corticotrophs, although, by
itself, AVP alone causes only a small ACTH response. However,
AVP potentiates CRH-driven ACTH release in vivo and in vitro,
when cells are first exposed to CRH. In contrast, if cells are
first exposed to AVP, CRH does not potentiate AVP-stimulated
ACTH secretion (Roper et al., 2011). Thus, it appears that AVP
and CRH can cooperate, but not substitute for each other to
regulate ACTH secretion.
NEUROENDOCRINE STRESS RESPONSES
AND CENTRAL INPUTS
To cope with the physiological changes following a stressor,
parvocellular neurons of the PVN integrate neural or hormonal
input from a variety of sources leading to a physiologic and
metabolic response. Direct inputs arising from the brainstem
are essential to integrating HPA reactions to systemic stressors.
Projections originating from noradrenergic and adrenergic
neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), locus
coeruleus, and the ventrolateral medulla that innervate the
parvocellular PVN have been identified (Kítazawa et al., 1987;
Hornby and Piekut, 1989; Cunningham et al., 1990). CRH
neurons of the medial parvocellular PVN receive noradrenergic
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
innervation from A2 adrenergic cell groups of the NTS (Kítazawa
et al., 1987; Hornby and Piekut, 1989). The co-expression of
alpha(1) and alpha(2) receptors in medial parvocellular CRH
neurons (Cummings and Seybold, 1988; Day et al., 1997, 1999)
allows norepinephrine to rapidly increase crh mRNA (Itoi
et al., 1999; Cole and Sawchenko, 2002; Khan et al., 2007).
Alpha(1) adrenergic receptors may be primarily responsible
for the stimulatory effects of norepinephrine (Cummings and
Seybold, 1988; Kiss and Aguilera, 1992; Khan et al., 2007),
whereas alpha(2) adrenergic receptors, specifically alpha(2A)
and alpha(2C), may be essential in inhibition of norepinephrine
release at the presynaptic membrane (Bucheler et al., 2002).
Another circuit that strongly influences HPA responses to
stress are projections from the median and dorsal raphe nuclei.
Serotonergic fibers to the parvocellular PVN (Sawchenko et al.,
1983; Zhang and Fogel, 2002) stimulate the HPA axis (Van
de Kar and Blair, 1999). Serotonin (5-HT) 2C receptors have
been implicated in 5-HT-induced activation of the HPA axis
(Heisler et al., 2007). However, 5-HT1A receptors have also
been shown to increase ACTH secretion (Rossi et al., 2010)
and knockout of 5-HT1b receptors causes a 50% reduction in
the diurnal rise in plasma corticosterone (Sollars et al., 2014).
Restraint-induced elevations in ACTH and corticosterone can
be increased by blocking 5-HT7 receptors (García-Iglesias et al.,
2013), while 5-HT can inhibit GABAergic synaptic transmission
at the PVN (Lee et al., 2008) providing evidence that the
effect of 5-HT on PVN neurons vary depending on where the
afferents terminate.
Limbic Pathways Regulate CRH Neuron
Function
Important information to PVN neurons also arises from a variety
of limbic structures, including the BNST, a group of related
subnuclei that directly project to the parvocellular PVN (Cullinan
et al., 1993; Dong et al., 2001). BNST neurons express androgen
receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor (ER; Simerly, 1993), and
play a crucial role in gonadal steroid regulation of HPA function.
The majority of these neurons are GABAergic (Cullinan et al.,
1993) and their activity can be enhanced by collateral CRH
afferents (Kash and Winder, 2006; Dabrowska et al., 2011).
The BNST also contains CRH neurons that project to the PVN
(Dong et al., 2001; Dong and Swanson, 2006) and contain
ARs (Heck and Handa, 2019a). Lesion studies show that BNST
GABAergic neurons inhibit CRH mRNA levels, and inhibit the
corticosterone responses to stress (Dunn, 1987; Herman et al.,
1994) as does treatment with androgens (Lund et al., 2005).
However, not all BNST neurons are inhibitory since selective
lesions of the anterior or lateral BNST can decrease ACTH
secretion (Gray et al., 1993; Herman et al., 1994). Nonetheless, the
BNST represents an important modulating region that is gonadal
steroid hormone-sensitive.
Other limbic regions known to modulate stress-responsive
HPA axis activity include the HC, prefrontal cortex (PFC), CeA,
medial AMY (MeA), and lateral septum. These regions do not
directly innervate parvocellular PVN but relay through areas
such as the BNST or peri-PVN (Dong et al., 2001; McKlveen et al.,
2015). The predominantly glutamatergic projections from HC
and PFC (Walaas and Fonnum, 1980) are translated to inhibitory
actions on the HPA axis via the GABAergic nature of these
relays (Diorio et al., 1993; Herman et al., 1998; Figueiredo et al.,
2003). By contrast, AMY to BNST and peri-PVN projections
are largely GABAergic. Thus, reducing the inhibitory tone is an
effective mechanism to increase HPA axis activity (Swanson and
Petrovich, 1998).
DEVELOPMENT OF NEUROPEPTIDES
AND THEIR REGULATION
Development of CRH
In rats, Crh mRNA is detected as early as embryonic day 17 in
the PVN (Grino et al., 1989), while the peptide is found to be
expressed the following embryonic day 18 (Bugnon et al., 1982).
In contrast to the CRH peptide, Crh mRNA is robustly expressed
during embryonic days 18 and 19, followed by a reduction on
days 20 and 21. CRH finally reaches adult levels of expression
by the end of postnatal day (PND) 7 (Grino et al., 1989). In
the mouse hypothalamus, CRH expression is detected initially
on embryonic day 13, but mimics the same trend as the rat and
decreases just before the time of birth (embryonic day 17–18 in
mice), followed by an increase to adult levels thereafter (Schmidt
et al., 2003).
Development of AVP and OT
In all species examined, AVP mRNA has been detected during
development before OT mRNA, and in greater quantities
(Wolf et al., 1984). In rodent studies, immunohistochemistry
(Whitnall et al., 1985), quantitative PCR (Lipari et al., 2001),
quantitative immunoassay (Sinding et al., 1980), and in situ
hybridization assays (Laurent et al., 1989), show that AVP is
consistently found in the developing fetus’ brain, while OT is
not significantly expressed until 1–2 days following parturition
(Yamashita et al., 1988; Laurent et al., 1989). Interestingly,
more recently, Tamborski et al. (2016) detected OT mRNA as
early as embryonic day 16 in females, but not until PND 2 in
males, indicating a sex difference in the development of central
oxytocin that may contribute to sex differences in adulthood.
The AVP circuitry also becomes sexually dimorphic with the
greater synthesis of AVP in males than females during early
postnatal stages (for more details, see reviews: Szot and Dorsa,
1993; Rood and De Vries, 2011; Rood et al., 2013). In adulthood,
many AVP populations of neurons are androgen-responsive (de
Vries and Al-Shamma, 1990). Both AVP and OT expressing-
neurons continue to increase postnatally in the PVN, and SON
of the hypothalamus (Van Tol et al., 1987; Almazan et al., 1989;
for further details of OT and AVP development, see reviews: di
Scala-Guenot et al., 1990; Bales and Perkeybile, 2012).
NEURODEVELOPMENT OF THE HPA AXIS
Estrogens and Androgens Have
Activational Actions on the HPA Axis
Gonadal steroids are crucial hormones in the regulation of the
adult HPA axis, resulting in stark differences in responsiveness of
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
the axis between sexes. Studies show that testosterone generally
depresses the stress response (Viau and Meaney, 1996) while
estradiol can either enhance or inhibit it (Handa et al., 2009;
Zuloaga et al., 2014). The actions of estrogens are controlled
by two major types of ER, ERα and ERβ. ERs are ligand-
activated transcription factors that bind to estrogen response
elements (ERE) in gene promoters, thereby providing a link
between gonadal hormones and transcriptional responses of
the HPA axis (McEwen et al., 1999). ERα and ERβ both have
unique yet overlapping expression patterns in the brain. ERα
is highest in the VMN, arcuate n. (ARC) and medial preoptic
area (MPOA), whereas ERβ is highly expressed in the PVN,
SCN, and SON (in the rat). Overlapping brain regions containing
both ERs include BNST, MeA, and MPOA (Hiroi et al., 2013).
The unique expression of ERα and ERβ accounts for various
physiological functions, specifically the HPA response to acute
stress considering that EREs exist upstream of AVP, OT, and
CRH gene promoters and can directly regulate gene transcription
(Shapiro et al., 2000; Miller et al., 2004; Pak et al., 2007; Hiroi
et al., 2013).
Estrogens have been shown to augment HPA axis activity
and the release of the stress-related secretagogues at several
sites due to the broad expression of ERs. In the adrenal
gland, estradiol increases the adrenal response to ACTH
administration (Patchev et al., 1996). Similarly, reports have
shown that at the level of the adenohypophysis, estradiol
results in a greater response to CRH demonstrated by increased
ACTH secretion. Ovariectomy decreases HPA axis stress-
responses and these effects can be reversed by replacement
of estradiol to females (Seale et al., 2004). Increased PVN
CRH immunoreactivity following estradiol treatment has also
been shown (Patchev et al., 1996), with more recent studies
displaying an overlap of ERβ expression in CRH neurons
of the mouse PVN, further suggesting a possible mechanism
for augmentation of HPA axis function by estrogens (Oyola
et al., 2017). By contrast, some studies have demonstrated
that estradiol decreases HPA axis activity or has no effect
(Young et al., 2001; Ochedalski et al., 2007). Treatment with
estradiol decreased neuronal activation in the PVN (Figueiredo
et al., 2007), as well as reduced ACTH secretion (Young
et al., 2001) and expression of Crh (Ochedalski et al., 2007).
Varying reports of the effects of estradiol on the HPA axis
could be explained by differing experimental conditions, such
as a dose or duration-dependent effect (Figueiredo et al.,
2007). Opposing effects of estradiol may also occur due to
different signaling mechanisms of ERα and ERβ (Tsigos and
Chrousos, 2002). In ovariectomized female rats, ERα agonist,
propylpyrazoletriol, increases stress-induced GC secretion while
diarylpropionitrile, an ERβ agonist, decreases stress-induced GC
secretion (Weiser and Handa, 2009). It has also been proposed
that ERα works by reducing the inhibitory tone of GABAergic
neurons that project to the PVN, such as those in the BNST,
hippocampus, and peri-PVN (Handa and Weiser, 2014) but has
limited expression in PVN-specific neurons (Oyola et al., 2017),
implicating indirect effects on the HPA axis (Weiser and Handa,
2009). Meanwhile, ERβ is proposed to directly alter HPA axis
function since it is found to be co-expressed with several PVN
neuropeptides, such as CRH, OT, and AVP (Lund et al., 2006;
Oyola et al., 2017).
Androgens are consistently reported to inhibit HPA axis
activation and activity (Rosinger et al., 2018; Heck and Handa,
2019a,b). Castration of male rodents removes endogenous
androgens, increasing stress-induced secretion of ACTH and
corticosterone (Handa et al., 2013). Further, testosterone or
dihydrotestosterone replacement is consistently shown to reverse
the inhibitory effects, reducing the ACTH and corticosterone
response to an acute stressor, suggesting the inhibitory role of
testosterone on the HPA axis (Williamson and Viau, 2008). The
alterations in ACTH and corticosterone were not accompanied
by alterations to CRH sensitivity in the pituitary, suggesting a
more central-mediated effect of androgens. Recent studies (Seale
et al., 2005b) show that the HPA axis is inhibited by testosterone
directly through ARs or indirectly through metabolism with
other co-regulatory elements that bind ARs or ERs.
Notably,
the
effects
of
dihydrotestosterone,
a
potent
androgenic metabolite of testosterone, are important in the
suppression of the HPA axis and GC secretion following stress.
Central administration of a 5α-reductase inhibitor, finasteride,
blunted the effects of testosterone, and not dihydrotestosterone,
implicating a central role for the enzyme, 5α-reductase,
in the reduction of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone in
HPA reactivity to stress (Handa et al., 2013). Consistent
with a study by Handa et al. (2013), dihydrotestosterone
injected near the PVN in a gonadectomized, adult male
decreases ACTH and corticosterone secretion (Lund et al.,
2006). Androgens additionally are reported to decrease CRH
response to stress in castrated males, indicating indirect
action of testosterone on CRH synthesis since ARs are not
expressed by hypophysiotropic CRH neurons (Bingaman et al.,
1994). In rodent studies, dihydrotestosterone is metabolized
intracellularly to 5α-androstane 3β, 17β-diol (3β-diol), which
subsequently binds ERβ to inhibit the HPA axis. Thus, although
interactions between androgen and estrogen actions can
occur at the level of ligand identity, interactions on a
molecular level are harder to identify. Recently, Mahfouz
et al. (2016) showed a significant overlap between AR and ER
in MPOA and hippocampus in rodents, using genome-wide
spatial co-expression of AR and ER targets. Whether this
overlap indicates functional interactions at a cellular level
in rodents remains to be determined, with the caveat that
additional factors may modify these cellular mechanisms
in humans.
It has been proposed that sex differences arise, in part,
due to varying levels of GR and MR and the availability
of
corticosteroids
in
the
brain.
Corticosteroid-binding
globulin (CBG), a glycoprotein produced by the liver, binds
to circulating corticosterone. CBG enhances corticosteroid
stability during transport to target tissues, but it also prevents
corticosteroids from binding to GR or MR (de Kloet et al.,
2005).
Only
free
corticosterone
can
exert
physiological
effects through its actions on its receptors. Thus, it is
important
to
make
a
distinction
when
comparing
total
plasma
corticosterone
levels
and
available
corticosterone.
In females, CBG is found at levels that are 2-fold higher
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
than in males, but levels of total corticosterone are also
significantly higher. Therefore, the increased levels of CBG
may help buffer the increased amount of total plasma
corticosterone, contributing to the lack of a sex difference
in free corticosterone levels (McCormick et al., 2002). Moreover,
CBG
binds
acute
stress-induced
corticosterone,
resulting
in a delayed free corticosterone response in comparison
to total plasma corticosterone, and implicating CBG as
an
important
buffer
for
available
corticosteroids
(Qian
et al., 2011). The greater levels of CBG in females likely
contributes to the increased HPA axis activity when compared
to males, whereas, low levels of CBG in males may lead to
higher availability of free corticosterone and a more robust
negative feedback on the HPA axis (Viau and Meaney, 1996;
Tinnikov, 1999).
Evidence for Organizational Actions of
Gonadal Steroids on HPA Axis
The sex
differences in adult stress responses may also
be programmed by neonatal exposure to gonadal steroids
suggesting an organizational effect on the neural circuitry
controlling patterns of corticosteroid secretion (Seale et al.,
2005a,b) and shaping brain morphology in some brain sites
controlling HPA axis function in adulthood (Green and
McCormick, 2016). The mechanism(s) by which gonadal steroid
hormones act to influence HPA function has not been completely
resolved but evidence for androgens and estrogens modulating
adrenal (Kitay, 1965), pituitary (Coyne and Kitay, 1969; Viau and
Meaney, 2004) and hypothalamic functions (Handa et al., 1994;
Viau and Meaney, 1996; Viau et al., 2001) has been reported. The
considerable overlap in gonadal and adrenal steroid hormone
receptor expression within the neural circuitry of the PVN
supports this as a mechanism (Figure 2; see review Goel et al.,
2014 for a more in-depth overview).
There are two important periods during development in
which a surge of testosterone has been reported to defeminize
and masculinize the brain of male rodents: late gestation
and shortly after birth (Weisz and Ward, 1980). Whereas
many studies have examined the sexual differentiation of
reproductive components of the brain, much less has been
published regarding the organizational differentiation of the
HPA axis. Postnatal gonadectomy of male rats has been
reported to cause a more female-like HPA axis activity in
adulthood, characterized by increased basal and stress-induced
corticosterone secretion (Patchev et al., 1995). Further, inhibiting
the aromatase enzyme to prevent the conversion of testosterone
to estradiol in neonatal males, has similar lasting consequences of
increased basal and stress-induced corticosterone in adulthood.
These results implicate the actions of estradiol, as the result
of the aromatization of testosterone in the male on the
organization of sex differences in the HPA axis (Lucion et al.,
1996; de Kloet et al., 1998). The organizational actions of
perinatal steroids have been further supported by studies
examining the pulsatile patterns of corticosterone secretion
throughout the day, where males show a lower amplitude
and frequency of corticosteroid pulses compared to females
(Seale et al., 2005a). Administration of an AR antagonist
in a perinatal male increases the amplitude and frequency
of corticosteroid pulses to resemble that of adult females.
Moreover, perinatal gonadectomy of males also leads to a
female-like pulsatile pattern in adulthood, while a single dose
of testosterone following gonadectomy reverses this effect.
Moreover, females treated with testosterone within 24 h of birth
show a male-like pattern of corticosterone secretion (Seale et al.,
2005a,b). These studies implicate an organizational action of
testosterone directly through AR or indirectly through ER, via
the aromatization of testosterone to estradiol, on the HPA axis
(Seale et al., 2005a,b).
Development of the HPA Axis During Early
Life
During pregnancy, the stress response of the fetus is immature
and relies heavily on inputs from the maternal and placental
systems (Gunn et al., 2013). During late gestation, the fetus
becomes capable of secreting CRH and ACTH in response
to maternal stress, resulting in corticosterone production
(Gunn et al., 2013). Basal levels of corticosterone during this
time are similar to those of adults (Meaney et al., 1985b),
suggesting functional HPA axis activity. From PND4 to PND14,
basal corticosteroid levels drop, accompanied by substantially
decreased ACTH and corticosterone production in response
to stress (Schmidt et al., 2003). This period is known as the
‘‘stress hypo-responsive period’’ (SHRP; Buschdorf and Meaney,
2016). During this time, the expression of GR and MR mRNA
is significantly increased (Yi et al., 1994). Accompanied by
the lower levels of corticosterone, these changes are thought
to dampen the HPA axis responses. Stress exposure during
the SHRP induces a slight increase of expression of c-Fos
mRNA in the PVN but does not influence ACTH or peripheral
corticosterone secretion (Levine, 1994). Such data suggests an
adrenal insensitivity may also play a role in the SHRP, but further
mechanisms have not yet been determined.
Recent studies show that SHRP can be maintained through
the influence of maternal care (Buschdorf and Meaney, 2016).
Maternal care, quantified through observations of pup licking
and maternal arch-backed nursing, are highly correlated with
each other (Caldji et al., 1998). Dams categorized by levels
of maternal care show a causal relationship to epigenetic
reprogramming that alters negative feedback sensitivity through
changes in DNA methylation and histone modifications (Weaver
et al., 2004; Buschdorf and Meaney, 2016). Several studies suggest
this may be related to the transcription factor, nerve growth
factor-inducible protein A (NGFI-A) which binds to a promoter
region on exon 1–7 of GR (Caldji et al., 1998) consisting of two
CpG dinucleotides on opposing ends of the response element
that are methylated on the day of birth. Offspring that received
high maternal care show higher amounts of demethylation of 5′
CpG sites in the NGFI-A binding region in adulthood (Buschdorf
and Meaney, 2016). Offspring that received low levels of maternal
care displayed no change in methylation. Point mutation studies
indicate that the NGFI-A binding strength and gene expression is
determined by the presence of a methyl group at the 5′ CpG site,
where a mutated 5′ CpG site resulted in increased transcription
of NR3C1, the gene encoding GR (Weaver et al., 2004). These
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
FIGURE 2 | Relationship of inputs of adrenal and gonadal steroid hormone receptors to the circuitry of the HPA axis. Several brain regions secrete adrenal and
gonadal hormones that act on receptors in the peri-PVN and paraventricular nucleus (PVN). Much of the expression shows considerable overlap.
studies support the actions of low maternal care to program
increased GR expression and increase feedback sensitivity of
adult offspring (Liu et al., 1997). Additional studies show
decreased corticosterone and ACTH responses to acute stress in
adulthood of high maternal care-exposed offspring. Such data
further support epigenetic reprogramming of the 5′ CpG site.
A genome analysis of chromosome 18 containing NR3C1 found
that varying amounts of maternal care correlated with changes
in protocadherin loci (McGowan et al., 2011) which regulate
the development of the CNS (McGowan et al., 2011) thereby
implicating maternal care during the SHRP for proper brain
development. However, it is important to note that the promoter
region on exon 1–7 of GR only accounts for about 1% of all
GR mRNA transcripts in the hippocampus. Reports examining
promoter region on exon 1–7 of GR methylation found that
upregulation of NGFI-A did not alter stress-induced activation
of the promoter region on exon 1–7 of GR transcription or total
expression of GR (Makino et al., 1995). Consistent with this,
Witzmann et al. (2012) showed low methylation levels at the 5′
CpG site following acute stress, further indicating that NGFI may
not drive the promoter region on exon 1–7 of GR transcription
nor play a role during the acute stress response (Witzmann et al.,
2012). Thus, while epigenetic reprogramming is altered through
maternal care, specific mechanisms in which this occurs are
still unclear.
Maternal separation during fetal development is another
variable that influences HPA axis development and adult
patterns of stress-reactivity (Boccia and Pederson, 2001).
Prolonged separation from the dam is associated with a
hyperactive HPA axis and increased anxiety- and depressive-like
behaviors in adult offspring (Liu et al., 1997). In contrast,
brief separation increases maternal attentiveness to pups,
resulting in better attenuation of the stress-response (Boccia
and Pederson, 2001). Rodent studies have demonstrated
that these changes are partially a consequence of alterations
in
the
dopaminergic
system
since
prolonged
maternal
separation
caused
decreased
dopamine
uptake
associated
with changes in dopamine transporter expression (Curley
et al., 2011). This is thought to lead to increased stress-
induced dopamine activity resulting in a hyperactive HPA
axis. 5-HT signaling has also been shown to be altered
by maternal separation with decreased metabolism in the
AMY and enhanced concentrations of 5-HT and associated
metabolites in the dorsal raphe nucleus and cingulate cortex
(Arborelius
and
Eklund,
2007).
Long-term
consequences
include the altered function of 5-HT receptors and transporters,
as well as decreased expression of 5-HT receptor subtypes
in the PFC and hypothalamus (Ladd et al., 2005). These
changes correlate with increased anxiety- and depressive-like
behaviors, suggesting that a signaling pathway linking the
dopaminergic and serotonergic systems with stress responses
exists, however, specific mechanisms have yet to be elucidated
(Zakharova et al., 2009).
Paternal influences on the stress axis of adult mice have
also been reported. Males exposed to 6 weeks of chronic
variable stress before breeding had offspring of both sexes with
reduced HPA axis activation to acute restraint in adulthood
(Rodgers et al., 2013). This correlated with gene transcription
changes in the PVN and BNST of offspring suggesting the
possibility of epigenetic reprogramming through the male
lineage. Studies have also investigated paternal retrieval and
grooming effects in offspring. Testosterone levels were decreased
in offspring from rats with increased paternal retrieval, as
was AVP expression in the BNST, and this correlated with
reduced aggressiveness in social interaction tests, such as
the resident-intruder test (Frazier et al., 2006). Such data
suggests an important hormonal link between paternal care,
testosterone levels, and aggression. AVP immunoreactivity in
the PVN was also found to be increased with reduced paternal
care (Rodgers et al., 2013), correlating with increased stress-
induced corticosterone secretion, further linking paternal care
and HPA axis responses. Nonetheless, specific mechanisms of
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
how paternal transmission to the offspring occurs have yet to
be elucidated.
The Development of the HPA Axis at
Puberty
Puberty is a unique developmental event, influenced largely by
the maturation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG)
axis, which is responsible for gonadal maturation and adult
hormone secretory patterns (Ojeda and Urbanski, 1994). Some
reports also suggest that this represents a second critical period
for organizational actions of gonadal hormones that further
sculpt the HPA axis into its adult-like characteristics (Romeo,
2003; see review Romeo, 2010 for a more thorough analysis of
age-dependent changes in the HPA axis).
Importantly, HPA axis reactivity is significantly greater before
puberty than after puberty. Rat studies in males show an
increased and prolonged stress-responsive release of ACTH
and GC prepubertally in comparison to post-pubertal animals
(Goldman et al., 1973; Romeo et al., 2004a). Similarly, the stress-
induced activity of CRH neurons in the prepubertal PVN is
greater than that of adults, demonstrating that the prolonged
prepubertal pattern of corticosterone and ACTH may be driven
by increased hypothalamic CRH synthesis (Romeo et al., 2004b;
Viau et al., 2005) and altered by the onset of male puberty. These
findings indicate a blunted GC-dependent negative feedback in
prepubertal males (Romeo et al., 2004a).
Studies in pre-pubertal male rodents show elevated HPA
activation, with increases in CRH activation following restraint
in comparison to adults, indicating that PVN CRH neuron
activity changes across puberty (Romeo et al., 2006). Following
a corticosterone injection, Romeo and McEwen (2006) showed
increased GR expression in regions of the brain, such as
HC, AMY, and PFC, in adolescents compared to adults.
This observation further indicated that puberty represents a
critical period during development that renders the brain more
vulnerable to environmental perturbations and increases the
risk of HPA-related neuropathologies (Romeo and McEwen,
2006). The changes in the HPA axis do not appear to be the
consequence of pubertal rises in testosterone (Romeo, 2003).
However, because the initial increase of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) secretion and kisspeptin occurs near the
onset of puberty, one possibility is that changes in the HPA
axis observed across puberty are preprogrammed developmental
events that are independent of changes in gonadal hormones
(Romeo, 2003).
Some reports further suggest that the pubertal rise in estradiol
may also play a role in shaping the adult HPA axis. Studies
in pre-pubertal females show an inhibitory effect of estradiol
on stress-induced HPA axis function, while estradiol treatment
in post-pubertal females shows a stimulatory effect of estradiol
during the acute stress response (Evuarherhe et al., 2009).
Further, regardless of whether females were ovariectomized
before or after puberty, administration of estradiol consistently
elevated basal and stress-induced GC secretion, as well as GC
pulse amplitude and frequency (Evuarherhe et al., 2009). Data
suggests there is a reversal effect of estradiol on HPA axis
function during puberty where estradiol is inhibitory before
puberty and stimulatory post-puberty, implying an estradiol-
independent mechanism in the development of the HPA axis
during puberty in adult females (Evuarherhe et al., 2009).
Disruption of the Maternal-Fetal HPA Axis
and Adult Disease Risk
A growing body of studies has described fetal risk factors
for adult diseases that form the basis for the hypothesis of
the Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD;
Sandman et al., 2015). The DOHaD postulates that there is a
critical period of development where the fetus is most sensitive
to certain environmental influences that significantly impact
short- and long-term health (Harris and Seckl, 2011). Such
environmental influences include maternal stress, which is a
likely correlate of fetal overexposure to GC, implying a common
pathway in which environmental insults become linked between
mother and fetus (Edwards et al., 1993; Cottrell and Seckl, 2009).
Commonly, administration of synthetic GCs has been a
common clinical treatment for women at risk for preterm labor,
to improve survival of the newborn by allowing proper lung
maturation (Liggins and Howie, 1972; Crowther et al., 2019).
Betamethasone or DEX is often used (Roberts and Dalziel, 2006)
in the clinic and they do not appear to differ in efficacy (Crowther
et al., 2019). DEX has also been used to treat female fetuses
diagnosed with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH; Speiser
et al., 2010), an autosomal recessive disorder that results in
the deficiency of 21-hydroxylase that impairs the synthesis of
corticosterone and causes impaired synthesis of adrenal enzymes
(Speiser et al., 2010). Therefore, steroid metabolism is redirected
to adrenal androgens, resulting in abnormal masculinization of
genital development and behaviors in females. Consequently,
dexamethasone is administered to female CAH fetuses to
inhibit adrenal androgen production and minimize these effects.
Notably, these females represent a population that is exposed
to dexamethasone early in gestation, a critical period for fetal
development. More recent studies have begun to elucidate long-
and short- term consequences of prenatal exposure to excess
GC, causing programming effects in the HPA axis of the fetus
that result in dysregulation of important physiological functions
in adulthood.
A key player mediating the consequences of maternal
elevations of GC from stress is the placenta. During pregnancy,
GC concentrations in maternal blood are higher than those of the
fetus. This is a result of 11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type
2 (11β-HSD2) expression by the placenta (Stroud et al., 2016).
11β-HSD2 oxidizes maternal corticosteroids into its inactive
11-keto derivatives (Benediktsson et al., 1997; Holmes et al.,
2006), which buffers the increased levels of maternal GCs to
the fetus. Levels of 11β-HSD2 are known to increase during
early and mid-gestation, followed by a drop in late gestation to
allow GC mediated fetal lung maturation. Furthermore, rodent
studies suggest that the drop in 11β-HSD2 during late gestation
allows increased transport of maternal GC to the fetus, increasing
the vulnerability of the fetus during this period to unwanted
programming effects (Edwards et al., 1993). Inhibition of 11β-
HSD2 with carbenoxolone during late gestation shows effects
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
similar to excess GC, further suggesting the importance of 11β-
HSD2 in protecting the fetus from overexposure of GC (Brown
et al., 1993; Lindsay et al., 1996; Holmes et al., 2006). Importantly,
the administration of synthetic GCs bypasses the 11β-HSD
system of the placenta since synthetic GCs are not a substrate for
the enzyme (Figure 3; Low et al., 1994; Walker et al., 1994).
The short- and long- term effects on the fetus of maternal
elevations of GC due to prenatal stress or prenatal exposure
to synthetic GC have been found to depend on the length
of exposure and time during development at which the insult
occurs (Barbazanges et al., 1996). Fujioka et al. (1999) highlighted
duration-dependent effects in rodents exposed to excess GCs
in CRH-expressing PVN neurons, where chronic prenatal stress
caused degeneration and apoptosis in these neurons (Baquedano
et al., 2011). However, brief prenatal stress did not cause a change
in CRH-expressing PVN neurons, suggesting that the duration of
the stressor is important for impacting the normal development
of PVN neurons (Fujioka et al., 1999) and perhaps neurons
controlling the HPA axis (Insel et al., 1988).
Other studies have investigated the time-dependent effects
of fetal exposure to excess GC. In rodents, in utero exposure
to elevated GCs during late gestation has been shown to cause
hyperactivity of the HPA axis in adulthood with elevated levels
of basal GC and ACTH and decreased CRH expression (Kapoor
et al., 2006), perhaps suggesting reduced negative feedback.
Increased peaks and prolonged secretion of these hormones in
response to stressors have also been observed (Muneoka et al.,
1997; Shoener et al., 2006). In contrast, Kamphuis et al. (2002)
demonstrated that postnatal exposure to a synthetic GC reduced
stress-induced HPA activity in adulthood, further suggesting
that the timing of GC elevation plays a crucial role in the
developing stress response. Importantly, studies have also shown
that treatment with allopregnanolone and 3β-diol can reverse the
hyperactive HPA response to immune challenges in adult rats
that were prenatally stressed (Brunton et al., 2015). This raises
the possibility that the HPA axis can retain sufficient plasticity
postnatally to allow reversal of maternal HPA axis hyperactivity
in the offspring.
Offspring of rodent dams prenatally treated with GC during
late gestation typically exhibit reduced birth weights that
were consistently reduced throughout life compared to control
offspring (Carbone et al., 2012). Reductions in birth weight
have been suggested to be a direct consequence of a lack of
placental 11β-HSD2 activity and excessive GC exposure on the
fetus (Holmes et al., 2006), rather than due to malnutrition
or poor maternal care (Nyirenda et al., 2001). Carbone et al.
(2012) further observed reduced long bone lengths through
PND21 in female, but not male, offspring prenatally exposed
to DEX. This was thought to be linked to a dysregulation in
growth hormone signaling, thereby reducing transcription of
the Igf-1 gene (Carbone et al., 2012). Similarly, Ghrh mRNA
transcripts in the ARC of female, but not male, offspring were
reduced (Carbone et al., 2012). Together, such data suggest a
sex-specific mechanism in which prenatal GC exposure causes a
reduction in Ghrh to decrease circulating GH, resulting in lower
plasma IGF-1, and reduced birth weights. Evidence for molecular
mechanisms underlying these events remains to be determined.
It is well-established that prenatal insults can impact the
autonomic system in adult offspring exposed to fetal GC.
Such long-term consequences include cardiovascular function
FIGURE 3 | Prenatal exposure to excess GCs has short- and long- term effects. During pregnancy, 11-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2
(11β-HSD2) expression in the placenta mediates the fetus’ exposure to excess maternal GC. 11β-HSD2 regulates the level of active GCs through the oxidation of
maternal corticosteroids into inactive 11-keto derivatives, reducing fetal exposure to active GCs. While 11β-HSD2 concentration in the placenta is high during most
of gestation, 11β-HSD2 levels drop during late gestation. As a result, fetal exposure to maternal GCs increases, leading to short term effects, observed immediately
at birth into adulthood. To note, synthetic GC does not act as a substrate for 11β-HSD2 and bypasses this system to the fetus.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
(O’Regan et al., 2008). Angiotensinogen is an important
component of the renin-angiotensin-system (RAS) that is
upregulated by GCs (Tamura et al., 1995). Estrogens are
found to have inhibitory influences over angiotensinogen gene
expression (Dzau and Hermann, 1982), implying sex-dependent
programming
effects
could
be
correlated
with
increased
sensitivity to GC-mediated hypertension in females (O’Regan
et al., 2004). Moreover, adult female offspring exposed to prenatal
stress display a more prolonged increase in systolic blood
pressure and a longer recovery period when subjected to restraint
stress than males (Igosheva et al., 2007). Such data are consistent
with recent observations of altered R-R interval variability
(Heart rate variability; HRV) in adult offspring exposed to
elevated fetal GCs. Adult female, but not male offspring of
prenatal GC treated dams exhibit a reduction in high-frequency
power when compared to control (Madhavpeddi et al., 2020).
Because
high-frequency
power
represents
parasympathetic
activity (Akselrod et al., 1981), these effects suggest that prenatal
GC treatment programs the parasympathetic nervous system,
which, in female offspring, is responsible for altered pressor
and tachycardic responses. Whether this is the same as the
responses of prenatal stress remains to be determined but
implicate sex-specific programming effects of the ANS due to
excess prenatal GC exposure.
In addition to alterations in ANS and neuroendocrine
function in adult offspring exposed to elevated GC levels in
development, the risk for adult metabolic dysfunction is also
increased. Female rats prenatally exposed to high levels of
GCs are hyperinsulinemic after oral glucose administration,
with alterations in the expression of genes that mediate GC
and lipid metabolism in subcutaneous fat (Brunton et al.,
2013). By contrast, prenatal GC exposure was found to
cause hyperglycemia following oral glucose in male offspring
(Nyirenda et al., 1998), with alterations in the expression of genes
that mediate GC and lipid metabolism in skeletal muscle and
liver. These observations suggest sex-specific mechanisms where
fetal exposure to GCs programs the stress response, leading
to a dysregulation of glucose-insulin homeostasis (Brunton
et al., 2013) and increased risk for diabetes mellitus type 2 in
adulthood (Nyirenda et al., 1998). Moreover, prenatal exposure
to GC alters hepatic gene expression, with decreased mRNA
transcripts encoding Pparα and Pgc1α, key regulators of lipid
and energy metabolism, and an increase of plasma triglyceride
concentrations in offspring (Drake et al., 2010; Brunton et al.,
2013). These observations suggest a mechanism in which fetal
GCs affect important genes in fatty acid metabolism and increase
the risk for hepatic steatosis in adulthood (Carbone et al., 2012).
Future Studies on DOHaD
The developmental origins of the disease model posit that events
during fetal and early-life correlate with long-term consequences
that encompass the development of neuroendocrine signaling
and
ultimately
susceptibility
to
neuropsychological
and
neuropathological diseases in adulthood. Improper development
of the HPA axis is commonly suggested as the primary
neuroendocrine
system
affected
by
alterations
in
the
prenatal environment.
A growing body of evidence further suggests the placenta’s
important role in mediating maternal-fetal interactions during
the prenatal period. Placental hormones and cytokines are
thought to regulate the effects of maternal stress on the fetal
HPA axis, but it is important to consider the nature and
timing of prenatal insults, as evidence suggests exposure to
prenatal stress during various gestational periods and varying
lengths of time exerts different effects on HPA axis activity
(Sandman et al., 2015). However, precise mechanisms in which
prenatal stressors influence neuroendocrine signaling between
the maternal-placental-fetal interface are still unclear. In humans,
a potential prospect is placental CRH, which is upregulated
by maternal and fetal cortisol. Studies implicate placental CRH
to directly mediate fetal pituitary-adrenal growth and steroid
production, factors that are known to significantly affect HPA
axis function during development and in adulthood (Green et al.,
2016). Notably, more recent evidence examines the effects of
fetal sex in placental crosstalk. In rodents, placentas of female
fetuses show greater expression of genes associated with immune
and endocrine function, while placentas of male fetuses tend
to express more genes involved in inflammation (Cvitic et al.,
2013). Moreover, the inherent sex differences in fetal metabolic
needs and timing of GC administration related to maturation and
decline of placental function towards the end of gestation could
help us understand mechanisms by which fetal sex influences
the maternal-placental-fetal interface, a primary regulator of
the development of the HPA axis (Lassance et al., 2015:
Sun et al., 2020).
Although there is a long history of research behind the
HPA axis and development, much remains to be revealed.
It is well known the HPA axis holds a fundamental role in
maintaining proper neuroendocrine function and a large body
of research strongly correlates the dysregulation of the HPA axis
to neuropsychological and physiological disease risk. Therefore,
it is reasonable to suggest a strong association between the
development of the HPA axis to such diseases, emphasizing the
importance of future developmental studies to address this large
gap in our current knowledge.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RH and TH conceived of topic. RH wrote original outline.
JS, NB, and MR wrote original manuscript. SM conceived of
and constructed figures. AB proofread the manuscript and
updated references. RH and TH edited and performed final
proofreading. All authors contributed to the article and approved
the submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) R01 DK105826 (RH)
and National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) U54 MH118919
(TH and RH).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
REFERENCES
Abe, K., and Critchlow, V. (1980). Delayed feedback inhibition of stress-induced
activation of pituitary-adrenal function: effects of varying dose, rate and
duration of corticosterone administration and of telencephalon removal.
Neuroendocrinology 31, 349–354. doi: 10.1159/000123100
Ahima, R. S., and Harlan, R. E. (1990). Charting of type II glucocorticoid
receptor-like immunoreactivity in the rat central nervous system. Neuroscience
39, 579–604. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(90)90244-x
Akana, S. F., Cassio, C. S., Du, J. Z., Levin, N., and Dallman, M. F. (1986).
Reset of feedback in the adrenocortical system: an apparent shift in sensitivity
of adrenocorticotropin to inhibition by corticosterone between morning and
evening. Endocrinology 119, 2325–2332. doi: 10.1210/endo-119-5-2325
Akselrod, S., Gordon, D., Ubel, F. A., Shannon, D. C., Barger, A. C., and
Cohen, R. J. (1981). Power spectrum analysis of heart rate fluctuations: a
quantitative probe of beat-to-beat cardiovascular control. Science 213, 220–222.
doi: 10.1126/science.6166045
Almazan, G., Lefebvre, D. L., and Zingg, H. H. (1989). Ontogeny of hypothalamic
vasopressin, oxytocin and somatostatin gene expression. Dev. Brain Res. 45,
69–75. doi: 10.1016/0165-3806(89)90008-4
Amar, A., and Weiss, M. (2003). Pituitary anatomy and physiology. Neurosurg.
Clin. N. Am. 14, 11–23. doi: 10.1016/s1042-3680(02)00017-7
Arborelius, L., and Eklund, M. B. (2007). Both long and brief maternal
separation produces persistent changes in tissue levels of brain monoamines
in middle-aged female rats. Neuroscience 145, 738–750. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2006.12.007
Bales, K. L., and Perkeybile, A. M. (2012). Developmental experiences and the
oxytocin receptor system. Horm. Behav. 61, 313–319. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.
2011.12.013
Baquedano, E., García-Cáceres, C., Diz-Chaves, Y., Lagunas, N., Calmarza-Font, I.,
Azcoitia, I., et al. (2011). Prenatal stress induces long-term effects in cell
turnover in the hippocampus-hypothalamus-pituitary axis in adult male rats.
PLoS One 6, 1–9. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027549
Barbazanges, A., Piazza, P. V., Moal, M. L., and Maccari, S. (1996). Maternal
glucocorticoid secretion mediates long-term effects of prenatal stress.
J. Neurosci. 16, 3943–3949. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-12-03943.1996
Benediktsson, R., Calder, A. A., Edwards, C. R., and Seckl, J. R. (1997).
Placental 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: a key regulator of fetal
glucocorticoid exposure. Clin. Endocrinol. 46, 161–166. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
2265.1997.1230939.x
Biag, J., Huang, Y., Gou, L., Hintiryan, H., Askarinam, A., Hahn, J. D., et al. (2012).
Cyto- and chemoarchitecture of the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus in
the C57BL/6J male mouse: a study of immunostaining and multiple fluorescent
tract tracing. J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 6–33. doi: 10.1002/cne.22698
Bingaman, E. W., Magnuson, D. J., Gray, T. S., and Handa, R. J. (1994). Androgen
inhibits the increases in hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
and CRH-immunoreactivity following gonadectomy. Neuroendocrinology 59,
228–234. doi: 10.1159/000126663
Boccia, M. L., and Pederson, C. A. (2001). Brief vs. long maternal separations in
infancy: contrasting relationships with adult maternal behavior and lactation
levels of aggression and anxiety. Psychoneuroendocrinology 26, 657–672.
doi: 10.1016/s0306-4530(01)00019-1
Bondy, C. A., Whitnall, M. H., Brady, L. S., and Gainer, H. (1989).
Coexisting peptides in hypothalamic neuroendocrine systems: some functional
implications. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 9, 427–446. doi: 10.1007/BF00712791
Bornstein, S. R., Ehrhart-Bornstein, M., Usadel, H., Böckmann, M., and
Scherbaum, W. A. (1991). Morphological evidence for a close interaction of
chromaffin cells with cortical cells within the adrenal gland. Cell Tissue Res.
265, 1–9. doi: 10.1007/BF00318133
Borrow, A. P., Stover, S. A., Bales, N. J., and Handa, R. J. (2019). ‘‘Posterior
pituitary hormones,’’ in Hormonal Signaling in Biology and Medicine:
Comprehensive Modern Endocrinology, ed. G. Litwack (Cambridge: Academic
Press), 203–226.
Bradbury, M. J., Akana, S. F., and Dallman, M. F. (1994). Roles of type
I and II corticosteroid receptors in regulation of basal activity in the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis during the diurnal trough and the
peak: evidence for a non-additive effect of combined receptor occupation.
Endocrinology 134, 1286–1296. doi: 10.1210/endo.134.3.8119168
Brown, R. W., Chapman, K. E., Edwards, C. R., and Seckl, J. R. (1993).
Human placental 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: evidence for and
partial purification of a distinct NAD-dependent isoform. Endocrinology 132,
2614–2621. doi: 10.1210/endo.132.6.8504762
Brunton, P. J., Donadio, M. V., Yao, S. T., Greenwood, M., Seckl, J. R.,
Murphy, D., et al. (2015). 5A-reduced neurosteroids sex-dependently reverse
central prenatal programming of neuroendocrine stress responses in rats.
J. Neurosci. 35, 666–677. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5104-13.2015
Brunton, P. J., Sullivan, K. M., Kerrigan, D., Russell, J. A., Seckl, J. R.,
and Drake, A. J. (2013). Sex-specific effects of prenatal stress on glucose
homoeostasis and peripheral metabolism in rats. J. Endocrinol. 217, 161–173.
doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0540
Bucheler, M. M., Hadamek, K., and Hein, L. (2002). Two α2 adrenergic receptor
subtypes, α2A and α2C, inhibit transmitter release in the brain of gene-targeted
mice. Neuroscience 109, 819–826. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(01)00531-0
Bugnon, D., Fellmann, A., Gouget, A., and Cardot, J. (1982). Corticoliberin
in rat brain: immunocytochemical identification and localization of a
novel neuroglandular system. Neurosci. Lett. 30, 25–30. doi: 10.1016/0304-
3940(82)90006-4
Buschdorf, J. P., and Meaney, M. J. (2016). Epigenetics/programming in the HPA
axis. Compr. Physiol. 6, 87–110. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c140027
Caldji, C., Tannenbaum, B., Sharma, S., Francis, D., Plotsky, P. M., and
Meaney, M. J. (1998). Maternal care during infancy regulates the development
of neural systems mediating the expression of fearfulness in the rat.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 95, 5335–5340. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.9.
5335
Carbone, D. L., Zuloaga, D. G., Hirori, R., Foradori, C. D., Legare, M. E.,
and Handa, R. J. (2012). Prenatal dexamethasone exposure potentiates
diet-induced hepatosteatosis and decreases plasma IGF-I in a sex-specific
fashion. Endocrinology 153, 295–306. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1601
Chalmers, D. T., Lovenberg, T. W., and De Souza, E. B. (1995). Localization
of novel corticotropin-releasing factor receptor (CRF2) MRNA expression to
specific subcortical nuclei in rat brain: comparison with CRF1 receptor MRNA
expression. J. Neurosci. 15, 6340–6350. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-10-06
340.1995
Chen, R., Lewis, K. A., Perrin, M. H., and Vale, W. W. (1993). Expression cloning
of a human corticotropin-releasing-factor receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
90, 8967–8971. doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.19.8967
Cole, R. L., and Sawchenko, P. E. (2002). Neurotransmitter regulation of cellular
activation and neuropeptide gene expression in the paraventricular nucleus of
the hypothalamus. J. Neurosci. 22, 959–969. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-
00959.2002
Cottrell, E. C., and Seckl, J. R. (2009). Prenatal stress, glucocorticoids and the
programming of adult disease. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 3:19. doi: 10.3389/neuro.
08.019.2009
Coulter, C. L. (2004). Functional biology of the primate fetal adrenal gland:
advances in technology provide new insight. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 31,
475–484. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1681.2004.04031.x
Coyne, M. D., and Kitay, J. I. (1969). Effect of ovariectomy on pituitary secretion
of ACTH. Endocrinology 85, 1097–1102. doi: 10.1210/endo-85-6-1097
Crowther, C. A., Middleton, P. F., Voysey, M., Askie, L., Zhang, S., Martlow, T. K.,
et al. (2019). Effects of repeat prenatal corticosteroids given to women at risk
of preterm birth: an individual participant data meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 16,
1–25. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002771
Cullinan, W. E., Herman, J. P., and Watson, S. J. (1993). Ventral subicular
interaction with the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus: evidence for a
relay in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. J. Comp. Neurol. 332, 1–20.
doi: 10.1002/cne.903320102
Cummings, S., and Seybold, V. (1988). Relationship of alpha-1- and alpha-
2-adrenergic-binding sites to regions of the paraventricular nucleus of
the hypothalamus containing corticotropin-releasing factor and vasopressin
neurons. Neuroendocrinology 47, 523–532. doi: 10.1159/000124965
Cunningham, E. T., Bohn, M. C., and Sawchenko, P. E. (1990). Organization
of adrenergic inputs to the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the
hypothalamus in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 292, 651–667. doi: 10.1002/cne.
902920413
Curley, J. P., Jensen, C. L., Mashoodh, R., and Champagne, F. A. (2011).
Social influences on neurobiology and behavior: epigenetic effects during
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
development. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 352–371. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2010.06.005
Cvitic, S., Longtine, M. S., Hackl, H., Wagner, K., Nelson, M. D., Desoye, G.,
et al. (2013). The human placental sexome differs between trophoblast
and epithelium and villous vessel endothelium. PLoS One 8:e79233.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079233
Dabrowska, J., Hazra, R., Ahern, T. H., Guo, J., McDonald, A. J., Mascagni, F.,
et al. (2011). Neuroanatomical evidence for reciprocal regulation of the
corticotrophin-releasing factor and oxytocin systems in the hypothalamus and
the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis of the rat: implications for balancing
stress and affect. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 1312–1326. doi: 10.1016/j.
psyneuen.2011.03.003
Dallman, M. F., Akana, S. F., Jacobson, L., Levin, N., Cascio, C. S., and
Shinsako, J. (1987). Characterization of corticosterone feedback regulation of
ACTH secretion. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 512, 402–414. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.
1987.tb24976.x
Dallman, M. F., Makara, G. B., Roberts, J. L., Levin, N., and Blum, M. (1985).
Corticotrope response to removal of releasing factors and corticosteroids
in vivo. Endocrinology 117, 2190–2197. doi: 10.1210/endo-117-5-2190
Day, H. E. W., Campeau, S., Watson, S. J., and Akil, H. (1997). Distribution
of α1a-, α1b- and α1d-adrenergic receptor MRNA in the rat brain and
spinal cord. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 13, 115–139. doi: 10.1016/s0891-0618(97)
00042-2
Day, H. E. W., Campeau, S., Watson, S. J., and Akil, H. (1999). Expression
of α1b adrenoceptor MRNA in corticotropin-releasing hormone-containing
cells of the rat hypothalamus and its regulation by corticosterone. J. Neurosci.
19,10098–10106. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-22-10098.1999
de Kloet, E. R., Joëls, M., and Holsboer, F. (2005). Stress and the brain: from
adaptation to disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 463–475. doi: 10.1038/nrn1683
de Kloet, E. R., Vreugdenhil, E., Oitzl, M. S., and Joels, M. (1998). Brain
corticosteroid receptor balance in health and disease. Endocr. Soc. 19, 269–301.
doi: 10.1210/edrv.19.3.0331
de Vries, G. J., and Al-Shamma, H. A. (1990). Sex differences in hormonal
responses of vasopressin pathways in the rat brain. J. Neurobiol. 21, 686–693.
doi: 10.1002/neu.480210503
Denef, C. (2008). Paracrinicty: the story of 30 years of cellular pituitary crosstalk.
J. Neuroendocrinol. 20, 1–70. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2007.01616.x
Deng, Q., Riquelme, D., Trinh, L., Low, M. J., Tomi´c, M., Stojilkovic, S.,
et al. (2015). Rapid glucocorticoid feedback inhibition of ACTH secretion
involves
ligand-dependent
membrane
association
of
glucocorticoid
receptors.
Endocrinology
156,
3215–3227.
doi:
10.1210/EN.2015-
1265
Deng, Q., Zhang, Z., and Wu, Y. (2017). The pulsatility of ACTH secretion in the
rat anterior pituitary cell perifusion system. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 41, 154–162.
doi: 10.1159/000455984
di Scala-Guenot, D., Strosser, M. T., Sarlieve, L. L., Legros, J. J., and Richard, P.
(1990). Development of neurophysin-containing neurons in primary cultures
of rat hypothalami is related to the age of the embryo: morphological study
and comparison of in vivo and in vitro neurophysins, oxytocin and vasopressin
content. J. Neurosci. Res. 25, 94–102. doi: 10.1002/jnr.490250112
Diorio, D., Viau, V., and Meaney, M. J. (1993). The role of the medial prefrontal
cortex (cingulate gyrus) in the regulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
responses to stress. J. Neurosci. 13, 3839–3847. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-
09-03839.1993
Dong, H. W., Petrovich, G. D., and Swanson, L. W. (2001). Basic organization
of projections from the oval and fusiform nuclei of the bed nuclei of the stria
terminalis in adult rat brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 436, 430–455. doi: 10.1002/
cne.1079
Dong, H. W., and Swanson, L. W. (2006). Projections from bed nuclei of
the stria terminalis, anteromedial area: cerebral hemisphere integration of
neuroendocrine, autonomic and behavioral aspects of energy balance. J. Comp.
Neurol. 494, 142–178. doi: 10.1002/cne.20788
Dorton, A. M. (2000). The pituitary gland: embryology, physiology and
pathophysiology.
Neonatal
Netw.
19,
9–17.
doi:
10.1891/0730-0832.
19.2.9
Drake, A. J., Raubenheimer, P. J., Kerrigan, D., McInnes, K. J., Seckl, J. R., and
Walker, B. R. (2010). Prenatal dexamethasone programs expression of genes
in liver and adipose tissue and increased hepatic lipid accumulation but not
obesity on a high-fat diet. Endocrinology 151, 1581–1587. doi: 10.1210/en.
2009-1088
Dumontet, T., Sahut-Barnola, I., Septier, A., Montanier, N., Plotton, I., Roucher-
Boulez, F., et al. (2019). PKA signaling drives reticularis differentiation
and sexually dimorphic adrenal cortex renewal. JCI Insight 3:398394.
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.98394
Dunn, J. D. (1987). Plasma corticosterone responses to electrical stimulation of the
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Brain Res. 407, 327–331. doi: 10.1016/0006-
8993(87)91111-5
Dzau, V. J., and Hermann, H. C. (1982). Hormonal control of angiotensinogen
production. Life Sci. 30, 577–584. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(82)90272-7
Edwards, C. R., Benediktsson, R., Lindsay, R. S., and Seckl, J. R. (1993).
Dysfunction
of
placental
glucocorticoid
barrier:
link
between
fetal
environment and adult hypertension? Lancet 341, 355–357. doi: 10.1016/0140-
6736(93)90148-a
Ehrhart-Bornstein, M., Hinson, J. P., Bornstein, S. R., Scherbaum, W. A.,
and Vinson, G. P. (1998). Intraadrenal interactions in the regulation of
adrenocortical steroidogenesis. Endocr. Rev. 19, 101–143. doi: 10.1210/edrv.19.
2.0326
Ericson, J., Norlin, S., Jessell, T. M., and Edlund, T. (1998). Integrated FGF and
BMP signaling controls the progression of progenitor cell differentiation and
the emergence of pattern in the embryonic anterior pituitary. Development 125,
1005–1015.
Evans, A. N., Liu, Y., Macgregor, R., Huang, V., and Aguilera, G. (2013).
Regulation of hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone transcription by
elevated glucocorticoids. Mol. Endocrinol. 27, 1796–1807. doi: 10.1210/me.
2013-1095
Evuarherhe, O., Leggett, J., Waite, E., Kershaw, Y., and Lightman, S. (2009).
Reversal of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal response to oestrogens around
puberty. J. Endocrinol. 202, 279–285. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0175
Figueiredo, H. F., Bruestle, A., Bodie, B., Dolgas, C. M., and Herman, J. P.
(2003). The medial prefrontal cortex differentially regulates stress-induced
c-fos expression in the forebrain depending on type of stressor. Eur. J. Neurosci.
18, 2357–2364. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02932.x
Figueiredo, H. F., Ulrich-Lai, Y. M., Choi, D. C., and Herman, J. P.
(2007). Estrogen potentiates adrenocortical responses to stress in female
rats. AJP Endocrinol. Metab. 292, E1173–E1182. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00
102.2006
Foradori, C. D., Werner, S. B., Sandau, U. S., Clapp, T. R., and Handa, R. J.
(2007). Activation of the androgen receptor alters the intracellular calcium
response to glutamate in primary hippocampal neurons and modulates
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase 2 transcription. Neuroscience
149, 155–164. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.06.054
Frazier, C. R., Trainor, B. C., Cravens, C. J., Whitney, T. K., and Marler, C. A.
(2006).
Paternal
behavior
influences
development
of
aggression
and
vasopressin expression in male california mouse offspring. Horm. Behav.
50, 699–707. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2006.06.035
Fujioka, T., Sakata, Y., Yamaguchi, K., Shibasaki, T., Kato, H., and Nakamura, S.
(1999). The effects of prenatal stress on the development of hypothalamic
paraventricular
neurons
in
fetal
rats.
Neuroscience
92,
1079–1088.
doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(99)00073-1
Gallo-Payet, N., Martinez, A., and Lacroix, A. (2017). Editorial: ACTH action
in the adrenal cortex: from molecular biology to pathophysiology. Front.
Endocrinol. 8:101. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2017.00101
García-Iglesias, B. B., Mendoza-Garrido, M. E., Gutiérrez-Ospina, G., Rangel-
Barajas, C., Noyola-Díaz, M., and Terrón, J. A. (2013). Sensitization of restraint-
induced corticosterone secretion after chronic restraint in rats: involvement of
5-HT7 receptors. Neuropharmacology 71, 216–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.
2013.03.013
Gillies, G. E., Linton, E. A., and Lowry, P. J. (1982). Corticotropin releasing
activity of the new CRF is potentiated several times by vasopressin. Nature 299,
355–357. doi: 10.1038/299355a0
Gjerstad, J. K., Lightman, S. L., and Spiga, F. (2018). Role of glucocorticoid
negative feedback in the regulation of HPA axis pulsatility. Stress 21, 403–416.
doi: 10.1080/10253890.2018.1470238
Goel, N., Workman, J. L., Lee, T. T., Innala, L., and Viau, V. (2014). Sex
differences in the HPA axis. Comp. Physiol. 4, 1121–1155. doi: 10.1002/cphy.
c130054
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
Goldman, J., Winget, C., Hollingshead, G. W., and Levine, S. (1973). Postweaning
development of negative feedback in the pituitary-adrenal system of the rat.
Neuroendocrinology 12, 199–211. doi: 10.1159/000122169
Gray, T. S., Piechowski, R. A., Yracheta, J. M., Rittenhouse, P. A., Bethea, C. L., and
Van de Kar, L. D. (1993). Ibotenic acid lesions in the bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis attenuate conditioned stress-induced increases in prolactin, ACTH
and corticosterone. Neuroendocrinology 57, 517–524. doi: 10.1159/000126400
Green, M., and McCormick, C. (2016). Sex and stress steroids in adolescence:
gonadal regulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in the rat. Gen.
Comp. Endocrinol. 234, 110–116. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2016.02.004
Green, M. R., Nottrodt, R., Simone, J. J., and McCormick, C. M. (2016).
Glucocorticoid receptor translocation and expression of relevant genes in
hippocampus in adolescent and adult male rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology 73,
32–41. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2016.07.210
Grino, M., Young, W. S., and Burgunder, J. (1989). Ontogeny of expression of
the corticotropin-releasing factor gene in the hypothalamic paraventricular
nucleus and of the proopiomelanocortin gene in rat pituitary. Endocrinology
124, 60–68. doi: 10.1210/endo-124-1-60
Gunn, B. G., Cunningham, L., Cooper, M. A., Corteen, N. L., Seifi, M.,
Swinny, J. D., et al. (2013). Dysfunctional astrocytic and synaptic regulation
of hypothalamic glutamatergic transmission in a mouse model of early-life
adversity: relevance to neurosteroids and programming of the stress response.
J. Neurosci. 33, 19534–19554. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1337-13.2013
Hammer, G. D., Parker, K. L., and Schimmer, B. P. (2005). Minireview:
transcriptional regulation of adrenocortical development. Endocrinology 146,
1018–1024. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1385
Handa, R. J., Kudwa, A. E., Donner, N. C., McGivern, R. F., and Brown, R.
(2013). Central 5-alpha reduction of testosterone is required for testosterone’s
inhibition of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis response to restraint
stress in adult male rats. Brain Res. 1529, 74–82. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.
07.021
Handa, R. J., Nunley, K. M., Lorens, S. A., Louie, J. P., McGivern, R. F.,
and Bollnow, M. R. (1994). Androgen regulation of adrenocorticotropin
and corticosterone secretion in the male rat following novelty and foot
shock stressors. Physiol. Behav. 55, 117–124. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(94)
90018-3
Handa, R. J., and Weiser, M. J. (2014). Gonadal steroid hormones and the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 35, 197–220.
doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2013.11.001
Handa, R. J., Weiser, M. J., and Zuloaga, D. G. (2009). A role for the androgen
metabolite, 5α-androstane-3β, 17β-diol, in modulating oestrogen receptor β-
mediated regulation of hormonal stress reactivity. J. Neuroendocrinol. 21,
351–358. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2009.01840.x
Harno, E., Ramamoorthy, T. G., Coll, A. P., and White, A. (2018). POMC:
the physiological power of hormone processing. Physiol. Rev. 98, 2381–2430.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00024.2017
Harris, A., and Seckl, J. (2011). Glucocorticoids, prenatal stress and the
programming of disease. Horm. Behav. 59, 278–289. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.
06.007
He, X., Traecy, M. N., Simmons, D. M., Ingraham, H. A., Swanson, L. S.,
and Rosenfeld, M. G. (1989). Expression of a large family of POU-domain
regulatory genes in mammalian brain development. Nature 340, 35–41.
doi: 10.1038/340035a0
Heck, A. L., and Handa, R. J. (2019a). Androgens drive sex biases in hypothalamic
corticotropin-releasing hormone gene expression after adrenalectomy of mice.
Endocrinology 160, 1757–1770. doi: 10.1210/en.2019-00238
Heck, A. L., and Handa, R. J. (2019b). Sex differences in the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis’ response to stress: an important role for gonadal
hormones. Neuropsychopharmacology 44, 45–58. doi: 10.1038/s41386-018-
0167-9
Heck, A. L., Sheng, J. A., Miller, A. M., Stover, S. A., Bales, N. J., Tan, S. M. L.,
et al. (2020). Social isolation alters hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis activity
after chronic variable stress in male C57BL/6 mice. Stress 23, 457–465.
doi: 10.1080/10253890.2020.1733962
Heisler, L. K., Pronchuk, N., Nonogaki, K., Zhou, L., Raber, J., Tung, L.,
et
al.
(2007).
Serotonin
activates
the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis via serotonin 2C receptor stimulation. J. Neurosci. 27, 6956–6964.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2584-06.2007
Herman, J. P., Cullinan, W. E., and Watson, S. J. (1994). Involvement of the
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in tonic regulation of paraventricular
hypothalamic CRH and AVP MRNA expression. J. Neuroendocrinol. 6,
433–442. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.1994.tb00604.x
Herman, J. P., Dolgas, C. M., and Carlson, S. L. (1998). Ventral subiculum
regulates hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical and behavioural responses to
cognitive stressors. Neuroscience 86, 449–459. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(98)
00055-4
Herman, J. P., Schafer, M. K., Thompson, R. C., and Watson, S. J. (1992). Rapid
regulation of corticotropin-releasing hormone gene transcription in vivo. Mol.
Endocrinol. 6, 1061–1069. doi: 10.1210/mend.6.7.1324419
Herman, J. P., and Tasker, J. G. (2016). Paraventricular hypothalamic mechanisms
of chronic stress adaptation. Front. Endocrinol. 7:137. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2016.
00137
Hernandez, V. S., Vazquez-Jaurez, E., Marquez, M. M., Jauregui-Huerta, F.,
Barrio, R. A., and Zhang, L. (2015). Extra-neurohypophyseal axonal
projections from individual vasopressin-containing magnocellular neurons
in rat hypothalamus. Front. Neuroanat. 9:130. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.
00130
Hiroi, R., Lacagnina, A. F., Hinds, L. R., Carbone, D. G., Uht, R. M., and
Handa, R. J. (2013). The androgen metabolite, 5α-androstane-3β,17β-diol (3β-
diol), activates the oxytocin promoter through an estrogen receptor-β pathway.
Endocrinology 154, 1802–1812. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2253
Holmes, M. C., Abrahamsen, C. T., French, K. L., Paterson, J. M., Mullins, J. J.,
and Seckl, J. R. (2006). The mother or the fetus? 11β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 null mice provide evidence for direct fetal programming
of behavior by endogenous glucocorticoids. J. Neurosci. 26, 3840–3844.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4464-05.2006
Hornby, P. J., and Piekut, D. T. (1989). Opiocortin and catecholamine input
to CRF-immunoreactive neurons in rat forebrain. Peptides 10, 1139–1146.
doi: 10.1016/0196-9781(89)90005-3
Igosheva, N., Taylor, P. D., Poston, L., and Glover, V. (2007). Prenatal stress in the
rat results in increased blood pressure responsiveness to stress and enhanced
arterial reactivity to neuropeptide Y in adulthood. J. Physiol. 582, 665–674.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2007.130252
Ilahi, S., and Ilahi, T. B. (2020). Anatomy, Adenohypophysis (Pars Anterior,
Anterior Pituitary). Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing.
Imaki, T., Nahan, J. L., Rivier, C., Sawchenko, P. E., and Vale, W.
(1991). Differential regulation of corticotropin-releasing factor MRNA in
rat brain regions by glucocorticoids and stress. J. Neurosci. 11, 585–599.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.11-03-00585.1991
Insel, T. R., Battaglia, G., Fairbanks, D. W., and De Souza, E. B. (1988).
The ontogeny of brain receptors for corticotropin-releasing factor and the
development of their functional association with adenylate cyclase. J. Neurosci.
8, 4151–4158. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.08-11-04151.1988
Ishimoto, H., and Jaffe, R. B. (2011). Development and function of the human
fetal adrenal cortex: a key component in the feto-placental unit. Endocr. Rev.
32, 317–355. doi: 10.1210/er.2010-0001
Israel, J., Oliet, S. H., and Ciofi, P. (2016). Electrophysiology of hypothalamic
magnocellular neurons in vitro: a rhythmic drive in organotypic cultures and
acute slices. Front. Neurosci. 10:109. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00109
Itoi, K., Helmreich, D. L., Lopez-Figueroa, M. O., and Watson, S. J. (1999).
Differential regulation of corticotropin-releasing hormone and vasopressin
gene transcription in the hypothalamus by norepinephrine. J. Neurosci. 19,
5464–5472. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-13-05464.1999
Jauregui-Huerta, F., Ruvalcaba-Delgadillo, Y., Gonzalez-Castañeda, R., Garcia-
Estrada, J., Gonzalez-Perez, O., and Luquin, S. (2010). Responses of
glial cells to stress and glucocorticoids. Curr. Immunol. Rev. 6, 195–204.
doi: 10.2174/157339510791823790
John, C. D., Christian, H. C., Morris, J. F., Flower, R. J., Solito, E., and
Buckingham, J. C. (2004). Annexin 1 and the regulation of endocrine function.
Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 15, 103–109. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2004.02.001
Kalin, N. H. (2018). Corticotropin-releasing hormone binding protein: stress,
psychopathology and antidepressant treatment response. Am. J. Psychiatry 175,
204–206. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.18010059
Kamphuis, P. J., Bakker, J. M., Broekhoven, M. H., Kunne, C., Croiset, G.,
Lentjes, E. G., et al. (2002). Enhanced glucocorticoid feedback inhibition
of
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
responses
to
stress
in
adult
rats
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
neonatally treated with dexamethasone. Neuroendocrinology 76, 159–169.
doi: 10.1159/000064526
Kapoor, A., Dunn, E., Kostaki, A., Andrews, M. H., and Matthews, S. G. (2006).
Fetal programming of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal function: prenatal stress
and glucocorticoids. J. Physiol. 572, 31–44. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.
105254
Kash, T. L., and Winder, D. G. (2006). Neuropeptide Y and corticotropin-
releasing factor bi-directionally modulate inhibitory synaptic transmission in
the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Neuropharmacology 51, 1013–1022.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.06.011
Khan, A. M., Ponzio, T. A., Sanchez-Watts, G., Stanley, B. G., Hatton, G. I., and
Watts, A. G. (2007). Catecholaminergic control of mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling in paraventricular neuroendocrine neurons: a proposed role
during glycemic challenges. J. Neurosci. 27:7344. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
0873-07.2007
Kiss, A., and Aguilera, G. (1992). Participation of A1-adrenergic receptors in
the secretion of hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone during stress.
Neuroendocrinology 56, 153–160. doi: 10.1159/000126223
Kitay, J. I. (1965). Effects of oophorectomy and various doses of estradiol-17β on
corticosterone production by rat adrenal slices. Proc. Soc. for Exp. Biol. Med.
120, 193–196. doi: 10.3181/00379727-120-30483
Kítazawa, S., Shioda, S., and Nakai, Y. (1987). Catecholaminergic innervation
of neurons containing corticotropin-releasing factor in the paraventricular
nucleus of the rat hypothalamus. Acta Anat. 129, 337–343.
Kolber, B. J., and Muglia, L. J. (2009). Defining brain region-specific glucocorticoid
action during stress by conditional gene disruption in mice. Brain Res. 1293,
85–90. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.03.061
Kovács, K., Földes, A., and Sawchenko, P. E. (2000). Glucocorticoid negative
feedback
selectively
targets
vasopressin
transcription
in
parvocellular
neurosecretory neurons. J. Neurosci. 20, 3843–3852. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
20-10-03843.2000
Ladd, C. O., Thrivikraman, K. V., Huot, R. L., and Plotsky, P. M. (2005).
Differential neuroendocrine responses to chronic variable stress in adult
long evans rats exposed to handling-maternal separation as neonates.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
30,
520–533.
doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2004.
12.004
Landgraf, R., and Neumann, I. D. (2004). Vasopressin and oxytocin release within
the brain: a dynamic concept of multiple and variable modes of neuropeptide
communication. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 25, 150–176. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.
2004.05.001
Lassance, L., Haghiac, M., Leahy, P., Basu, S., Minium, J., Zhou, J., et al. (2015).
Identification of early transcriptome signatures in placenta exposed to insulin
and obesity. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 212, 647.e1–647.e11. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.
2015.02.026
Laurent, F. M., Hindelang, C., Klein, M. J., Stoeckel, M. E., and Felix, J. M. (1989).
Expression of the oxytocin and vasopressin genes in the rat hypothalamus
during development: an in situ hybridization study. Dev. Brain Res. 46,
145–154. doi: 10.1016/0165-3806(89)90152-1
Lee, K. S., Han, T. H., Jo, J. Y., Kang, G., Lee, S. Y., Ryu, P. D., et al.
(2008). Serotonin inhibits GABA synaptic transmission in presympathetic
paraventricular nucleus neurons. Neurosci. Lett. 439, 138–142. doi: 10.1016/j.
neulet.2008.05.012
Levine, S. (1994). The ontogeny of the hypothalmo-pituitary-adrenal axis:
the influence of maternal factors. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 746, 275–288.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb39245.x
Liggins, G. C., and Howie, R. N. (1972). A controlled trial of antepartum
glucocorticoid treatment prevention of the respiratory distress syndrome in
premature infants. Pediatrics 50, 515–525.
Lightman, S. L., and Conway-Campbell, B. L. (2010). The crucial role of pulsatile
activity of the HPA axis for continuous dynamic equilibration. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 710–718. doi: 10.1038/nrn2914
Lindsay, R. S., Lindsay, R. M., Waddel, B. J., and Seckl, J. R. (1996). Prenatal
glucocorticoid exposure leads to offspring hyperglycaemia in the rat: studies
with the 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibitor carbenoxolone.
Diabetologia 39, 1299–1305. doi: 10.1007/s001250050573
Lipari, E. F., Lipari, D., Gerbino, A., Di Liberto, D., Bellafiore, M., Catalono, M.,
et al. (2001). The Hypothalamic magnocellular neurosecretory system in
developing rats. Eur. J. Histochem. 45, 163–168. doi: 10.4081/1626
Liu, D., Diorio, J., Tannenbaum, B., Caldji, C., Francis, D., Freedman, A.,
et al. (1997). Maternal care, hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal response to stress. Science 277, 1659–1662.
doi: 10.1126/science.277.5332.1659
Longcope, C. (1986). Adrenal and gonadal androgen secretion in normal
females. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 15, 213–228. doi: 10.1016/s0300-595x(86)
80021-4
Low, S. C., Moisan, M. P., Noble, J. M., Edwards, C. R., and Seckl, J. R. (1994).
Glucocorticoids regulate hippocampal 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
activity and gene expression in vivo in the rat. J. Neuroendocrinol. 6, 285–290.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.1994.tb00584.x
Lucion, A. B., Charchat, H., Pereira, G. A. M., and Rasia-Filho, A. A.
(1996). Influence of early postnatal gonadal hormones on anxiety in
adult male rats. Physiol. Behav. 60, 1419–1423. doi: 10.1016/s0031-9384(96)
00246-6
Lund, T. D., Hinds, L. R., and Handa, R. J. (2006). The Androgen 5α-
dihydrotestosterone and its metabolite 5α-androstan-3β,17β-diol inhibit the
hypothalamo-pituitary- adrenal response to stress by acting through estrogen
receptor beta-expressing neurons in the hypothalamus. J. Neurosci. 26,
1448–1456. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3777-05.2006
Lund, T. D., Rovis, T., Chung, W. C. J., and Handa, R. J. (2005). Novel actions
of estrogen receptor-beta on anxiety-related behaviors. Endocrinology 146,
797–807. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1158
Madhavpeddi, L., Hammond, B., Carbone, D., Handa, R. J., and Hale, T. M.
(2020).
Impact
of
prenatal
dexamethasone
on
adult
cardiovascular
autonomic
regulation.
FASEB
J.
34:1.
doi:
10.1096/fasebj.2020.34.s1.
05817
Mahfouz, A., Lelieveldt, B. P. F., Grefhorst, A., van Weert, L. T. C. M., Mol, I. M.,
Sips, H. C. M., et al. (2016). Genome-wide coexpression of steroid receptors in
the mouse brain: identifying signaling pathways and functionally coordinated
regions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 113, 2738–2743. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1520376113
Makino, S., Schulkin, J., Smith, M. A., Pacak, K., Palkovits, M., and Gold, P. W.
(1995). Regulation of corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor messenger
ribonucleic
acid
in
the
rat
brain
and
pituitary
by
glucocorticoids
and
stress.
Endocrinology
136,
4517–4525.
doi:
10.1210/endo.136.10.
7664672
McCormick, C. M., Linkroum, W., Sallinen, B. J., and Miller, N. W. (2002).
Peripheral and central sex steroids have differential effects on the HPA axis
of male and female rats. Stress 5, 135–247. doi: 10.1080/10253890210000
61165
McCorry, L. K. (2007). Physiology of the autonomic nervous system. Am. J. Pharm.
Educ. 71:78. doi: 10.5688/aj710478
McEwen, B. S. (1998). ‘‘Stress, adaptation and disease: allostasis and allostatic
load,’’ in Molecular Aspects, Integrative Systems and Clinical Advances, eds
S. M. McCann, J. M. Lipton, E. M. Sternberg, G. P. Chrousos, P. W. Gold, and
C. C. Smith (New York, NY: New York Academy of Sciences), 33–44.
McEwen, B. S., Harold, S. E. A., and Milliken, M. (1999). Estrogen actions in the
central nervous system. Endocr. Rev. 20, 279–307. doi: 10.1210/edrv.20.3.0365
McGowan, P. O., Suderman, M., Sasaki, A., Huang, T. C. T., Hallett, M.,
Meaney, M. J., et al. (2011). Broad epigenetic signature of maternal care
in the brain of adult rats. PLoS One 6:e14739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0014739
McKlveen, J. M., Myers, B., and Herman, J. P. (2015). The medial prefrontal cortex:
coordinator of autonomic, neuroendocrine and behavioural responses to stress.
J. Neuroendocrinol. 27, 446–456. doi: 10.1111/jne.12272
Michaud, J. L. (2001). The developmental program of the hypothalamus
and its disorders. Clin. Genet. 60, 255–263. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2001.
600402.x
Michaud, J. L., Rosenquist, T., May, N. R., and Fan, C. M. (1998). Development
of neuroendocrine lineages requires the BHLH-PAS transcription factor SIM1.
Genes Dev. 12, 3264–3275. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.20.3264
Miller, W. J. S., Suzuki, S., Miller, L. K., Handa, R. J., and Uht, R. M. (2004).
Estrogen receptor (ER)β isoforms rather than ERα regulate corticotropin-
releasing hormone promoter activity through an alternate pathway. J. Neurosci.
24, 10628–19635. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5540-03.2004
Moir, L., Bochukova, E. G., Dumbell, R., Banks, G., Bains, R. S., Nolan, P. M.,
et al. (2017). Disruption of the homeodomain transcription factor orthopedia
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
homeobox (Otp) is associated with obesity and anxiety. Mol. Metab. 6,
1419–1428. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2017.08.006
Morales-Delgado, N., Castro-Robles, B., Ferrán, J. L., Martinez-de-la-Torre, M.,
Puelles, L., and Díaz, C. (2014). Regionalized differentiation of CRH, TRH and
GHRH peptidergic neurons in the mouse hypothalamus. Brain Struct. Funct.
219, 1083–1111. doi: 10.1007/s00429-013-0554-2
Morimoto, M., Morita, N., Ozawa, H., Yokoyama, K., and Kawata, M. (1996).
Distribution of glucocorticoid receptor immunoreactivity and MRNA in the
rat brain: an immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization study. Neurosci.
Res. 26, 235–269. doi: 10.1016/s0168-0102(96)01105-4
Morohashi, K., and Zubair, M. (2011). The fetal and adult adrenal cortex. Mol.
Cell. Endocrinol. 336, 193–197. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.11.026
Muneoka, K., Ogawa, T., Kamei, K., Muraoka, S., Tomiyoshi, R., Mimura, Y.,
et al. (1997). Prenatal nicotine exposure affects the development of the central
serotonergic system as well as the dopaminergic system in rat offspring:
involvement of route of drug administrations. Dev. Brain Res. 102, 117–126.
doi: 10.1016/s0165-3806(97)00092-8
Neumann, I. D. (2007). Stimuli and consequences of dendritic release of oxytocin
within the brain. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 35, 1252–1257. doi: 10.1042/BST03
51252
Neumann, I. D., Krömer, S. A., Toschi, N., and Ebner, K. (2000). Brain oxytocin
inhibits the (re)activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in male rats:
involvement of hypothalamic and limbic brain regions. Regul. Pept. 96, 31–38.
doi: 10.1016/s0167-0115(00)00197-x
Nyirenda, M. J., Lindsay, R. S., Kenyon, C. J., Burchell, A., and Seckl, J. R.
(1998).
Glucocorticoid exposure in late gestation permanently programs
rat hepatic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucocorticoid receptor
expression and causes glucose intolerance in adult offspring. J. Clin. Invest. 101,
2174–2181. doi: 10.1172/JCI1567
Nyirenda, M. J., Welberg, L. A., and Seckl, J. R. (2001). Programming
hyperglycaemia in the rat through prenatal exposure to glucocorticoids-fetal
effect or maternal influence? J. Endocrinol. 170, 653–660. doi: 10.1677/joe.0.
1700653
O’Regan, D., Kenyon, C. J., Seckl, J. R., and Holmes, M. C. (2004). Glucocorticoid
exposure in late gestation in the rat permanently programs gender-specific
differences in adult cardiovascular and metabolic physiology. Am. J. Physiol.
287, E863–E870. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00137.2004
O’Regan, D., Kenyon, C. J., Seckl, J. R., and Holmes, M. C. (2008).
Prenatal dexamethasone ‘‘programmes’’ hypotension, but stress-induced
hypertension in adult offspring. J. Endocrinol. 196, 343–352. doi: 10.1677/JOE-
07-0327
Ochedalski, T., Subbaraju, S., Wynn, P. C., and Aguilera, G. (2007). Interaction
between oestrogen and oxytocin on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
activity. J. Neuroendocrinol. 19, 189–197. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2006.
01525.x
Ohbuchi, T., Haam, J., and Tasker, J. G. (2015). Regulation of neuronal
activity in hypothalamic vasopressin neurons. Interdiscip. Inf. Sci. 21, 225–234.
doi: 10.4036/iis.2015.B.07
Ojeda, S. R., and Urbanski, H. F. (1994). ‘‘Puberty in the rat,’’ in The Physiology of
Reproduction, eds E. Knobil and J. D. Neill (New York, NY: Raven Press, Ltd.),
363–409.
Oyola, M. G., Thompson, M. K., Handa, A. Z., and Handa, R. J. (2017).
Distribution of chemical composition of estrogen receptor β neurons in the
paraventricular nucleus of the female and male mouse hypothalamus. J. Comp.
Neurol. 525, 3666–3682. doi: 10.1002/cne.24295
Pacak, K. (2011). Phaeochromocytoma: a catecholamine and oxidative stress
disorder. Endocr. Regul. 45, 65–90. doi: 10.4149/endo_2011_02_65
Pak, T. R., Chung, W. C. J., Hinds, L. R., and Handa, R. J. (2007).
Estrogen receptor-beta mediates dihydrotestosterone-induced stimulation of
the arginine vasopressin promoter in neuronal cells. Endocrinology 148,
3371–3382. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-0086
Papadimitriou, A., and Priftis, K. N. (2009). Regulation of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal
axis.
Neuroimmunomodulation
16,
265–271.
doi: 10.1159/000216184
Parenti, G., Zampetti, B., Rapizzi, E., Ercolino, T., Giachè, V., and Mannelli, M.
(2012). Updated and new perspectives on diagnosis, prognosis and therapy
of malignant pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma. J. Oncol. 2012:872713.
doi: 10.1155/2012/872713
Patchev, V. K., Hassan, A. H., Holsboer, D. F., and Almeida, O. F.
(1996). The neurosteroid tetrahydroprogesterone attenuates the endocrine
response to stress and exerts glucocorticoid-like effects on vasopressin gene
transcription in the rat hypothalamus. Neuropsychopharmacology 15, 533–540.
doi: 10.1016/S0893-133X(96)00096-6
Patchev, V. K., Hayashi, S., Orikasa, C., and Almeida, O. F. (1995). Implications of
estrogen-dependent brain organization for gender differences in hypothalmo-
pituitary-adrenal regulation. FASEB J. 9, 419–423. doi: 10.1096/fasebj.9.5.
7896013
Pulichino, A., Vallette-Kasic, S., Couture, C., Gauthier, Y., Brue, T., David, M.,
et al. (2003). Human and mouse TPIT gene mutations cause early onset
pituitary ACTH deficiency. Genes Dev. 17, 711–716. doi: 10.1101/gad.10
65603
Qian, X., Droste, S. K., Gutièrrez-Mecinas, M., Collins, A., Kersanté, F.,
Reul, J. M. H. M., et al. (2011). A rapid release of corticosteroid-
binding globulin from the liver restrains the glucocorticoid hormone
response to acute stress. Endocrinology 152, 3738–3748. doi: 10.1210/en.
2011-1008
Raadsheer, F. C., Sluiter, A. A., Ravid, R., Tilders, F. J. H., and Swaab, D. F.
(1993). Localization of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) neurons in
the paraventricular nucleus of the human hypothalamus; age-dependent
colocalization with vasopressin. Brain Res. 615, 50–62. doi: 10.1016/0006-
8993(93)91113-7
Rabadan-Diehl, C., Makara, G., Kiss, A., Zelena, D., and Aguilera, G. (1997).
Regulation of pituitary corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) receptor
MRNA and CRH binding during adrenalectomy: role of glucocorticoids and
hypothalamic factors. J. Neuroendocrinol. 9, 689–697. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2826.
1997.00626.x
Rakova, N., Kitada, K., Lerchl, K., Dahlmann, A., Birukov, A., Daub, S.,
et al. (2017). Increased salt consumption induces body water conservation
and decreases fluid intake. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 1932–1943. doi: 10.1172/
JCI88530
Rankin, J., Walker, J. J., Windle, R., Lightman, S. L., and Terry, J. R.
(2012). Characterizing dynamic interactions between ultradian glucocorticoid
rhythmicity and acute stress using the phase response curve. PLoS One
7:e30978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030978
Reul, J. M., and de Kloet, E. R. (1985). Two receptor systems for corticosterone
in rat brain: microdistribution and differential occupation. Endocrinology 117,
2505–2511. doi: 10.1210/endo-117-6-2505
Rhodes, C. H., Morriell, J. I., and Pfaff, D. W. (1981). Immunohistochemical
analysis of magnocellular elements in rat hypothalamus: distribution and
numbers of cells containing neurophysin, oxytocin and vasopressin. J. Comp.
Neurol. 198, 45–64. doi: 10.1002/cne.901980106
Rivier, C., and Vale, W. (1983). Modulation of stress-induced ACTH release by
corticotropin-releasing factor, catecholamines and vasopressin. Nature 305,
325–327. doi: 10.1038/305325a0
Roberts, D., and Dalziel, S. (2006). Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating fetal
lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst.
Rev. 19:CD004454. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004454.pub2
Rodgers, A. B., Morgan, C. P., Bronson, S. L., Revello, S., and Bale, T. L.
(2013). Paternal stress exposure alters sperm microRNA content and
reprograms offspring HPA stress axis regulation. J. Neurosci. 33, 9003–9012.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0914-13.2013
Romeo,
R.
D.
(2003).
Puberty:
a
period
of
both
organizational
and
activational effects of steroid hormones on neurobehavioural development.
J.
Neuroendocrinol.
15,
1185–1192.
doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2003.
01106.x
Romeo, R. D. (2010). Pubertal maturation and programming of hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal
reactivity.
Front.
Neuroendocrinol.
31,
232–240.
doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2010.02.004
Romeo, R. D., Bellani, R., Karatsoreos, I. N., Chhua, N., Vernov, M., Conrad, C. D.,
et al. (2006). Stress history and pubertal development interact to shape
hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis plasticity. Endocrinology 147, 1667–1674.
doi: 10.1210/en.2005-1432
Romeo, R. D., Lee, S. J., Chhua, N., McPherson, C. R., and McEwen, B. S.
(2004a). Testosterone cannot activate an adult-like stress response in
prepubertal male rats. Neuroendocrinology 79, 125–132. doi: 10.1159/000
077270
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
Romeo,
R.
D.,
Lee,
S.
J.,
and
McEwen,
B.
S.
(2004b).
Differential
stress
reactivity
in
intact
and
ovariectomized
prepubertal
and
adult
female
rats.
Neuroendocrinology
80,
387–393.
doi:
10.1159/0000
84203
Romeo, R. D., and McEwen, B. S. (2006). Stress and the adolescent
brain.
Ann.
N.
Y.
Acad.
Sci.
1094,
202–214.
doi:
10.1196/annals.
1376.022
Rood, B. D., and De Vries, G. J. (2011). Vasopressin innervation of the mouse
(Mus musculus) brain and spinal cord. J. Comp. Neurol. 519, 2434–2474.
doi: 10.1002/cne.22635
Rood, B. D., Stott, R. T., You, S., Smith, C. J. W., Woodbury, M. E., and De
Vries, G. J. (2013). Site of origin of and sex differences in the vasopressin
innervation of the mouse (Mus musculus) brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 521,
2321–2358. doi: 10.1002/cne.23288
Roper, J. A., O’Carroll, A.-M., Young, W. S. III, and Lolait, S. J. (2011). The
vasopressin avpr1b receptor: molecular and pharmacological studies. Stress 14,
98–115. doi: 10.3109/10253890.2010.512376
Rosinger, Z. J., Jacobskind, J. S., Bulanchuk, N., Malone, M., Fico, D., Justice, N. J.,
et al. (2018). Characterization and gonadal hormone regulation of a sexually
dimorphic corticotropin releasing factor receptor 1 cell group. J. Comp. Neurol.
527, 1056–1069. doi: 10.1002/cne.24588
Rossi, D. V., Dai, Y., Thomas, P., Carrasco, G. A., DonCarlos, L. L.,
Muma, N. A., et al. (2010). Estradiol-induced desensitization of 5-HT1A
receptor signaling in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus
is independent of estrogen receptor-beta. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35,
1023–1033. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.01.003
Rozeboom, A. M., Akil, H., and Seasholtz, A. F. (2007). Mineralocorticoid
receptor overexpression in forebrain decreases anxiety-like behavior and alters
the stress response in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 104, 4688–4693.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0606067104
Ruel, J. M., and de Kloet, E. R. (1985). Two receptor systems for corticosterone
in rat brain: microdistribution and differential occupation. Endocrinology 117,
2505–2511. doi: 10.1210/endo-117-6-2505
Sandman, C. A., Buss, C., Head, K., and Davis, E. P. (2015). Fetal exposure
to maternal depressive symptoms is associated with cortical thickness in
late childhood. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 324–334. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.
06.025
Sapolsky, R. M., Krey, L. C., and McEwen, B. S. (1984). Stress down-regulates
corticosterone receptors in a site-specific manner in the brain. Endocrinology
114, 287–292. doi: 10.1210/endo-114-1-287
Sapolsky, R. M., Romero, L. M., and Munck, A. U. (2000). How Do glucocorticoids
influence
stress
responses?
Integrating,
suppressive,
stimulatory
and
preparative
actions.
Endocr.
Rev.
21,
55–89.
doi:
10.1210/edrv.21.
1.0389
Sawchenko, P. E. (1987). Evidence for a local site of action for glucocorticoids
in inhibiting CRF and vasopressin expression in the paraventricular nucleus.
Brain Res. 403, 213–223. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)90058-8
Sawchenko, P. E., Swanson, L. W., Steinbusch, H. W., and Verhofstad, A. A.
(1983). The distribution and cells of origin of serotonergic inputs to the
paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the rat. Brain Res. 277, 355–360.
doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(83)90945-9
Sawchenko, P. E., Swanson, L. W., and Vale, W. W. (1984). Co-expression
of
corticotropin-releasing
factor
and
vasopressin
immunoreactivity
in parvocellular neurosecretory neurons of the adrenalectomized rat.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 81, 1883–1887. doi: 10.1073/pnas.81.
6.1883
Scanes, C. G. (2015). Pituitary Gland. Sturkie’s Avian Physiology, 6th edition.
Milwaukee, WI: Academic Press.
Schlosser, S. F., Almeida, O. F., Patchev, V. K., Yassouridis, A., and Elands, J.
(1994). Oxytocin-stimulated release of adrenocorticotropin from the rat
pituitary is mediated by arginine vasopressin receptors of the V1b Type.
Endocrinology 135, 2058–2063. doi: 10.1210/endo.135.5.7956927
Schmidt,
M.
V.,
Enthoven,
L.,
van
der
Mark,
M.,
Levine,
S.,
de
Kloet, E. R. and Oitzl, M. S. (2003). The postnatal development of the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis in the mouse. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 21,
125–132. doi: 10.1016/S0736-5748(03)00030-3
Schonemann, M. D., Ryan, A. K., McEvilly, R. J., O’Connell, S. M.,
Arias, C. A., Kalla, K. A., et al. (1995). Development and survival of the
endocrine hypothalamus and posterior pituitary gland requires the neuronal
POU domain factor Brn-2. Genes Dev. 9, 3122–3135. doi: 10.1101/gad.
9.24.3122
Seale, J. V., Wood, S. A., Atkinson, H. C., Bate, E., Lightman, S. L., Ingram, C. D.,
et al. (2004). Gonadectomy reverses the sexually diergic patterns of circadian
and stress-induced hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity in male and
female rats. J. Neuroendocrinol. 16, 516–524. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2004.
01195.x
Seale, J. V., Wood, S. A., Atkinson, H. C., Harbuz, M. S., and Lightman, S. L.
(2005a). Postnatal masculinization alters the HPA axis phenotype in the
adult female rat. J. Physiol. 563, 265–274. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.
078212
Seale, J. V., Wood, S. A., Atkinson, H. C., Lightman, S. L., and Harbuz, M. S.
(2005b).
Organizational
role
for
testosterone
and
estrogen
on
adult
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity in the male rat. Endocrinology 146,
1973–1982. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1201
Shapiro, R. A., Xu, C., and Dorsa, D. M. (2000). Differential transcriptional
regulation of rat vasopressin gene expression by estrogen receptor α and β.
Endocrinology 141, 4056–4064. doi: 10.1210/endo.141.11.7796
Shoener, J. A., Baig, R., and Page, K. C. (2006). Prenatal exposure to
dexamethasone alters hippocampal drive on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis activity in adult male rats. Am. J. Physiol. Regl. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 290,
R1366–R1373. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00757.2004
Simerly, R. B. (1993). Distribution and regulation of steroid hormone receptor
gene expression in the central nervous system. Adv. Neurol. 59, 207–226.
Sinding, C., Czernichow, P., Seif, S. M., and Robinson, A. G. (1980). Quantitative
changes in neurohypophyseal peptides in the developing brain. Peptides 1,
45–50. doi: 10.1016/0196-9781(80)90102-3
Sollars, P. J., Weiser, M. J., Kudwa, A. E., Bramley, J. R., Ogilvie, M. D.,
Spencer, R. L., et al. (2014). Altered entrainment to the day/night cycle
attenuates the daily rise in circulating corticosterone in the mouse. PLoS One
9:e111944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111944
Solomon, M. B., Loftspring, M., de Kloet, A. D., Ghosal, S., Jankord, R.,
Flak, J. N., et al. (2015). Neuroendocrine function after hypothalamic depletion
of glucocorticoid receptors in male and female mice. Endocrinology 156,
2843–2853. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1276
Speert, D. B., MCClennen, S. J., and Seasholtz, A. F. (2002). Sexually
dimorphic expression of corticotropin-releasing hormone-binding protein in
the mouse pituitary. Endocrinology 143, 4730–4731. doi: 10.1210/en.2002-
220556
Speiser, P. W., Azziz, R., Baskin, L. S., Lucia, G., Hensle, T. W., Merke, D. P.,
et al. (2010). Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to steroid 21-hydroxylase
deficiency: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 95, 4133–4160. doi: 10.1210/jc.2018-01865
Spiga, F., Zavala, E., Walker, J. J., Zhao, Z., Terry, J. R., and Lightman, S. L. (2017).
Dynamic responses of the adrenal steroidogenic regulatory network. PNAS 114,
E6466–E6474. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1703779114
Stroud, L. R., Papandonatos, G. D., Parade, S. H., Salisbury, A. L., Phipps, M. G.,
Lester, B. M., et al. (2016). Prenatal major depressive disorder, placenta
glucocorticoid and serotonergic signaling and infant cortisol response.
Psychosom. Med. 78, 979–990. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000410
Sun, T., Gonzalez, T. L., Deng, N., DiPentino, R., Clark, E. L., Lee, B., et al. (2020).
Sexually dimorphic crosstalk at the maternal-fetal interface. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 105, e4831–e4847. doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgaa503
Sun, N., Wu, Y., Nanba, K., Sbiera, S., Kircher, S., Kunzke, T., et al. (2018).
High-resolution tissue mass spectrometry imaging reveals a refined functional
anatomy of the human adult adrenal gland. Endocrinology 159, 1511–1524.
doi: 10.1210/en.2018-00064
Swanson, L. W., and Kuypers, H. G. (1980). The paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus: cytoarchitectonic subdivisions and organization of projections
to the pituitary, dorsal vagal complex and spinal cord as demonstrated
by retrograde fluorescence double-labeling methods. J. Comp. Neurol. 194,
555–570. doi: 10.1002/cne.901940306
Swanson, L. W., and Petrovich, G. D. (1998). What is the amygdala? Trends
Neurosci. 21, 323–331. doi: 10.1016/s0166-2236(98)01265-x
Swanson, L. W., and Sawchenko, P. E. (1983). Hypothalamic integration:
organization of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Ann. Rev. Neurosci.
6, 269–324. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ne.06.030183.001413
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
19
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
Szot, P., and Dorsa, D. M. (1993). Differential timing and sexual dimorphism in
the expression of the vasopressin gene in the developing rat brain. Brain Res.
Dev. Brain Res. 73, 177–183. doi: 10.1016/0165-3806(93)90136-x
Takata, N., Sakakura, E., Eiraku, M., Kasukawa, T., and Sasai, Y. (2017). Self-
patterning of rostral-caudal neuroectoderm requires dual role of fgf signaling
for localized wnt antagonism. Nat. Commun. 8:1339. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-
01105-2
Tamborski, S., Mintz, E. M., and Caldwell, H. K. (2016). Sex differences
in the embryonic development of the central oxytocin system in mice.
J. Neuroendocrinol. 28. doi: 10.1111/jne.12364
Tamura, K., Umemura, S., Fukamizu, A., Ishii, M., and Murakami, K. (1995).
Recent advances in the study of renin and angiotensinogen genes: from
molecules to the whole body. Hypertens Res. 18, 7–18. doi: 10.1291/
hypres.18.7
Tasker, J. G., and Dudek, F. E. (1991). Electrophysical properties of neurones in the
region of the paraventricular nucleus in slices of rat hypothalamus. J. Physiol.
443, 271–293.
Tinnikov, A. A. (1999). Responses of serum corticosterone and corticosteroid-
binding globulin to acute and prolonged stress in the rat. Endocrine 11,
145–150. doi: 10.1385/ENDO:11:2:145
Tsigos,
C.,
and
Chrousos,
G.
P.
(2002).
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis, neuroendocrine factors and stress. J. Psychosom. Res. 53, 865–871.
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3999(02)00429-4
Van de Kar, L. D., and Blair, M. L. (1999). Forebrain pathways mediating
stress-induced
hormone
secretion.
Front.
Neuroendocrinol.
20,
1–48.
doi: 10.1006/frne.1998.0172
Van Haarst, A. D., Oitzl, M. S., and de Kloet, E. R. (1997). Facilitation of feedback
inhibition through blockade of glucocorticoid receptors in the hippocampus.
Neurochem. Res. 22, 1323–1328. doi: 10.1023/a:1022010904600
Van Tol, H. H. M., Voorhius, D. T. H. A. M., and Burbach, J. P. H.
(1987). Oxytocin gene expression in discrete hypothalamic magnocellular cell
groups is stimulated by prolonged salt loading. Endocrinology 120, 71–76.
doi: 10.1210/endo-120-1-71
Vandesande, F., and Dierickx, K. (1975). Identification of the vasopressin
producing and of the oxytocin producing neurons in the hypothalamic
magnocellular neurosecretory system of the rat. Cell Tissue Res. 164, 153–162.
doi: 10.1007/BF00218970
Vazquez, D. M., Bailey, C., Dent, G. W., Okimoto, D. K., Steffek, A., López, J. F.,
et al. (2006). Brain corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) circuits in the
developing rat: effect of maternal deprivation. Brain Res. 1121, 83–94.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.08.104
Viau, V., Bingham, B., Davis, J., Lee, P., and Wong, M. (2005). Gender and puberty
interact on the stress-induced activation of parvocellular neurosecretory
neurons and corticotropin-releasing hormone messenger ribonucleic acid
expression in the rat. Endocrinology 146, 137–146. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-0846
Viau, V., and Meaney, M. J. (1996). The inhibitory effect of testosterone on
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses to stress is mediated by the medial
preoptic area. J. Neurosci. 16, 1866–1876. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-05-
01866.1996
Viau, V., and Meaney, M. J. (2004). Testosterone-dependent variations in plasma
and intrapituitary corticosteroid binding globulin and stress hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal activity in the male rat. J. Endocrinol. 181, 223–231.
doi: 10.1677/joe.0.1810223
Viau, V., Soriano, L., and Dallman, M. F. (2001). Androgens alter corticotropin
releasing hormone and arginine vasopressin mRNA within forebrain
sites known to regulate activity in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis.
J.
Neuroendocrinol.
13,
442–452.
doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2826.2001.
00653.x
Vinson, G. P., Hinson, J. P., and Tóth, I. E. (1994). The neuroendocrinology of the
adrenal cortex. J. Neuroendocrinol. 6, 235–246. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.1994.
tb00578.x
Walaas, I., and Fonnum, F. (1980). Biochemical evidence for glutamate as a
transmitter in hippocampal efferents to the basal forebrain and hypothalamus
in the rat brain. Neuroscience 5, 1691–1698. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(80)
90088-3
Walker, J. J., Spiga, F., Waite, E., Zhao, Z., Kershaw, Y., Terry, J. R., et al. (2012).
The origin of glucocorticoid hormone oscillations. PLoS Biol. 10:e1001341.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001341
Walker, B. R., Williams, B. C., and Edwards, C. R. (1994). Regulation of 11
beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity by the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis in the rat. J. Endocrinol. 141, 467–472. doi: 10.1677/joe.0.14
10467
Wamsteeker-Cusulin,
J.
I.,
Füzesi,
T.,
Watts,
A.
G.,
and
Bains,
J.
S.
(2013). Characterization of corticotropin-releasing hormone neurons in the
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus of Crh-IRES-Cre mutant mice.
PLoS One 8:64943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064943
Wang, D., He, X., Zhao, Z., Feng, Q., Lin, R., Sun, Y., et al. (2015).
Whole-brain mapping of the direct inputs and axonal projections of
POMC and AgRP neurons. Front. Neuroanat. 9:40. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.
00040
Weaver, I. C. G., Cervoni, N., Champagne, F. A., D’Alessio, A. C., Sharma, S.,
Seckl, J. R., et al. (2004). Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior. Nat.
Neurosci. 7, 847–854. doi: 10.1038/nn1276
Wei, Q., Lu, X., Liu, L., Schafer, G., Shieh, K., Burke, S., et al. (2004). Glucocorticoid
receptor overexpression in forebrain: a mouse model of increased emotional
lability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 101, 11851–11856. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0402208101
Weidenfeld, J., Feldman, S., Itzik, A., Van de Kar, L. D., and Newman, M. E.
(2002). Evidence for a mutual interaction between noradrenergic and
serotonergic
agonists
in
stimulation
of
ACTH
and
corticosterone
secretion in the rat. Brain Res. 941, 113–117. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)
02641-0
Weiser, M. J., and Handa, R. J. (2009). Estrogen impairs glucocorticoid
dependent negative feedback on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis via
estrogen receptor alpha within the hypothalamus. Neuroscience 159, 883–895.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.12.058
Weisz, J., and Ward, I. L. (1980). Plasma testosterone and progesterone titers
of pregnant rats, their male and female fetuses and neonatal offspring.
Endocrinology 106, 306–316. doi: 10.1210/endo-106-1-306
Whitnall, M. H., Key, S., Ben-Barak, Y., Ozato, K., and Gainer, H. (1985).
Immunocytochemical
studies
of
the
ontogeny
of
oxytocinergic
and
vasopressinergic neurons’. J. Neurosci. 5, 98–109. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
05-01-00098.1985
Williamson, M., and Viau, V. (2008). Selective contributions of the medial preoptic
nucleus to testosteronedependant regulation of the paraventricular nucleus
of the hypothalamus and the HPA axis. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp.
Physiol. 295, 1020–1030. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.90389.2008
Witzmann,
S.
R.,
Turner,
J.
D.,
Meriaux,
S.
B.,
Meijer,
O.
C.,
and
Muller, C. P. (2012). Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor
promoter 17 in adult rats. Epigenetics 7, 1290–1301. doi: 10.4161/epi.
22363
Wolf, D., Harris, N., and Rotter, V. (1984). Reconstitution of P53 expression
in a nonproducer Ab-MuLV-transformed cell line by transfection of
a functional P53 gene. Cell 38, 119–126. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(84)
90532-4
Yamashita, T., Tomoo, K. K., and Kawashima, S. (1988). Arginine vasopressin
contents of the hypothalamus and pituitary during fetal and postnatal
development in the mouse. Dev. Growth Differ. 30, 563–571. doi: 10.1111/j.
1440-169X.1988.00563.x
Yi, S. J., Masters, J. N., and Baram, T. Z. (1994). Glucocorticoid receptor mRNA
ontogeny in the fetal and postnatal rat forebrain. Mol. Cell. Neursci. 5, 385–393.
doi: 10.1006/mcne.1994.1048
Young, E. A., Altemus, M., Parkinson, V., and Shastry, S. (2001). Effects of
estrogen antagonists and agonists on the ACTH response to restraint stress
in female rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 25, 881–891. doi: 10.1016/S0893-
133X(01)00301-3
Zakharova, E., Miller, J., Unterwald, E., Wade, D., and Izenwasser, S. (2009).
Social and physical environment alter cocaine conditioned place preference
and dopaminergic markers in adolescent male rats. Neuroscience 163, 890–897.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.068
Zhang, X., and Fogel, R. (2002). Glutamate mediates an excitatory influence of the
paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus on the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.
J. Neurophysiol. 88, 49–63. doi: 10.1152/jn.2002.88.1.49
Zhao, L., Bakke, M., Krimkevich, Y., Cushman, L. J., Parlow, A. F., Camper, S. A.,
et al. (2001). Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1) is essential for pituitary gonadotrope
function. Development 128, 147–154.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
20
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

Sheng et al.
HPA Axis and Development
Zhu, X., Gleiberman, A. S., and Rosenfeld, M. G. (2007). Molecular physiology of
pituitary development: signaling and transcriptional networks. Physiol. Rev. 87,
933–963. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00006.2006
Zubair, M., Ishihara, S., Oka, S., Okumura, K., and Morohashi, K. (2006). Two-step
regulation of Ad4BP/SF-1 gene transcription during fetal adrenal development:
initiation by a hox-Pbx1-Prep1 complex and maintenance via autoregulation
by Ad4BP/SF-1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 26, 4111–4121. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00
222-06
Zuloaga, D. G., Zuloaga, K. L., Hinds, L. R., Carbone, D. L., and Handa, R. J. (2014).
Estrogen receptor β expression in the mouse forebrain: age and sex differences.
J. Comp. Neurol. 522, 358–371. doi: 10.1002/cne.23400
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Sheng, Bales, Myers, Bautista, Roueinfar, Hale and Handa. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
21
January 2021 | Volume 14 | Article 601939

