REVIEW
published: 24 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2021.661476
Edited by:
Francisco Javier Rubio,
National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA), United States
Reviewed by:
Eisuke Koya,
University of Sussex, United Kingdom
Michele Pignatelli,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
(HHMI), United States
*Correspondence:
Priyanka Rao-Ruiz
p.rao@vu.nl
Michel C. van den Oever
michel.vanden.oever@vu.nl
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Received: 30 January 2021
Accepted: 26 February 2021
Published: 24 March 2021
Citation:
Rao-Ruiz P, Visser E, Mitri ´c M,
Smit AB and van den Oever MC
(2021) A Synaptic Framework
for the Persistence of Memory
Engrams.
Front. Synaptic Neurosci. 13:661476.
doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2021.661476
A Synaptic Framework for the
Persistence of Memory Engrams
Priyanka Rao-Ruiz*, Esther Visser†, Miodrag Mitri ´c†, August B. Smit and
Michel C. van den Oever*
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam
Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
The ability to store and retrieve learned information over prolonged periods of time
is an essential and intriguing property of the brain. Insight into the neurobiological
mechanisms that underlie memory consolidation is of utmost importance for our
understanding of memory persistence and how this is affected in memory disorders.
Recent evidence indicates that a given memory is encoded by sparsely distributed
neurons that become highly activated during learning, so-called engram cells. Research
by us and others conﬁrms the persistent nature of cortical engram cells by showing that
these neurons are required for memory expression up to at least 1 month after they were
activated during learning. Strengthened synaptic connectivity between engram cells is
thought to ensure reactivation of the engram cell network during retrieval. However,
given the continuous integration of new information into existing neuronal circuits and
the relatively rapid turnover rate of synaptic proteins, it is unclear whether a lasting
learning-induced increase in synaptic connectivity is mediated by stable synapses
or by continuous dynamic turnover of synapses of the engram cell network. Here,
we ﬁrst discuss evidence for the persistence of engram cells and memory-relevant
adaptations in synaptic plasticity, and then propose models of synaptic adaptations and
molecular mechanisms that may support memory persistence through the maintenance
of enhanced synaptic connectivity within an engram cell network.
Keywords: memory engram, engram cell network, synaptic connectivity, memory persistence, cellular feedback
loops
INTRODUCTION
Our memories deﬁne who we are, help us make decisions and guide our behavior. The ability to
eﬀectively encode, store and retrieve information is therefore an essential feature of life. Although
the recollection of most experiences fades with time, certain memories are retained for many years
or even a lifetime. How the brain is able to process and persistently store learned information has
been a topic of intense research for a long time and great progress has been made in recent years
toward a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying memory persistence.
Memory formation is initiated by the integration of external and interoceptive sensory stimuli in
neuronal circuits, forming a cohesive representation of a speciﬁc event. Subsequently, the neurons
involved are thought to undergo physical changes that enable retrieval of the learned information.
The physical representation of experience-driven changes in the brain is collectively referred to as
a memory engram (Box 1), a term that gained popularity in recent years (Josselyn et al., 2015),
but that was ﬁrst introduced by the German scientist Richard Semon in the early 20th century
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
(Semon, 1911). Learning-induced changes do not occur globally
or randomly within memory-relevant brain regions. Instead,
accumulating evidence indicates that sparse ensembles of
neurons become highly activated during learning and act as a
substrate for the storage of a memory engram (Whitaker and
Hope, 2018; Josselyn and Tonegawa, 2020). As such, the neurons
that encode a memory through consolidation of learning-induced
physical adaptations (i.e., the engram) are called engram cells
(Tonegawa et al., 2015).
The initial process of long-term memory formation through
cellular consolidation of experience-driven changes occurs on a
time-scale of hours to days and requires de novo protein synthesis
(McGaugh, 2000). However, for a memory to persist and to
be retrieved at remote timepoints (>2 weeks) after learning,
it is thought to undergo a process of systems consolidation
(Frankland and Bontempi, 2005), which involves temporal
reorganization of the cells involved in the brain-wide engram
network (Figure 1) (Tonegawa et al., 2018). More speciﬁcally,
memory retrieval at recent timepoints (within the 1st week) after
learning relies heavily on processing of learned information and
consolidation of the engram in subregions of the hippocampus, as
well as the amygdala and other subcortical structures (depending
on the type of information that is processed), whereas systems
consolidation drives the engagement of neocortical regions in
memory retrieval (Takashima et al., 2006; Wheeler et al., 2013).
In particular, areas of the prefrontal cortex are not involved
in recent memory expression, but are required for adequate
memory retrieval at remote timepoints (Frankland et al., 2004;
Goshen et al., 2011; Lesburgueres et al., 2011). In line with
this, expression of recent memories relies on engram cells in
the hippocampus (Liu et al., 2012; Denny et al., 2014; Tanaka
et al., 2014; Rao-Ruiz et al., 2019), whereas remote memories
depend on reactivation of learning-activated neurons in areas
of the prefrontal cortex (Kitamura et al., 2017; Matos et al.,
2019), among other regions (Tayler et al., 2013). The progressive
dependency on engram cells in neocortical regions is likely driven
by post-learning synchronization and replay of neuronal activity
in hippocampal and cortical areas (Squire et al., 2015; Xia et al.,
2017). Interestingly, whereas prolonged optogenetic inhibition of
the hippocampal CA1 region does not aﬀect expression of remote
contextual fear memory, temporally precise inhibition during
a memory test does impair recall and reduces the increase in
activity in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) normally observed
at this timepoint (Goshen et al., 2011). This indicates that systems
consolidation drives the necessity of cortical regions in remote
memory, but interplay between the hippocampus and neocortex
remains important for adequate remote memory retrieval under
normal conditions. Notably, systems consolidation has been
demonstrated for contextual memories (Frankland et al., 2004;
Goshen et al., 2011), but also occurs after other types of
learning, such as spatial learning (Teixeira et al., 2006) and social
transmission of food preference (Lesburgueres et al., 2011).
The
enduring
neurobiological
adaptations
that
ensure
memory storage and persistent reactivation of engram cells
during memory retrieval are largely unknown. At the level
of neuronal physiology, changes in excitability and synaptic
plasticity have been observed in engram cells in various brain
regions (Whitaker and Hope, 2018; Josselyn and Tonegawa,
2020). Alterations in intrinsic physiological properties of a
neuron (i.e., membrane conductance) control the probability
of action potential generation (Hille, 1978), thereby favoring or
limiting synaptic vesicle release. As such, the excitability state of a
neuron inﬂuences neurotransmission and contributes to synaptic
changes involved in memory encoding and consolidation (Zhang
and Linden, 2003; Chen L. et al., 2020). Several studies have
demonstrated that the excitability state of a neuron aﬀects its
probability to be allocated in an engram network (Zhou et al.,
2009; Yiu et al., 2014; Brebner et al., 2020). Furthermore, a
transient learning-induced increase in excitability of engram
cells is thought to mediate the linkage of experiences that
occur close in time through co-allocation of engram cells (Cai
et al., 2016; Rashid et al., 2016), whereas transient increased
excitability that lasts up to 1 h after retrieval regulates the
accuracy of subsequent memory retrieval (Pignatelli et al.,
2019). Hence, changes in the excitability state of an engram
cell have a critical role in memory processing. However, as
most excitability changes that have been observed thus far are
acutely induced by learning or memory retrieval, it is unclear
how long-lasting these changes are and whether this underlies
the retention of an engram cell network. Moreover, as a single
neuron might participate in multiple engram cell networks,
a persistent change in whole cell excitability would inﬂuence
the processing of multiple memory engrams. Therefore, the
persistence and reactivation of engram cell networks more likely
depends on the strengthening of speciﬁc synaptic connections
between neurons that ﬁre together (Hebb, 1949). If learning
modulates the properties of a subset of synapses on an engram
cell (i.e., the engram synapses), that speciﬁc neuron would be
able to contribute to other engram cell networks via its remaining
synaptic connections, allowing for much greater ﬂexibility and
memory capacity in neuronal circuits. Hence, for the purpose
of this review, we will focus predominantly on mechanisms of
synaptic connectivity underlying the stability and reactivation of
engram cell networks over time.
We will ﬁrst summarize evidence of the existence of sparse and
persistent engram cells. Secondly, we will provide an overview
of learning-induced global and engram cell-speciﬁc synaptic
changes associated with progressive memory stages. Finally, we
will discuss synaptic models and molecular mechanisms that aim
to explain how enhanced synaptic connectivity of the engram cell
network is maintained over time to support memory persistence.
ENGRAM CELLS SUPPORTING
MEMORY PERSISTENCE
The concept that memories are encoded by synchronized ﬁring
of neuronal ensembles was ﬁrst postulated by Hebb (1949).
This theory was initially supported by studies that used in vivo
electrophysiological recordings as a measure of neuronal activity
or the expression of immediate early genes (IEGs) as a proxy
thereof (John and Schwartz, 1978; Sheng and Greenberg, 1990).
Recent technological advances enabled researchers to causally
link neuronal ensemble activity with the expression of learned
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
BOX 1 | Key deﬁnitions.
Memory engram: the physical representation of learning-induced changes in the brain that are causal to memory storage and retrieval.
Engram cells: neurons that encode a memory through consolidation of learning-induced physical adaptations. These neurons are highly activated during learning
and subsequently act as a substrate for the storage of a memory engram.
Engram cell network: a network of engram cells that persists through the establishment of engram synapses.
Engram synapses: synapses between engram cells that are formed or strengthened as a result of learning to ensure reactivation of the engram cell network during
memory retrieval.
Synaptic connectivity: collection of structural (size and number) and electrophysiological (strength and efﬁcacy) properties of synapses. Learning augments one or
more of these properties to enhance synaptic connectivity between engram cells.
Global synaptic adaptations: learning-induced changes in synaptic connectivity that have been measured in a random population of neurons in a given brain
region, without discriminating between engram and non-engram cells.
Engram cell-speciﬁc synaptic adaptations: learning-induced changes in synaptic connectivity that have been measured selectively in engram cells in a given
brain region, often by comparison with non-engram cells.
Cellular feedback loops: recurrent cause-and-effect sequences where the output of an intracellular molecular pathway inﬂuences its input.
systems consolidation
active
inactive
time
learning
PFC
cortex
subcortical areas
HPC
recent memory
PFC
cortex
subcortical areas
HPC
remote memory
PFC
cortex
subcortical areas
HPC
FIGURE 1 | Temporal reorganization of an engram cell network. Learning is associated with activation of neuronal ensembles (indicated by circles) in
memory-relevant brain regions, including hippocampal, cortical and subcortical areas. These speciﬁc neurons consolidate the physical changes that support
memory storage and retrieval and are therefore considered engram cells. During the ﬁrst post-learning hours to days, strengthening of synaptic connectivity occurs
between engram cells in the hippocampus (HPC) and other areas to enable recent memory expression. Over the following days to weeks, systems consolidation,
involving replay and synchronization of learning-associated neuronal activity patterns in HPC and cortical regions, such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC), is thought to
promote maturation of cortical engram cells. This process drives strengthening of synaptic connectivity between cortical-cortical and cortical-subcortical engram
cells and a progressive shift in the engram cell network toward a higher dependency on cortical engram cells for remote memory expression.
behavior. These approaches are based on engineered viral vectors
and/or transgenic rodent lines that either bias the allocation of
neurons into an engram cell network or that make use of the
transcriptional promoter of an IEG, such as Fos or Arc, to drive
expression of a transgene in neurons that are activated during
an experimenter-deﬁned time-window (Cruz et al., 2013; Josselyn
et al., 2015). When combined with targeted cell ablation, opto- or
chemogenetics, this enables selective manipulation of neuronal
ensembles and thereby the analysis of gain- or loss-of-function.
Aversive and appetitive learning paradigms in rodents have
been used to determine whether neuronal ensemble activity
causally supports memory expression. In particular, learning-
activated neuronal ensembles that control expression of recently
acquired aversive and appetitive memories have been identiﬁed
in the amygdala (Han et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2009; Hsiang
et al., 2014; Redondo et al., 2014; Gore et al., 2015), hippocampus
(Liu et al., 2012; Denny et al., 2014; Tanaka et al., 2014;
Rao-Ruiz et al., 2019) and retrosplenial cortex (Cowansage et al.,
2014) among other regions. With respect to appetitive memories,
several studies have shown that neurons in the striatum
and prefrontal cortex that are activated during expression of
conditioned responses, such as cue-induced food or drug seeking
and context-dependent locomotor sensitization, are required for
subsequent expression of the same behavior (Koya et al., 2009;
Bossert et al., 2011; Cruz et al., 2014; Suto et al., 2016; Warren
et al., 2016; Caprioli et al., 2017; Wall et al., 2019). These ﬁndings,
among others, have provided invaluable insight into the causal
relationship between neuronal ensemble activity and conditioned
behavior. As such, the neurons that are highly activated during
learning and subsequently necessary for memory expression are
thought to harbor the engram. However, in most early studies,
the interval between the behavioral tagging/ablation session and
the session during which the eﬀect of the ensemble manipulation
was determined was typically ∼1–7 days, which left the question
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
of whether activated neuronal ensembles function as engram cells
responsible for the persistence of a speciﬁc memory unresolved.
To enable visualization and manipulation of neuronal
ensembles over prolonged periods of time, it is necessary to
induce a stable or permanent tag in activated neurons. Tayler
et al. (2013) used a TetTag transgenic mouse line to express
a stable form of GFP in neurons that were activated during
contextual fear conditioning (CFC). They observed context-
dependent reactivation of tagged neurons in hippocampal and
cortical regions 2 days after conditioning, whereas reactivation
selectively occurred in several cortical regions upon retrieval
2 weeks later. More recently, Kitamura et al. (2017) combined the
TetTag mouse with optogenetic manipulation and reported that
CFC-activated neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)
are suﬃcient and necessary for memory expression 12–14 days
after conditioning. In line with this, we found, using a viral-TRAP
(Targeted Recombination in Active Populations) combined with
chemogenetics approach, that CFC-activated mPFC neurons
are required for remote memory expression up to at least
1 month after learning (Matos et al., 2019). It is noteworthy
that in both studies, mPFC engram cells were not involved
in recent memory expression, supporting their time-dependent
engagement through systems consolidation. The temporal role
of mPFC engram cells was further demonstrated in a study
that tagged these cells during memory retrieval at diﬀerent
timepoints after fear conditioning using a TRAP2 transgenic
mouse (DeNardo et al., 2019). Interestingly, the involvement of
CFC-activated mPFC neurons in remote memory appears to be
contingent upon training intensity, with strong fear conditioning
resulting in a disengagement of the learning-activated mPFC
ensemble (Matos et al., 2019). We speculate that the encoding
of highly aversive experiences depends on evolutionary more
primordial emotional brain systems, consequently leading to a
lack of top-down control by the mPFC. The persistent nature
of memory encoding by mPFC neurons was also demonstrated
in a mouse alcohol self-administration paradigm (Visser et al.,
2020). We found that mPFC neurons that are activated during
alcohol self-administration drive cue-induced relapse to alcohol
seeking following 1 month of abstinence. Thus, even though
investigations into engram cell stability gained attention only
recently, it is evident that the mPFC can serve as a critical network
hub, harboring persistent engram cells that encode aversive and
appetitive types of memory.
LEARNING-ASSOCIATED ADAPTATIONS
IN SYNAPTIC CONNECTIVITY
Augmentation of synaptic connectivity through changes in the
structural and/or electrophysiological properties of synapses is
considered to be crucial for memory consolidation, storage and
retrieval. Collectively, these adaptations may ensure enhanced
synaptic
connectivity
between
engram
cells
and
eﬃcient
reactivation of the network upon exposure to reminder cues.
At an experimental level, several criteria need to be met to
link synaptic connectivity with the stabilization of memories
(Martin et al., 2000). These include evidence that (1) learning
induces the formation of new connections and/or the structural
remodeling of pre-existing ones, (2) learning induces detectable
changes in network-speciﬁc synaptic physiology, (3) mimicking
or manipulating altered synaptic connectivity (via criterium
1 and/or 2) installs or disrupts memory, respectively. In the
following sections, we will highlight several key observations that
fulﬁll one or more of these criteria.
Global Synaptic Adaptations Associated
With Recent Memory
In line with the aforementioned criteria, numerous studies
have provided evidence that enhanced synaptic connectivity
is associated with the formation and retrieval of long-term
memories. For instance, studies using Golgi impregnation and
electron microscopy demonstrated that associative learning
enhances spine density and the formation of multiple-synapse
boutons on hippocampal CA1 neurons (Geinisman et al., 2001;
Leuner et al., 2003) and enlarges the postsynaptic density
of spines in the lateral amygdala (Lamprecht et al., 2006).
Moreover, in vivo transcranial two-photon imaging has shown
that fear learning and subsequent extinction learning results in
elimination and formation, respectively, of spines on the same
dendritic branches in the frontal association cortex of mice
(Lai et al., 2012). Lai et al. (2012) also elegantly demonstrated
that the degree of structural plasticity correlated with behavioral
responses of the animal and that reconditioning eliminates
spines that were formed after extinction learning. The latter
structural changes argue against the concept that learning
enhances synaptic connectivity, however, whether the strength
of remaining synapses was altered as a result of learning
was not examined. Other studies suggest that learning-induced
enhancement of synaptic connectivity is localized to ‘dendritic
hotspots’, in clusters of synapses (Govindarajan et al., 2006; Frank
et al., 2018). These clusters, rather than single synaptic contacts,
could function as the fundamental unit of information storage.
For instance, at a computational level, biophysical modeling
suggests such clustered plasticity supports sparsity and increases
memory capacity of neuronal systems. This was supported
by two-photon imaging of the retrosplenial cortex in Thy1-
YFP-H mice, which demonstrated that while contextual fear
conditioning does not alter the overall rate of spine turnover, it
results in clustered spine formation causally related to learning
over 5 days of training (Frank et al., 2018). Thus, learning induces
the formation of new, potentially clustered connections and the
remodeling of existing connections and these structural changes
in turn can support augmented synaptic connectivity patterns
that subserve long-lasting memory storage.
Evidence for synaptic potentiation is based on either direct
measurement of learning-induced changes in synaptic physiology
using in vivo and ex vivo electrophysiological recordings
(McKernan and Shinnick-Gallagher, 1997; Rogan et al., 1997)
or through indirect measurements of saturation/occlusion or
mimicry/manipulation of synaptic plasticity. For instance, cue-
reward learning enhances AMPA receptor-mediated strength
of thalamic synapses onto lateral amygdala neurons, which
correlates with the level of learning in individual animals
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
(Tye et al., 2008). In contrast, saturation of hippocampal synaptic
strength prior to learning, by in vivo electrical stimulation-
induced long-term potentiation (LTP), results in anterograde
amnesia for acquisition of new spatial information, as well as
the inability to adapt previously stored spatial relationships
(McNaughton et al., 1986). Furthermore, mimicry experiments
using optogenetic manipulation have proven that it is feasible
to artiﬁcially modulate memory expression. For example, in vivo
optogenetically-induced long-term synaptic depression (LTD) of
auditory inputs in the lateral amygdala after learning impairs
expression of auditory fear memory, which can be rescued by
evoking LTP of these inputs (Nabavi et al., 2014). Additionally,
pharmacological disruption of learning-induced and PKM-zeta
mediated synaptic potentiation impairs memory storage and
prevents successful memory retrieval (Pastalkova et al., 2006;
Shema et al., 2011), although potential oﬀ-target eﬀects of these
manipulations demand further investigation. These and other
studies provide evidence that learning-induced enhancement of
synaptic connectivity is necessary for memory storage, however,
they do not pinpoint whether these adaptations occur speciﬁcally
in sparsely distributed engram cells or on a more global scale.
Engram Cell-Speciﬁc Synaptic
Adaptations Associated With Recent
Memory
Converging evidence over the last few years indicates that
learning-induced strengthening of synaptic connectivity occurs
speciﬁcally between neurons that are activated at the time
of learning. For instance, a CFC-induced increase in synapse
density and AMPA/NMDA receptor current ratio has been
reported in hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) engram cells, which
is prevented by post-learning inhibition of protein synthesis
(Ryan et al., 2015). Furthermore, this study described enhanced
connectivity between DG and CA3 engram cells compared to
connectivity with neighboring non-engram cells in the CA3.
Interestingly, in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, contextual
memory expression is impaired and learning does not increase
spine density on DG engram cells, however, this spine and
memory deﬁcit can be rescued by optogenetically-induced LTP
in these engram cells (Roy et al., 2017). At the synaptic level,
pertinent proof for engram cell-speciﬁc enhancement in synaptic
connectivity was provided by Choi et al. (2018), who developed
dual-eGRASP to selectively label synapses between neurons
activated by learning, their non-activated counterparts and the
combinations thereof, with diﬀerent ﬂuorescent tags. They found
an enhancement in synapse size and density on hippocampal
CA1 engram cells that receive input from CA3 engram cells
after fear conditioning, and showed that these adaptations
supported memory strength and occluded subsequent LTP. At
the molecular level, an early study (Matsuo et al., 2008) examined
the dynamics of newly synthesized AMPA receptors by coupling
the expression of GFP-GluA1 to activation of the Fos promoter.
They found that new GluA1 subunits were selectively recruited to
mushroom-type spines in hippocampal CA1 neurons 24 h after
fear conditioning, suggestive of a learning-induced enhancement
of AMPA receptor-mediated synaptic strength. Intriguingly, a
follow-up study reported an overall reduction of spine density on
learning-activated CA1 pyramidal neurons (Sanders et al., 2012),
hinting toward a form of synaptic reﬁnement through selective
strengthening of a subset of spines on engram cells. Together,
these studies provide strong evidence that learning induces
an augmentation of (structural and physiological) synaptic
connectivity between engram cells in the hippocampus and its
necessity for the successful expression of recent memories.
In addition to the hippocampus, accumulating evidence
points to adaptations in synaptic connectivity of engram
cells in other brain regions. Lateral amygdala neurons tagged
during auditory fear conditioning or discriminative fear learning
exhibit enhanced pathway-speciﬁc synaptic strength with aﬀerent
neurons (Gouty-Colomer et al., 2016; Kim and Cho, 2017)
and depotentiation of those same synapses causes memory loss
(Kim and Cho, 2017). A very elegant study by Abdou et al.
(2018) demonstrated that for memories that share a neuronal
ensemble in the lateral amygdala, optogenetic potentiation and
depotentiation of pathway-speciﬁc synapses selectively interfere
with one memory while sparing the other. Motor skill learning
has been shown to induce synaptic remodeling in a small subset
of neurons in the motor cortex. These synapses were tracked with
the expression of a photoactivatable Rac that targets activated
synapses and the resulting memory can be disrupted by optical
shrinkage of recently potentiated spines (Hayashi-Takagi et al.,
2015). In the nucleus accumbens (NAc), an increase in silent
synapses has been observed in activated neurons that mediate
the expression of conditioned locomotor sensitization induced
by cocaine treatment (Koya et al., 2012; Whitaker et al., 2016).
Silent synapses contain functional NMDARs, but no functional
AMPARs, and are considered to reﬂect an immature synaptic
state (Rumpel et al., 1998). The functional relevance of the
increase in silent synapses on activated neurons in the accumbens
is unknown, but may reﬂect a transient state of these cells after
the expression of the cocaine-evoked psychomotor sensitization
which might be followed by recruitment of new AMPARs to these
synapses. The latter has been observed at a global level in the NAc
upon retrieval of remote cocaine memory (Wright et al., 2020)
and in the dorsal hippocampal CA1 after retrieval of recent fear
memory (Rao-Ruiz et al., 2011).
Together, these ﬁndings convincingly demonstrate that new
learning is associated with enhanced synaptic connectivity
involving increased pathway-speciﬁc potentiation of synapses
between
engram
cells.
Importantly,
enhanced
synaptic
connectivity observed in the ﬁrst days after learning is necessary
for adequate recent memory expression, but whether it
contributes to the persistence of an engram cell network is
poorly understood.
Global Synaptic Adaptations Associated
With Remote Memory
Compared with adaptations that have been identiﬁed within
the ﬁrst week after conditioning, less is known about synaptic
mechanisms that contribute to memory retention beyond this
timeframe. At the structural level, an increase in spine density
has been reported on neurons in the infralimbic and ACC after
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
CFC (Restivo et al., 2009; Vetere et al., 2011a,b). In the ACC, the
enhanced spine density is apparent 1 week after learning, then
gradually increases over the following 5 weeks and lasts for at least
7 weeks (Vetere et al., 2011a). It is well-established that repeated
exposure to psychostimulants, such as cocaine, also results in an
increase in density of dendritic spines on cortical and striatal
neurons and this is retained for at least 1 month (Robinson and
Kolb, 1999). After motor learning, formation of new spines (5% of
total spines) occurs on layer 5 pyramidal neurons in the primary
motor cortex, as observed using in vivo two-photon imaging
(Yang et al., 2009). Interestingly, the proportion of new spines
that is maintained up to 2 weeks after motor learning is positively
modulated by the number of training sessions and correlates with
performance in this task. Yang et al. (2009) estimated that a small
fraction of the newly formed spines (0.04% of total spines) is
retained throughout the life of the animal and thereby represent a
permanent trace of a learned experience in cortical networks. Of
note, motor skill learning reﬂects a type of procedural learning,
whereas most engram studies have thus far focused on associative
learning and episodic memories. It is unknown whether the
mechanisms of synaptic connectivity underlying these diﬀerent
forms of memory are fundamentally similar.
Several proteins have been discovered that contribute to
memory persistence by altering structural connectivity. For
instance, myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) is a transcription
factor known to negatively regulate spinogenesis and viral-
mediated enhanced expression of MEF2 in ACC pyramidal
neurons during the ﬁrst, but not seventh, week after fear
conditioning prevents the learning-induced increase in spine
density and subsequently impairs memory expression (Vetere
et al., 2011a). The increase in spine density in the NAc
after repeated cocaine exposure is also regulated by MEF2
(Pulipparacharuvil et al., 2008), but surprisingly, reducing spine
density through enhancement of MEF2-mediated transcription
promotes behavioral sensitization and cocaine conditioned place
preference memory, suggesting that the cocaine-enhanced spine
density serves as a compensatory mechanism to limit the eﬀects
of future cocaine exposure. This demonstrates that an experience-
induced increase in spine density does not always underlie
memory consolidation and should be interpreted with caution in
the absence of causal evidence. Interestingly, MEF2 primes PSD-
95 protein for degradation (Tsai et al., 2012) and disruption of
PSD-95 function has been shown to impair retention of remote
fear and ethanol conditioned place preference memory (Camp
et al., 2011; Fitzgerald et al., 2015). With respect to fear memory,
mice expressing a loss-of-function mutant PSD-95 show reduced
neuronal activity in the infralimbic cortex during remote memory
expression and decreased spine density and morphology in this
region. Furthermore, CAMKIIα has a critical role in memory
persistence, as mice with heterozygous CAMKIIα expression
have impaired cortical LTP and show memory deﬁcits at remote,
but not recent, timepoints after learning (Frankland et al., 2001).
Thus, several proteins involved in long-term structural plasticity
of the synapse are critically contributing to memory persistence.
At the physiological level, evidence for long-lasting changes
in synaptic function is predominantly obtained with appetitive
learning paradigms. For instance, mice that receive repeated
cocaine injections in an alternate context initially show synaptic
depression (as measured by the AMPA to NMDA receptor
current ratio) in neurons in the NAc, which reverses into synaptic
potentiation at 10–14 days after the last cocaine treatment
(Kourrich et al., 2007). Increased membrane expression of GluA1
and GluA3 subunits has been observed in the NAc at day 45, but
not day 1, after cocaine self-administration, which is paralleled
by enhanced presence of calcium permeable (i.e., GluA2-lacking)
AMPA receptors (Conrad et al., 2008). In line with this,
selective pharmacological blockade of calcium permeable AMPA
receptors in the NAc attenuates time-dependent enhancement
of conditioned cocaine seeking. Projections of the mPFC to the
NAc core are thought to promote conditioned drug seeking,
whereas projections to the shell may suppress drug seeking
responses (Peters et al., 2009; Van den Oever et al., 2010). Cocaine
self-administration initially generates silent synapses in both
projections, but these are matured at day 45 of abstinence through
recruitment of AMPA receptors (Ma et al., 2014). Interestingly,
Ma et al. (2014) found that optogenetically-evoked LTD in
the mPFC-NAc core projection attenuates conditioned cocaine
seeking, whereas the opposite occurs after LTD-induction in
the mPFC-NAc shell projection. Similarly, cocaine-induced
locomotor sensitization is abolished after optogenetic reversal
of synaptic potentiation in NAc D1-expressing medium spiny
neurons (Pascoli et al., 2012). Regarding aversive conditioning,
it was elegantly shown that transient loss of NMDA receptor
subunit GRIN1 expression in the forebrain abolishes LTP and
when its expression is temporarily suppressed at 6 months after
learning, this impairs the expression of a 9-month-old contextual
and auditory fear memory (Cui et al., 2004).
Taken together, memory persistence is associated with
enhanced synaptic connectivity through persistent changes in
structural and physiological properties in brain regions that are
engaged in a particular experience and prevention or reversal
of these alterations disrupts memory retention. In the examples
above, random neurons were selected and analyzed in relevant
brain areas and therefore it remains to be determined whether the
lasting adaptations described represent the engram in neurons
that are activated during memory acquisition and retrieval.
Engram Cell-Speciﬁc Synaptic
Adaptations Associated With Remote
Memory
Whereas fear memory-encoding engram cells in the hippocampal
DG develop a rapid increase in spine density that diminishes
within 2 weeks after learning, a more gradual increase in
spine density occurs on engram cells in the mPFC which
lasts for a least 2 weeks (Kitamura et al., 2017). Notably,
selective blockade of synaptic transmission in DG engram
cells prevents the subsequent increase in spines on mPFC
engram cells, in line with the observations that post-learning
synchronization and replay of hippocampal and cortical neuronal
activity drives systems consolidation. However, whether the
additional spines on mPFC engram cells represent enhanced
synaptic connectivity with neurons in the same engram cell
network or with other neurons is yet unknown. Using an
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
elegant combination of genetic tagging (Arc-TRAP mouse line)
with retrograde and anterograde tracing of activated neurons,
Wall et al. (2019) found that neurons in the dorsal striatum
that are activated by cocaine exposure receive monosynaptic
input from widely distributed, but sparsely activated, cortical
neurons. They show that synaptic strength (measured as
postsynaptic AMPA receptor-mediated currents and presynaptic
release probability) is selectively enhanced between cocaine-
activated cortical and striatal neurons at 21 days after treatment.
Interestingly, synaptic strength is further enhanced speciﬁcally
between activated populations when animals are re-exposed
to cocaine 15 days after repeated cocaine treatment and then
persists for at least 4 more weeks. To date, these are, to
our knowledge, the only studies that investigated synaptic
connectivity of engram cells at a remote timepoint after a speciﬁc
experience. Hence, the precise mechanisms that contribute to
the stability of connectivity between engram cells and thereby
support reactivation of an engram cell network during memory
retrieval require further investigation.
MEMORY PERSISTENCE THROUGH
STABLE OR DYNAMIC ADAPTATIONS IN
SYNAPTIC CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN
ENGRAM CELLS
We will now discuss how enhanced synaptic connectivity,
through structural and/or physiological adaptations (pre- and
postsynaptic), could be maintained over time (Figure 2A).
Unfortunately, at present, there is little experimental evidence
to support a one-to-one correlation between memory retention
and the individual synapses that contribute to the maintenance
of this augmented connectivity. This would require long-term
monitoring of the same population of engram cell synapses over
a time-scale of weeks to months. Therefore, we will speculate
about potential mechanisms and suggest one model that involves
stable engram synapses that are deﬁned at the time of learning
and a second model of dynamic ongoing plasticity of synaptic
connections between engram cells (Figure 2B). Furthermore,
we complement both models with the possibility that synaptic
pruning occurs in an engram cell network to preserve the global
memory encoding capacity of neural circuits.
Stable Synaptic Connectivity Without
(1a) or With Pruning (1b)
In this model, enhanced learning-induced connectivity would
endure immutably over the lifetime of a given memory due
to unvarying size and strength of either (1a) all, or (1b) a
subset of synaptic connections triggered by learning (Figure 2B).
A handful of studies have, however, raised the possibility that
spine dynamics may commensurate with the duration for which
a memory is dependent on a particular population of engram
cells. For instance, using two-photon microendoscopy, Attardo
et al. (2015) found that dendritic spines in the hippocampus
have a mean life-time comparable to the time-scale of systems
level memory consolidation (approximately 15 days) and only
transient increases in spine density were observed on DG
engram cells after fear conditioning (Kitamura et al., 2017).
Conversely, spine density on mPFC engram cells is enhanced
remotely after learning (Kitamura et al., 2017) and at a global
level, a small but signiﬁcant fraction of new motor learning-
induced cortical spines are retained over the lifetime of an
animal (Yang et al., 2009). Thus, in line with their long-term
contribution to memory persistence, neocortical dendritic spines
also demonstrate heightened permanency relative to those in the
hippocampus, supporting a role for stabilized patterns of synaptic
connectivity within cortical networks and potentially between
cortical engram cells and their subcortical targets.
The importance of activity-dependent synaptic pruning for
the optimization of cortical network function and capacity during
critical periods of development is well-established (Garey, 1984)
and is also thought to have an important function during
experience-dependent shaping of memory circuits (Holtmaat and
Caroni, 2016). Therefore, we argue that it is likely that stable
synaptic connectivity is maintained by only a subset of new
and/or strengthened synapses after learning (Yang et al., 2009),
i.e., scenario (1b), rather than by all engram synapses recruited
during learning, i.e., scenario (1a). In support of this, pruning of
motor learning-induced cortical spines occurs during rapid eye
movement sleep, in addition to the strengthening of a subset of
new spines (Li et al., 2017). Relatively weak engram synapses are
most likely eliminated ﬁrst and MEF2 may play an important
role in this process (Caroni et al., 2014). Reﬁnement of the
engram cell network by gradual elimination of the majority,
but not all, learning-induced new and/or strengthened synapses
would enable some synaptic alterations to endure and maintain a
partially augmented state of synaptic connectivity.
Dynamic Synaptic Connectivity Without
(2a) or With Pruning (2b)
An alternative view to a ﬁxed synaptic connectivity conﬁguration
is a ﬂuid model in which individual synapses on engram cells can
be continually calibrated and reorganized (Routtenberg, 2013),
while maintaining overall enhanced synaptic connectivity within
the engram cell network. Computational studies lend credence to
this model, wherein discrete synaptic weights within an engram
cell network can ﬂuctuate structurally and physiologically, while
the overall connectivity strength of the memory circuit remains
invariant (Abraham et al., 2019; Susman et al., 2019). Dynamic
synaptic connectivity would enable a more malleable state of the
network that would also account for the eﬀects of homeostatic
adjustments within the network, and assumes that a stored
memory can outlive the strength of individual synapses that
encode it. However, obtaining evidence for this dynamic model,
at the level of both structural and physiological adaptations in the
engram cell network, is technically challenging and would require
the measurement of a population of synapses across extended
times and diﬀerent phases of behavior. Nonetheless, it is relevant
to note that empirical evidence indicates that learning induces
the clustered addition of dendritic spines and that this may
serve to increase eﬃciency of information storage with relevant
circuits of the brain (Fu et al., 2012; Frank et al., 2018). Although
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
Enhanced synaptic 
connectivity
(structural & physiological 
adaptations)
Learning 
event
Baseline
t1
1a)
Time
 Synapitc connectivity 
of engrnam network
Synaptic 
pruning
1a) & 2a)
1b) & 2b)
Baseline 
Learning event
1b)
2a)
2b)
Stable connectivity 
without pruning
Strengthened engram synapses
New engram synapses
Pre-existing synapses
t2
Dynamic connectivity 
without pruning
Stable connectivity 
with pruning
Dynamic connectivity 
with pruning
Full maintenance of 
enhanced synaptic 
connectivity 
t1
t2
Partial maintenance of 
enhanced synaptic 
connectivity 
Full maintenance of 
enhanced synaptic 
connectivity 
Partial maintenance of 
enhanced synaptic 
connectivity 
Stable synapse or cluster
Dynamic synapse or cluster
Stable synapse or cluster
Dynamic synapse or cluster
t2
t2
t2
t2
A
B
FIGURE 2 | Memory persistence through stable or dynamic adaptations in synaptic connectivity between engram cells. (A) Learning induces structural and
physiological adaptations of engram synapses (during t1) that results in enhanced synaptic connectivity within the engram cell network. After initial formation and
strengthening of engram synapses, enhanced synaptic connectivity is fully maintained or pruning may lead to a partial retention of augmented connectivity within the
engram cell network, with the purpose to promote the global memory encoding capacity of neural circuits. (B) Two potential models by which enhanced synaptic
connectivity is fully or partially maintained to mediate memory persistence. Model 1 shows a stable state of engram synapse connectivity after t1 and predicts that
synaptic alterations established by learning persist invariantly over time. This can occur either for all learning-induced synapses (1a) or for a subset of these synapses
after synaptic pruning and reﬁnement of the network (1b). Alternatively, Model 2 describes a dynamic view of synaptic connectivity and hypothesizes that the
strength of individual synapses, possibly within a cluster, can be modiﬁed while keeping the overall connectivity of the engram cell network constant. This can either
occur for all engram synapses/clusters (2a) or a subset of synapses/clusters after synaptic pruning and reﬁnement of the network (2b). t1: days to weeks, t2: weeks
to months. Gray arrowheads indicate an example of a synapse or synaptic cluster that is maintained stably (1a, 1b) or in a dynamic manner (2a, 2b) over time.
awaiting experimental evidence at the level of engram cells, in
such a clustered plasticity model (Govindarajan et al., 2006),
dynamic synaptic connectivity could be driven by bidirectional
changes among individual synapses within a dendritic branch,
while overall enhanced connectivity of the network remains
unchanged. As with the stable synaptic connectivity model, we
expect a dynamic model with synaptic pruning that results
in a partially augmented engram cell network to have more
physiological relevance (i.e., scenario 2b) than a model that
assumes no spine turnover (i.e., scenario 2a). Dynamically
clustered synaptic plasticity at a subset of engram-to-engram cell
connections would enable eﬃcient reactivation of the engram
cell network upon memory retrieval (Govindarajan et al., 2006),
while also limiting the use of resources to optimize memory
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
capacity. Whether clustering, reﬁnement and scaling of synaptic
connectivity between engram cells takes place randomly or at
specialized dendritic hotspots after learning is yet unknown.
Similar to structural connectivity, persistent physiological
changes in synaptic strength can be supported by a stable or
dynamic population of synapses between engram cells. So far,
identiﬁed augmentation of synaptic strength has been measured
by whole cell patch-clamp recordings, which do not provide
insight into the speciﬁc synapses that are altered as a result
of learning. Moreover, physiological adaptations likely also
commensurate with the duration of engagement of engram
cells in memory expression. For instance, DG engram cells
exhibit enhanced synaptic strength the ﬁrst days after fear
conditioning (Ryan et al., 2015; Choi et al., 2018), but this
may reﬂect a transient state similar to structural connectivity
in the hippocampus. Experimentally-induced global LTP has
been shown to persist for a considerable amount of time in
the hippocampus (Abraham et al., 2002), arguing against a
transient state of enhanced synaptic strength in hippocampal
engram cells, however, it is questionable whether this represents
a naturalistic mechanism. To date, strongest support for a
persistent enhancement of pre- and postsynaptic properties has
been observed between cocaine-activated cortical and striatal
neurons several weeks after cocaine exposure (Wall et al., 2019).
Future studies should address whether the alterations in synaptic
strength are maintained by a stable or ﬂuctuating pool of synapses
over time-scales that reﬂect memory persistency.
The models we propose represent a dormant state of the
memory after learning. Depending on epochs of retrieval and the
conditions under which retrieval occurs, synaptic connectivity
within the engram cell network may be altered, enabling
updating of memory strength and content. This process is
likely associated with modulation of physiological properties of
existing synapses between engram cells (Wall et al., 2019), as
well as addition/removal of synapses to reset connectivity within
the network. Additionally, it may involve exclusion of already
incorporated neurons or the engagement of new neurons in the
engram cell network.
POTENTIAL MOLECULAR MECHANISMS
THAT SUPPORT THE PERSISTENCE OF
ENGRAM SYNAPSES
We will discuss a few of many possible mechanisms that can
perpetuate synaptic connectivity within an engram cell network
over weeks to months (for a more detailed review, see e.g.,
Smolen et al., 2019). Learning induces protein turnover (synthesis
and degradation) that is necessary for remodeling of synaptic
connectivity that drives memory formation and its stability over
time. However, both gene and protein products have relatively
short half-lives with proteins exhibiting an average turnover rate
of 9 days in the brain (Price et al., 2010). Although experience can
alter protein turnover of selected synaptic proteins (Heo et al.,
2018), a majority of proteins known to constitute synapses are
degraded and typically replaced within a time course of hours
to days (Dorrbaum et al., 2018). Given this molecular turnover,
how would the gene/protein machinery of enhanced synaptic
connectivity be maintained over the time-course of memory
persistence in either stable or dynamic synapses? Overall, it
is likely that intracellular feedback occurs within and across
speciﬁc cellular compartments, enabling signal transduction
and regulation of discrete transcriptional/translational programs
within engram cells. Here, we will focus our discussion on
mechanisms involving persistent synaptic molecular tags that
trigger synapse-to-nucleus biochemical signaling cascades and
(epi)genetic adaptations (Figure 3). We propose that these
mechanisms may work in concert to maintain engram cell
connectivity patterns over the lifetime of a memory.
Synapse-Speciﬁc Feedback Loops
The theory of synaptic tagging and capture (STC) (Frey and
Morris, 1997) provides a mechanism by which connectivity
between engram cells can be enhanced and sustained over time
(Moncada et al., 2015). This would require the allocation of a
persistent molecular tag or multiple tags to a subset of potentiated
synapses within a dendritic branch/cluster on neurons that are
activated at the time of learning and responsible for memory
persistence. These ‘synaptic tags’ can subsequently trigger
synapse-speciﬁc and self-sustaining molecular feedback loops,
involving signal transduction, transcriptional, and translational
pathways. In turn, information from the nucleus would travel
only to individual, ‘tagged’ synapses or clusters of synapses
(Govindarajan et al., 2006), as opposed to the remaining
population of synapses on engram cells that are not involved in
retention of a particular experience. This could maintain overall
engram cell network connectivity via the regulation of synaptic
gene programs, stimulation of local protein synthesis at the
synapse and synapse-selective recruitment of glutamate and other
receptors/channels to the postsynaptic density. Such mechanisms
would have to take place recurrently (long after stimulation
has ceased) during epochs of engram cell reactivation, when
synaptic replay mimics activity patterns (intensity and temporal
properties) that occur during initial memory formation (Ikegaya
et al., 2004; Atherton et al., 2015; Wei et al., 2016; Giri et al.,
2019; Smolen et al., 2019). Although attractive, this experience-
speciﬁc and enduring STC-driven feedback remains largely
speculative and the molecular tags remain to be identiﬁed. As
discussed, transient forebrain-selective knock-out of neuronal
GRIN1 during the 7th month after learning, subsequently leads
to a severe loss in expression of cued and contextual fear
memory (Cui et al., 2004). This suggests that the amnesia is
attributable to the disruption of NMDAR-dependent activation of
downstream signaling pathways necessary to sustain adaptations
underlying the maintenance of augmented synaptic strength.
Additionally, learning-induced, and AMPA and NMDA receptor-
mediated, recruitment of cortical neurons in remote memory
is paralleled by, and dependent on, epigenetic modiﬁcations in
the cortex (Lesburgueres et al., 2011). This potentially drives
transcriptional programs to support remote memory retention.
Together, these studies provide preliminary evidence for synapse-
driven feedback loops in memory persistence, however, these
theories require more experimental evidence at an engram cell-
speciﬁc level, and over time-scales relevant to the persistence of
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
Genetic/epigenetic 
changes
TF
regulation of gene/protein 
expression
Neurotrophins/kinases/transcription 
factors/ncRNAs
Replay and generation of molecular tags 
at engram synapses
trafficking to/from the 
synapse
trafficking of mRNA/protein directly to relevant synapses
Synaptic signals
Bridging 
signals
Nuclear signals
FIGURE 3 | Organization of cellular feedback loops predicted to maintain augmented synaptic connectivity between engram cells. Ongoing molecular feedback
between speciﬁc synapses and the nucleus would require coordinated communication between different cellular compartments in engram cells. This may be initiated
by the formation of a learning-induced synaptic tag at relevant synapses (and/or clusters of synapses) within a dendritic branch. These molecular tags (e.g.,
self-perpetuating kinases, locally translated mRNAs, adhesion molecules, ion channels) may serve as synaptic signals that can, in turn, trigger self-sustaining
neurobiological feedback loops, involving signal transduction molecules and bridging signals [e.g., kinases, neurotrophins, transcription factors (TF) or dendritic
non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs)] between the synapse and nucleus. These bridging signals may then persistently regulate and direct transcriptional and translational
programs via epigenetic (e.g., histone methylation/acetylation or DNA methylation) and genetic (e.g., transcription and growth factors) mechanisms within the
nucleus/cytosol. The newly synthesized gene/protein products can then be relayed to discrete engram synapses/synaptic clusters enabling the modiﬁcation or
perpetuation of synaptic plasticity and a maintenance of overall synaptic connectivity of the engram cell network.
remote memories. Although the identity of spatially restricted
synaptic tags is largely unknown, there are several potential
candidates. Synaptic tags may involve long-lasting proteins
whose turnover is altered upon learning, mRNAs that are locally
transcribed at the synapse, adhesion molecules, ion channels
and self-perpetuating “cognitive kinases” (Martin and Kosik,
2002; Sajikumar et al., 2005; Heo et al., 2018; Smolen et al.,
2019). Next, feedback would require coordinated and ongoing
communication between diﬀerent cellular compartments, such
as between speciﬁc synapses and the nucleus. These signal
transduction pathways or ‘bridging signals’, although unidentiﬁed
for engram cells, may involve several synaptonuclear signaling
proteins including kinases, neurotrophins, transcription factors
or dendritic non-coding RNAs [reviewed in detail elsewhere:
(Thompson et al., 2004; Ch’ng and Martin, 2011; Karpova et al.,
2012; Herbst and Martin, 2017)].
Genetic Feedback Loops
Regulated
transcriptional/translational
programs
within
engram cells that are ongoing long after learning/stimulation
occurs are considered to contribute to a lasting increase
in
synaptic
connectivity.
Indeed,
transcriptome
proﬁling
of mPFC cells activated by cocaine exposure (Ye et al.,
2016) or fear conditioning (Ye et al., 2016; Chen M. B.
et al., 2020) demonstrated that these cells express newly
synthesized molecular signatures weeks (14–16 days) after
the experience, including the expression of genes involved in
presynaptic function (Chen M. B. et al., 2020). Transcription
and growth factors likely participate in transcriptional feedback
loops initiating and perpetuating gene expression programs
that underlie engram cell stability and memory storage.
The transcription factor CREB, a well-studied example, is
crucial for mechanisms of intrinsic and synaptic plasticity
(Barco et al., 2002), and thereby regulates allocation (Dong et al.,
2006; de Armentia et al., 2007; Zhou et al., 2009; Yiu et al., 2014),
consolidation (Bourtchuladze et al., 1994) and linking of memory
(Cai et al., 2016) across several brain regions and memory types.
We recently demonstrated that CREB-mediated transcription
in DG (Rao-Ruiz et al., 2019) and mPFC (Matos et al., 2019)
engram cells is necessary for the consolidation of recent and
remote contextual fear memory, respectively. However, whether
and how sustained CREB-mediated transcription in the nucleus
leads to the maintenance of augmented synaptic connectivity
patterns over time is currently unknown. Although direct
experimental evidence is lacking, feedback loops initiated at
the engram synapse may result in auto-activation of CREB-
mediated transcription via CRE elements in the promoter region
of CREB (Meyer et al., 1993). In addition to the regulation
of gene products that can be targeted to speciﬁc synapses,
CREB-mediated elevation of intrinsic neuronal excitability may
increase the eﬃciency of relevant synaptic connections within
the engram cell network during synaptic replay events (Lisman
et al., 2018). In addition to CREB, growth factors can also
participate in the maintenance of engram cells, either alone or
in a reciprocal interaction with CREB. For example, the growth
factor BDNF has emerged as an important regulator of neuronal
structure,
functional
connectivity,
synaptic
plasticity
and
learning (Schinder and Poo, 2000; Tyler et al., 2002; Bekinschtein
et al., 2008). Along with CREB, global hippocampal BDNF levels
can persist for at least 20 h after learning (Bambah-Mukku et al.,
2014), and delayed autoregulatory BDNF expression, 12 h after
Inhibitory Avoidance (IA) learning, has been shown to be critical
to the persistence of IA memory for at least 7 days (Bekinschtein
et al., 2007). In DG engram cells, activation of CREB-mediated
transcription and upregulation of BDNF is apparent at 24 h
after contextual fear conditioning (Rao-Ruiz et al., 2019). Thus,
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
although lacking direct experimental evidence over periods of
weeks to months, it is possible that transcriptional feedback
loops involving CREB, BDNF or other transcription and growth
factors participate in the maintenance of synaptic connectivity
patterns over weeks, months or even years.
Epigenetic Feedback Loops
As described above, synaptic triggers can lead to epigenetic
modiﬁcations that regulate transcriptional signatures supporting
remote memory. In line with this, learning-induced chromatin
modiﬁcations (e.g., histone methylation/acetylation or DNA
methylation) have been measured at a global level in the
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex (Miller et al., 2010; Graﬀ
et al., 2014; Zovkic et al., 2014; Halder et al., 2016), and recently
in an engram cell-speciﬁc manner in the hippocampal DG
(Gulmez Karaca et al., 2020; Marco et al., 2020). These studies
demonstrate that such epigenetic adaptations are important
for the consolidation, retrieval, updating and maintenance of
memories. For instance, changes in methylation state of synaptic
plasticity genes in cortical neurons have been observed long
(4 weeks) after contextual fear conditioning (Halder et al.,
2016). Moreover, these changes displayed a signiﬁcant overlap
with chromatin modiﬁcations observed 1 h after conditioning
(Halder et al., 2016). Thus, epigenetic mechanisms may play
a pivotal role in self-sustaining feedback loops regulating the
expression of persistent transcriptional signatures that (1) are
necessary for the retention of enhanced synaptic connectivity
within the engram cell network, or (2) could prevent engram
cell connectivity patters from being overwritten in the face of
new experience-driven plasticity (Kyrke-Smith and Williams,
2018). However, how epigenetic feedback loops could support
the maintenance of speciﬁc engram synapses remains to
be investigated.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
Accumulating evidence indicates that expression of remote
memory depends on cortical neurons that are activated at the
time of memory acquisition. After learning, consolidation is
thought to enhance synaptic connectivity within the engram
cell network through structural and physiological adaptations,
thereby supporting memory retention. Based on this, we
propose that the connectivity patterns that support persistence
of an engram cell network can be perpetuated over time
in diﬀerent ways. Whether augmented connectivity is indeed
maintained by stable or dynamic synapses and whether it
involves synaptic pruning is an important topic for future
research. To date, experimental evidence that provides detailed
insight into the mechanisms that contribute to the persistence
of synaptic connectivity between engram cells, such as the
role of synapse turnover, and the identity of molecular
mechanisms that coordinate and sustain these processes, is
limited. A handful of interconnected synaptic and (epi)genetic
feedback loops have been identiﬁed for speciﬁc types of
memory at a global level of analysis. However, the picture
remains incomplete, and the palette of recursive mechanisms
that direct plasticity to speciﬁc sites and connections within
the engram cell network long after learning occurs, remains
largely unknown. Furthermore, even though we have focused
mainly on mechanisms of enhanced synaptic connectivity
underlying memory retention, non-synaptic mechanisms [e.g.,
persistent changes in excitability, (epi)genetic adaptations that
are not connectivity related] may also play a role and need
to be further investigated in order to obtain a comprehensive
picture of the cellular and molecular processes that support
memory persistence.
The ﬁeld of learning and memory is currently in a
fortunate position, with a highly specialized and rapidly
developing technical toolbox; including, but not limited to,
in vivo imaging techniques to measure brain circuit dynamics,
permanent cell/synapse-speciﬁc tagging methods, ultrasensitive
-omics techniques, and spatio-temporally precise manipulation
tools (Sakaguchi and Hayashi, 2012; Chen et al., 2013; Josselyn
et al., 2015; Yang and Yuste, 2017; Choi et al., 2020). Although
challenging, this repertoire of techniques positions the ﬁeld with
unprecedented opportunities to dissect the complex architecture
of memory persistence across multiple levels of analysis. A ﬁrst
step toward delineating how enhanced connectivity patterns are
stabilized within an engram cell network would involve chronic,
longitudinal in vivo imaging of engram cell synapse dynamics
over time-scales that reﬂect the persistency of remote memories.
This might also reveal whether enhanced connectivity occurs in
functional clusters exclusive to synapses between engram cells
of interconnected brain regions, or whether this is maintained
by engram synapses that function as single units. Next, the
identiﬁcation of synaptic tags, signaling mechanisms, epigenetic
modiﬁcations and transcriptional/translational events speciﬁc
to engram cells would require temporal molecular analysis of
these neurons and the speciﬁc synapses between them. This
could be addressed by combining permanent ﬂuorescent tagging
of engram cells/synapses with the generation of molecular
proﬁles of these compartments. Finally, causal manipulation
of identiﬁed molecular adaptations speciﬁcally in engram cells
is crucial to elucidate how changes that maintain enhanced
synaptic connectivity support the stabilization of an engram
cell network over time. It is noteworthy that thus far, the
majority of studies focused on Fos- or Arc-expressing engram
cells. Fos- and Arc-expressing neurons overlap to a large extent
after learning (Rao-Ruiz et al., 2019), but evidence suggests
that Fos-expressing neurons represent a subpopulation within a
larger engram cell network (Sun et al., 2020). Distinct engram
cell subpopulations may potentially maintain enhanced synaptic
connectivity through diﬀerent mechanisms and/or underlying
molecular feedback loops. In addition to alterations that occur
within the engram cells, research focusing on the potential role
of neuromodulation, inhibitory microcircuits and non-neuronal
cell types in the maintenance of stability of a memory engram
is highly relevant. In conclusion, elucidating the molecular,
structural and physiological framework of engram synapse-
speciﬁc mechanisms is imperative to decode how synaptic
connectivity within an engram cell network can be strengthened,
maintained and updated to support the longevity of a memory.
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This study was funded by an NWO VIDI grant (016.168.313) to
MO, EV, and MM and NWO Veni grant (016.171.033) to PR-R.
REFERENCES
Abdou, K., Shehata, M., Choko, K., Nishizono, H., Matsuo, M., Muramatsu, S. I.,
et al. (2018). Synapse-speciﬁc representation of the identity of overlapping
memory engrams. Science 360, 1227–1231. doi: 10.1126/science.aat3810
Abraham, W. C., Jones, O. D., and Glanzman, D. L. (2019). Is plasticity of synapses
the mechanism of long-term memory storage? NPJ Sci. Learn. 4:9.
Abraham, W. C., Logan, B., Greenwood, J. M., and Dragunow, M. (2002).
Induction and experience-dependent consolidation of stable long-term
potentiation lasting months in the hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 22, 9626–9634.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.22-21-09626.2002
Atherton, L. A., Dupret, D., and Mellor, J. R. (2015). Memory trace replay: the
shaping of memory consolidation by neuromodulation. Trends Neurosci. 38,
560–570. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.07.004
Attardo, A., Fitzgerald, J. E., and Schnitzer, M. J. (2015). Impermanence of
dendritic spines in live adult CA1 hippocampus. Nature 523, 592–596. doi:
10.1038/nature14467
Bambah-Mukku, D., Travaglia, A., Chen, D. Y., Pollonini, G., and Alberini, C. M.
(2014). A positive autoregulatory BDNF feedback loop via C/EBPbeta mediates
hippocampal memory consolidation. J. Neurosci. 34, 12547–12559. doi: 10.
1523/jneurosci.0324-14.2014
Barco, A., Alarcon, J. M., and Kandel, E. R. (2002). Expression of constitutively
active CREB protein facilitates the late phase of long-term potentiation by
enhancing synaptic capture. Cell 108, 689–703. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)
00657-8
Bekinschtein, P., Cammarota, M., Igaz, L. M., Bevilaqua, L. R., Izquierdo, I., and
Medina, J. H. (2007). Persistence of long-term memory storage requires a late
protein synthesis- and BDNF- dependent phase in the hippocampus. Neuron
53, 261–277. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.11.025
Bekinschtein, P., Cammarota, M., Katche, C., Slipczuk, L., Rossato, J. I., Goldin, A.,
et al. (2008). BDNF is essential to promote persistence of long-term memory
storage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 2711–2716.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0711863105
Bossert, J. M., Stern, A. L., Theberge, F. R., Cifani, C., Koya, E., Hope, B. T.,
et al. (2011). Ventral medial prefrontal cortex neuronal ensembles mediate
context-induced relapse to heroin. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 420–422. doi: 10.1038/
nn.2758
Bourtchuladze, R., Frenguelli, B., Blendy, J., Cioﬃ, D., Schutz, G., and Silva, A. J.
(1994). Deﬁcient long-term memory in mice with a targeted mutation of the
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein. Cell 79, 59–68. doi: 10.1016/0092-
8674(94)90400-6
Brebner, L. S., Ziminski, J. J., Margetts-Smith, G., Sieburg, M. C., Reeve, H. M.,
Nowotny, T., et al. (2020). The emergence of a stable neuronal ensemble from
a wider pool of activated neurons in the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex during
appetitive learning in mice. J. Neurosci. 40, 395–410. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
1496-19.2019
Cai, D. J., Aharoni, D., Shuman, T., Shobe, J., Biane, J., Song, W., et al. (2016).
A shared neural ensemble links distinct contextual memories encoded close in
time. Nature 534, 115–118. doi: 10.1038/nature17955
Camp, M. C., Feyder, M., Ihne, J., Palachick, B., Hurd, B., Karlsson, R. M., et al.
(2011). A novel role for PSD-95 in mediating ethanol intoxication, drinking
and place preference. Addict. Biol. 16, 428–439. doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2010.
00282.x
Caprioli, D., Venniro, M., Zhang, M., Bossert, J. M., Warren, B. L., Hope, B. T.,
et al. (2017). Role of dorsomedial striatum neuronal ensembles in incubation
of methamphetamine craving after voluntary abstinence. J. Neurosci. 37, 1014–
1027. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3091-16.2016
Caroni, P., Chowdhury, A., and Lahr, M. (2014). Synapse rearrangements upon
learning: from divergent-sparse connectivity to dedicated sub-circuits. Trends
Neurosci. 37, 604–614. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2014.08.011
Chen, J. L., Andermann, M. L., Keck, T., Xu, N. L., and Ziv, Y. (2013). Imaging
neuronal populations in behaving rodents: paradigms for studying neural
circuits underlying behavior in the mammalian cortex. J. Neurosci. 33, 17631–
17640. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3255-13.2013
Chen, L., Cummings, K. A., Mau, W., Zaki, Y., Dong, Z., Rabinowitz, S., et al.
(2020). The role of intrinsic excitability in the evolution of memory: Signiﬁcance
in memory allocation, consolidation, and updating. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.
173, 107266. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2020.107266
Chen, M. B., Jiang, X., Quake, S. R., and Sudhof, T. C. (2020). Persistent
transcriptional programmes are associated with remote memory. Nature 587,
437–442. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2905-5
Ch’ng, T. H., and Martin, K. C. (2011). Synapse-to-nucleus signaling. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 21, 345–352. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2011.01.011
Choi, J. E., Kim, J., and Kim, J. (2020). Capturing activated neurons and synapses.
Neurosci. Res. 152, 25–34. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2019.12.020
Choi, J. H., Sim, S. E., Kim, J. I., Choi, D. I., Oh, J., Ye, S., et al. (2018). Interregional
synaptic maps among engram cells underlie memory formation. Science 360,
430–435. doi: 10.1126/science.aas9204
Conrad, K. L., Tseng, K. Y., Uejima, J. L., Reimers, J. M., Heng, L. J., Shaham, Y.,
et al. (2008). Formation of accumbens GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors mediates
incubation of cocaine craving. Nature 454, 118–121. doi: 10.1038/nature06995
Cowansage, K. K., Shuman, T., Dillingham, B. C., Chang, A., Golshani, P., and
Mayford, M. (2014). Direct reactivation of a coherent neocortical memory of
context. Neuron 84, 432–441. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.09.022
Cruz, F. C., Babin, K. R., Leao, R. M., Goldart, E. M., Bossert, J. M., Shaham, Y.,
et al. (2014). Role of nucleus accumbens shell neuronal ensembles in context-
induced reinstatement of cocaine-seeking. J. Neurosci. 34, 7437–7446.
doi:
10.1523/jneurosci.0238-14.2014
Cruz, F. C., Koya, E., Guez-Barber, D. H., Bossert, J. M., Lupica, C. R., Shaham, Y.,
et al. (2013). New technologies for examining the role of neuronal ensembles in
drug addiction and fear. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 743–754. doi: 10.1038/nrn3597
Cui, Z., Wang, H., Tan, Y., Zaia, K. A., Zhang, S., and Tsien, J. Z. (2004). Inducible
and reversible NR1 knockout reveals crucial role of the NMDA receptor in
preserving remote memories in the brain. Neuron 41, 781–793. doi: 10.1016/
s0896-6273(04)00072-8
de Armentia, M. L., Jancic, D., Olivares, R., Alarcon, J. M., Kandel, E. R., and Barco,
A. (2007). cAMP response element-binding protein-mediated gene expression
increases the intrinsic excitability of CA1 pyramidal neurons. J. Neurosci. 27,
13909–13918. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3850-07.2007
DeNardo, L. A., Liu, C. D., Allen, W. E., Adams, E. L., Friedmann, D., Fu, L., et al.
(2019). Temporal evolution of cortical ensembles promoting remote memory
retrieval. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 460–469. doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0318-7
Denny, C. A., Kheirbek, M. A., Alba, E. L., Tanaka, K. F., Brachman, R. A.,
Laughman, K. B., et al. (2014). Hippocampal memory traces are diﬀerentially
modulated by experience, time, and adult neurogenesis. Neuron 83, 189–201.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.05.018
Dong, Y., Green, T., Saal, D., Marie, H., Neve, R., Nestler, E. J., et al. (2006).
CREB modulates excitability of nucleus accumbens neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 9,
475–477. doi: 10.1038/nn1661
Dorrbaum, A. R., Kochen, L., Langer, J. D., and Schuman, E. M. (2018). Local and
global inﬂuences on protein turnover in neurons and glia. eLife 7:e34202.
Fitzgerald, P. J., Pinard, C. R., Camp, M. C., Feyder, M., Sah, A., Bergstrom,
H. C., et al. (2015). Durable fear memories require PSD-95. Mol. Psychiatry 20,
901–912. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.161
Frank, A. C., Huang, S., Zhou, M., Gdalyahu, A., Kastellakis, G., Silva, T. K., et al.
(2018). Hotspots of dendritic spine turnover facilitate clustered spine addition
and learning and memory. Nat. Commun. 9:422.
Frankland, P. W., and Bontempi, B. (2005). The organization of recent
and remote memories. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 119–130.
doi: 10.1038/nrn
1607
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
Frankland, P. W., Bontempi, B., Talton, L. E., Kaczmarek, L., and Silva, A. J. (2004).
The involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in remote contextual fear
memory. Science 304, 881–883. doi: 10.1126/science.1094804
Frankland, P. W., O’brien, C., Ohno, M., Kirkwood, A., and Silva, A. J. (2001).
Alpha-CaMKII-dependent plasticity in the cortex is required for permanent
memory. Nature 411, 309–313. doi: 10.1038/35077089
Frey, U., and Morris, R. G. (1997). Synaptic tagging and long-term potentiation.
Nature 385, 533–536. doi: 10.1038/385533a0
Fu, M., Yu, X., Lu, J., and Zuo, Y. (2012). Repetitive motor learning induces
coordinated formation of clustered dendritic spines in vivo. Nature 483, 92–95.
doi: 10.1038/nature10844
Garey, L. J. (1984). Structural development of the visual system of man. Hum.
Neurobiol. 3, 75–80.
Geinisman, Y., Berry, R. W., Disterhoft, J. F., Power, J. M., and Van Der Zee, E. A.
(2001). Associative learning elicits the formation of multiple-synapse boutons.
J. Neurosci. 21, 5568–5573. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.21-15-05568.2001
Giri, B., Miyawaki, H., Mizuseki, K., Cheng, S., and Diba, K. (2019). Hippocampal
reactivation extends for several hours following novel experience. J. Neurosci.
39, 866–875. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1950-18.2018
Gore, F., Schwartz, E. C., Brangers, B. C., Aladi, S., Stujenske, J. M., Likhtik, E.,
et al. (2015). Neural representations of unconditioned stimuli in Basolateral
Amygdala mediate innate and learned responses. Cell 162, 134–145. doi: 10.
1016/j.cell.2015.06.027
Goshen, I., Brodsky, M., Prakash, R., Wallace, J., Gradinaru, V., Ramakrishnan, C.,
et al. (2011). Dynamics of retrieval strategies for remote memories. Cell 147,
678–689. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.033
Gouty-Colomer, L. A., Hosseini, B., Marcelo, I. M., Schreiber, J., Slump, D. E.,
Yamaguchi, S., et al. (2016). Arc expression identiﬁes the lateral amygdala fear
memory trace. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 364–375. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.18
Govindarajan, A., Kelleher, R. J., and Tonegawa, S. (2006). A clustered plasticity
model of long-term memory engrams. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 575–583. doi:
10.1038/nrn1937
Graﬀ, J., Joseph, N. F., Horn, M. E., Samiei, A., Meng, J., Seo, J., et al. (2014).
Epigenetic priming of memory updating during reconsolidation to attenuate
remote fear memories. Cell 156, 261–276. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.12.020
Gulmez Karaca, K., Kupke, J., Brito, D. V. C., Zeuch, B., Thome, C., Weichenhan,
D., et al. (2020). Neuronal ensemble-speciﬁc DNA methylation strengthens
engram stability. Nat. Commun. 11:639.
Halder, R., Hennion, M., Vidal, R. O., Shomroni, O., Rahman, R. U., Rajput,
A., et al. (2016). DNA methylation changes in plasticity genes accompany
the formation and maintenance of memory. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 102–110. doi:
10.1038/nn.4194
Han, J. H., Kushner, S. A., Yiu, A. P., Hsiang, H. L., Buch, T., Waisman, A., et al.
(2009). Selective erasure of a fear memory. Science 323, 1492–1496.
Hayashi-Takagi, A., Yagishita, S., Nakamura, M., Shirai, F., Wu, Y. I., Loshbaugh,
A. L., et al. (2015). Labelling and optical erasure of synaptic memory traces in
the motor cortex. Nature 525, 333–338. doi: 10.1038/nature15257
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior; A Neuropsychological Theory.
New York, NY: Wiley.
Heo, S., Diering, G. H., Na, C. H., Nirujogi, R. S., Bachman, J. L., Pandey, A.,
et al. (2018). Identiﬁcation of long-lived synaptic proteins by proteomic analysis
of synaptosome protein turnover. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, E3827–
E3836.
Herbst, W. A., and Martin, K. C. (2017). Regulated transport of signaling proteins
from synapse to nucleus. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 45, 78–84. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.
2017.04.006
Hille, B. (1978). Ionic channels in excitable membranes. Curr.ent problems and
biophysical approaches. Biophys. J. 22, 283–294. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3495(78)
85489-7
Holtmaat, A., and Caroni, P. (2016). Functional and structural underpinnings of
neuronal assembly formation in learning. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1553–1562. doi:
10.1038/nn.4418
Hsiang, H. L., Epp, J. R., Van Den Oever, M. C., Yan, C., Rashid, A. J., Insel, N., et al.
(2014). Manipulating a "cocaine engram" in mice. J. Neurosci. 34, 14115–14127.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3327-14.2014
Ikegaya, Y., Aaron, G., Cossart, R., Aronov, D., Lampl, I., Ferster, D., et al. (2004).
Synﬁre chains and cortical songs: temporal modules of cortical activity. Science
304, 559–564. doi: 10.1126/science.1093173
John, E. R., and Schwartz, E. L. (1978). The neurophysiology of information
processing and cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 29, 1–29. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
ps.29.020178.000245
Josselyn, S. A., and Tonegawa, S. (2020). Memory engrams: recalling the past and
imagining the future. Science 367:eaaw4325. doi: 10.1126/science.aaw4325
Josselyn, S. A., Kohler, S., and Frankland, P. W. (2015). Finding the engram. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 16, 521–534. doi: 10.1038/nrn4000
Karpova, A., Bar, J., and Kreutz, M. R. (2012). Long-distance signaling from
synapse to nucleus via protein messengers. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 970, 355–376.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_16
Kim, W. B., and Cho, J. H. (2017). Encoding of discriminative fear memory by
input-speciﬁc LTP in the Amygdala. Neuron 95, 1129–1146.e5.
Kitamura, T., Ogawa, S. K., Roy, D. S., Okuyama, T., Morrissey, M. D., Smith,
L. M., et al. (2017). Engrams and circuits crucial for systems consolidation of
a memory. Science 356, 73–78. doi: 10.1126/science.aam6808
Kourrich, S., Rothwell, P. E., Klug, J. R., and Thomas, M. J. (2007). Cocaine
experience controls bidirectional synaptic plasticity in the nucleus accumbens.
J. Neurosci. 27, 7921–7928. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1859-07.2007
Koya, E., Cruz, F. C., Ator, R., Golden, S. A., Hoﬀman, A. F., Lupica, C. R.,
et al. (2012). Silent synapses in selectively activated nucleus accumbens neurons
following cocaine sensitization. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1556–1562. doi: 10.1038/nn.
3232
Koya, E., Golden, S. A., Harvey, B. K., Guez-Barber, D. H., Berkow, A., Simmons,
D. E., et al. (2009). Targeted disruption of cocaine-activated nucleus accumbens
neurons prevents context-speciﬁc sensitization. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1069–1073.
doi: 10.1038/nn.2364
Kyrke-Smith, M., and Williams, J. M. (2018). Bridging synaptic and epigenetic
maintenance mechanisms of the Engram. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 11:369. doi:
10.3389/fnmol.2018.00369
Lai, C. S., Franke, T. F., and Gan, W. B. (2012). Opposite eﬀects of fear conditioning
and extinction on dendritic spine remodelling. Nature 483, 87–91. doi: 10.1038/
nature10792
Lamprecht, R., Farb, C. R., Rodrigues, S. M., and Ledoux, J. E. (2006). Fear
conditioning drives proﬁlin into amygdala dendritic spines. Nat. Neurosci. 9,
481–483. doi: 10.1038/nn1672
Lesburgueres, E., Gobbo, O. L., Alaux-Cantin, S., Hambucken, A., Triﬁlieﬀ, P.,
and Bontempi, B. (2011). Early tagging of cortical networks is required for
the formation of enduring associative memory. Science 331, 924–928.
doi:
10.1126/science.1196164
Leuner, B., Falduto, J., and Shors, T. J. (2003). Associative memory formation
increases the observation of dendritic spines in the hippocampus. J. Neurosci.
23, 659–665. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.23-02-00659.2003
Li, W., Ma, L., Yang, G., and Gan, W. B. (2017). REM sleep selectively prunes
and maintains new synapses in development and learning. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
427–437. doi: 10.1038/nn.4479
Lisman, J., Cooper, K., Sehgal, M., and Silva, A. J. (2018). Memory formation
depends on both synapse-speciﬁc modiﬁcations of synaptic strength and cell-
speciﬁc increases in excitability. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 309–314.
doi: 10.1038/
s41593-018-0076-6
Liu, X., Ramirez, S., Pang, P. T., Puryear, C. B., Govindarajan, A., Deisseroth, K.,
et al. (2012). Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear
memory recall. Nature 484, 381–385. doi: 10.1038/nature11028
Ma, Y. Y., Lee, B. R., Wang, X., Guo, C., Liu, L., Cui, R., et al. (2014).
Bidirectional modulation of incubation of cocaine craving by silent synapse-
based remodeling of prefrontal cortex to accumbens projections. Neuron 83,
1453–1467. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.023
Marco, A., Meharena, H. S., Dileep, V., Raju, R. M., Davila-Velderrain, J., Zhang,
A. L., et al. (2020). Mapping the epigenomic and transcriptomic interplay
during memory formation and recall in the hippocampal engram ensemble.
Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1606–1617. doi: 10.1038/s41593-020-00717-0
Martin, K. C., and Kosik, K. S. (2002). Synaptic tagging – who’s it? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 3, 813–820.
Martin, S. J., Grimwood, P. D., and Morris, R. G. (2000). Synaptic plasticity and
memory: an evaluation of the hypothesis. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 23, 649–711.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.23.1.649
Matos, M. R., Visser, E., Kramvis, I., Van Der Loo, R. J., Gebuis, T., Zalm, R., et al.
(2019). Memory strength gates the involvement of a CREB-dependent cortical
fear engram in remote memory. Nat. Commun. 10:2315.
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
Matsuo, N., Reijmers, L., and Mayford, M. (2008). Spine-type-speciﬁc recruitment
of newly synthesized AMPA receptors with learning. Science 319, 1104–1107.
doi: 10.1126/science.1149967
McGaugh, J. L. (2000). Memory–a century of consolidation. Science 287, 248–251.
doi: 10.1126/science.287.5451.248
McKernan, M. G., and Shinnick-Gallagher, P. (1997). Fear conditioning induces
a lasting potentiation of synaptic currents in vitro. Nature 390, 607–611. doi:
10.1038/37605
McNaughton, B. L., Barnes, C. A., Rao, G., Baldwin, J., and Rasmussen, M.
(1986). Long-term enhancement of hippocampal synaptic transmission and
the acquisition of spatial information. J. Neurosci. 6, 563–571. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.06-02-00563.1986
Meyer, T. E., Waeber, G., Lin, J., Beckmann, W., and Habener, J. F. (1993). The
promoter of the gene encoding 3’,5’-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
response element binding protein contains cAMP response elements: evidence
for positive autoregulation of gene transcription. Endocrinology 132, 770–780.
doi: 10.1210/endo.132.2.8381074
Miller, C. A., Gavin, C. F., White, J. A., Parrish, R. R., Honasoge, A., Yancey,
C. R., et al. (2010). Cortical DNA methylation maintains remote memory. Nat.
Neurosci. 13, 664–666. doi: 10.1038/nn.2560
Moncada, D., Ballarini, F., and Viola, H. (2015). Behavioral tagging: a translation
of the synaptic tagging and capture hypothesis. Neural Plast. 2015:650780.
Nabavi, S., Fox, R., Proulx, C. D., Lin, J. Y., Tsien, R. Y., and Malinow, R. (2014).
Engineering a memory with LTD and LTP. Nature 511, 348–352. doi: 10.1038/
nature13294
Pascoli, V., Turiault, M., and Luscher, C. (2012). Reversal of cocaine-evoked
synaptic potentiation resets drug-induced adaptive behaviour. Nature 481,
71–75. doi: 10.1038/nature10709
Pastalkova, E., Serrano, P., Pinkhasova, D., Wallace, E., Fenton, A. A., and Sacktor,
T. C. (2006). Storage of spatial information by the maintenance mechanism of
LTP. Science 313, 1141–1144. doi: 10.1126/science.1128657
Peters, J., Kalivas, P. W., and Quirk, G. J. (2009). Extinction circuits for fear and
addiction overlap in prefrontal cortex. Learn. Mem. 16, 279–288. doi: 10.1101/
lm.1041309
Pignatelli, M., Ryan, T. J., Roy, D. S., Lovett, C., Smith, L. M., Muralidhar, S.,
et al. (2019). Engram cell excitability state determines the eﬃcacy of memory
retrieval. Neuron 101, 274–284.e5.
Price, J. C., Guan, S., Burlingame, A., Prusiner, S. B., and Ghaemmaghami, S.
(2010). Analysis of proteome dynamics in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 107, 14508–14513.
Pulipparacharuvil, S., Renthal, W., Hale, C. F., Taniguchi, M., Xiao, G., Kumar,
A., et al. (2008). Cocaine regulates MEF2 to control synaptic and behavioral
plasticity. Neuron 59, 621–633. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.06.020
Rao-Ruiz, P., Couey, J. J., Marcelo, I. M., Bouwkamp, C. G., Slump, D. E., Matos,
M. R., et al. (2019). Engram-speciﬁc transcriptome proﬁling of contextual
memory consolidation. Nat. Commun. 10:2232.
Rao-Ruiz, P., Rotaru, D. C., Van Der Loo, R. J., Mansvelder, H. D., Stiedl, O., Smit,
A. B., et al. (2011). Retrieval-speciﬁc endocytosis of GluA2-AMPARs underlies
adaptive reconsolidation of contextual fear. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1302–1308. doi:
10.1038/nn.2907
Rashid, A. J., Yan, C., Mercaldo, V., Hsiang, H. L., Park, S., Cole, C. J., et al. (2016).
Competition between engrams inﬂuences fear memory formation and recall.
Science 353, 383–387. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf0594
Redondo, R. L., Kim, J., Arons, A. L., Ramirez, S., Liu, X., and Tonegawa, S. (2014).
Bidirectional switch of the valence associated with a hippocampal contextual
memory engram. Nature 513, 426–430. doi: 10.1038/nature13725
Restivo, L., Vetere, G., Bontempi, B., and Ammassari-Teule, M. (2009). The
formation of recent and remote memory is associated with time-dependent
formation of dendritic spines in the hippocampus and anterior cingulate cortex.
J. Neurosci. 29, 8206–8214. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0966-09.2009
Robinson, T. E., and Kolb, B. (1999). Alterations in the morphology of dendrites
and dendritic spines in the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex following
repeated treatment with amphetamine or cocaine. Eur. J. Neurosci. 11, 1598–
1604. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.1999.00576.x
Rogan, M. T., Staubli, U. V., and Ledoux, J. E. (1997). Fear conditioning induces
associative long-term potentiation in the amygdala. Nature 390, 604–607. doi:
10.1038/37601
Routtenberg, A. (2013). Lifetime memories from persistently supple synapses.
Hippocampus 23, 202–206. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22088
Roy, D. S., Muralidhar, S., Smith, L. M., and Tonegawa, S. (2017). Silent memory
engrams as the basis for retrograde amnesia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114,
E9972–E9979.
Rumpel, S., Hatt, H., and Gottmann, K. (1998). Silent synapses in the developing
rat visual cortex: evidence for postsynaptic expression of synaptic plasticity.
J. Neurosci. 18, 8863–8874. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.18-21-08863.1998
Ryan, T. J., Roy, D. S., Pignatelli, M., Arons, A., and Tonegawa, S. (2015). Engram
cells retain memory under retrograde amnesia. Science 348, 1007–1013. doi:
10.1126/science.aaa5542
Sajikumar, S., Navakkode, S., Sacktor, T. C., and Frey, J. U. (2005). Synaptic tagging
and cross-tagging: the role of protein kinase Mzeta in maintaining long-term
potentiation but not long-term depression. J. Neurosci. 25, 5750–5756. doi:
10.1523/jneurosci.1104-05.2005
Sakaguchi, M., and Hayashi, Y. (2012). Catching the engram: strategies to examine
the memory trace. Mol. Brain 5:32. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-5-32
Sanders, J., Cowansage, K., Baumgartel, K., and Mayford, M. (2012). Elimination of
dendritic spines with long-term memory is speciﬁc to active circuits. J. Neurosci.
32, 12570–12578. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1131-12.2012
Schinder, A. F., and Poo, M. (2000). The neurotrophin hypothesis for synaptic
plasticity. Trends Neurosci. 23, 639–645. doi: 10.1016/s0166-2236(00)01672-6
Semon, R. (1911). Die Mneme als Erhaltendes Prinzip im Wechsel des Organischen
Geschehens. Leipzig: W. Engelmann.
Shema, R., Haramati, S., Ron, S., Hazvi, S., Chen, A., Sacktor, T. C., et al. (2011).
Enhancement of consolidated long-term memory by overexpression of protein
kinase Mzeta in the neocortex. Science 331, 1207–1210. doi: 10.1126/science.
1200215
Sheng, M., and Greenberg, M. E. (1990). The regulation and function of c-fos
and other immediate early genes in the nervous system. Neuron 4, 477–485.
doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(90)90106-p
Smolen, P., Baxter, D. A., and Byrne, J. H. (2019). How can memories last for
days, years, or a lifetime? Proposed mechanisms for maintaining synaptic
potentiation and memory. Learn. Mem. 26, 133–150. doi: 10.1101/lm.049395.
119
Squire, L. R., Genzel, L., Wixted, J. T., and Morris, R. G. (2015). Memory
consolidation. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7:a021766.
Sun, X., Bernstein, M. J., Meng, M., Rao, S., Sørensen, A. T., Yao, L., et al. (2020).
Functionally distinct neuronal ensembles within the memory Engram. Cell 181,
410–423.e17.
Susman, L., Brenner, N., and Barak, O. (2019). Stable memory with unstable
synapses. Nat. Commun. 10:4441.
Suto, N., Laque, A., De Ness, G. L., Wagner, G. E., Watry, D., Kerr, T., et al. (2016).
Distinct memory engrams in the infralimbic cortex of rats control opposing
environmental actions on a learned behavior. eLife 5:e21920.
Takashima, A., Petersson, K. M., Rutters, F., Tendolkar, I., Jensen, O., Zwarts,
M. J., et al. (2006). Declarative memory consolidation in humans: a prospective
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
756–761. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0507774103
Tanaka, K. Z., Pevzner, A., Hamidi, A. B., Nakazawa, Y., Graham, J., and Wiltgen,
B. J. (2014). Cortical representations are reinstated by the hippocampus during
memory retrieval. Neuron 84, 347–354. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.09.037
Tayler, K. K., Tanaka, K. Z., Reijmers, L. G., and Wiltgen, B. J. (2013). Reactivation
of neural ensembles during the retrieval of recent and remote memory. Curr.
Biol. 23, 99–106. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.11.019
Teixeira, C. M., Pomedli, S. R., Maei, H. R., Kee, N., and Frankland, P. W. (2006).
Involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in the expression of remote spatial
memory. J. Neurosci. 26, 7555–7564. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.1068-06.2006
Thompson, K. R., Otis, K. O., Chen, D. Y., Zhao, Y., O’dell, T. J., and Martin,
K. C. (2004). Synapse to nucleus signaling during long-term synaptic plasticity;
a role for the classical active nuclear import pathway. Neuron 44, 997–1009.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.11.025
Tonegawa, S., Liu, X., Ramirez, S., and Redondo, R. (2015). Memory engram cells
have come of age. Neuron 87, 918–931. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.08.002
Tonegawa, S., Morrissey, M. D., and Kitamura, T. (2018). The role of engram
cells in the systems consolidation of memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 485–498.
doi: 10.1038/s41583-018-0031-2
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

Rao-Ruiz et al.
Synaptic Connectivity of Engram Persistency
Tsai, N. P., Wilkerson, J. R., Guo, W., Maksimova, M. A., Demartino, G. N., Cowan,
C. W., et al. (2012). Multiple autism-linked genes mediate synapse elimination
via proteasomal degradation of a synaptic scaﬀold PSD-95. Cell 151, 1581–1594.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.040
Tye, K. M., Stuber, G. D., De Ridder, B., Bonci, A., and Janak, P. H. (2008). Rapid
strengthening of thalamo-amygdala synapses mediates cue-reward learning.
Nature 453, 1253–1257. doi: 10.1038/nature06963
Tyler, W. J., Alonso, M., Bramham, C. R., and Pozzo-Miller, L. D. (2002). From
acquisition to consolidation: on the role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
signaling in hippocampal-dependent learning. Learn. Mem. 9, 224–237. doi:
10.1101/lm.51202
Van den Oever, M. C., Spijker, S., Smit, A. B., and De Vries, T. J. (2010). Prefrontal
cortex plasticity mechanisms in drug seeking and relapse. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 35, 276–284. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.11.016
Vetere, G., Restivo, L., Cole, C. J., Ross, P. J., Ammassari-Teule, M., Josselyn, S. A.,
et al. (2011a). Spine growth in the anterior cingulate cortex is necessary for
the consolidation of contextual fear memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
8456–8460. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016275108
Vetere, G., Restivo, L., Novembre, G., Aceti, M., Lumaca, M., and Ammassari-
Teule, M. (2011b). Extinction partially reverts structural changes associated
with remote fear memory. Learn. Mem. 18, 554–557. doi: 10.1101/lm.2246711
Visser, E., Matos, M. R., Van Der Loo, R. J., Marchant, N. J., De Vries, T. J., Smit,
A. B., et al. (2020). A persistent alcohol cue memory trace drives relapse to
alcohol seeking after prolonged abstinence. Sci. Adv. 6:eaax7060. doi: 10.1126/
sciadv.aax7060
Wall, N. R., Neumann, P. A., Beier, K. T., Mokhtari, A. K., Luo, L., and
Malenka, R. C. (2019). Complementary genetic targeting and monosynaptic
input mapping reveal recruitment and reﬁnement of distributed corticostriatal
ensembles by cocaine. Neuron 104, 916–930. e5.
Warren, B. L., Mendoza, M. P., Cruz, F. C., Leao, R. M., Caprioli, D., Rubio, F. J.,
et al. (2016). Distinct Fos-expressing neuronal ensembles in the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex mediate food reward and extinction memories. J. Neurosci.
36, 6691–6703. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0140-16.2016
Wei, Y., Krishnan, G. P., and Bazhenov, M. (2016). Synaptic mechanisms of
memory consolidation during sleep slow oscillations. J. Neurosci. 36, 4231–
4247. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3648-15.2016
Wheeler, A. L., Teixeira, C. M., Wang, A. H., Xiong, X., Kovacevic, N., Lerch,
J. P., et al. (2013). Identiﬁcation of a functional connectome for long-term fear
memory in mice. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9:e1002853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1002853
Whitaker, L. R., and Hope, B. T. (2018). Chasing the addicted engram: identifying
functional alterations in Fos-expressing neuronal ensembles that mediate drug-
related learned behavior. Learn. Mem. 25, 455–460.
doi: 10.1101/lm.0466
98.117
Whitaker, L. R., Carneiro De Oliveira, P. E., Mcpherson, K. B., Fallon, R. V.,
Planeta, C. S., Bonci, A., et al. (2016). Associative learning drives the formation
of silent synapses in neuronal ensembles of the nucleus Accumbens. Biol.
Psychiatry 80, 246–256. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.006
Wright, W. J., Graziane, N. M., Neumann, P. A., Hamilton, P. J., Cates, H. M.,
Fuerst, L., et al. (2020). Silent synapses dictate cocaine memory destabilization
and reconsolidation. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 32–46. doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0537-6
Xia, F., Richards, B. A., Tran, M. M., Josselyn, S. A., Takehara-Nishiuchi, K.,
and Frankland, P. W. (2017). Parvalbumin-positive interneurons mediate
neocortical-hippocampal
interactions
that
are
necessary
for
memory
consolidation. eLife 6:e27868.
Yang, G., Pan, F., and Gan, W. B. (2009). Stably maintained dendritic spines
are associated with lifelong memories. Nature 462, 920–924.
doi: 10.1038/
nature08577
Yang, W., and Yuste, R. (2017). In vivo imaging of neural activity. Nat. Methods 14,
349–359. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4230
Ye, L., Allen, W. E., Thompson, K. R., Tian, Q., Hsueh, B., Ramakrishnan, C., et al.
(2016). Wiring and molecular features of prefrontal ensembles representing
distinct experiences. Cell 165, 1776–1788. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.010
Yiu, A. P., Mercaldo, V., Yan, C., Richards, B., Rashid, A. J., Hsiang, H. L., et al.
(2014). Neurons are recruited to a memory trace based on relative neuronal
excitability immediately before training. Neuron 83, 722–735. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuron.2014.07.017
Zhang, W., and Linden, D. J. (2003). The other side of the engram: experience-
driven changes in neuronal intrinsic excitability. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 885–900.
doi: 10.1038/nrn1248
Zhou, Y., Won, J., Karlsson, M. G., Zhou, M., Rogerson, T., Balaji, J., et al. (2009).
CREB regulates excitability and the allocation of memory to subsets of neurons
in the amygdala. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1438–1443. doi: 10.1038/nn.2405
Zovkic, I. B., Paulukaitis, B. S., Day, J. J., Etikala, D. M., and Sweatt, J. D. (2014).
Histone H2A.Z subunit exchange controls consolidation of recent and remote
memory. Nature 515, 582–586. doi: 10.1038/nature13707
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Rao-Ruiz, Visser, Mitri´c, Smit and van den Oever. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
March 2021 | Volume 13 | Article 661476

