Formulational vs. Epistemological
Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
SEUNGBAE PARK
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
ABSTRACT: A formulational debate is a debate over whether certain deﬁnitions of sci-
entiﬁc realism and antirealism are useful. By contrast, an epistemological debate is a
debate over whether we have sufﬁcient evidence for scientiﬁc realism and antirealism,
deﬁned in a certain manner. I argue that Hilary Putnam’s deﬁnitions of scientiﬁc realism
and antirealism are more useful than Bas van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions of scientiﬁc realism
and constructive empiricism because Putnam’s deﬁnitions can generate both formula-
tional and epistemological debates, whereas van Fraassen’s can generate only formula-
tional debates.
RÉSUMÉ : Un débat sur la formulation est un débat sur la question de savoir si certaines
déﬁnitions du réalisme et de l’antiréalisme scientiﬁques sont utiles ou inutiles. En
revanche, un débat épistémologique est un débat sur la question de savoir si nous
avons sufﬁsamment de preuves pour admettre le réalisme et l’antiréalisme scientiﬁques
lorsqu’ils sont déﬁnis d’une manière donnée. Je soutiens que les déﬁnitions du réalisme
et de l’antiréalisme scientiﬁques proposées par Hilary Putnam sont plus utiles que les
déﬁnitions que donne Bas van Fraassen du réalisme scientiﬁque et de l’empirisme cons-
tructif parce que les déﬁnitions de Putnam peuvent générer à la fois des débats
épistémologiques et des débats sur la formulation, alors que celles de van Fraassen
ne peuvent générer que des débats de formulation.
Keywords:
acceptance,
aim,
belief,
epistemological,
formulational,
Putnam,
van Fraassen
Dialogue 59 (2020), 479–496
© Canadian Philosophical Association/Association canadienne de philosophie 2020
doi:10.1017/S0012217320000062
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1. Introduction
There are diverse deﬁnitions of scientiﬁc realism and antirealism in the litera-
ture. This paper argues that Hilary Putnam’s1 deﬁnitions of scientiﬁc realism
and antirealism are more useful than Bas van Fraassen’s2 deﬁnitions of scientiﬁc
realism and constructive empiricism. Why is it important to adjudicate between
Putnam’s and van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions? Realists and antirealists would engage
in different debates, depending on which deﬁnitions they choose as the frame-
work for their debates. Moreover, the adjudication would yield useful informa-
tion about how to deﬁne scientiﬁc realism and antirealism in order to generate
voluminous debates about science.
In Section 2, I specify the distinction between formulational and epistemolog-
ical debates, and then show that Putnam’s deﬁnitions can generate both types. In
Section 3, I argue that van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions can generate formulational, but
not epistemological debates. In Section 4, I point out that the deﬁnition of ‘our
best theories’ can be found in Putnam’s deﬁnitions, but not in van Fraassen’s.
Thus, indispensabilists in the philosophy of mathematics can utilize Putnam’s
deﬁnitions, but not van Fraassen’s. In Section 5, I reply to reviewers’ objections
and other objections. This paper is intended to be useful to those who wonder
what kinds of debates there are in the literature with respect to realism, and
how we should formulate realism and antirealism.
2. Formulational and Epistemological Debates
This
section
distinguishes
between
formulational
and
epistemological
debates, and shows that the no-miracles argument3 has generated both
types of debates.
A formulational debate is a debate over whether certain deﬁnitions of realism
and antirealism are useful, and whether some are more useful than others. The
arguments in such a debate do not require a commitment to either realism or anti-
realism, and participants can argue for their deﬁnitions without taking epistemic
attitudes toward any scientiﬁc theory, such as the Big Bang theory.
An epistemological debate is a debate over whether we have sufﬁcient
evidence for realism and antirealism, deﬁned in a certain manner. Participants
in epistemological debates construct arguments, such as the no-miracles
argument and the pessimistic induction4 to show that there is enough evidence
to believe or disbelieve that certain theories are true or false, empirically
adequate, etc. Participants in this type of debate commit either to realism or
to antirealism.
1
Putnam (1975, 73).
2
Van Fraassen (1980, 8–12).
3
Putnam (1975, 73).
4
Stanford (2006, 20), Wray (2007; 2010, 371; 2013, 4327), Khalifa (2010),
Nickles (2017, 153).
480
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The no-miracles argument5 says that it is reasonable to suggest that some the-
ories are successful because they are true,6 whereas it is unreasonable to suggest
that they are successful because a miracle has occurred. A theory is successful,
“so long as it has worked well, i.e., so long as it has functioned in a variety of
explanatory contexts, has led to conﬁrmed predictions and has been of broad
explanatory scope.”7 According to the no-miracles argument, therefore, realism
is the position that afﬁrms, whereas antirealism is the position that denies, that
we are warranted in believing that successful theories are true.8
Under Putnam’s deﬁnitions, realists and antirealists have engaged in epistemo-
logical debates over whether we are warranted in believing that successful theories
are true. Realists run the no-miracles argument to establish that we are warranted
in believing that successful theories are true. In response, antirealists run the pes-
simistic induction, which holds that we can infer the downfall of successful pre-
sent theories from that of successful past theories. The pessimistic induction
implies that we are not warranted in believing that successful theories are true.
It follows that Putnam’s deﬁnitions have promoted epistemological debates.
Under Putnam’s deﬁnitions, realists and antirealists have also engaged in for-
mulational debates. For example, Alan Musgrave9 and Jarrett Leplin10 have
advanced an enhanced variant of realism to get around the pessimistic induction.
This variant asserts that scientiﬁc theories making novel predictions are true.
Timothy Lyons11 and Peter Vickers12 retort that some past theories, such as
Bohr’s theory of the atom and Fresnel’s wave theory of light, made true novel
predictions. It follows that Putnam’s deﬁnitions have also promoted formula-
tional debates.
Van Fraassen attempts to undercut Putnam’s explanation of the success of sci-
ence by proposing an evolutionary alternative, which holds that the success of
science can be explained in terms of the survival of successful scientiﬁc
theories:
… I claim that the success of current scientiﬁc theories is no miracle. It is not even
surprising to the scientiﬁc (Darwinist) mind. For any scientiﬁc theory is born into a
life of ﬁerce competition, a jungle red in tooth and claw. Only the successful theories
survive — the ones which in fact latched on to actual regularities in nature.13
5
Putnam (1975, 73).
6
I drop the qualiﬁers, ‘typically’ and ‘approximately,’ for the sake of convenience.
7
Laudan (1981, 23).
8
Park (2019a, 280).
9
Musgrave (1985, 211).
10
Leplin (1997).
11
Lyons (2003, 898–899; 2017, 3204).
12
Vickers (2017, 3227).
13
Van Fraassen (1980, 40).
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
481
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This evolutionary explanation is an alternative to Putnam’s insofar as it invokes
the survival of successful scientiﬁc theories instead of their truth. The alternative
creates the burden for Putnam to prove that his is better than van Fraassen’s. It
must be noted, however, that when van Fraassen advances the alternative, he
operates under Putnam’s deﬁnitions, and not his own, to which I turn now.
3. Van Fraassen’s Deﬁnitions
Van Fraassen’s deﬁnition of realism consists of the aim part and the acceptance
part. The aim part holds that “Science aims to give us, in its theories, a literally
true story of what the world is like.”14 The acceptance part holds that “accep-
tance of a scientiﬁc theory involves the belief that it is true.”15 His deﬁnition
of empiricism also consists of the aim part and the acceptance part. The aim
part holds that “Science aims to give us theories which are empirically ade-
quate.”16 The acceptance part holds that “acceptance of a theory involves as
belief only that it is empirically adequate.”17 In the following subsections,
I argue that both the aim and acceptance parts of his deﬁnitions can generate
formulational debates, but not epistemological debates.
3.1. The Aim Parts
The aim parts of van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions cannot generate epistemological
debates. Neither says anything about whether we are warranted in believing
that, say, the Big Bang theory or string theory is true and empirically adequate.
It is one thing to say that science aims to produce true and empirically adequate
theories; it is entirely another to say that we are warranted in believing that par-
ticular theories are true and empirically adequate. In other words, even if science
aims to produce true and empirically adequate theories, we might not be war-
ranted in believing that particular theories are true and empirically adequate.
The aim parts, however, can generate formulational debates. After all, van
Fraassen’s opponents can object that it is problematic to deﬁne realism and
empiricism in terms of aims of science, while offering the following arguments.
The idea that science has aims clashes with Thomas Kuhn’s18 view of sci-
ence. Kuhn argues that science develops through alternations of normal science
and revolutionary science. Even if these cycles continue, science does not con-
verge on truths. Science does not develop toward a goal any more than organ-
isms evolve toward a given end. Organisms are “products of a process that
moved steadily from primitive beginnings but toward no goal.”19 The analogy
14
Van Fraassen (1980, 8).
15
Van Fraassen (1980, 8).
16
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
17
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
18
Kuhn (1962/1970: 172).
19
Kuhn (1962/1970: 172).
482
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

between organisms and scientiﬁc theories is “very nearly perfect.”20 Therefore,
it is wrong to say, Kuhn would conclude, that science aims to give us true and
empirically adequate theories.
Ironically, van Fraassen also appeals to evolutionary theory to give an account of
science. Recall that he advances an evolutionary explanation to refute the
no-miracles argument. The evolutionary explanation, however, does not ﬁt well
with his deﬁnitions of realism and empiricism. On the one hand, the evolutionary
explanation embodies the Darwinian idea that successful scientiﬁc theories exist
because they defeated others in a battle to survive. On the other hand, van
Fraassen’s deﬁnitions embody the Lamarckian idea that science has aims. It is not
clearhowvanFraassencanreconcilehisDarwinianexplanationwithhisdeﬁnitions.
Moreover, van Fraassen says that empiricism is better than realism because “it
makes better sense of science, and of scientiﬁc activity, than realism does and
does so without inﬂationary metaphysics.”21 His idea is that both realism and
empiricism explain science, but empiricism takes less epistemic risk. This dif-
ference amounts to “a positive argument for constructive empiricism.”22
Something is wrong, however, with this positive argument for empiricism.
Realism and empiricism assert that science has aims, thus the explanations
that they generate are not mechanical but rather teleological. In a mechanical
explanation, an event is explained in terms of its efﬁcient cause. In a teleological
explanation, by contrast, an event is explained in terms of its ﬁnal cause, viz., its
goal or aim. For example, the mechanical explanation of a rock falling is that the
Earth exerts a gravitational force on it, while the teleological explanation is that
it has the goal of returning to its natural place. Ancient science regarded both
mechanical and teleological explanations as legitimate, whereas modern science
only regards mechanical explanations as legitimate. To explain science in terms
of realism and empiricism is to give teleological explanations of science, which
would be agreeable to ancient scientists, such as Aristotle and Ptolemy, but dis-
agreeable to modern scientists, such as Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Newton,
and Darwin. Modern scientists banished aims and goals not only from physics
but also from biology.23
Should van Fraassen follow modern scientists on this count? Many philoso-
phers, including van Fraassen, embrace naturalism, which holds that philosophy
does not fundamentally differ from science. Van Fraassen contends, for exam-
ple, that inference to the best explanation is used “in science and philosophy no
less than in ordinary life and in literature.”24 Van Fraassen25 uses inference to
20
Kuhn (1962/1970: 172).
21
Van Fraassen (1980, 73).
22
Van Fraassen (1980, 73).
23
Park (forthcoming, Section 6).
24
Van Fraassen (1989, 131).
25
Van Fraassen (1980).
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
483
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the best explanation to argue for his contextual theory of explanation.26 To apply
scientiﬁc methodologies to the study of science means prohibiting the explana-
tions of science in terms of realism and empiricism, as they are deﬁned by van
Fraassen.
There is a further issue concerning van Fraassen’s contention that empiricism
is better than realism. Like realism, empiricism invokes an aim of science. It is
not clear which is more epistemically remote from us — the aim of science or
theoretical entities, such as electrons. Van Fraassen might argue that the empir-
icist thesis that science aims for empirically adequate theories best explains sci-
entiﬁc practices, thus we should believe that science aims for empirically
adequate theories. Scientiﬁc theories, however, also best explain natural phe-
nomena. It is not clear why we should believe the empiricist explanation of sci-
ence, but not believe the scientiﬁc explanations of the world.
3.2. The Acceptance Parts
The acceptance part of realism holds that “acceptance of a scientiﬁc theory
involves the belief that it is true,”27 and that the acceptance part of empiricism
holds that “acceptance of a theory involves as belief only that it is empirically
adequate.”28 To accept a theory is to commit to “confront any future phenomena
by means of the conceptual resources of this theory.”29 One exhibits acceptance
of a theory by the “assumption of the role of explainer.”30 In short, to accept a
theory is to commit to use it for scientiﬁc purposes, e.g., explaining and predict-
ing some phenomena.
The acceptance parts of realism and empiricism are not normative theses. The
acceptance part of realism does not say that scientists ought to believe, are jus-
tiﬁed in believing, or can rationally believe that a theory they accept is true. Nor
does the acceptance part of empiricism say that scientists ought to believe, are
justiﬁed in believing, or can rationally believe that a theory they accept is empir-
ically adequate.
Both parts are descriptive theses. They describe, among other things, what
scientists believe when they accept a theory. The acceptance part of realism
says that scientists believe that a theory they accept is true, whereas the accep-
tance part of empiricism says that scientists believe that a theory they accept
is empirically adequate. As noted earlier, to accept a theory is to commit to
use it for scientiﬁc purposes. Thus, the acceptance part of realism implies that
scientists believe that a theory they use for scientiﬁc purposes is true, whereas
the acceptance part of empiricism implies that scientists believe that a theory
26
Park (2019b, Subsection 3.1).
27
Van Fraassen (1980, 8).
28
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
29
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
30
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
484
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

they use for scientiﬁc purposes is empirically adequate. As van Fraassen puts it,
acceptance of a theory “is a phenomenon of scientiﬁc activity.”31 Thus, the
acceptance parts of realism and empiricism are different descriptions of science.
How can we adjudicate between the acceptance parts of realism and empiri-
cism? The answer to this question is obvious. Given that they are different
descriptions of science, they would be true if science is as they say it is.
Speciﬁcally, if scientists believe that a theory they accept is true, then the accep-
tance part of realism would be true and the acceptance part of empiricism would
be false. By contrast, if scientists believe that a theory they accept is merely
empirically adequate, then the acceptance part of realism would be false
while the acceptance part of empiricism would be true. Thus, the dispute
between realists and empiricists could be resolved by conducting a thorough
psychological survey about what scientists believe with respect to the theories
that they use for scientiﬁc purposes.
So what? It would be pointless to construct philosophical arguments, such as
the no-miracles argument or the pessimistic induction, to resolve the dispute
between realists and empiricists. After all, the philosophical arguments say noth-
ing about what scientists actually believe. The no-miracles argument does not
assert that scientists believe that successful theories are true. Nor does the pes-
simistic induction say that scientists do not believe that successful scientiﬁc the-
ories are true. Suppose that van Fraassen has refuted the no-miracles argument
with his evolutionary explanation. The demolition of the no-miracles argument,
however, would not mean that scientists do not believe that a theory they accept
is true. Even if the no-miracles argument was refuted, acceptance of a theory
might involve the belief that it is true. Scientists’ doxastic states are independent
of the status of the no-miracles argument.
Of course, van Fraassen attempts to undermine the no-miracles argument by
advancing the evolutionary explanation. Recall, however, that, in doing so, he
operates not under his own deﬁnitions, but rather under Putnam’s. Under van
Fraassen’s deﬁnitions, empiricists have no reason to refute the no-miracles argu-
ment. After all, refuting it would not make it more likely that scientists believe
that a theory they accept is empirically adequate. Refuting the acceptance part of
realism requires not refuting the no-miracles argument but rather conducting a
psychological survey on scientists that would show that scientists do not believe
that a theory they accept is true.
Many rival participants in the scientiﬁc realism debate, however, do not
believe that their disputes can be resolved by a psychological study about
what scientists believe. Rather, they believe that the resolution will be made
through the construction of philosophical arguments, such as the no-miracles
argument and the pessimistic induction. They also believe that their disagree-
ment concerns not what scientists believe, but rather what epistemic attitudes
31
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
485
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

we ought to take toward theories that scientists accept. It follows that the accep-
tance parts of realism and empiricism fail to capture the disagreements among
the rivaling participants in the scientiﬁc realism debate.
If scientists believe that a theory they accept is true or empirically adequate,
that may be an interesting fact for philosophers of science to take into account.
But neither the fact that scientists believe that it is true, nor the fact that they
believe that it is empirically adequate, would resolve the dispute among rival
philosophers of science. The debate between them is not about what scientists
believe, but rather about what we are warranted in believing. A normative state-
ment cannot be derived from descriptive statements.32
In this context, it is useful to consider a standard objection to cultural relativ-
ism in ethics. Cultural relativism asserts that cultural approval makes an action
right, and cultural disapproval makes an action wrong. Critics object that, if cul-
tural relativism were true, we could resolve the dispute over the morality of the
death penalty simply by conducting an opinion poll. If the majority supports the
death penalty, it is moral; if the majority opposes it, it is immoral. The majority
opinion, however, cannot resolve this moral dispute. Neither retentionists nor
abolitionists would give up their positions in the face of the majority opinion.
They would only take the majority opinion into account when determining
their attitude toward the death penalty. Therefore, cultural relativism is
problematic.33
A similar objection can be raised against van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions. Under
his deﬁnitions, the dispute between realists and empiricists could be resolved
by conducting an opinion poll among scientists. If the majority of scientists
say that they believe a theory they accept is true, then the acceptance part of real-
ism might be true and the acceptance part of empiricism might be false. By con-
trast, if the majority says that they believe that it is empirically adequate, then the
acceptance part of empiricism might be true and the acceptance part of realism
might be false. A majority opinion, however, cannot resolve the epistemological
dispute over whether we are warranted in believing that a theory that scientists
accept is true or empirically adequate. No philosopher in the scientiﬁc realism
debate would give up a position in the face of the correct descriptions of what
scientists believe.
Empiricists might object that van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions do not have the
absurd consequence that the majority opinion would settle the dispute between
realists and empiricists. Even if the majority of scientists testiﬁed that they
believe that a theory they accept is true, the dispute between realists and empir-
icists could persist. Empiricists could argue that they do not believe what scien-
tists say about what they believe. They could disregard scientists’ testimony and
32
Hume (1888/1978, 469).
33
Davis (2014, 78).
486
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

stick to their position that scientists believe that a theory they accept is empiri-
cally adequate.
It would, however, be arrogant to contend that philosophers know better
about what scientists believe than the scientists themselves. It is well known
in philosophy of mind that we have better epistemic access to our own mental
states than do others. For example, if pain occurs in my mind, that mental
state is better known to me than to anyone else. Of course, I might be wrong
about my own mental state; it is nonetheless true, however, that I have better epi-
stemic access to it than does anyone else.34 Therefore, we should put more trust
in what scientists say about what they believe than in what empiricists say con-
cerning what scientists believe.
In sum, the acceptance parts of realism and empiricism cannot trigger any
epistemological debate between realists and empiricists. They can, however,
stimulate formulational debates among rival philosophers over how useful
they are. They can also trigger a psychological debate among rival psychologists
concerning whether scientists believe that a theory they accept is true or empir-
ically adequate.
Many years have passed since van Fraassen35 deﬁned realism and empiricism
in terms of acceptance. No philosopher, however, has attempted to adjudicate
between the acceptance parts of realism and empiricism, i.e., to determine
whether “acceptance of a scientiﬁc theory involves the belief that it is true”36
or “acceptance of a theory involves as belief only that it is empirically ade-
quate.”37 That is not surprising, given that philosophers do not conduct opinion
polls to resolve psychological disputes.
The no-miracles argument and the pessimistic induction have dominated the
scientiﬁc realism debate since the 1970s.38 Why is it that Putnam’s deﬁnitions,
as opposed to van Fraassen’s, have dominated the scientiﬁc realism debate for
the past several decades? My partial answer to this question is that Putnam’s def-
initions can generate both formulational and epistemological debates, while van
Fraassen’s deﬁnitions can generate only formulational debates.
4. Our Best Theories
How can we adjudicate between Putnam’s and van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions? The
more debates certain deﬁnitions generate about science, the more insights they
will generate, and hence the more useful they will be. In Sections 2 and 3, I
argued that Putnam’s deﬁnitions can generate both formulational and epistemo-
logical debates, whereas van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions can generate only
34
Goldman (1993).
35
Van Fraassen (1980).
36
Van Fraassen (1980, 8).
37
Van Fraassen (1980, 12).
38
Magnus and Callender, 2004), Sankey (2017).
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
487
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

formulational debates. In this section, I present another reason to think that
Putnam’s deﬁnitions are more useful than van Fraassen’s.
There are many theories in current science, e.g., the Big Bang theory, evolu-
tionary theory, string theory, and so forth. Which of them are our best theories?
On what basis can we pick our best theories? Is the Big Bang theory one of our
best theories? If so, why? What about string theory? If not, why not? In short,
how can we deﬁne ‘our best theories’?
An answer to this question can be found in Putnam’s deﬁnitions, which sug-
gest that our best theories are those that are successful. We can pick our best the-
ories by investigating whether a particular theory “has functioned in a variety of
explanatory contexts, has led to conﬁrmed predictions and has been of broad
explanatory scope.”39 The Big Bang theory ﬁts this deﬁnition of success,
while string theory does not.40 Consequently, realists would believe that the for-
mer is true, but they would not believe that the latter is true.
By contrast, the answer to the question above cannot be inferred from van
Fraassen’s deﬁnitions. His deﬁnitions say that science aims to give us true
and empirically adequate theories, and that acceptance of a theory involves
the beliefs that it is true and empirically adequate. Important questions arise.
Did science achieve its aim by giving us the Big Bang theory or string theory?
Are scientists justiﬁed in accepting them? Van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions do not sug-
gest any answers to these questions. That is not surprising, given that his deﬁ-
nitions do not concern the question of which theories are true or empirically
adequate, but rather the questions of whether science aims to produce true or
empirically adequate theories, and whether scientists believe that a theory
they use for scientiﬁc purposes is true or empirically adequate.
For this reason, van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions cannot help indispensabilists in the
philosophy of mathematics. Indispensabilists advocate the Quine-Putnam indis-
pensability argument “that mathematics is indispensable to our best scientiﬁc
theories, observations conﬁrm mathematical components as well as concrete
components of our best scientiﬁc theories, and hence we ought to believe that
mathematical entities are real, just as we ought to believe that theoretical entities,
such as electrons and black holes, are real.”41 This argument is advocated by
Willard Quine,42 Putnam,43 Michael Resnik,44 and Mark Colyvan.45 None of
these indispensabilists has deﬁned ‘our best theories.’ Without this deﬁnition,
however, it is not clear which mathematical statements are worthy of our beliefs,
39
Laudan (1981, 23).
40
See (Park, 2017, 382) for how scientists plan to conﬁrm string theory.
41
Park (2016, 116).
42
Quine (1948; 1980; 1992).
43
Putnam (1971).
44
Resnik (1997).
45
Colyvan (2001).
488
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and which mathematical entities are worthy of our ontological commitment. For
example, are we justiﬁed in believing that the mathematical components of the
Big Bang theory are true? If so, why? Are we justiﬁed in believing that the math-
ematical constituents of string theory are true? If not, why not? Indispensabilists
cannot ﬁnd any answers to these questions in van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions.
Indispensabilists, however, can ﬁnd answers to the questions in Putnam’s def-
initions. We are justiﬁed in believing that the mathematical components of the
Big Bang theory are true — but not in believing that those of string theory are
true — because the Big Bang theory is successful whereas string theory is not.
Of course, mathematical antirealists might object that we are not warranted in
believing that mathematical components of successful present theories, includ-
ing the Big Bang theory, are true, conjuring up the pessimistic induction that,
since successful past theories were discredited, successful present theories,
including the Big Bang theory, will also be discredited. The mathematical anti-
realists’ appeal to the pessimistic induction, however, would demonstrate that
Putnam’s deﬁnitions could even trigger epistemological debates between math-
ematical realists and antirealists. Stimulating such debates is further proof that
Putnam’s deﬁnitions are more productive than van Fraassen’s.
5. Objections and Replies
Critics might argue that both the no-miracles argument and the pessimistic
induction are relevant to van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions. The no-miracles argument
indicates that true and empirically adequate theories are achievable aims of sci-
ence, and that it is rational to accept such a theory. By contrast, the pessimistic
induction indicates that true and empirically adequate theories are unachievable
aims of science, and that it is irrational to accept such a theory.46
This critical comment is agreeable. It is, however, compatible with everything
I said in the previous sections. In Subsection 3.2, for example, I state that the
no-miracles argument does not assert that scientists believe that a theory they
accept is true, so the refutation of the no-miracles argument does not mean
the refutation of realism. In other words, it is one thing that the no-miracles argu-
ment is refuted, and it is another that scientists do not believe that a theory they
accept is true. My claim does not conﬂict with the reviewer’s reasonable com-
ment above.
My opponents might raise the following objection. This paper claims that
Putnam’s deﬁnitions are better than van Fraassen’s. It does not follow, however,
that the former are correct and the latter are incorrect.47
Strictly speaking, this paper claims that Putnam’s deﬁnitions are more useful
than van Fraassen’s. It does not claim that the former are correct and the latter are
incorrect, or that the former are true and the latter are false. Why not? A
46
I thank an anonymous referee for this critical comment.
47
I thank an anonymous referee for this objection.
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
489
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

deﬁnition is a proposal about how to use a certain term. A proposal can be use-
ful, but it cannot be true or false. To say that Putnam’s deﬁnitions are true and
van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions are false is as absurd as to say that my marriage pro-
posal is true and your marriage proposal is false.
Let me elucidate an implication of the deﬁnitional nature of scientiﬁc realism.
Anjan Chakravartty observes that “scientiﬁc realism is characterized differently
by every author who discusses it, and this presents a challenge to anyone hoping
to learn what it is.”48 Chakravartty’s assertion that different authors characterize
scientiﬁc realism differently should be interpreted not as the claim that different
authors describe scientiﬁc realism differently but rather as the claim that differ-
ent authors put forward different deﬁnitions of ‘scientiﬁc realism.’ Relatedly, it
is wrong to ask, ‘What is scientiﬁc realism?’ but right to ask, ‘What deﬁnitions
of “scientiﬁc realism” are there in the literature?’ Which are useful? Which are
inﬂuential?
Let me turn to another possible objection. On the one hand, this paper
criticizes van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions and defends Putnam’s deﬁnitions, thus it
clearly engages in a formulational debate. On the other hand, it criticizes van
Fraassen’s deﬁnitions for generating only formulational debates. That might
appear strange, but it is certainly not self-defeating. My position would be self-
defeating if it asserted that van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions cannot generate formula-
tional debates. My position, however, does assert that they can generate
formulational debates. Thus, the foregoing criticism is compatible with my posi-
tion. Let me pick up another possible objection, namely that it is wrong to say
that van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions cannot generate epistemological debates. An
epistemological debate under van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions could be over whether
acceptance of a scientiﬁc theory requires the belief that it is true, empirically ade-
quate, useful, and so on. In other words, there could be a debate over whether
those who accept a scientiﬁc theory believe that it is true, empirically adequate,
or useful. Realists, empiricists, and instrumentalists might argue, respectively,
that accepters believe that it is true, empirically adequate, and useful.
In light of this objection, I distinguish between epistemological and doxastic
debates. An epistemological debate concerns whether we have sufﬁcient evi-
dence for a doxastic state, whereas a doxastic debate concerns whether we are
in a certain doxastic state. Van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions can be a starting point
for a doxastic debate, but not for an epistemological debate. To reiterate, realists
and empiricists under van Fraassen’s framework are not engaged in a dispute
over whether we have sufﬁcient evidence for a scientiﬁc theory.
Let me now turn to a more general issue. Moti Mizrahi observes that
“Whenever the work of an inﬂuential philosopher is criticized, a common
move made by those who seek to defend the inﬂuential philosopher’s work is
48
Chakravartty (2017).
490
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to claim that his or her ideas have been misconstrued.”49 I have criticized van
Fraassen’s deﬁnitions in the previous sections. So I anticipate that the prospec-
tive defenders of van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions will accuse me of having committed
the straw man fallacy. I turn to this objection next.
The defenders of van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions might argue that, on close anal-
ysis, a normative statement can be derived from the aim parts of realism and
empiricism. Van Fraassen states that an aim “determines what counts as suc-
cess.”50 For realists, what promotes truths is good, whereas for empiricists,
what promotes empirical adequacy is good. Hence, realists and empiricists
would say, respectively, that scientists ought to perform activities that promote
truths and empirical adequacy. For example, they ought to make novel predic-
tions. Thus, a normative judgement can be derived from the aim parts of realism
and empiricism, and I misread van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions.
It is one thing, however, to say that science aims for true and empirically ade-
quate theories; it is another to say that scientists ought to pursue them. The infer-
ence from the former to the latter requires an additional premise, such as the
thesis that scientists have a motive to achieve the aims of science. Van
Fraassen, however, drives a wedge between the aims of science and individual
scientists’ motives, saying that the aims of science are different from individual
scientists’ motives, just as the “aim of the game of chess is to checkmate your
opponent; but the motive for playing may be fame, gold, and glory.”51 Thus,
van Fraassen would not say that a normative thesis can be derived from the
aim parts of realism and empiricism.
Moreover, I already pre-empted this possible objection in the ﬁrst paragraph
of Subsection 3.1, where I argued that it is one thing that science aims to produce
true and empirically adequate theories; it is another that we are warranted in
believing that particular theories are true and empirically adequate. Suppose
that science has historically aimed for empirically adequate theories. Does it fol-
low that scientists were justiﬁed in believing that their theories, such as
Aristotelian mechanics, the caloric theory, and the phlogiston theory, were
empirically adequate? My answer is ‘no.’ We now know that past theories
could not handle empirical anomalies, i.e., that they were empirically inade-
quate.52 Thus, past scientists would not have been justiﬁed in believing that
their theories were empirically adequate. It is fallacious to infer that, since sci-
ence aims for empirically adequate theories, scientists are warranted in believing
that their theories are empirically adequate. Thus, claiming that normativity can
be derived from the aim parts of realism and empiricism is to attribute this fal-
lacious inference to van Fraassen.
49
Mizrahi (2018, 19).
50
Van Fraassen (1980, 8).
51
Van Fraassen (1980, 8).
52
Park (2018, 5).
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
491
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In addition, this possible objection clashes with van Fraassen’s contention
that empiricism “makes better sense of science, and of scientiﬁc activity, than
realism does and does so without inﬂationary metaphysics.”53 Empiricism can-
not explain science at all, if it consists of the acceptance part and the epistemic
thesis that scientists are warranted in believing that successful scientiﬁc theories
are empirically adequate. It is conceptually problematic to say, for example, that
the Big Bang theory is successful because scientists are warranted in believing
that it is empirically adequate. It would be bizarre to explain phenomena in terms
of a normative thesis. Thus, to claim that normativity can be derived from the
aim parts of realism and empiricism is to attribute bizarre explanations to van
Fraassen.
Consider also that van Fraassen invokes the English view of rationality when
he argues that the realist belief that a successful scientiﬁc theory is true is “rea-
sonable enough, but supererogatory.”54 The English view of rationality asserts
that “what it is rational to believe includes anything that one is not rationally
compelled to disbelieve.”55 Note that van Fraassen makes a normative claim
about the realist belief by appealing to the English view of rationality. If norma-
tivity already inheres in the aim part of realism, as the foregoing possible objec-
tion suggests, it is not clear why van Fraassen would invoke the English view of
rationality to make a normative claim about the realist belief.
Some readers might still think that I have committed the straw man fallacy
against van Fraassen. I challenge them to present textual evidence to support
their interpretations, instead of merely interpreting realism and empiricism
according to their own wishes, or merely expressing their opinions about how
realism and empiricism should be interpreted. Also, they would have to defuse
the textual evidence that I presented in Subsection 3.2, and the arguments that I
present in this section for my interpretation of van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions.
Recall that, as Mizrahi observes, philosophers commonly defend an inﬂuen-
tial philosopher’s position by saying that critics misunderstand the inﬂuential
philosopher’s ideas. Mizrahi makes an apt criticism against those philosophers,
viz., the continued iterations of such a defence make it doubtful that “the inﬂu-
ential philosopher’s ideas are worthy of attention and/or acceptance.”56
Mizrahi’s criticism is insightful and admirable. Continued invocations of the
straw man fallacy against the critics of van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions run the risk
of transforming his clear deﬁnitions into elusive ones, and hence decreasing
rather than increasing their philosophical value.
We can learn nothing from an elusive idea, but we can learn something from a
problematic one. There is no difference between an elusive idea and an empty
53
Van Fraassen (1980, 73).
54
Van Fraassen (2017, 102).
55
Van Fraassen (1989, 171–172).
56
Mizrahi (2018, 19).
492
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

one, or at least we should treat an elusive idea as if it were empty. As mentioned
in Subsection 3.2, the no-miracles argument and the pessimistic induction have
dominated the scientiﬁc realism debate since the 1970s. Another partial expla-
nation of why they have been so inﬂuential is that they are clear, simple, and ele-
gant. Not surprisingly, they have been roundly criticized in the literature. As a
result, we have learned a lot about science.
6. Conclusion
Putnam’s deﬁnitions can generate both formulational and epistemological
debates, whereas van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions can only generate formulational
debates. This difference partially explains why Putnam’s deﬁnitions have dom-
inated the scientiﬁc realism debate since the 1970s. One philosophical moral is
that, if you aim to deﬁne realism and antirealism in a way that can trigger copious
debates, you should do so not in terms of the aims of science and/or acceptance
of a theory, but rather in terms of a common property of our best theories. The
resulting debates would yield rich insights about science.
Finally, I anticipate that many readers will accuse me of having committed the
straw man fallacy against van Fraassen. Let me remind them that I presented
arguments to support my interpretation of van Fraassen’s deﬁnitions, and that
to play the card of the straw man fallacy without refuting my arguments and
without presenting alternative arguments runs the risk of transforming van
Fraassen’s clear deﬁnitions into elusive ones. Prospective objectors are
reminded of these two caveats: no elusive idea is instructive, and obscurity is
an anathema to analytic philosophers.
Acknowledgements
I thank Dialogue’s Editorial Assistant, Jill Flohil, and the journal’s referees for
useful comments. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education of the
Republic of Korea and the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF-2018S1A5A2A01039606).
References
Chakravartty, Anjan
2017
“Scientiﬁc Realism.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/
entries/scientiﬁc-realism/.
Colyvan, Mark
2001
The Indispensability of Mathematics. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Davis, Thomas
2014
Contemporary Moral and Social Issues: An Introduction Through
Original Fiction, Discussion, and Readings. West Sussex, UK: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
493
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Goldman, Alvin
1993
“The Psychology of Folk Psychology.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences
16(1): 15–28.
Hume, David
1888/1978
A Treatise of Human Nature. L.A. Selby-Bigge and P.H. Nidditch
(eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Khalifa, Kareem
2010
“Default Privilege and Bad Lots: Underconsideration and Explanatory
Inference.” International Studies in the Philosophy of Science 24(1):
91–105.
Kuhn, Thomas
1962/1970
The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Laudan, Larry
1981
“A Confutation of Convergent Realism.” Philosophy of Science 48(1):
19–49.
Leplin, Jarrett
1997
A Novel Defense of Scientiﬁc Realism. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Lyons, Timothy
2003
“Explaining the Success of a Scientiﬁc Theory.” Philosophy of Science
70(5): 891–901.
Lyons, Timothy
2017
“Epistemic Selectivity, Historical Threats, and the Non-Epistemic
Tenets of Scientiﬁc Realism.” Synthese 194(9): 3203–3219.
Magnus, P.D., and Craig Callender
2004
“Realist Ennui and the Base Rate Fallacy.” Philosophy of Science 71(3):
320–338.
Mizrahi, Moti
2018
“The (Lack of) Evidence for the Kuhnian Image of Science.” Social
Epistemology Review and Reply Collective 7(7): 19–24.
Musgrave, Alan
1985
“Realism vs. Constructive Empiricism,” in Images of Science: Essays on
Realism and Empiricism, edited by Paul M. Churchland and Clifford
A. Hooker. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 197–221.
Nickles, Thomas
2017
“Cognitive Illusions and Nonrealism: Objections and Replies,” in
Varieties of Scientiﬁc Realism: Objectivity and Truth in Science,
edited
by
Evandro
Agazzi.
Switzerland:
Springer
International
Publishing, pp. 151–163.
Park, Seungbae
2016
“Against Mathematical Convenientism.” Axiomathes 26(2): 115–122.
494
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Park, Seungbae
2017
“Understanding without Justiﬁcation and Belief?” Principia: An
International Journal of Epistemology 21(3): 379–389.
Park, Seungbae
2018
“The Problem of Unobserved Anomalies.” Filosoﬁja. Sociologija
29(1): 4–12.
Park, Seungbae
2019a
“The Descriptive and Normative Versions of Scientiﬁc Realism and
Pessimism.” Filozoﬁa: Journal of Philosophy 74(4): 278–290.
Park, Seungbae
2019b
“The Disastrous Implications of the ‘English’ View of Rationality in a
Social World.” Social Epistemology 33(1): 88–99.
Park, Seungbae
Forthcoming
“Critiques of Axiological Realism and Surrealism.” Acta
Analytica. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12136-019-00397-x.
Putnam, Hilary
1971
Philosophy of Logic. New York: Harper and Row.
Putnam, Hilary
1975
Mathematics, Matter and Method (Philosophical Papers, vol. 1).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, Willard V.O.
1948
“On What There Is.” Review of Metaphysics 2(5): 21–38.
Quine, Willard V.O.
1980
From a Logical Point of View, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Quine, Willard V.O.
1992
Pursuit of Truth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Resnik, Michael
1997
Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sankey, Howard
2017
“Realism, Progress and the Historical Turn.” Foundations of Science
22(1): 201–214.
Stanford, P. Kyle
2006
Exceeding Our Grasp: Science, History, and the Problem of
Unconceived Alternatives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, Bas
1980
The Scientiﬁc Image. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, Bas
1989
Laws and Symmetry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, Bas
2017
“Misdirection and Misconception in the Scientiﬁc Realism Debates,” in
Varieties of Scientiﬁc Realism: Objectivity and Truth in Science,
edited
by
Evandro
Agazzi.
Switzerland:
Springer
International
Publishing, pp. 95–108.
Formulational vs. Epistemological Debates Concerning Scientiﬁc Realism
495
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Vickers, Peter
2017
“Understanding the Selective Realist Defence against the PMI.”
Synthese 194(9): 3221–3232.
Wray, K. Brad
2007
“A Selectionist Explanation for the Success and Failures of Science.”
Erkenntnis 67(1): 81–89.
Wray, K. Brad
2010
“Selection and Predictive Success.” Erkenntnis 72(3): 365–377.
Wray, K. Brad
2013
“The Pessimistic Induction and the Exponential Growth of Science
Reassessed.” Synthese 190(18): 4321–4330.
496
Dialogue
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0012217320000062 Published online by Cambridge University Press

