ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 14 July 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01737
Edited by:
Christopher Osterhaus,
Ludwig Maximilian University
of Munich, Germany
Reviewed by:
Horst Krist,
University of Greifswald, Germany
Jennifer M. Zosh,
Penn State University, Brandywine,
United States
*Correspondence:
Anke Maria Weber
weber-a@uni-landau.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Developmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 31 January 2020
Accepted: 23 June 2020
Published: 14 July 2020
Citation:
Weber AM, Reuter T and
Leuchter M (2020) The Impact of a
Construction Play on 5- to 6-Year-Old
Children’s Reasoning About Stability.
Front. Psychol. 11:1737.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01737
The Impact of a Construction Play on
5- to 6-Year-Old Children’s
Reasoning About Stability
Anke Maria Weber*, Timo Reuter and Miriam Leuchter
Institute for Children and Youth Education, Educational Sciences, University of Koblenz and Landau, Landau, Germany
Theory: Young children have an understanding of basic science concepts such as
stability, yet their theoretical assumptions are often not concerned with stability. The
literature on theory theory and theory-evidence coordination suggests that children
construct intuitive theories about their environment which can be adjusted in the face
of counterevidence that cannot be assimilated into the prior theory. With increasing
age, children acquire a Center theory when balancing objects and try to balance
every object at their middle, succeeding with symmetrical objects. Later, they acquire
the basic science concept of stability through learning that the weight distribution
of an object is of importance. Thus, they acquire a Mass theory and succeed
in balancing asymmetrical objects as well. Fluid and crystallized intelligence might
contribute to children’s acquisition of Mass theory. Moreover, their Mass theory might
be supported by implementing a playful intervention including (a) material scaffolds and
(b) verbal scaffolds.
Aims: We investigated which theories children have about stability and whether these
theories can be adjusted to Mass theory by implementing a playful intervention.
Method: A total of 183 5- to 6-year-old children took part in the study with a
pre-post-follow-up intervention design. Children’s Mass theory was assessed with an
interview in which children explained constructions’ stabilities. The children received
a playful intervention with two differing degrees of scaffolding (material scaffolds or
material + verbal scaffolds) or no scaffolding.
Results: At ﬁrst few children used a Mass theory to explain their reasoning. However,
after being confronted with counterevidence for the asymmetrical constructions, children
changed their explanation and applied a Mass theory. More children in the play group
with the highest degree of scaffolding, i.e., material + verbal scaffolds, acquired a
Mass theory compared to the other groups. Fluid as well as crystallized intelligence
contributed to children’s acquisition of a Mass theory.
Discussion: Counterevidence can support children in their acquisition of a Mass theory.
A playful intervention with scaffolding supports children even more.
Keywords: guided play, theory theory, theory-evidence coordination, free play, science learning, intelligence
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
INTRODUCTION: SCIENCE EDUCATION
Early knowledge acquisition in the science domain and scientiﬁc
reasoning lay the foundation for the understanding of complex
science concepts, which are relevant throughout the school years
and in later life (Eshach and Fried, 2005; Trundle and Saçkes,
2012). Accordingly, studies have demonstrated that science
learning and scientiﬁc reasoning can be promoted in the early
years of childhood (Gelman and Brenneman, 2004; Akerson et al.,
2011; Klahr et al., 2011; Cremin et al., 2015).
Children construct intuitive theories to explain what is
happening around them, and adjust these theories continuously
(Gopnik and Wellman, 2012). These theories encompass science
concepts, which might be altered by confronting children
with counterevidence (Bonawitz et al., 2012). Promoting
young children’s science learning aims at helping them adjust
their theories and should consider children’s developmental
constraints by considering children’s everyday activities, e.g.,
their play (Copple and Bredenkamp, 2009). One possibility for
such science-related play could be construction play in the
form of block play, which is an important leisure activity for
young children (Rubin et al., 1978; Pellegrini and Gustafson,
2005; Borriello and Liben, 2018; Verdine et al., 2019). An
adult’s guidance might be integrated into children’s play in the
form of scaﬀolding, which might support children’s science
learning (cf. van de Pol et al., 2010; Klahr et al., 2011;
Mantzicopoulos et al., 2013).
Therefore, children’s science theories might be supported
through
science-related
play
that
focuses
on
children’s
experiences and encompasses an adult’s scaﬀolding.
Theory Theory, Bayesian Inference, and
Theory-Evidence Coordination
Fostering scientiﬁc reasoning is one goal of science education
(Chin, 2007; Klahr et al., 2011). Studies on children’s scientiﬁc
reasoning rely on literature concerned with theory theory,
Bayesian inference and theory-evidence coordination. Theory
theory is concerned with the adjustment of children’s intuitive
theories when they are confronted with evidence. Bayesian
inference focuses on the interaction of intuitive theories with
evidence, while theory-evidence coordination investigates the
conditions under which children can interpret evidence.
According to theory theory, children construct intuitive
theories about their environment, which have similarities with
scientiﬁc theories (Gopnik and Wellman, 2012). Intuitive and
scientiﬁc theories share at least ﬁve characteristics. (1) They
encompass causal representations of the surrounding world,
(2) may be hierarchically organized, (3) provide possible
explanations for regularities, (4) allow predictions of regularities,
and (5) can be adjusted in the face of counterevidence. In
this process, not only the explanations for certain subordinate
relations but also the general assumptions about regularities can
change (Bonawitz et al., 2012; Gopnik and Wellman, 2012).
Such adjustment occurs, often gradually, if a child is confronted
with counterevidence that cannot be assimilated into their prior
theory, either through their own interventions, e.g., in their
play, or through observing the interventions of others (Gopnik
and Wellman, 2012). According to Gopnik and Meltzoﬀ(1997),
children pass through the same developmental processes and
therefore have similar representations about the same objects at
roughly similar times in their lives. Most children do not test
their theories with experiments but adjust them when they are
confronted with evidence (Gopnik, 2013). Research has provided
support for theory theory, inter alia, in the domain of balance
(Bonawitz et al., 2012), and biology (Schulz et al., 2007).
Researchers have applied Bayesian inference to the theory
theory framework to value the role of probability and prior
knowledge on learning processes (Schulz et al., 2007; Gopnik
and Wellman, 2012; Gopnik, 2013). Bayesian inference indicates
how a learner changes their theory after being confronted with
a set of evidence and how children might combine theory and
evidence (Schulz et al., 2007). Bayesian models consider prior
knowledge and its eﬀect on inductive reasoning as well as how
much a person believes one theory to be true. Furthermore, prior
beliefs and evidence might interact, e.g., a child might interpret
data according to their prior beliefs and dismiss counterevidence
(Hawkins et al., 1984; Griﬃths et al., 2011; Gopnik, 2013).
Children with consistent presumptions will likely change their
theory less easily than children with inconsistent presumptions
(Gopnik et al., 2001; Sobel et al., 2004; Griﬃths et al., 2011).
Studies on theory-evidence coordination have found that
young children often face problems relating a theory with
evidence (Ruﬀman et al., 1993; Koerber et al., 2005; Piekny
and Maehler, 2013), which seemingly contradicts the results of
studies on theory theory (Schulz et al., 2007; Bonawitz et al.,
2012). However, taking a closer look at the studies on theory-
evidence coordination, these studies showed that young children
primarily face problems when evidence was presented in the
form of imperfect covariation. Children were more likely to
successfully coordinate theory with evidence when the evidence
was presented in the form of perfect covariation, which is how
the studies on theory theory presented evidence. For example,
Sobel et al. (2004) found that children were even able to make
inferences from indirect evidence of perfect covariation in the
form of data they had not directly observed.
In conclusion, at least three factors might contribute to young
children’s science learning with regard to their developmental
constraints and should be considered. (1) Children can
interpret perfect covariation but face problems with imperfect
covariation (Koerber et al., 2005). Therefore, evidence should
be presented in the form of perfect covariation. (2) Children
have prior theories about science phenomena and often have
similar theories at a certain age (Gopnik and Meltzoﬀ, 1997).
Therefore, these prior theories should be considered so that
the presented evidence relates to children’s intuitive theories.
(3) Children with consistent prior theories might need to see
counterevidence repeatedly to adjust their theory because this
adjustment often happens gradually (Gopnik and Wellman,
2012). Therefore, children should receive enough time to deal
with the phenomenon.
The question remains how best to confront young children
with evidence relating to their science theories. Children’s
developmental constraints can be addressed by allowing for
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
activities that occur in their everyday lives, e.g., play (Copple
and Bredenkamp, 2009). Moreover, play might be enriched
by scaﬀolding materials as well as an adult’s verbal support
(Zosh et al., 2018).
Material and Verbal Scaffolds in Guided
Play
Play-based learning is the mandated pedagogy in early years’
curricula in many countries (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2009; Pyle et al.,
2017) and is regarded as developmentally appropriate practice
(Copple and Bredenkamp, 2009). Researchers have widely agreed
that play can be characterized as a voluntary, intrinsically
motivated, child-directed, and process- rather than goal-oriented
behavior that contains elements of choice (Rubin et al., 1983;
Pellegrini, 2013; Weisberg et al., 2013; Trawick-Smith, 2015;
Daubert et al., 2018).
Zosh et al. (2018) deﬁne play as a spectrum that allows
for diﬀerent types of play, ranging from free play as voluntary,
intrinsically motivated, and process-oriented behavior directed
by the child to more goal-oriented and adult-directed forms
of playful instruction. In between these two poles, guided play
represents a blend of free play and playful instruction (Zosh et al.,
2018). Guided play can be described as a playful activity that
is directed by the child, i.e., the child is autonomous to decide
what to do, for how long and at what pace. The adult’s role in
guided play is to prepare a play environment and support the
children’s activities to facilitate learning (Weisberg et al., 2013,
2016; Zosh et al., 2018).
Guided play shares strong commonalities with the guided
inquiry principle, which has been identiﬁed as one of the most
eﬀective approaches to learning and teaching (Mayer, 2004;
Alﬁeri et al., 2011; Lazonder and Kamp, 2012). Researchers have
frequently framed guidance in inquiry-based science teaching
within the scaﬀolding construct (Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007). In the
scaﬀolding literature, both material scaﬀolds and an adult’s verbal
scaﬀolds are considered eﬀective in guiding children’s learning
(van de Pol et al., 2010; Martin et al., 2019). Accordingly, guided
play can take at least two diﬀerent forms (Weisberg et al., 2016),
guided play with material scaﬀolds only, and guided play with
additional verbal scaﬀolds.
In guided play with material scaﬀolds, the adult provides the
children with purposefully designed and structured materials
aiming at a speciﬁc learning objective (Weisberg et al., 2016).
Research indicates that children’s explorations with purposefully
structured and limited materials can foster science learning
(Cook et al., 2011; van Schijndel et al., 2015). In particular,
learning materials are eﬀective when they link the learning
objective to children’s prior knowledge (Leuchter et al., 2014)
and focus children’s attention on those aspects that are essential
for understanding (DeLoache, 2014). For example, to foster
children’s stability concepts, the adult might provide the
children with an assembly of building blocks and a variety of
photographs. In guided play with material scaﬀolds only, the
adult initiates the play activities by inviting the children to
rebuild the block constructions depicted on the photographs
and to explore whether the constructions remain stable or
tumble. By building these constructions, the children are likely to
face evidence (the construction remains stable or tumbles) that
might be incompatible with their intuitive theory (cf. Gopnik
and Wellman, 2012). However, beyond initiating children’s
explorations, the adult does not intervene in the process.
Research suggests that children show more explorative
behaviors when an adult takes a passive role (Bonawitz et al.,
2011). In contrast, studies indicate that children’s unguided
explorations might not be suﬃcient to encounter the learning
objective (Butts et al., 1994; Chen and Klahr, 1999; Klahr
and Nigam, 2004; Sarama and Clements, 2009). In the stability
example, children might rebuild the construction inappropriately
and thus might witness incorrect evidence or imperfect
covariation.
Moreover,
children
might
interpret
evidence
inappropriately to conﬁrm their intuitive but incorrect theory.
In guided play with additional verbal scaﬀolds, the adult not
only provides materials but additionally plays along with the
children, supports the children’s play verbally and encourages
higher order thinking (Chin, 2007; Haden, 2010; Kleickmann
et al., 2016; Weisberg et al., 2016; Martin et al., 2019).
The adult can use a set of verbal scaﬀolding techniques to
aid children’s cognitive activities (for an overview cf. van
de Pol et al., 2010) and support the cognitive processes
involved in theory-evidence coordination, thus helping children
adjust their intuitive theory. Activating prior knowledge by
asking questions and prompting the children to express their
presumptions, e.g., whether a block construction will remain
stable or tumble can facilitate the integration of new aspects
into existing schemata (Mayer, 1997; Weinert and Helmke,
1998; Gurlitt and Renkl, 2010). Additionally, asking for the
child’s reasoning, e.g., by prompting the child to justify their
presumptions about the block construction’s stability allows the
child to structure their prior knowledge and thinking processes
(Hsin and Wu, 2011). Providing explanations may help the
child coordinate their observations with an evidence-based
interpretation of a phenomenon (Murphy and Messer, 2000;
Renkl, 2002). Encouraging comparisons supports the child in
identifying relational similarities or diﬀerences between entities
by highlighting certain features (Hsin and Wu, 2011; Richey and
Nokes-Malach, 2013). Furthermore, modeling, i.e., performing
certain behaviors and thinking styles, oﬀers a possibility for
imitation (Mayer, 2004; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007).
Research
indicates
that
guided
play
with
additional
verbal scaﬀolds promotes children’s science learning more
eﬀectively than free play (Pine et al., 1999; Hadzigeorgiou,
2002;
Fisher
et
al.,
2011;
Reuter
and
Leuchter,
2020).
However, there are only a few studies that have deliberately
compared the eﬀectiveness of material scaﬀolds with additional
verbal
scaﬀolds
for
children’s
science
learning.
Leuchter
and Naber (2019) found that a combination of structured
materials and verbal scaﬀolds supported 6- to 7-year-old
children’s learning in the physics domain of force more
than only materials, only verbal support or free exploration.
Similarly, the results of Hadzigeorgiou (2002) show that
4- to 6-year-olds perform more meaningful activities at
an inclined plane to explore the concept of mechanical
stability when they received structured materials and verbal
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
scaﬀolding compared to children who received only materials
or played freely.
Studying children’s scientiﬁc reasoning in a playful context can
aim at unraveling the interplay of material and verbal scaﬀolds.
Concerning children’s reasoning about science phenomena
guided play can serve as a developmentally appropriate context
to shed a light on (1) children’s theory adjustment, (2) the way
their prior theories interact with the evidence provided through
the scaﬀolding materials, and (3) the conditions that may support
children to coordinate theory with evidence.
The Statics Domain and Children’s
Beliefs About Balance
Statics can be deﬁned as the state of equilibrium of an object,
which in turn is concerned with forces acting on objects that
are either at rest or in motion (Riley and Sturges, 1993).
Statics is therefore concerned with stability. If the middle of
a symmetrical object is supported by a supporting surface, the
object will remain stable. Therefore, the consideration of an
object’s geometrical center is suﬃcient when rating symmetrical
objects. For an asymmetrical object, however, the mass must
be considered because the geometrical center and the center of
gravity do not correspond. If the center of gravity of an object
is supported, the object will remain in place; however, if it is
not supported, the object will tumble. According to Bonawitz
et al. (2012); Krist (2010), and Siegler (1976), with increasing
age children develop an understanding of the weight distribution
so that they can estimate the stability of an asymmetrical
object/construction.
Studies with infants have mostly employed the violation of
expectation paradigm and have shown that infants have basic
knowledge about stability (Baillargeon and Hanko-Summers,
1990). Studies with older children, however, have shown
that even preschoolers face problems explaining why certain
objects either remain stable or tumble. Krist and Krüger
(2012) explain this discrepancy with diﬀerent approaches of
the violation of expectation paradigm and verbal explanations
as a possible reason for this ability gap. They state that
being surprised (violation of expectation) does not take
as much cognitive reasoning as verbally explaining one’s
underlying theory.
Young children indeed hold misconceptions about balance.
Siegler (1976) and Siegler and Chen (1998) placed diﬀerent
weights at diﬀerent distances on a fulcrum and asked children
to rate the fulcrum’s balance. The researchers found that
children from 9 years of age started to consider both weight
and distance, while younger children tend to view weight
and distance separately. Other studies by Krist et al., have
shown that between the ages of three to eight, children’s
abilities of balancing symmetrical and asymmetrical blocks
and estimating symmetrical as well as asymmetrical objects’
stabilities increase continuously independent of the type of
assessment (rating photographs, Krist, 2010; eye tracking, Krist
et al., 2018; balancing blocks, Krist et al., 2005). Even though
children’s estimation of asymmetrical blocks’ stabilities increased,
all three studies found children’s performance on the estimation
of symmetrical objects (e.g., cuboids) to be superior to their
estimation of asymmetrical objects (e.g., L-shaped objects).
As noted earlier, the center of gravity does not correspond
to the geometrical center of an asymmetrical object. For
symmetrical objects, however, considering their geometrical
center is suﬃcient. Thus, children’s diﬃculty in estimating the
stability of asymmetrical objects indicates that they face problems
considering the weight distribution.
Some studies have taken a closer look at children’s theories
about balance. Pine et al. (2007) asked 6- to 8-year-old children
about their reasoning when balancing beams on a fulcrum
and categorized their verbal utterances as well as their gestures
into four categories: middle, weight, distance, and other. They
found that most answers fell into the other or weight categories,
and few children considered the distance. Moreover, Weber
and Leuchter (2020) found that more than half of the 5- and
6-year-olds in their sample used an undiﬀerentiated pattern
when rating photographs of asymmetrical objects, approximately
1/3 applied Center knowledge, and less than 10% of children
applied Mass knowledge.
The above studies have examined children’s knowledge
about stability from a developmental psychological perspective.
However, it is also of interest if children’s Mass knowledge can be
supported in regard to their developmental constraints. Playful
interventions with building blocks have supported the acquisition
of diﬀerent mathematical and spatial skills in other studies (e.g.,
Ferrara et al., 2011; Fisher et al., 2013; Borriello and Liben, 2018;
Thomson et al., 2018; Verdine et al., 2019).
Regarding children’s rating of stabilities, Pine and Messer
(2003) found that 5- to 6-year-olds were able to balance more
symmetrical as well as more asymmetrical blocks after playing
with the blocks compared to a pretest. In another study, children
between 4 and 7 years of age ﬁrst balanced symmetrical and
asymmetrical objects on a beam scale (Bonawitz et al., 2012),
and their balancing behavior was categorized into three categories
(No, Center, and Mass theory). Furthermore, the results indicated
that younger children tend to use an undiﬀerentiated pattern (No
theory) and do not consider the center or the mass. Second, after
balancing objects on a beam, children either played with a mass-
consistent or a center-consistent toy on their own and freely.
Afterward, they again balanced an asymmetrical block. Children
who had a Center theory before playing observed evidence that
did not conﬁrm their theory if they were in the mass condition.
Many of these children adopted a Mass theory. Children who
had a Mass theory before playing also observed evidence that did
not conﬁrm their theory if they were in the center condition.
Most of these children did not alter their balancing behavior
and instead explained away the evidence and remained Mass
theorists. This outcome indicated that even a short presentation
of counterevidence can support children’s learning, but that their
prior theories need to be considered.
The diﬀerent eﬀects of free play and guided play with material
and material + verbal scaﬀolds on children’s science learning in
the domain of balance with regard to their prior theories have not
yet been investigated. Furthermore, it remains unclear whether
these adjustments remain stable over a longer period of time or if
the children relapse into their prior intuitive theories.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
Possible Relationship With Intelligence
Intelligence is one of the most important prerequisites for
learning. The ability to solve or complete puzzles or patterns
is considered an indicator of ﬂuid intelligence (Cattell, 1987;
Flynn and Blair, 2013). Two components of ﬂuid intelligence
are ﬁgural perception and ﬁgural reasoning as indicators of an
individual’s ability to perceive and mentally represent objects
and abstract certain characteristics (Cattell, 1987; Weiß and
Osterland, 2013). In the context of stability, ﬁgural perception
and ﬁgural reasoning might contribute to children’s Mass theory.
To rate stabilities correctly, children must perceive, mentally
represent and abstract the spatial features of the objects or
constructions (Weber and Leuchter, 2020).
Language capacity is considered an indicator of crystallized
intelligence and is one of the key indicators of mental ability in
young children (Cattell, 1987; Flynn and Blair, 2013). Language
capacity contributes to knowledge acquisition (Thorsen et al.,
2014). Moreover, children with a higher language capacity might
ﬁnd it easier to articulate their reasoning and might proﬁt more
from verbal scaﬀolds.
The Present Research
The present study is concerned with the eﬀects of three diﬀerent
types of construction play on children’s science learning in
the statics domain, speciﬁcally constructions’ stabilities. We
implemented two types of guided play (verbal + material
scaﬀolds, material scaﬀolds) and free play. Following the
literature on theory theory, Bayesian inference, and theory-
evidence coordination, young children’s science learning may be
fostered by confronting children with evidence in the form of
perfect covariation (Koerber et al., 2005; Gopnik and Wellman,
2012). Furthermore, children’s prior theories, which they have
acquired through their everyday activities, e.g., their play, should
be considered so that the presented evidence relates to these
theories, which can then help children interpret the evidence
(Gopnik and Meltzoﬀ, 1997; Gopnik and Wellman, 2012). For
example, at the age of 5 to 6, children might explain and predict
the stability of an object with a Center theory or have other
theories (Bonawitz et al., 2012; Weber and Leuchter, 2020).
Material scaﬀolds can be prepared in such a way that they
show perfect covariation for Mass theory and contradict Center
theory. Through verbal scaﬀolding, an adult can help the children
connect the evidence presented through the material scaﬀolds
with their prior (intuitive) theories. Thus, scaﬀolds may support
children’s theory adjustment from Other1 or Center theory to
Mass theory. Since theory adjustment often happens gradually
(Gopnik and Wellman, 2012), children should receive enough
time to explore stabilities. We designed playful interventions
that consider these constraints and investigated the eﬀects of
the diﬀerent kinds of play on children’s theory adjustments
in the statics domain. Moreover, we explored whether these
adjustments remained stable over an extended period of time.
1By Other, we do not imply that children have no theory at all, but rather treat it as
a rest category for children’s answers that were neither concerned with the center
nor the mass of constructions (cf. Bonawitz et al., 2012, p. 221).
Finally,
interindividual
prerequisites
might
be
partly
responsible for children’s theory adjustment and interact with the
type of playful intervention that the children received. Research
on theory theory, Bayesian inference and theory-evidence
coordination suggests that children with a consistent prior
theory might not adjust their theories as easily as children with
an inconsistent prior theory (Koerber et al., 2005; Gopnik and
Wellman, 2012). Thus, we are interested in the contribution
of children’s prior theories on their adjustments after being
confronted with perfect evidence for Mass theory. Additionally,
intelligence aﬀects learning (Cattell, 1987; Flynn and Blair,
2013; Thorsen et al., 2014) and may thus contribute to theory
adjustment as well. With respect to ﬂuid intelligence, we
hypothesize that ﬁgural perception and ﬁgural reasoning
facilitate
theory
adjustment.
With
respect
to
crystallized
intelligence, we hypothesize that children with higher language
capacity might proﬁt more from verbal scaﬀolds than children
with lower language capacity.
Therefore, we specify the following research questions:
(1) Do children explain their reasoning about stability with
Mass theory, Center theory or Other?
(2) Can guided play with material scaﬀolds and with or
without verbal scaﬀolds enhance children’s consistent use
of Mass theory compared to free play (a) directly after
a playful intervention and (b) over an extended period
of time? Does intelligence relate to the consistent use of
Mass theory?
(3) Does the consistency of children’s prior theories relate to
children’s consistent use of Mass theory in the diﬀerent
play conditions (a) directly after a playful intervention and
(b) over an extended period of time? Does intelligence
relate to the consistent use of Mass theory when prior
theories are considered?
(4) Do children with a consistent Mass theory after the playful
intervention perform diﬀerently on a transfer test than
children who did not use Mass theory consistently? Does
intelligence relate to performance on the transfer test?
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants
In total, 183 children (88 girls, 95 boys), between the ages of
ﬁve and six (M = 5.55, SD = 0.51), took part in the study.
The participants visited 23 kindergartens in Germany (2 to
13 children per kindergarten), which all agreed to take part
in the study and helped connect with the children and their
parents. The kindergartens were located either in villages (700
to 3,000 inhabitants; N = 83 children), small cities (less than
20,000 inhabitants; N = 10 children) or medium sized cities
(approximately 50,000 inhabitants; N = 91 children of whom 51
lived in the city center and 40 in the periphery). A total of 171
children were European, 9 were Asian, 2 were African, and 1 was
Central American. All children and their parents were informed
about the goals of the study, and all children took part voluntarily
and with their parents’ consent.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
Some children dropped out of the study completely because,
e.g., they moved or were ill on the dates agreed with the
kindergartens, and some other children had missing values
on some of the items. We used pairwise deletion because
we decided to include the highest amount of data whenever
possible. Therefore, the number of participants varies between
diﬀerent analyses.
Procedure
The study consisted of a pre-post-follow-up design with two
guided play groups and a free play group. The pretest (T1)
took place approximately 2 weeks before the play session and
the immediate posttest (T2). The follow-up (T3) took place
approximately 10 weeks after the posttest. The duration of the
play session was approximately 1 h.
For the intervention, the children were parallelized into the
three intervention groups according to their language capacity,
which was assessed at pretest. Thus, matched samples were
produced and each child in the Verbal group had a “language
capacity twin” in the Material and in the Free play group.
Both the Material group (59 children, 32 girls, and 27 boys)
and the Verbal group (64 children, 27 girls, and 37 boys)
received scaﬀolding materials in the form of building blocks.
The Verbal group received additional verbal scaﬀolds. The Free
play group (60 children, 29 girls, and 31 boys) played with
building blocks freely. The reason for the diﬀerences in group
size is that each intervention was to be conducted in a group of
approximately four to six children to achieve ecological validity.
Therefore, ﬁve children in the Verbal group were not assigned to
language capacity triplets in the other two groups. In total, there
were 51 interventions with group sizes varying between 2 to 6
children per group.
The play was led by one of six female experimenters. To
prevent experimenter eﬀects, group∗experimenter was varied,
so that all experimenters had led all intervention groups, i.e.,
Verbal, Material, and Free play group. In all intervention groups,
the children were free to choose what they wanted to build or
if they wanted to build with a friend or rather on their own.
Furthermore, breaks were always possible, and the children were
free to stop playing entirely (cf. Rubin et al., 1983; Weisberg
et al., 2016). For manipulation check, the play sessions were
video or audio recorded with the permission of parents and
children. Based on the recordings, we rated children’s playfulness
according to Bundy et al. (2001) as well as children’s on-task
behavior. High inferential ratings showed that all children in all
recordings showed indications of playfulness, e.g., children sang,
laughed, joked around with another or the experimenter, chose
to build challenging constructions, and built together. Moreover,
children’s on-task behavior did not diﬀer between the groups.
Children in the Material group and the Verbal group received
photographs of diﬀerent block constructions, which diﬀered in
the number of blocks used and in their complexity. With each
photograph came a box containing the building blocks needed
for building the construction. The blocks diﬀered in their shapes
(cuboids, triangles, etc.), sizes, and colors (brown, black, yellow,
red, and green). The materials were developed prior to this
study and tested in play sessions to ensure that children were
able to rebuild the structures shown on the photographs and
had fun playing with the materials. The material scaﬀolds were
implemented to structure the play and served as suggestions for
the children. However, the children in the guided play groups
were free to build constructions other than those we presented to
them. In order for the activity to be enjoyable and playful for the
children, we allowed the children to decide whenever they wanted
to move on to the next activity. However, the experimenters
could suggest another activity if they felt that the children started
to lose interest.
The material scaﬀolds encompassed ﬁve activities and were
presented in a standardized order (cf. Supplementary Material
1 for all photographs):
(1) Black block (11 photographs): You can build the building
shown on the photograph. Build the building and guess if
the blocks remain stable or tumble.
(2) Add-a-block (8 photographs): These blocks on the photos
were bewitched so they would remain stable. Can you
rebuild the building, so that it is stable? (If a child did not
succeed, the experimenter provided a green block): Look,
here is a green block. Try to stabilize the building with it.
(3) Sliding (9 photographs): This is the sliding play. You
rebuild the building on the photograph. Then, you slide
the upper block along the lower block until it falls
(experimenter models it). That’s noisy, isn’t it?
(4) Rebuild (11 photographs): You can just rebuild the
building on these photographs and see how well you are
doing. Some buildings are very easy to rebuild; others
are more diﬃcult. However, every single one will remain
stable if built correctly.
(5) Stable/Tumble (8 photographs): The buildings on the
photographs will sometimes remain stable, but at other
times, the blocks are bewitched. Look at the photograph
and predict “stable” or “tumble,” and then try them out to
see whether you were correct.
Additionally, the Verbal group received verbal scaﬀolds in
the form of the activation of prior knowledge, asking for
reasoning, the provision of explanations, the encouragement of
comparisons, and modeling (cf. Table 1; Hogan and Pressley,
1997; van de Pol et al., 2010; for the script cf. Supplementary
Material 2). The experimenters used this limited set of scaﬀolds
presented in the script but applied them ﬂexibly when playing
with the children. All experimenters had received a training
on how to apply scaﬀolding during play prior to leading
the interventions.
The Free play group received a large box with the same
building blocks as the guided play groups, but the blocks were
unstructured. The experimenters did not suggest any buildings
that the children could build but only told the children to play
with the blocks freely.
During the play time, the experimenter praised the children’s
eﬀorts in all three groups and motivated them to try again if they
encountered problems with building. Sometimes children would
ask the experimenter for help with building, which she would
provide in the Verbal group. However, in the Material group or
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
the Free play group, she would friendly decline and suggest that
children ask another child for help (cf. Supplementary Material
3 for excerpts from the playful intervention).
Measures
Children’s Theories
Children’s
theories
about
stability
were
assessed
with
a
standardized single interview consisting of photographs of four
symmetrical and four asymmetrical block constructions, which
were always supported by a black block (cf. Supplementary
Material 4). The children were asked to estimate whether the
block construction presented in the ﬁrst photograph would
remain stable or not if the black block was removed. Afterward,
the children received a total of ﬁve blocks, namely, four cuboid
blocks consisting of two brown blocks, one black block and one
yellow block (9 cm∗3 cm∗1.5 cm), as well as one smaller black
cuboid block (3 cm∗3 cm∗1.5 cm). All the blocks were made
of non-lacquered wood and colored by the researchers using
acrylic colors to avoid slipperiness. The brown blocks had a
narrow line drawn onto them with a pencil to facilitate ﬁnding
the blocks’ middle for the children. The children were asked to
rebuild the construction presented in the photograph. Then,
the interviewer repeated the children’s former answer regarding
the construction’s stability (stable or unstable) and asked them
to explain the prediction. They answered, and the interviewer
invited them to remove the black block and ascertain whether
they had rated the stability correctly. Then, they proceeded
to the second block structure and so on. The interviews were
videotaped or recorded if both the parents and the child had
consented to it; if not, the interviewer made notes on the child’s
theory. The same interview was administered at each point of
measurement, i.e., the same test items were presented at T1, T2,
and T3. The testing time was approximately 10 min.
Only the asymmetrical block constructions were used in the
data analyses. The test started with two symmetrical items to
familiarize the children with the test logic. The fourth and sixth
items showed symmetrical constructions and were applied to
ensure that children had positive mastery experiences during
the testing because studies have found that symmetrical items’
stabilities are easier for children to estimate than asymmetrical
items’ stabilities (Krist, 2010). The three asymmetrical items
showed perfect covariance for Mass theory because the weight
distribution always determined the stability. However, the second
asymmetrical item as well as all the symmetrical items could also
be rated correctly with Center theory, while the ﬁrst and third
asymmetrical items could not. Therefore, the evidence for Center
theory was imperfect.
The children’s answers were coded following the speech
coding scheme from Pine et al. (2007), as shown in Table 2. If
a child was unable to verbalize their answer, but, e.g., pointed at
the vertical block, their answer was also rated as Mass theory. If
a child indicated the middle with gestures, the answer was rated
as Center theory. The children’s explanations were coded by two
independent raters, Cohen’s κ > 0.90.
Regarding the items that were not used for further analysis,
the distribution of the children’s answers at T1 was as follows.
For the ﬁrst item (familiarization, symmetrical), 18 Mass, 118
Center, and 39 Other. For the second item (familiarization,
symmetrical), 14 Mass, 124 Center, and 37 Other. For the fourth
item (motivation, symmetrical), 19 Mass, 115 Center, and 42
Other. For the sixth item (motivation, symmetrical), 15 Mass, 96
Center, and 64 Other. The seventh item showed an asymmetrical
construction but was removed from further analyses because it
was inconclusive. The probability of the item remaining stable
was 50% for statics reasons. Thus, there is no deﬁnite answer to
this item. The third, ﬁfth, and eighth items were asymmetrical
items that were included in the data analyses and used for the
assessment of children’s stability theories (cf. Figure 1).
Transfer Test
At the third point of measurement, a paper-pencil transfer
test consisting of photographs of 16 asymmetrical block
constructions was administered (cf. Figure 2 and Supplementary
Material 5 for all transfer items), i.e., 8 stable constructions
and 8 unstable constructions. The test was conducted in a
group of up to six children who were seated back-to-back to
TABLE 1 | Scaffolding techniques used in the Verbal group (Hogan and Pressley,
1997; van de Pol et al., 2010).
Technique
Example
Activating prior knowledge
Have you ever seen something like
this?
Asking for reasons
Can you explain this in more detail,
so I can really understand what you
think?
Providing explanations
Well done! If the heavy side of a
block hovers in midair, the block will
tumble
Encouraging comparisons
Your building looks different than
[another child’s building], doesn’t it?
What is different? Is something
similar?
Modeling
Look! (Experimenter also looks very
closely/experimenter shows how to
build a certain building)
TABLE 2 | Coding scheme.
Coding
Speech
Example
Mass theory
The child refers to the
weight being on one side of
the brown blocks, mentions
heaviness or talks about
the importance of the
vertical block
“This side is heavier.” “It’s
because of the block that’s
standing on the other”
Center theory
The child refers to the
middle of the block or a
bigger amount of the block
resting on either the black
or the yellow block
“The brown block is resting
more on the yellow block”
Other
Child speaks of something
other than the two variables
of interest (weight, middle),
e.g., refers to the color
“I don’t know.” “It tumbles,
because it tumbles”
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
FIGURE 1 | The asymmetrical constructions used to assess children’s reasoning. Item 1 and 2 are stable constructions, item 3 is an unstable construction.
FIGURE 2 | Example items of the transfer test, both items show stable constructions.
prevent them from copying from each other. The test took
approximately 10 min. The children were asked to rate the
constructions’ stabilities by either circling the photograph for
a stable construction or crossing out the photograph for an
unstable construction. Thus, children were not required to
verbalize their knowledge. The constructions could only be rated
correctly by considering the weight distribution because if the
center of gravity was supported by the brown block but the
geometrical center was not, then the constructions would always
remain stable. However, if the center of gravity was not supported
but the geometrical center was, then the construction would
always tumble. For this instrument, the children did not need to
explain their reasoning and only had to rate photographs. The
children’s content knowledge could be assessed to support the
results of the reasoning test.
Aspects of Intelligence
Visual perception and ﬁgural reasoning as two aspects of ﬂuid
intelligence were assessed with the labyrinths and matrices
subtests of the Culture Fair Test (CFT 1-R; Weiß and Osterland,
2013) at T1. T-values were not available, as only two subtests were
conducted (for more information on test parameters, please cf.
CFT 1- R handbook).
Language capacity as an indicator for crystallized intelligence
was assessed with the German version of the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (PPVT 4; Dunn et al., 2015) at T1. The PPVT is
a picture-based standardized single interview for which t-values
are available. The test consists of 19 sets with 12 items each
consisting of four pictures per item. Five-year-old children start
with set 4, and 6-year-old children start with set 5. For each
item, the children receive a word and point at the corresponding
picture. This procedure is continued until the child answers
8 out of 12 items in a set incorrectly (cf. PPVT 4 handbook
for more information). The PPVT 4 was also administered
to ensure that all children understood and spoke the German
language suﬃciently.
The total testing time was approximately 1 h at T1, 10 min at
T2 and 20 min at T3. At T3, the follow-up test was administered
before the transfer test. During the testing, breaks were possible
whenever the child or the experimenter considered it necessary.
Data Analyses
The statistics program R, version 3.6.2 (R Core Team, 2019)
was used for data analyses. We used the survival (Therneau,
2015) package for the speciﬁcation of survival analyses and the
survminer (Alboukadel et al., 2019) package for forest plots.
In the ﬁrst step, we investigated the number of children
who had a Mass theory, a Center theory or Other on
each point of measurement. The children received feedback
about the correctness of their stability rating because after
rating the stability, they removed the black block and could
ascertain if they had answered correctly. Therefore, they had the
opportunity to learn during testing. Thus, their answers were
not independent and could not be summarized but instead were
treated as individual events as the assumption of local stochastic
independence was violated. Therefore, we used methods of risk-
event analysis to analyze the group diﬀerences in the application
of Mass theory (cf. Singer and Willett, 2003).
RESULTS
Children’s Use of Mass Theory
To address the ﬁrst research question concerned with children’s
use of causal relations, especially Mass theory, when explaining
asymmetrical objects’ stabilities, we investigated the percentage
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
of children who applied mass for explaining each of the three
asymmetrical constructions on the ﬁrst point of measurement.
The following results were obtained across all groups. For the
ﬁrst item, 11%2 of children explained their reasoning with Mass
theory, 41% with Center theory, and 48% provided another
answer. For the second item, 20% of children explained their
reasoning with Mass theory, 56% with Center theory, and 23%
provided another answer. For the third item, 16% of children
explained their reasoning with Mass theory, 48% with Center
theory, and 35% provided another answer, cf. Figure 3 for
percentage shares of children’s theories (cf. Supplementary
Material 6 for percentages of correct answers). To compare the
probability of answering with a speciﬁc theory between items, we
compared the proportions of children who had answered with
a speciﬁc theory (either Mass, Center or Other) using z-tests of
proportions. They revealed that children were not more likely
to explain their reasoning with Mass for any of the three items,
z = 5.41, df = 2, p = 0.067; however, the answer probabilities for
Center theory, z = 8.87, df = 2, p = 0.012, and Other, z = 23.90,
df = 2, p < 0.001, diﬀered across the items.
The percentage of children applying each theory for each
group at T1, T2 and T3 is presented in Table 3. The use of Mass
theory increased at T2 and T3, especially in the Verbal group.
Effects of Guided Play
To address the second research question concerning whether
diﬀerent kinds of play can enhance children’s consistent use of
Mass theory directly after the intervention as well as over a longer
period of time, we used methods of survival analyses. Survival
analysis is used to analyze the expected duration of time until an
event takes place. In our case, the event is the children’s consistent
use of Mass theory after the playful intervention.
Consistency at T2
First, we used the binomial distribution to ﬁnd a cut-oﬀthat
guarantees that the probability of children ﬁnding the correct
answer through guessing was below 10%. This enabled us to
ﬁnd how many correct answers might be given through guessing
with σ = 1.64, i.e., p < 0.10, and a binomial probability of 1/3.
Thus, we are able to categorize the children into children who
explained their reasoning with Mass theory either consistently or
inconsistently directly after the intervention at T2. Children with
3 out of 3 correct answers were rated as answering consistently,
p = 0.037. Seven children who had explained their reasoning with
Mass theory consistently at T1 (3 out of 3 Mass answers) were
excluded from these analyses.
We deﬁned each item as a point in time; therefore, time = 1
refers to the ﬁrst item of T2, time = 2 to the second item
of T2, and time = 3 to the third item of T2. The event of
answering with Mass theory 3 out of 3 times could only take
place at time = 3 or not at all. The detailed results of the Kaplan-
Meier analysis are presented in Supplementary Material 7. The
survival rate implies the percentage of children who remain either
Center theorists or Other, and thus are not applying Mass theory
consistently at T2. Therefore, the rate of children who applied
2Rounded percentages.
Mass theory consistently is 100% minus survival rate, e.g., 100%-
77% for the Verbal group. The results indicated that 23% of the
children in the Verbal group explained their reasoning with Mass
consistently at T2 compared to 9% of children in the Material
group and 6% of children in the Free play group.
To investigate the results of the Kaplan-Meier analysis
with a stricter procedure and to include the contributions of
metric predictors, i.e., ﬂuid and crystallized intelligence, a Cox
regression (cf. Table 4) was speciﬁed, likelihood ratio test = 12.87,
p = 0.012. The Cox proportional hazard model assumes that the
hazard curves for the groups should be proportional. This means
that if child 1 is twice as likely to explain their reasoning with
Mass theory than child 2 at an initial point in time, then at all
later points in time, child 1 remains twice as likely to explain their
reasoning with Mass theory consistently compared to child 2. In
this particular Cox-regression, the event could only take place at
time = 3. Therefore, the proportional hazard assumption was met.
The Cox regression showed group diﬀerences in the
consistency of answering with mass between the Free play
group and the Verbal group. However, there were no diﬀerences
between the Material group and the Verbal group or the Free
play group and the Material group. The Verbal group was
almost four times as likely to explain their reasoning with Mass
theory consistently compared to the Free play group, as indicated
by the regression coeﬃcient, and by a factor of HR = 3.70.
Although neither the diﬀerences between the Verbal group and
the Material group nor those between the Material group and
the Free play group were statistically signiﬁcant, descriptively,
the Cox regression implied that the Verbal group had twice the
chance of applying Mass theory consistently than the Material
group, HR = 1.99 and that the Material group had approximately
twice the chance than the Free play group, HR = 1.86. Crystallized
intelligence contributed to the consistent application of Mass
theory, while ﬂuid intelligence did not.
We tested whether crystallized intelligence interacted with
the children’s Mass theory in the three intervention groups.
The analysis showed a diﬀerence between the Material group
and the Verbal group dependent on crystallized intelligence,
crystallized intelligence∗1Material–Verbal, b = 0.15, p = 0.032.
This indicates that children with high crystallized intelligence
in the Verbal group proﬁted more than children with high
crystallized intelligence in the Material group (Table 5).
Consistency Over T2 and T3
Next, we were interested in whether children’s answers diﬀered
in their consistency over a longer period of time to check if the
eﬀect of the guided play was lasting. Therefore, we combined the
three items of T2 and T3 into 6 points in time. Again, we used
the binomial distribution with σ = 1.64, p < 0.10, and binomial
probability = 1/3 to categorize the children into children who
explained their reasoning with Mass theory either consistently
or inconsistently. Children with ≥4 Mass explanations out of
6 when combining the items of the posttest and the follow-
up were categorized as answering consistently, p = 0.097. The
ﬁrst point in time on which the event could take place was
time = 4, i.e., the ﬁrst item of T3, because the children had
to answer four items with Mass theory to fulﬁll the event. The
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
FIGURE 3 | Percentages of theories applied by the children to explain all three reasoning items’ stabilities per measurement point and intervention group.
TABLE 3 | Number of children applying each theory in each group over all three points of measurement.
Verbal group (N = 64)
Material group (N = 59)
Free play group (N = 60)
Item
Other (%)
Center (%)
Mass (%)
Other (%)
Center (%)
Mass (%)
Other (%)
Center (%)
Mass (%)
T1
1
47
40
13
51
40
9
47
42
12
2
24
60
16
30
50
20
15
59
25
3
29
53
18
49
40
11
29
51
20
T2
1
38
25
38
32
43
25
34
51
15
2
14
39
46
13
53
34
9
60
30
3
13
36
51
25
40
35
21
53
26
T3
1
35
23
42
40
36
24
48
29
23
2
15
27
58
10
36
55
8
46
46
3
32
21
47
2
50
48
23
54
23
Percentages are given in rounded numbers.
event could also take place at time = 5, i.e., the second item of
T3, and at time = 6, i.e., the third item of T3. We speciﬁed a
Kaplan-Meier analysis to investigate the percentage of children
using Mass theory consistently (cf. Figure 4 and Supplementary
Material 7). Extending the descriptive results, the children in
the Verbal group had the highest percentage of using Mass
theory consistently at each point in time compared to the other
two groups, Verbal group = 40%, Material group = 23%, Free
play group = 15%.
Next, a Cox regression (cf. Table 5) was speciﬁed, likelihood
ratio test = 22.38, p < 0.001. First, we tested the proportional
hazard assumption by correlating the scaled Schoenfeld residuals
for group membership with time to ensure that the time
and the residuals were independent. The hazard curves for
the groups were proportional, as indicated by the global test,
χ2 = 5.56, p = 0.234, as well as the group comparisons, all
p > 0.05. The Cox regression showed group diﬀerences between
the Verbal group and the Free play group, with the Verbal
group having a higher chance of explaining their reasoning with
Mass theory consistently by factor HR = 3.45. Again, there
were no group diﬀerences between the Material group and the
Free play group or between the Material group and the Verbal
group. However, descriptively, the Verbal group had the highest
chance of explaining their reasoning with Mass theory. Fluid and
crystallized intelligence contributed to the consistent explanation
with Mass theory. For the hazard ratios, cf. Figure 5.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
TABLE 4 | Cox-regressions for children’s acquisition of Mass theory at T2.
95% CI
b
SE
z
HR
LL
UL
Development of consistencies between groups (Cox-regression)
1Free play–Verbal
1.31*
0.65
2.01
3.70
1.03
13.26
1Material–Verbal
0.69
0.58
1.18
1.99
0.63
6.26
1Free play–Material
0.62
0.76
0.81
1.86
0.42
8.31
Fluid intelligence
0.04
0.06
0.69
1.04
0.93
1.16
CrI
0.08*
0.03
2.41
1.08
1.01
1.15
Interaction of crystallized intelligence with intervention group
1Free play–Verbal*CrI
−0.05
0.11
−0.44
0.95
0.76
1.19
1Material–Verbal*CrI
0.15*
0.07
2.15
1.67
1.01
1.34
1Free play–Material*CrI
−0.20
0.12
−1.71
0.82
0.65
1.03
CrI free play
0.16
0.10
1.58
1.18
0.96
1.44
CrI material
−0.04
0.06
−0.68
0.96
0.86
1.08
CrI verbal
0.11**
0.04
2.65
1.12
1.03
1.22
Fluid intelligence
0.05
0.06
0.87
1.05
0.94
1.18
CrI, crystallized intelligence; HR, hazard ratio; CI, 95% conﬁdence-interval; LL, lower level; UL, upper level. *p < 0.05. **p < 0.01.
TABLE 5 | Cox-regressions for children’s acquisition of Mass theory at T3 considering T2.
95% CI
b
SE
z
HR
LL
UL
Development of consistencies between groups (Cox-regression) over T2 and T3
1Free play–Verbal
1.22**
0.45
2.74
3.40
1.42
8.16
1Material–Verbal
0.57
0.41
1.39
1.77
0.79
3.95
1Free play–Material
0.66
0.51
1.30
1.93
0.72
5.18
Fluid intelligence
0.10*
0.04
2.48
1.11
1.02
1.20
CrI
0.06*
0.02
2.56
1.06
1.01
1.11
Interaction of crystallized intelligence with intervention group
1Free play–Verbal*CrI
−0.02
0.06
−0.37
0.98
0.87
1.10
1Material–Verbal*CrI
0.14*
0.05
2.57
1.15
1.03
1.28
1Free play–Material*CrI
−0.16*
0.07
−2.30
0.85
0.74
0.98
CrI free play
0.11*
0.05
1.99
1.11
1.00
1.23
CrI material
−0.06
0.05
−1.25
0.94
0.86
1.03
CrI verbal
0.08**
0.03
2.61
1.09
1.02
1.16
Fluid intelligence
0.11**
0.04
2.61
1.12
1.03
1.21
CrI, crystallized intelligence; HR, hazard ratio; CI, 95% conﬁdence-interval; LL, lower level; UL, upper level. *p < 0.05. **p < 0.01.
Again, the interaction of crystallized intelligence and the
intervention group was included in the Cox regression (cf.
Table 5). Crystallized intelligence contributed to the consistent
use of Mass theory in the Verbal group and in the Free play group
but not in the Material group. These diﬀerences were statistically
signiﬁcant. For low crystallized intelligence, the children in the
Material group proﬁted most from the intervention compared to
the Verbal group and the Free play group.
Relationship of Children’s Theory at T1
and Children’s Consistent Use of Mass
Theory
To address the third research question concerned with the
relationship of the children’s prior theories and their consistent
use of Mass theory after the playful intervention, we categorized
the children into those answering consistently or inconsistently
at T1. For this method, we used the same criterion used
for the prior analyses, i.e., children explaining their reasoning
with either Center theory or Other 3 out of 3 times,
σ = 1.64, p < 0.10, binomial probability of 1/3, were
categorized as answering consistently at T1, and the other
children were categorized as answering inconsistently. Hence,
for the following analyses, the sample was divided into
six groups, i.e., a consistent and inconsistent group for
each
of
the
three
intervention
groups.
For
categorizing
children consistently answering with Other, we considered
those children who had provided a theory neither concerned
with the center nor the mass of constructions for all three
items of the pretest.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
FIGURE 4 | Survival curves of the three play groups.
For the survival analysis, we applied the criterion of children
explaining their reasoning with ≥4 Mass out of 6 to investigate
whether children’s prior theories relate to their acquisition of
Mass theory. Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that the children
in the Verbal group who had answered inconsistently at T1
had the highest chance of explaining their reasoning with Mass
consistently after the guided play, with 62% (cf. Supplementary
Material 7 for the comprehensive results).
Next, a Cox regression (cf. Table 6) was speciﬁed, likelihood
ratio test = 26.15, p < 0.001. The hazard curves for the groups
were proportional, as indicated by the global test, χ2 = 7.13,
p = 0.416, as well as the group comparisons, all p > 0.05. We
decided to use the Verbal group children who had answered
inconsistently at T1 as the reference group for the Cox regression
because theory suggests that this group should have the highest
probability of explaining their reasoning with Mass theory. We
found that this group had a signiﬁcantly higher probability
of explaining their reasoning with Mass theory than the Free
play group children who had answered inconsistently at T1.
Furthermore, descriptively, the Verbal group children who had
answered inconsistently at T1 had the highest probability of
all groups for explaining their reasoning with Mass theory (cf.
Figure 6). We found no diﬀerences between the Free play group
children who had answered consistently at T1 and any of the
other groups. Fluid and crystallized intelligence contributed to
the consistent use of Mass theory for all groups.
Transfer Test
To address the fourth research question concerned with
children’s performance on the transfer test, we compared children
who had explained their reasoning with Mass theory consistently
at T2 and T3, M = 11.44, SD = 3.50, to children who had not
explained their reasoning with Mass theory consistently at T2
and T3, M = 7.41, SD = 4.16. Regardless of the intervention
group, those children who had explained their reasoning with
Mass theory consistently at T2 and T3 performed better on the
transfer test than the other children, t(65.83) = −5.26, p < 0.001.
A multiple regression analysis showed that neither ﬂuid, b = 0.05,
p = 0.571, nor crystallized intelligence, b = 0.04, p = 0.319,
contributed to children’s performance on the transfer test beyond
the consistent use of Mass theory. In addition, crystallized
intelligence did not moderate the consistent use of Mass theory
on children’s performance on the transfer test, b = 0.17, p = 0.082.
Furthermore, we compared the three intervention groups on
the transfer test: Verbal group, M = 8.17, SD = 4.64; Material
group, M = 8.89, SD = 4.19; Free play group, M = 8.57,
SD = 4.25. Crystallized intelligence did not moderate the eﬀect
of the intervention group on the children’s performance on
the transfer test. An ANOVA showed no diﬀerences between
the groups on performance in the transfer test, F(2) = 0.27,
p = 0.762. Furthermore, there were no diﬀerences between the
groups if the consistency at T1 was included, F(5) = 1.37,
p = 0.242. Crystallized intelligence did not moderate the eﬀect
of consistency at T1∗intervention group on performance in
the transfer test.
DISCUSSION
Science learning in early childhood can and should be promoted
(Eshach and Fried, 2005; Trundle and Saçkes, 2012). However,
studies on early science learning are quite sparse, and it remains
unclear how to best support young children with diﬀerent
individual prerequisites.
Therefore, we conducted a study on 5- to 6-year-olds’ science
learning in the speciﬁc domain of statics with regard to their prior
intuitive theories and their individual cognitive prerequisites
to investigate the eﬀects of diﬀerent types of play on theory
adjustments. First, we were interested whether children explained
their reasoning with Mass theory. In accordance with Pine et al.
(2007), the children in our study faced problems estimating
the stability of asymmetrical constructions and explaining the
reasons for these stabilities. Most children provided another
explanation and referred to characteristics of building blocks
that have nothing to do with the mass or the center. Some
children considered the center, and few considered the mass.
This is in line with ﬁndings from other studies concerning
the development of children’s knowledge of mass (e.g., Siegler,
1976; Siegler and Chen, 1998; Krist, 2010; Bonawitz et al., 2012;
Weber and Leuchter, 2020).
The result that young children do not have a Mass theory,
but rather a Center theory or provide answers unconcerned
with mass and center can serve as a starting point for designing
learning environments that foster children’s scientiﬁc reasoning,
i.e., their theory adjustment, by providing them with perfect
evidence for Mass theory (cf. Koerber et al., 2005; Klahr et al.,
2011; Gopnik and Wellman, 2012). These learning environments
should consider developmentally appropriate practice, i.e., play
with scaﬀolds (Copple and Bredenkamp, 2009; Weisberg et al.,
2016). Thus, we investigated whether a playful intervention
could support children’s theory adjustment from an intuitive
prior theory to a Mass theory. Play was implemented in the
form of construction play with building blocks with diﬀering
amounts of adult guidance. The Free play group played with
blocks on their own. The Material group received static material
scaﬀolds prepared by an adult. In both of these groups, the adult
only motivated and praised the children’s eﬀorts but did not
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
FIGURE 5 | Forest plot with hazard ratios for the intervention groups including T2 and T3. ∗p < 0.05. ∗∗p < 0.01.
TABLE 6 | Development of Mass theory consistencies between groups (Cox-regression) at T3 considering T2.
95% CI
b
SE
z
HR
LL
UL
Verbal inconsistent as the reference group
1Verbal inconsistent– Verbal consistent
−1.46
0.77
−1.90
0.23
0.05
1.04
1Verbal inconsistent– Material inconsistent
−0.66
0.47
−1.40
0.52
0.21
1.30
1Verbal inconsistent– Material consistent
−0.66
0.58
−1.15
0.52
0.17
1.60
1Verbal inconsistent– Free play inconsistent
−1.59**
0.53
−3.03
0.20
0.07
0.57
1Verbal inconsistent–Free play consistent
−1.11
0.76
−1.45
0.33
0.07
1.47
FI
0.08*
0.04
2.05
1.09
1.00
1.18
CrI
0.06**
0.02
2.67
1.06
1.02
1.10
Free play consistent as the reference group
1Free play consistent–Verbal inconsistent
1.11
0.76
1.45
3.02
0.68
13.46
1Free play consistent–Verbal consistent
−0.35
1.01
−0.35
0.70
0.10
5.07
1Free play consistent–Material inconsistent
0.45
0.81
0.55
1.56
0.32
7.64
1Free play consistent–Material consistent
0.45
0.87
0.51
1.56
0.28
8.65
1Free play consistent–Free play inconsistent
−0.49
0.85
−0.58
0.61
0.12
3.22
FI
0.08*
0.04
2.05
1.09
1.00
1.18
CrI
0.06**
0.02
2.67
1.06
1.02
1.10
FI, ﬂuid intelligence; CrI, crystallized intelligence; 1β, difference in regression coefﬁcient between two groups. HR, hazard ratio; CI, 95% conﬁdence-interval; LL, lower
level; UL, upper level. *p < 0.05. **p < 0.01.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
FIGURE 6 | Forest plot with hazard ratios for the intervention groups in consideration of children’s prior theories and including T2 and T3. ∗p < 0.05. ∗∗p < 0.01.
intervene in the play process. The Verbal group received the
same material scaﬀolds as the Material group, and additionally,
an adult used verbal scaﬀolds during the play. Thus, the Verbal
group received the highest amount of adult guidance. After the
playful intervention as well as after the follow-up test, the Kaplan-
Meier analysis showed that the children in the Verbal group
were most likely to use Mass theory consistently to explain their
reasoning. The Material group was more likely to use Mass
theory than the Free play group. Group comparisons with a Cox
regression showed that the Verbal group outperformed the Free
play group but not the Material group.
The acquisition of Mass theory however, might be dependent
on interindividual variables such as intelligence and consistency
of prior theory that interact with the degree of scaﬀolding. Thus,
we investigated whether children’s prior theories are related to
the adjustments of their theories to Mass theory. The link of
children’s prior theories with theory adjustment to Mass theory
seems to be partly dependent on intervention type. The children
in the Verbal group who had answered inconsistently during the
pretest were most likely to adopt a Mass theory after the playful
intervention compared to all other groups.
Last, we investigated whether the use of Mass theory to explain
stabilities was related to children’s results on a paper-pencil
transfer test. Mass theorists performed better on the transfer test
than Center theorists and children in the Other category. Our
ﬁndings contribute to the literature on science education in the
kindergarten years and will be discussed following the order of
the research questions.
Children’s Use of Mass Theory
The ﬁrst research question was concerned with children’s
explanations of asymmetrical constructions’ stabilities before the
playful intervention. We investigated whether 5- to 6-year-old
children explained asymmetrical constructions’ stabilities with
Mass theory, Center theory or Other.
Considering the assumptions of theory theory (Gopnik
and Wellman, 2012), we found that children’s theories about
stability encompassed causal relations, as the theories provided
explanations for the stability of the constructions and allowed for
predictions of whether a construction would be stable or unstable
depending on how it is supported. Thus, a child with a Center
theory believes that the middle of a construction needs to be
supported and that the middle is the cause for a construction’s
stability. A child with a Mass theory believes that a construction’s
weight needs to be supported and that the weight distribution
is the cause for a construction’s stability. A child providing
another explanation might have other ideas concerning the causal
relationship between support and stability, e.g., the color. Since
most children could not explain asymmetrical constructions’
stabilities correctly, we can assume that children do not have a
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
Mass theory (e.g., Siegler, 1976; Siegler and Chen, 1998; Krist,
2010; Bonawitz et al., 2012; Weber and Leuchter, 2020).
Nevertheless, the children were more likely to use Center
theory and less likely to provide another explanation in the course
of the pretest. The reason might be that they received visual
conﬁrmation of the Center theory for the symmetrical items.
Hence, the children might have inferred and generalized Center
theory as an explanation for constructions’ stabilities (Bonawitz
et al., 2012). Therefore, the children might have acquired a Center
theory instead of remaining in the Other category or kept their
Center theory instead of adopting Mass theory.
Even though all the children had the opportunity to learn
about the mass even during the pretest because they received
feedback concerning the constructions’ stabilities, the probability
that the children would explain their reasoning with Mass theory
remained the same across all three items at pretest. This outcome
indicates that the presented evidence at pretest might not have
been suﬃcient to acquire Mass theory. Even though the children
observed perfect evidence for Mass theory (cf. Koerber et al.,
2005), a short presentation and asking for explanations about
the stability in a one-to-one setting was not enough to introduce
the children to Mass theory. Since the children seemed to be
unable to acquire an understanding of the mass that easily,
construction play with varying degrees of structuring seems to
be an appropriate approach to investigate whether the children
could acquire an understanding of the mass during a play.
Effects of Guided Play
The second research question was concerned with the playful
interventions’ eﬀects on children’s consistent use of Mass theory
and the possible relationship with intelligence.
From the results it can be concluded that the more support the
children received when confronted with evidence, the more likely
they were to adjust their Other or Center theory and to explain
their reasoning with Mass theory. This result indicates that
children need support when learning about stabilities. Guided
play with material and verbal scaﬀolds has been shown to support
children’s acquisition of Mass theory more than free play (cf.
Zosh et al., 2018). In the Material group, the children might have
overlooked the evidence, and in the Free play group, the children
could only have observed it randomly.
Consistent with the literature on theory theory and theory-
evidence coordination (e.g., Koerber et al., 2005; Gopnik and
Wellman, 2012), our results indicate that three factors should be
fulﬁlled when supporting young children’s learning about science:
(1) perfect covariation of the evidence, (2) considering the
children’s prior theories, and (3) leaving the children with enough
time to explore the evidence. We approached these factors by
(1) taking care to present children with perfect covariation.
We only used constructions that included asymmetrical features
that always conﬁrmed Mass theory but always disconﬁrmed
Center theory. (2) We assessed children’s prior theories at pretest
and tried to confront them with evidence supporting Mass
theory and contradicting their Center theory. (3) The children
were free to play with the provided materials for an hour so
that they had a suﬃcient amount of time to explore and play
with the materials. Furthermore, we considered the children’s
developmental constraints and related science to their everyday
activities by using diﬀerent playful activities with building blocks
as a learning setting (Copple and Bredenkamp, 2009).
The
activities
the
children
engaged
in
fulﬁlled
the
characteristics of play (Rubin et al., 1983; Pellegrini, 2013;
Weisberg et al., 2013; Trawick-Smith, 2015; Daubert et al., 2018).
The children played voluntarily, and the play was child-directed
and contained elements of choice. We did not measure the
children’s motivation during the play. Therefore, we cannot
make a statement about their intrinsic motivation. An indication
of their motivation might be that the children could stop playing
at any time, but approximately 95% of the children continued to
play for the provided time in all groups, as the video recordings
for the manipulation check and the experimenters’ written
records showed. Furthermore, highly inferential analyses of the
recordings demonstrated that all of the children in all of the
groups showed playful behavior (cf. Bundy et al., 2001). The
play was not free of goals because we had a speciﬁc learning
goal, namely, the acquisition of Mass theory, in mind. However,
the play was still process-oriented, as we did not push this goal
on the children.
Our playful intervention was based on the continual view
postulated by, e.g., Zosh et al. (2018). The free play was free
of an adult’s guidance, the guided play with material scaﬀolds
was structured and oﬀered children suggestions for playing
with blocks, and the guided play with material and verbal
scaﬀolds oﬀered additional verbal guidance. Speciﬁcally, when
implementing the verbal scaﬀolds, we asked for the children’s
prior knowledge to allow them to express their presumptions to
facilitate the adjustment of their theory (Mayer, 1997; Weinert
and Helmke, 1998; Gurlitt and Renkl, 2010). By asking for
reasoning, the children could be made aware of their theory, and
they were supported in structuring their theory (Hsin and Wu,
2011). The provision of explanations helped the children organize
new knowledge, e.g., knowledge about the mass, and integrate
this new knowledge into their theories (Richey and Nokes-
Malach, 2013). By encouraging comparisons, we tried to support
the children in comparing stable and unstable constructions
and to generalize the underlying principle, i.e., the mass (Hsin
and Wu, 2011; Richey and Nokes-Malach, 2013). Last, modeling
might have oﬀered the children the possibility for imitation
(Mayer, 2004; Hmelo-Silver et al., 2007).
Our study showed that crystallized intelligence had a positive
relationship with children’s consistent application of Mass theory
directly after the intervention. The interaction of crystallized
intelligence with the intervention group showed that children
with high crystallized intelligence proﬁted more in the Verbal
group than did children with high crystallized intelligence in the
Material group. Fluid intelligence did not relate to the consistent
explanation with Mass theory directly after the intervention. This
outcome indicates that children acquired Mass theory regardless
of their ability to mentally represent and abstract the spatial
features of constructions’ stabilities. After including the follow-
up, both ﬂuid intelligence and crystallized intelligence related to
the consistent explanation with Mass theory over an extended
period of time. Crystallized intelligence interacted with the
intervention group and related to the consistent application of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
15
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
Mass theory in the Verbal group and the Free play group but not
in the Material group. Children with low crystallized intelligence
were more likely to adjust their theories in the Material group,
while children with high crystallized intelligence were more likely
to adjust their theories in the Verbal group.
Language capacity is understood as an indicator of crystallized
intelligence (Cattell, 1987; Flynn and Blair, 2013). Thus, our
results suggest that the children with a low language capacity
proﬁted most from the Material group. Seemingly, the material
scaﬀolds were suﬃciently self-explaining so that the children
with a low language capacity could observe evidence for Mass
theory and adjust their theories. Moreover, the children with
a low language capacity in the Verbal group did not proﬁt
from the intervention because they may have suﬀered from a
high cognitive load (Kirschner, 2002). They not only needed
to process the new information about the learning content
provided through the verbal scaﬀolds but also the language
itself. In contrast, the children with a high language capacity
proﬁted from the verbal scaﬀolds that were provided in the
Verbal group. Our ﬁndings imply that when providing verbal
instructions and support, it may be important to consider
children’s language capacity.
Children with a higher ﬂuid intelligence, i.e., a capacity to
represent constructions mentally and abstract important spatial
features (Cattell, 1987; Weiß and Osterland, 2013; Weber and
Leuchter, 2020), were more likely to acquire Mass theory over
the course of 10 weeks. This outcome is in line with studies from
developmental psychology showing that children’s Mass theory
develops between ages ﬁve and seven (Bonawitz et al., 2012). In
their everyday lives, children have many possibilities to explore
stabilities and develop an understanding of the underlying
principles. A possible explanation might be that children with a
higher ﬂuid intelligence learn these principles faster than children
with a lower ﬂuid intelligence (cf. Weber and Leuchter, 2020).
In addition to intelligence, other individual competencies,
such as children’s prior theories about stabilities, could relate to
children’s acquisition of Mass theory.
Relationship of Children’s Prior Theories
and Their Consistent Use of Mass Theory
The third research question was concerned with the role of
children’s prior theories on their consistent use of Mass theory
after the interventions.
The children with inconsistent prior theories who received
the highest amount of support (Verbal group) acquired a
Mass theory, while those children who received less support
(Material group and Free play group) did not acquire a Mass
theory. This result indicates that prior theories play a role in
theory adjustment, which is in line with ﬁndings concerned
with Bayesian inference in the context of theory-theory by,
e.g., Bonawitz et al. (2012) and Sobel et al. (2004). The
children who answered inconsistently at T1 did not have a
consistent prior theory and therefore had the highest chance
of acquiring a Mass theory. Their theoretical assumptions were
inconsistent compared to the theories of children who had
explained their reasoning consistently with Center theory or
Other (cf. Koerber et al., 2005; Griﬃths et al., 2011; Gopnik and
Wellman, 2012; Gopnik, 2013). Since the children in the Verbal
group were most likely to acquire a Mass theory, children seem
to proﬁt from high amounts of guidance and support; moreover,
in our study, only observation seems to be insuﬃcient for
the understanding of counterevidence. In sum, children with
inconsistent prior theoretical assumptions proﬁt from supported
play but do not adjust their theories by playing with blocks freely.
Transfer Test
The fourth research question was concerned with children’s
performance on a transfer test at follow-up. Independent of
intervention group, we compared children who had used Mass
theory consistently after the playful intervention to children
who had failed to do so on a transfer test with asymmetrical
block constructions. The children who had answered consistently
outperformed children who had answered inconsistently. This
result indicates that children who explain their reasoning
with Mass theory are also more likely to rate asymmetrical
constructions’ stabilities correctly, which suggests that the
children acquired an understanding of Mass theory.
However, comparing the three intervention groups, children
performed equally well on the transfer test, even though we
found group diﬀerences on the reasoning test. The transfer test,
unlike the reasoning test, was a paper-pencil test and according
to Karmiloﬀ-Smith (1992) and Pine and Messer (2003) rather
tested knowledge that children might not have been able to
verbalize. The transfer test indicates that children in all groups
had knowledge about stabilities at T3, but only the children in the
Verbal group were able to verbalize their reasoning.
The children who had a low language capacity succeeded in
the transfer test but not in the reasoning task. They did not have
to explain their reasoning in the transfer test; they were only
required to decide about the constructions’ stabilities. Although
we tried to consider a low language capacity in the reasoning
task by counting speciﬁc gestures as indicators for Mass theory,
e.g., pointing to the Mass, or Center theory, e.g., pointing at the
middle, the transfer test was seemingly easier for the children to
handle. This is especially meaningful for children with a diﬀerent
native language because these children might face challenges in
explaining their reasoning adequately but might be able to show
their knowledge about stability with a non-verbal test. Therefore,
to oﬀer children the opportunity to show their knowledge about
science phenomena such as stability, methods that do not require
the children to speak might be helpful.
Limitations
There are some limitations to this study concerning the
implementation and measurement.
Implementation of Play
Regarding the implementation of the playful intervention, we
compared material scaﬀolds, material + verbal scaﬀolds and free
play regarding their eﬀects on children’s Mass theory. The eﬀect
of verbal scaﬀolds uncoupled from material scaﬀolds was not
investigated. Future studies could implement a verbal scaﬀolds
group by presenting children with the same unstructured
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
16
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
building blocks a free play group receives and adding verbal
scaﬀolds. Moreover, the implementation of a baseline group not
receiving any intervention would allow investigating whether free
play has an eﬀect on children’s theory adjustment toward Mass
theory compared to children’s development.
We videotaped only some of the playful interventions for a
manipulation check; as some children or their parents denied
permission to videotape, some interventions were only audio-
recorded. Moreover, for a few interventions, neither videos nor
recordings exist due to technical failures with the equipment.
Therefore, children’s behavior during play cannot be analyzed,
even though there might be interindividual diﬀerences in how
children interacted with the experimenter and used the provided
materials. For example, some children might have asked for help
more often or might have built with the building blocks more
actively, while others may have instead watched other children
build. Furthermore, the materials provided in the guided play
groups served as suggestions, and children in all groups were
free to build other buildings. From the existing videos and
recordings, we assume that the children in the guided play groups
played the suggested activities and used the scaﬀolding materials.
However, some children might have built at a higher pace and
thus may have built more of the suggested structures than other
children. Last, regarding children’s behavior, the amount of time
that the children spent playing on their own or with other
children, their manipulation of and their conversations about
the building blocks might have contributed to children’s Mass
theory after the intervention. These factors should be investigated
in a future study.
In this study, we only used a limited set of verbal scaﬀolds and
did not control for the verbal scaﬀolds’ adaptability. However, the
adaptability might have contributed to children’s acquisition of
Mass theory. Therefore, children’s and experimenters’ behavior
during play should be investigated in the future.
Measures
The children received eight items showing diﬀerent block
constructions, and three asymmetrical items were used to assess
children’s theories about stability. The other symmetrical items
were used to familiarize the children with the test and motivate
them during testing because children ﬁnd it easier to estimate
symmetrical constructions’ stabilities (Krist, 2010). These Center
theory-compliant items might have led some children to adopt a
Center theory instead of remaining in the Other category, even
though the evidence for Center theory was imperfect. The results
of this study show that although the children received these
Center theory items, many still adopted Mass theory after the
playful intervention. Future studies might beneﬁt from the use of
more items, which would also prolong the testing time, as more
asymmetrical as well as symmetrical items would be needed. This
addition could impact the children’s attention capacity and their
motivation to participate.
Children received feedback about the constructions’ stabilities
during testing because they built the construction and then
removed the supporting black block to ascertain whether
they had rated the stability correctly. Therefore, children had
the opportunity to learn during testing, and the items were
dependent on each other. As a result, we could not just
sum up the items, and every item was considered a point in
time. Thus, we used methods of risk-event analysis to analyze
the data. Independent measurements would allow for diﬀerent
statistical approaches, e.g., statistical procedures that refer to the
mean. Thus, in future studies, to achieve independent measures,
children could not build constructions on their own but only rate
and explain stabilities on the basis of photographs so that they do
not receive feedback about stability.
Nevertheless, our study indicates that guided play can support
young children’s science learning. Diﬀering degrees of scaﬀolding
in guided play can be beneﬁcial for helping children with diﬀerent
prerequisites adjust their theories when observing new evidence.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets generated for this study are available on request to
the corresponding author.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical review and approval was not required for the study
on human participants in accordance with the local legislation
and institutional requirements. Written informed consent to
participate in this study was provided by the participants’ legal
guardian/next of kin.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AW and ML contributed to conception and design of the study.
AW organized the database, performed the statistical analysis,
and wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. AW, TR, and ML
wrote sections of the manuscript. All authors contributed to
manuscript revision, read, and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This research was funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG), grant number 290497409.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Ina Plöger for helping develop the
scaﬀolding materials and our research assistants Laura Löwe,
Hanna Fuhrmann, Kristin Hoﬀmeister, Rebecca Ott, and
Aliena Eichhorn for helping with data acquisition, data input,
transcribing, and coding of the interviews. Last but not least, we
would like to thank all children, who participated in our research.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.
01737/full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
17
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
REFERENCES
Akerson, V. L., Buck, G. A., Donnelly, L. A., Nargund-Joshi, V., and Weiland, I. S.
(2011). The importance of teaching and learning nature of science in the early
childhood years. J. Sci. Educ. Technol. 20, 537–549. doi: 10.1007/s10956-011-
9312-5
Alboukadel, K., Kosinski, M., and Biecek, P. (2019). Survminer: Drawing survival
curves using ggplot2 (Version 0.4.6) [Computer software]. Available at: https:
//CRAN.R-project.org/package=survminer.
Alﬁeri, L., Brooks, P. J., Aldrich, N. J., and Tenenbaum, H. R. (2011). Does
discovery-based instruction enhance learning? J. Educ. Psychol. 103, 1–18. doi:
10.1037/a0021017
Baillargeon, R., and Hanko-Summers, S. (1990). Is the top object adequately
supported
by
the
bottom
object?
Young
infants’
understanding
of
support
relations.
Cogn.
Dev.
5,
29–53.
doi:
10.1016/0885-2014(90)
90011-H
Bonawitz, E. B., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D., Spelke, E., and Schulz, L.
(2011). The double-edged sword of pedagogy: instruction limits spontaneous
exploration and discovery. Cognition 120, 322–330. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.
2010.10.001
Bonawitz, E. B., van Schijndel, T. J. P., Friel, D., and Schulz, L. (2012). Children
balance theories and evidence in exploration, explanation, and learning. Cogn.
Psychol. 64, 215–234. doi: 10.1016/j.cogpsych.2011.12.002
Borriello, G. A., and Liben, L. S. (2018). Encouraging maternal guidance of
preschoolers’ spatial thinking during block play. Child Dev. 89, 1209–1222.
doi: 10.1111/cdev.12779
Bundy, A. C., Nelson, L., Metzger, M., and Bingaman, K. (2001). Validity and
reliability of a test of playfulness. Occup. Ther. J. Res. 21, 276–292. doi: 10.1177/
153944920102100405
Butts, D. P., Hofman, H. M., and Anderson, M. (1994). Is direct experience enough?
A study of young children’s views of sounds. J. Elemen. Sci. Educ. 6, 1–16.
doi: 10.1007/BF03170646
Cattell, R. B. (1987). Intelligence: It’s Structure, Growth and Action. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Chen, Z., and Klahr, D. D. (1999). All other things being equal: acquisition and
transfer of the control of variables strategy. Child Dev. 70, 1098–1120. doi:
10.1111/1467-8624.00081
Chin, C. (2007). Teacher questioning in science classrooms: approaches that
stimulate productive thinking. J. Res. Sci. Teach. 44, 815–843. doi: 10.1002/tea.
20171
Cook, C., Goodman, N. D., and Schulz, L. E. (2011). Where science starts:
spontaneous experiments in preschoolers’ exploratory play. Cognition 120,
341–349. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2011.03.003
Copple, C., and Bredenkamp, J. (eds) (2009). Developmentally Appropriate Practice
in Early Childhood Programs Serving Children From Birth Through Age 8,
3rd Edn. Washington, D.C: National Association for the Education of Young
Children.
Cremin, T., Glauert, E., Craft, A., Compton, A., and Stylianidou, F. (2015). Creative
little scientists: exploring pedagogical synergies between inquiry-based and
creative approaches in early years science. Educ. 3-13 43, 404–419. doi: 10.1080/
03004279.2015.1020655
Daubert, E., Ramani, G. B., and Rubin, K. H. (2018). “Play-based learning and
social development,” in Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development, eds M.
Boivin, R. D. Peters, and R. Tremblay (Ottawa: Centre of Excellence for Early
Childhood Development).
DeLoache, J. S. (2014). “Early development of the understanding of symbolic
artifacts,” in Wiley-Blackwell Handbooks of Developmental Psychology. The
Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive Development, 2nd Edn, ed.
U. Goswami (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell), 312–336.
Dunn, L. M., Dunn, D. M., Lenhard, A., Lenhard, W., Segerer, R., and Suggate,
S. (2015). PPVT 4. Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test. Bengaluru: Pearson
Assessment.
Eshach, H., and Fried, M. N. (2005). Should science be taught in early
childhood? J. Sci. Educ. Technol. 14, 315–336. doi: 10.1007/s10956-005-
7198-9
Ferrara, K., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Newcombe, N. S., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., and Lam, W. S.
(2011). Block talk: spatial language during block play. Mind BrainEduc. 5,
143–151. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-228X.2011.01122.x
Fisher, K. R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., Singer, D. G., and Berk, L. E. (2011).
“Playing around in school: Implications for learning and educational policy,”
in .), The Oxford Handbook of the Development of Play, ed. A. D. Pellegrini
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), 341–362.
Fisher, K. R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Newcombe, N., and Golinkoﬀ, R. M. (2013).
Taking shape: supporting preschoolers’ acquisition of geometric knowledge
through
guided
play.
Child
Dev.
84,
1872–1878.
doi:
10.1111/cdev.
12091
Flynn, J. R., and Blair, C. (2013). “The history of intelligence: new spectacles
for developmental psychology,” in The Oxford Handbook of Developmental
Psychology: Vol. 1: Body and Mind, ed. P. D. Zelazo (Oxford: Oxford University
Press.), 765–790.
Gelman, R., and Brenneman, K. (2004). Science learning pathways for young
children. Early Child. Res. Q. 19, 150–158.
Gopnik, A. (2013). “Causality,” in The Oxford Handbook of Developmental
Psychology: Body and Mind, Vol. 1, ed. P. D. Zelazo (Oxford: Oxford University
Press), 628–650.
Gopnik, A., and Meltzoﬀ, A. (1997). Words, Thoughts, and Theories. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E., and Glymour, C. (2001). Causal learning
mechanisms in very young children: two-, three-, and four-year-olds infer
causal relations from patterns of variation and covariation. Dev. Psychol. 37,
620–629. doi: 10.1037//0012-1649.37.5.620
Gopnik, A., and Wellman, H. M. (2012). Reconstructing constructivism: causal
models, bayesian learning mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychol,. Bull.
138, 1085–1108. doi: 10.1037/a0028044
Griﬃths, T. L., Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gopnik, A. (2011). Bayes and
blickets: eﬀects of knowledge on causal induction in children and adults. Cog.
Sci. 35, 1407–1455. doi: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01203.x
Gurlitt, J., and Renkl, A. (2010). Prior knowledge activation: How diﬀerent concept
mapping tasks lead to substantial diﬀerences in cognitive processes, learning
outcomes, and perceived self-eﬃcacy. Instr. Sci. 38, 417–433. doi: 10.1007/
s11251-008-9090-5
Haden, C. A. (2010). Talking about science in museums. Child Dev. Perspect. 4,
62–67. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2009.00119.x
Hadzigeorgiou, Y. (2002). A study of the development of the concept of mechanical
stability in preschool children. Res. Sci. Educ. 32, 373–391. doi: 10.1023/A:
1020801426075
Hawkins, J., Pea, R. D., Glick, J., and Scribner, S. (1984). “Merds that laugh
don’t like mushrooms”: evidence for deductive reasoning by preschoolers. Dev.
Psychol. 20, 584–594. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.20.4.584
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., Berk, L. E., and Singer, D. G. (2009). A Mandate
for Playful Learning in Preschool. Presenting the Evidence. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., Duncan, R. G., and Chinn, C. A. (2007). Scaﬀolding and
achievement in problem-based and inquiry learning: a response to Kirschner.
Sweller, and Clark (2006). Educ. Psychol. 42, 99–107.
Hogan, K., and Pressley, M. (1997). “Becoming a scaﬀolder of students’ learning,”
in Scaﬀolding Student Learning, eds K. Hogan and M. Pressley (Cambridge, MA:
Brookline), 185–191.
Hsin, C. T., and Wu, H. K. (2011). Using scaﬀolding strategies to promote young
children’s scientiﬁc understandings of ﬂoating and sinking. J. Sci. Educ. Technol.
20, 656–666. doi: 10.1007/s10956-011-9310-7
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A Developmental Perspective on
Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kirschner, P. A. (2002). Cognitive load theory: implications of cognitive load theory
on the design of learning. Learn. Instr. 12, 1–10.
Klahr, D., and Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence of learning paths in early science
instruction: eﬀect of direct instruction and discovery learning. Psychol. Sci. 15,
661–667. doi: 10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00737.x
Klahr, D., Zimmerman, C., and Jirout, J. (2011). Educational interventions to
advance children’s scientiﬁc thinking. Science 333, 971–975. doi: 10.1126/
science.1204528
Kleickmann, T., Tröbst, S., Jonen, A., Vehmeyer, J., and Möller, K. (2016).
The
eﬀects
of
expert
scaﬀolding
in
elementary
science
professional
development on teachers’ beliefs and motivations, instructional practices,
and student achievement. J. Educ. Psychol. 108, 21–42. doi: 10.1037/edu000
0041
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
18
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
Koerber,
S.,
Sodian,
B.,
Thoermer,
C.,
and
Nett,
U.
(2005).
Scientiﬁc
reasoning in young children: preschoolers’ ability to evaluate covariation
evidence.
Swiss
J.
Psychol.
64,
141–152.
doi:
10.1024/1421-0185.64.
3.141
Krist, H. (2010). Development of intuitions about support beyond infancy. Dev.
Psychol. 46, 266–278. doi: 10.1037/a0018040
Krist, H., Atlas, C., Fischer, H., and Wiese, C. (2018). Development of basic
intuitions about physical support during early childhood: evidence from a novel
eye-tracking paradigm. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 2:174702181773719. doi: 10.1177/
1747021817737196
Krist, H., Horz, H., and Schönfeld, T. (2005). Children’s block balancing revisited:
no evidence for representational redescription. Swiss J. Psychol. 64, 183–193.
doi: 10.1024/1421-0185.64.3.183
Krist, H., and Krüger, M. (2012). Towards a new method for bridging the gap
between “smart” infants and “dumb” preschoolers. Eur. J. Dev. Psychol. 9,
631–637. doi: 10.1080/17405629.2012.657895
Lazonder, A. W., and Kamp, E. (2012). Bit by bit or all at once? Splitting up
the inquiry task to promote children’s scientiﬁc reasoning. Learn. Instr. 22,
458–464. doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2012.05.005
Leuchter, M., and Naber, B. (2019). Studying children’s knowledge base of one-
sided levers as force ampliﬁers. J. Res. Sci. Teach. 56, 91–112. doi: 10.1002/tea.
21470
Leuchter, M., Saalbach, H., and Hardy, I. (2014). Designing science learning
in the ﬁrst years of schooling. An intervention study with sequenced
learning material on the topic of ‘ﬂoating and sinking’. Int. J. Sci. Educ. 36,
1751–1771.
Mantzicopoulos, P., Patrick, H., and Samarapungavan, A. (2013). Science
literacy in school and home contexts: kindergarteners’ science achievement
and motivation. Cogn. Instr. 31, 62–119. doi: 10.1080/07370008.2012.
742087
Martin, N. D., Dornfeld Tissenbaum, C., Gnesdilow, D., and Puntambekar,
S. (2019). Fading distributed scaﬀolds: the importance of complementarity
between teacher and material scaﬀolds. Instr. Sci. 47, 69–98. doi: 10.1007/
s11251-018-9474-0
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: are we asking the right questions? Educ.
Psychol. 32, 1–19. doi: 10.1207/s15326985ep3201_1
Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure discovery
learning? The case for guided methods of instruction. Am,. Psychol. 59, 14–19.
doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.59.1.14
Murphy, N., and Messer, D. (2000). Diﬀerential beneﬁts from scaﬀolding
and children working alone. Educ. Psychol. 20, 17–31. doi: 10.1080/
014434100110353
Pellegrini, A. D. (2013). “Play,” in The Oxford Handbook of Developmental
Psychology: Self and Other, Vol. 2, ed. P. D. Zelazo (Oxford: Oxford Universiy
Press), 276–299.
Pellegrini, A. D., and Gustafson, K. (2005). “Boys’ and Girls’ Uses of Objects for
Exploration, Play, and Tools in Early Childhood,”in The Nature of Play: Great
Apes and Humans eds A. D. Pellegrini and P. Smith ( New York, NY: Guilford
Press.), 113–138.
Piekny,
J.,
and
Maehler,
C.
(2013).
Scientiﬁc
reasoning
in
early
and
middle
childhood:
the
development
of
domain-general
evidence
evaluation,
experimentation,
and
hypothesis
generation
skills.
Br.
J.
Dev.
Psychol.
31(Pt
2),
153–179.
doi:
10.1111/j.2044-835X.2012.
02082.x
Pine, K. J., Lufkin, N., Kirk, E., and Messer, D. (2007). A microgenetic analysis of
the relationship between speech and gesture in children: evidence for semantic
and temporal asynchrony. Lang. Cogn. Process. 22, 234–246. doi: 10.1080/
01690960600630881
Pine, K. J., and Messer, D. (2003). The development of representations as children
learn about balancing. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 21, 285–301.
Pine, K. J., Messer, D., and Godfrey, K. (1999). The teachability of children with
naive theories: an exploration of the eﬀects of two teaching methods. Br. J./
Educ. Psychol. 69, 201–211.
Pyle, A., DeLuca, C., and Danniels, E. (2017). A scoping review of research on
play-based pedagogies in kindergarten education. Rev. Educ. 5, 311–351. doi:
10.1002/rev3.3097
R Core Team (2019). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Renkl, A. (2002). Worked-out examples: instructional explanations support
learning by self-explanations. Learn. Instr. 12, 529–556. doi: 10.1016/S0959-
4752(01)00030-5
Reuter, T., and Leuchter, M. (2020). Children’s concepts of gears and their
promotion through play. J. Res. Sci. Teach. doi: 10.1002/tea.21647 [Epub ahead
of print].
Richey, J. E., and Nokes-Malach, T. J. (2013). How much is too much? Learning
and motivation eﬀects of adding instructional explanations to worked examples.
Learn. Instr. 25, 104–124. doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2012.11.006
Riley, W. F., and Sturges, L. D. (1993). Engineering Mechanics: Statics, 2nd Edn.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Rubin, K. H., Fein, G. G., and Vandenberg, B. (1983). “Play,” in Handbook of Child
Psychology, ed. E. M. Hetherington (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley), 693–774.
Rubin, K. H., Watson, K. S., and Jambor, T. W. (1978). Free-Play behaviors in
preschool and kindergarten children. Child Dev. 49, 534–536. doi: 10.2307/
1128725
Ruﬀman, T., Perner, J., Olson, D. R., and Doherty, M. (1993). Reﬂecting
on scientiﬁc thinking: children’s understanding of the hypothesis-evidence
relation. Child Dev. 64, 1617–1636. doi: 10.2307/1131459
Sarama, J., and Clements, D. H. (2009). “Concrete” computer manipulatives in
mathematics education. Child Dev. Perspect. 3, 145–150. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-
8606.2009.00095.x
Schulz, L. E., Bonawitz, E. B., and Griﬃths, T. L. (2007). Can being scared
cause tummy aches? Naive theories, ambiguous evidence, and preschoolers’
causal inferences. Dev. Psychol. 43, 1124–1139. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.43.5.
1124
Siegler, R. S. (1976). Three aspects of cognitive development. Cogn. Psychol. 8,
481–520.
Siegler, R. S., and Chen, Z. (1998). Developmental diﬀerences in rule learning: a
microgenetic analyses. Cogn. Psychol. 36, 273–310.
Singer, J. D., and Willett, J. B. (2003). Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis: Modelling
Change and Event Occurence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gopnik, A. (2004). Children’s causal
inferences
from
indirect
evidence:
backwards
blocking
and
Bayesian
reasoning in preschoolers. Cogn. Sci. 28, 303–333. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsci.2003.1
1.001
Therneau, T. (2015). A Package for Survival Analysis in S. (Version 2.38) [Computer
software]. Available at: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=survival.
Thomson, D., Casey, B. M., Lombardi, C. M., and Nguyen, H. N. (2018). Quality of
fathers’ spatial concept support during block building predicts their daughters’
early math skills – But not their sons’. Early Child. Res. Q. 50, 11–96. doi:
10.1016/j.ecresq.2018.07.008
Thorsen, C., Gustafsson, J. E., and Cliﬀordson, C. (2014). The inﬂuence of ﬂuid
and crystallized intelligence on the development of knowledge and skills. Br. J.
Educ. Psychol. 84, 556–570. doi: 10.1111/bjep.12041
Trawick-Smith, J. (2015). “Teacher–child play interactions to achieve learning
outcomes,” in Research in Early Childhood Science Education, eds K. C. Trundle
and M. Saçkes (Berlin: Springer), 259–277.
Trundle, K. C., and Saçkes, M. (2012). “Science and early education,” in
Handbook of Early Childhood Education, ed. R. Pianta (New York, NY: Guilford
Publications), 240–258.
van de Pol, J., Volman, M., and Beishuizen, J. (2010). Scaﬀolding in teacher–
student interaction: a decade of research. Educ. Psychol. Rev. 22, 271–296.
doi: 10.1007/s10648-010-9127-6
van Schijndel, T. J. P., Visser, I., van Bers, B. M. C. W., and Raijmakers, M. E. J.
(2015). Preschoolers perform more informative experiments after observing
theory-violating evidence. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 131, 104–119. doi: 10.1016/j.
jecp.2014.11.008
Verdine, B. N., Zimmermann, L., Foster, L., Marzouk, M. A., Golinkoﬀ, R. M.,
Hirsh-Pasek, K., et al. (2019). Eﬀects of geometric toy design on parent-child
interactions and spatial language. Early Child. Res. Q. 46, 126–141. doi: 10.1016/
j.ecresq.2018.03.015
Weber, A. M., and Leuchter, M. (2020). Measuring preschool children’s knowledge
of the principle of static equilibrium in the context of building blocks: validation
of a test instrument. Br. J. Educ. Psychol. 90, 50–74. doi: 10.1111/bjep.12304
Weinert, F. E., and Helmke, A. (1998). The neglected role of individual diﬀerences
in theoretical models of cognitive development. Learn. Instr. 8, 309–323. doi:
10.1016/S0959-4752(97)00024-8
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
19
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

Weber et al.
Play’s Impact on Children’s Reasoning
Weisberg, D. S., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., Kittredge, A. K., and Klahr,
D. (2016). Guided play. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 25, 177–182. doi: 10.1177/
0963721416645512
Weisberg, D. S., Zosh, J. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., and Golinkoﬀ, R. M. (2013). Talking
it up: play, language development, and the role of adult support. Am. J. Play 6,
39–54.
Weiß, R. H., and Osterland, J. (2013). CFT 1-R. Boston, MA: Hogrefe.
Zosh, J. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Hopkins, E. J., Jensen, H., Liu, C., Neale, D., et al.
(2018). Accessing the inaccessible: redeﬁning play as a spectrum. Front. Psychol.
9:1124. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01124
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Weber, Reuter and Leuchter. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
20
July 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1737

